UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A meta-cognitive account for the impact of implausible suggestions on estimations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7735g9nv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Egidi, Giovanna
Hasson, Uri

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A meta-cognitive account for the impact of implausible suggestions on estimations
Giovanna Egidi (g.egidi@gmail.com)
Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, The University of Trento
Trento, Italy

Uri Hasson (uri.hasson@unitn.it)
Center for Mind/Brain Sciences, The University of Trento
Trento, Italy
Abstract

knowledge of the domain (e.g., people’s longevity). They
consider the boundary value of the distribution, for example,
that the maximal age a person can reach is 117 years old.
Because the given anchor exceeds this value, people can
reject it as a viable estimate and end up adjusting their
estimate to that boundary. Importantly, in this process,
people do not need to rely on their knowledge of the
particular target in question (Gandhi).
It is only in the next step, when people are asked to
provide an absolute number that they access specific
knowledge of the target. At this stage they compare targetrelated knowledge to the domain-maximum value to which
they had adjusted and test the hypothesis that the target
item’s extension is similar to the domain maximum. This
confirmatory testing increases the accessibility of
knowledge consistent with the hypothesis (e.g., Gandhi
accomplished many things in his life; is often portrayed as
an old man) and this knowledge is then used to form the
absolute judgment (Mussweiler & Strack, 2000, 2001).
This model explains how implausible anchors of different
magnitudes can produce equally high estimates (e.g., the
anchors 214 and 271 yield comparable estimates for
Gandhi’s age; Mussweiler & Strack, 2001). In addition, this
model makes an implicit assumption regarding the role of
knowledge: Because the internally generated domainmaximum value that people use as a proxy for adjustment is
the upper limit of the domain, this value must be the upper
bound for estimates. People should therefore not provide
estimates higher than that boundary.
In this paper, we consider the relative role of knowledge
and confidence in mediating the effect of implausible
suggestions. Building on the aforementioned framework, we
develop an account that explains how the impact of extreme
anchors is mediated not only by people’s knowledge, but
also by their confidence in that knowledge – i.e., by their
meta-cognitive assessment of their own knowledge. A
central premise of our account is that people’s confidence in
their knowledge of the domain in question can affect their
sensitivity to extreme anchors in the context of the
comparative judgment. For example, consider two people
who think that the maximum age a person can live is 125
years. One person is certain of this assessment, but the other
is not. It is reasonable to expect that the first person will
effectively adjust to 125 (as in Mussweiler & Strack, 2001),
but that the second person will still be influenced by the
initial implausible anchor. Confidence in target knowledge

We propose a model of why implausible numeric suggestions
function as anchors and influence people’s estimates. In two
experiments we tested the hypothesis that people’s confidence
in their knowledge modulates their susceptibility to
implausible suggestions. We found that higher confidence
reduces the impact of implausible anchors. A third experiment
showed that knowledge, defined as participants’ agreement on
a value, weakly affects the impact of a suggestion. These
results indicate that theoretical accounts for the impact of
implausible suggestions on estimations should consider the
role of meta-cognitive information.
Keywords: confidence, knowledge; anchoring; suggestions;
assimilation

Introduction
People often make numeric estimations in circumstances of
uncertainty. It is well known that in these situations they
tend to assimilate their estimates to numeric values
suggested to them. This assimilation bias, called anchoring
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1974), has been demonstrated in
several domains (for a review, see Chapman & Johnson,
2002).
These suggested values do not have to be reasonable to
exert an effect on estimation. For example, people who are
asked to estimate Gandhi’s age at death provide higher
estimates after being asked whether Gandhi died at the age
of 214 than after being asked whether he died at the age of
86 (Mussweiler & Strack, 2001). The fact that even
blatantly implausible suggestions can affect estimates is
counterintuitive: because people should easily identify the
claim Gandhi lived to 214 as false, they should easily
discard this suggestion. This suggestion should therefore
have little impact on judgment. Why is it then that
implausible anchors affect people’s estimates?
One possibility is that the influence of these suggestions
is mediated by internally generated knowledge (e.g.,
Mussweiler & Strack, 2001). On this explanation, anchoring
occurs as a consequence of two processes: an adjustment
process (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974) followed by a
selective accessibility process (Mussweiler & Strack, 1999,
2001, Strack & Mussweiler, 1997). Implausible suggestions
are typically given by asking people to consider a numeric
value via a comparative question, e.g., Was Mahatma
Gandhi younger or older than 214 years when he died?
When answering this question, people draw on their

242

could also affect people’s evaluations of extreme anchors, in
the context of the absolute judgment. For example, an
implausible anchor might have a limited effect on the
estimate of a person who is certain that Gandhi died in his
seventies. However, the same anchor may strongly influence
a person who thinks that Gandhi died in his seventies but is
less certain.
This meta-cognitive account makes two novel predictions:
First, people’s estimates will be more influenced by
implausible anchors for domains and targets whose
knowledge is associated with low confidence. Second, when
presented with an implausible anchor, people’s estimates
may exceed the domain maximum, particularly when
people’s confidence in their knowledge of the domain or the
target is low.
The experiments presented here tested these predictions.
In Experiment 1, we examined how implausible anchors
affect estimates in domains for which upper boundary
values were associated with either higher or lower
confidence ratings (all confidence ratings were obtained in
independent norming). In Experiment 2 we tested whether
the level of confidence in both domain and target knowledge
interacts in determining the anchoring effect. We could
therefore identify the effects of both domain and target
confidence on the impact of implausible anchors. In
Experiment 3, we operationalized people’s knowledge in
terms of the degree of participants’ consensus in estimating
the target and domain-maximum values. We examined
whether it mediates the effects of implausible anchors.

domains for Experiments 1 and 2 (see Table 1). Three were
domains for which people were more confident of the
domain’s maximum (mean confidence = 2.58; items 1, 2, 3
in Table 1), and three were from those for which people
were less confident (mean confidence = 1.9, items 4, 5, 6, in
Table 1). Within these six domains, the mean confidence
ratings for the two targets were 2.43 (higher confidence) and
1.74 (lower confidence). Numeric estimates for the targets
did not reliably differ in any domain. To conclude, domainconfidence (confidence in domain-maximum ratings) and
target-confidence (confidence in extension of specific
targets) was manipulated orthogonally.
After choosing the six domains, we constructed anchor
values for each domain based on the numeric estimates for
the domain maximum. The lower anchor was set at 1
standard deviation above the mean estimate for the domain
maximum. The higher anchor value was constructed to be 4
standard deviations above the mean estimate for the domain
maximum.
For Experiment 3, we chose materials based on the
dispersion of the response distributions in the norming
study. In that experiment, ‘knowledge’ of the target and
domain was defined in terms of the tightness of the
distribution of estimated values. Items with tight
distributions were those in which participants tended to
provide similar estimates, and those with wide distributions
were those in which estimates varied greatly.
Table 1: Experimental items in Experiments 1 and 2
(Higher-confidence targets not used in Exp. 1)

Construction of Materials
We constructed 40 candidate domains. For each domain we
generated two target items: one for which we expected that
people would be more confident in their knowledge with
respect to the domain, and one for which we expected that
they would be less confident. For example, we expected that
people would be more confident in their knowledge of the
number of stories in the Empire State Building than in their
knowledge of the number of stories in The Petronas Towers
in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. This resulted in three norming
questions for each domain: one referring to the domain’s
maximum value (e.g., what is the number of stories in the
tallest skyscraper ever built) and two referring to the two
targets within the domain (e.g., how many stories are there
in The Empire State Building / The Petronas Towers).
These questions were distributed across three lists so that
each participant answered a question referring either to the
domain maximum or one of the two domain targets. For
each question, participants (N=40 Stony Brook
undergraduates) provided a numerical estimate and then
indicated their confidence in their response on a scale from
1 (not confident at all) to 7 (extremely confident). The mean
confidence ratings for the domain maximum question
ranged from 1.14 to 3.92 (M = 2.14, SD = 0.66). The mean
confidence ratings for target items ranged from 1 to 4.71 (M
= 1.95, SD = 0.7).
On the basis of these confidence ratings, we chose six

HigherConfidence
Target

Domain

LowerConfidence
Target

Higher Confidence Domains
1) Speed of cars

BMW-Z4

Pontiac Solstice

2) Number of movies

Julia Roberts

Sophia Loren

3) Number of stories

Empire State
building

Petronas Towers

Lower Confidence Domains
4) Number of women’s
rights law voted for by
a woman senator
5) Number of sections
in newspapers’ Sunday
edition
6) Number of deaths
from natural disaster

Hillary Clinton

Dianne Feinstein

N.Y. Times

L.A. Times

2004 tsunami in
Indonesia

1999 earthquake
in Turkey

Experiment 1
This experiment tested whether domain confidence mediates
the impact of extreme anchors. In this study we included
only lower-confidence targets within each domain because
these offered the largest potential for anchoring effects. The
paradigm consisted of a comparative question followed by

243

an absolute question. The comparative question asked
participants if they agreed or disagreed with a given anchor,
e.g.: The Pontiac Solstice can reach a top speed of 226
MPH: Agree / Disagree. Following, if they disagreed, they
were asked to provide their absolute estimate. This phrasing
of the first question was used because in contrast to the
phrasing used in prior works (which asks whether the actual
number is higher or lower than the given anchor), there is no
pragmatic implication that the suggested value is necessarily
wrong. In addition, we constructed two variations of this
question where we prefaced it with the clause It is true
that… and It is false that… (e.g., It is true that the Pontiac
Solstice can reach a top speed of 226 MPH). This framing
was meant to increase or decrease the relevance of the
anchor for the judgment following pilot work showing that
phrasing a proposition as true increases its perceived
veracity. The three framings (Neutral, True, False) were
manipulated between participants.

Figure 1: Domain confidence mediates anchoring
The departure from domain maximum (y = 0) was reliable
for the higher anchors in both domains (lower-confidence
domain: t(54) = 4.6, p < .001; higher-confidence domain:
t(54) = 2.4, p < .05), but responses for lower anchors did not
differ from 0 (ps = 0.12). Thus, we can conclude that
participants’ estimates were anchored to the domain
maximum only in the case of lower implausible anchors,
which were 1 standard deviation above the domain
maximum. When these anchor values were even more
extreme, their influence on estimates was stronger, though it
was modulated by participants’ confidence of the domain in
question. Note, in addition, that because we removed
responses that agreed with the anchor value, our analysis is
a very conservative estimate of the influence of the anchor.

Method
One-hundred and eighty-six Stony Brook University
undergraduate students completed the forms as partial
fulfillment of course requirements. We matched the 6 target
items with 2 anchor values and thus obtained 12 questions.
We then created three counterbalanced lists so that each
participant would be presented with only one target and one
anchor from each domain in either true, false, or no framing.
The overall design was 3 (Framing: None, True, False) X 2
(Domain confidence: Lower vs. Higher) X 2 (Anchor
magnitude: Lower vs. Higher). In this and the following
experiments, each item was presented on a separate sheet
and was mixed with other questions in a larger survey.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 extended our test of the impact of confidence
on anchoring by manipulating both domain and target
confidence. In addition, the experiment used the standard
phrasing of the comparative question (e.g., the Pontiac
Solstice can reach a top speed of more than / less than 226
mph), which does not pragmatically imply that the anchor
value is potentially valid. It is possible that this phrasing
would lower estimates in the high anchor condition because,
as opposed to the phrasing used in Experiment 1, it implies
that the given number is incorrect. Participants circled the
more sensible option in the comparative judgment and then
indicated their estimate in the absolute judgment (What is
your estimate of the top speed of a Pontiac Solstice?).

Results and Discussion
We standardized participants’ responses to each question by
transposing their response to z scores with respect to the
mean of the domain-maximum question and its standard
deviation. To provide a conservative estimate of the effect
of anchors we then removed those responses in which
participants agreed with the anchor value (26%). This is a
conservative estimate as it includes only responses given
after participants rejected the anchor, which are likely to be
lower than the anchor itself. We also removed highly
atypical responses 10 standard deviations above the domain
mean (1%). We therefore used data from 53 participants
who provided a data point for each experimental condition.
As Figure 1 shows, higher anchors (Anchor+) yielded
higher estimates, (F(1,52) = 16, p < .001), consistent with
prior literature. Crucially, for higher-confidence domains
the effect of higher anchors was reduced, but confidence did
not have an impact on responses to lower anchors (F(1,52)
= 6.3, p < .05 for the interaction). The data also show a main
effect of domain confidence (F(1,52) =4.22, p < .05). There
was no effect of framing (true vs. false vs. baseline), nor any
other effect.

Method
One-hundred and fifty-four Stony Brook undergraduates
took part in the study as part of course requirement. We
used the same six domains as in Experiment 1 but included
both targets for each domain, for a total of 12 questions that
were then presented with either a lower or a higher anchor.
The domains and targets we used are shown in Table 1. We
assigned the questions to 6 experimental lists so that each
participant saw only one question from each of the six
domains. The design was: 2 (Domain confidence: Lower vs.
Higher) x 2 (Target confidence: Lower vs. Higher) x 2

244

(Anchor magnitude: Lower vs. Higher).
Because we constructed anchor values to be higher than
the domain maximum, we expected that participants would
typically judge that the real value was less than the anchor
(e.g., judge that the top speed of a Pontiac is less than 226
mph). To balance the distribution of their responses, we
included two filler items with low anchor values so that for
these items participants could easily indicate that the target
value was greater than the anchor.

estimates in three domains. Two domains showed an
interaction between target confidence and anchor
magnitude. Thus, on the single-item level the anchoring
effect was as expected, but target-confidence did not reveal
the predicted effect.
Table 2: Individual domain effects in Experiment 2
Domain
1
2
3
4
5
6

Results and Discussion
We removed responses that were greater than 10 standard
deviations from the domain maximum (1%). Data were
normalized with respect to the domain-maximum
distribution as in Experiment 1. Figure 2 shows the results
for the higher confidence domains (items 1, 2, 3 in Fig. 2
top) and for the lower confidence domains (items 4, 5, 6 in
Fig. 2 bottom). For each item the figure shows the mean
estimations relative to the domain maximum, for lower and
higher confidence targets (T+/T-) when presented with
higher or lower anchors (A+/A-).

Target
F = 5.2, p < .01
F = 3.3, p = .07
F = 31, p < .001
F = 7.4 p < .01

Interaction
F=5.3, p < .05a
F=11.2, p<.01b
-

Notes
T+>TT+<TT+>TT+>T-

Note. astronger anchoring effect for lower-confidence targets.
b
stronger anchoring effect for higher-confidence targets

As a second analysis we performed an omnibus anova.
Because the design consisted of 8 conditions applied to six
thematic domains, we did not conduct a repeated measure
analysis since no participant responded to all eight
conditions. Instead, all factors were modeled as betweenparticipant responses. As expected from the analyses of the
individual domains, this analysis revealed that high anchors
were associated with higher estimates (M = 2.45 vs. .93;
F(1, 792) = 109, MSE = 454, p < .001). As shown in Figure
3, the impact of anchors was stronger when confidence in
domain knowledge was lower, resulting in a reliable
interaction between domain confidence and anchor value
(F(1, 792) = 6.82, MSE = 29.4, p < .01). This finding
replicates that of Experiment 1.
Figure 4 shows the impact of domain and target
confidence. Lower-confidence domains were associated
with higher estimates (M = 2.27 vs. 1.11; F(1, 792) = 63,
MSE = 252, p < .001). Higher-confidence targets were
associated with higher estimates, but only for lower
confidence domains. This resulted in an interaction between
the two factors (F(1, 792) = 7.25, MSE = 30.0, p < .01) as
well as a main effect of target confidence (F(1,792) = 6.67,
p < .01).

Figure 2: Individual domain results in Experiment 2
First, we examined response patterns separately for each
domain, because each consisted of a manipulation of target
confidence and anchor magnitude. All domains showed
reliable main effects of anchor magnitude; higher anchors
yielded higher estimates (ps < .05). Table 2 shows the other
reliable effects. Four domains showed main effects of target
confidence: Higher target confidence yielded higher

Figure 3: Domain and Anchor effects in Experiment 2
In this analysis, the general linear model accounted for 21%
of the variance (adjusted R2). A model including only

245

anchor magnitude accounted for 12% of the variance
(adjusted R2). This demonstrates that including confidencerelated factors in the model lead to a substantial increase in
the variance accounted for.

for the higher-knowledge domains and 1.60 for the lowerknowledge domains (both were lower than the lower
confidence domains used in Experiment 2). The design was:
2 (Domain knowledge: Lower vs. Higher) x 2 (Target
knowledge: Lower vs. Higher) x 2 (Anchor magnitude:
Lower vs. Higher). The procedure was the same as in
Experiment 2.

Results and Discussion
We removed 2 responses that were above 10 standard
deviations from the domain maximum. Data were
normalized with respect to the domain-maximum
distribution as in Experiment 1 and 2.
We first examined response patterns within each domain
separately, since each formed a manipulation of target
knowledge and anchor magnitude. In all six domains higher
anchors were associated with higher ratings (ps < .05). One
item showed an effect of target knowledge (p = .051). No
other effects or interactions were reliable in this analysis.
As a second analysis we performed an omnibus anova.
This analysis revealed a main effect of anchor (F(1,839) =
337, p < .001) and a main effect of domain knowledge
(F(1,839) = 12, p < .01). Higher knowledge domains were
associated with higher estimates (M = 2.2 vs. 1.78). In this
analysis, the model accounted for 29% of the variance
(adjusted R2), but a model including only the anchor
magnitude factor accounted for 28% of the variance
(adjusted R2). That is, knowledge-related factors did not
introduce a qualitative change in the variance accounted for.
We also examined the departure of estimates from domain
maximum (y = 0) for each item. We performed 24 t-tests as
there were 4 estimates for each domain. Estimates for all
targets differed reliably from 0 (ps < .05; FDR corrected for
multiple comparisons). The mean estimate for lower
anchors was 1.03 and the mean estimate for higher anchors
was 2.14. In other words, participants anchored to the given
values rather than to the domain maximum (0). This effect
was more pronounced for higher anchors.

Figure 4: Domain and Target effects in Experiment 2
We also examined the departure of estimates from domain
maximum (y = 0) for each item. We performed 24 t-tests as
there were 4 estimates for each domain. With the exception
of domain #2, estimates for all targets differed reliably from
0 (FDR corrected for multiple comparisons). For domain #2,
only the higher-anchor/lower-confidence item showed a
value greater than 0. Thus, for the most part, participants
anchored to the given values rather than to the domain
maximum. To conclude, this study replicated the findings of
Experiment 1 and showed that estimations given in the
presence of anchoring suggestions tended to reliably exceed
the domain maximum.

Experiment 3
In this study, the impact of anchoring was evaluated as a
function of participants’ group knowledge. Knowledge was
defined in terms of the ratio of standard deviation of a
distribution to its mean -- a unit-less measure affording
standardization across items. These values were separately
calculated for two distributions in the norming study: that of
participants’ estimations of the target value and that of their
estimations of the domain-maximum value. Lower values of
this ratio indicate higher knowledge.

Discussion
This research was motivated by the observation that extreme
numerical suggestions strongly affect people’s estimations.
A factor that could explain this effect is one’s confidence in
his or her knowledge – a factor whose role has not be
explored to date. We identified two relevant types of
knowledge– that of a domain maximum and that of the
specific target assessed. Our central hypothesis was that
greater confidence in one’s knowledge of either of these
would yield decreased assimilation to implausible anchors,
which in our study were defined as being either 1 or 4
standard deviations above an estimated domain maximum.
Experiment 1 examined the impact of confidence in the
knowledge of the domain maximum, and Experiment 2
extended it to also manipulate confidence in the knowledge
of the target item itself. Both experiments yielded the
expected anchoring effect replicating prior work in the field.
Both experiments indicated that higher confidence in the

Method
One hundred and sixty-seven Stony Brook undergraduates
took part in the study as part of course requirement. We
chose domains and targets that were associated with higher
and lower knowledge, as defined above. The values for the
target ratings were 0.85 for high-knowledge targets (Min =
0.68, Max = 1.12) and 1.79 for low-knowledge targets (Min
= 1.18, Max = 3.03). The mean of the three high-knowledge
domains was 1.16 and that of the low knowledge domains
was 2.05. This resulted in an orthogonal matching of
domain and target knowledge. To dissociate the potential
impact of confidence and knowledge combined, we chose
these items so that knowledge thus defined would be
independent of item confidence. The overall confidence in
the domain-maximum for these items was quite low: 1.40

246

knowledge of the domain maximum mediates the impact of
extreme anchors. In Experiment 1, confidence in domain
maximum reduced the impact of the higher anchor, but not
that of the lower anchor (Fig. 1). In Experiment 2,
confidence reduced the impact of both higher and lower
anchors, and in addition attenuated the overall anchoring
effect (i.e., the difference between lower and higher anchor).
Experiment 2 also revealed how estimations were related
to both domain and target confidence. When domain
confidence was higher, estimations were quite low and
unrelated to target confidence. This suggests that confidence
in the domain maximum is sufficient for modulating the
impact of an extreme anchor. Interestingly, when confidence
in the domain was lower, participants gave higher
estimations for higher confidence targets (we address this
issue below). Experiment 3 tested whether knowledge,
defined as the populations’ consensus regarding the domain
or target extensions, mediates the impact of extreme
anchors. The experiment revealed a strong effect of anchor
magnitude for all items, as in Experiments 1 and 2.
However, this effect was not mediated by any knowledgerelated factor. While higher knowledge domains appeared
more sensitive to the anchors, this factor accounted for only
1% of the total variance explained in the experiment. It is
possible that these domains were associated with more fluid
knowledge retrieval, which lead to a tendency to accept
higher values for them.
Our experiments also tested whether participants
anchored to the domain maximum, as hypothesized in prior
work (e.g., Mussweiler & Strack, 2001). In Experiments 2
and 3, estimates exceeded the domain maximum in all
conditions. In Experiment 1 only the estimates for high
confidence domains exceeded the domain maximum.
However, note that since the responses that agreed with the
anchor were removed, the reported effects were attenuated.
These departures from the domain maximum were also
found for higher confidence domains: both anchors
prompted estimates above domain maximum, with higher
anchors prompting higher estimations. It is difficult to
explain this by assuming that people’s estimates reflect
solely adjustment to the domain maximum. At the same
time, the fact that the anchoring effect was stronger for
lower confidence than higher confidence domains suggests
that participants were influenced by the domain maximum.
The finding that higher-confidence targets were more
affected by anchors when domain confidence was lower
(Exp 2) was unexpected; we predicted that in general higher
confidence would yield lower estimates. A possible
explanation is that participants’ confidence in their domainmaximum estimations and their confidence in target
estimations indexed different processes. Confidence ratings
for the domain knowledge seem to index strength of belief,
or commitment. In contrast, confidence ratings for the target
knowledge could be driven by ease-of-retrieval
misattribution effects. High processing fluency can increase
reported confidence of responses (Werth & Strack, 2003).
People might feel more confident when estimating the

maximum speed of a BMW-Z4 than that of a Pontiac
Solstice, since they can easily retrieve information regarding
the former. They could therefore conclude that their ability
to access information easily indicates that such information
is correct. This could explain why confidence in target
estimations did not modulate the impact of anchors in the
expected direction. Furthermore, it is possible that the
experience of fluency for a target, when presented with an
anchor, leads participants to more willingly entertain a large
value with respect to the target: if the anchor is true of the
target that would explain why it is easily recognizable.
It should be noted that in this research even the higherconfidence domains and targets did not receive very high
confidence ratings. We did not use domains with very high
confidence for two reasons. First, we wanted to manipulate
orthogonally domain-maximum and target confidence, but
we were unable to find low-confidence targets for highconfidence domains. Second, when people are highly certain
of the domain-maximum or target value it is likely that
anchors should not have any impact. This would have
resulted in a floor effect in the study.
Although more research is necessary to understand the
impact of confidence and anchor magnitude on estimations,
our findings demonstrate that meta-cognitive factors are
highly relevant for explaining the effects of implausible
anchors.

Acknowledgments
We thank Richard Gerrig for his thoughtful comments.

References
Chapman, G. B., & Johnson, E. J. (2002). Incorporating the
irrelevant: Anchors in judgments of belief and value. In T.
Gilovich & D. Griffin (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The
psychology of intuitive judgment. (pp. 120-138):
Cambridge University Press.
Mussweiler, T., & Strack, F. (1999). Hypothesis-consistent
testing and semantic priming in the anchoring paradigm:
A selective accessibility model. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 35, 136-164.
Mussweiler, T., & Strack, F. (2000). Numeric judgments
under uncertainty: The role of knowledge in anchoring.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 36, 495-518.
Mussweiler, T., & Strack, F. (2001). Considering the
impossible: Explaining the effects of implausible anchors.
Social Cognition, 19, 145-160.
Strack, F., & Mussweiler, T. (1997). Explaining the
enigmatic anchoring effect: Mechanisms of selective
accessibility. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology,
73(3), 437-446.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157),
1124-1131.
Werth, L., & Strack, F. (2003). An inferential approach to
the knew-it-all-along phenomenon. Memory, 11, 411–
419.

247

