UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A PDP Simulation of the Effects of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation on Semantic Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0mk3w7gp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Drakesmith, Mark
Pobric, Gorana
Welbourne, Stephen

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A PDP Simulation of the E ffects of Transcranial M agnetic Stimulation on Semantic
Cognition
M ar k D rakesmith (mar k.drakesmith@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk)
Gorana Pobric (gorana.pobric@manchester.ac.uk)
Stephen W elbourne (stephen.r.welbourne@manchester.ac.uk)
Neuroscience and Aphasia Research Unit (NARU), School of Psychological Sciences, Zochonis Building, Brunswick Street,
University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK.
A bstract

almost exclusively results in impaired semantic memory
(see Hodges & Patterson, 2007, for a review). One feature
common to many SD patients is poor naming performance,
which is differentiated according to naming level:
subordinate naming is the worst affected whilst
superordinate naming is the most likely to be preserved.
Evidence from neuroimaging studies such as PET and
fMRI reveal two contradictory perspectives on how
semantic memory is stored. Some (e.g. Petersen et al, 1988;
Grabowski et al, 2001) have shown that participants given
visual and verbal stimuli for various items, show increased
blood flow to frontal and temporal regions of the cortex.
However, there is also evidence that semantic memory is
distributed. Thompson-Schill et al (1999) found that
participants asked to recall visual properties of an object
showed increased activity in the left fusiform gyrus.
Grosman et al (2002) found that retrieval of actions
associated with tool use elicited higher activation of premotor cortex, suggesting a store of motor representations.
This distributed theory has been used to explain why there
appear to be distant neural substrates for animal objects and
man-made objects (e.g. Caramazza & Shelton, 1998)
because of differing perceptual content between these
categories.
These two contradictory strands have been unified in the
form of the semantic hub theory (reviewed in Patterson et
al, 2007). The theory states that semantic memory is
distributed across regions which store representations
specific to a certain modality such as visual or motor
representations. These representations are, however,
interconnected via a central ‘semantic hub’ in the ATL. This
hub gives rise to amodal semantic concepts through its
interconnections
between
the
modality-specific
representations.
Some imaging studies have looked at naming level effects
(e.g. Tyler et al, 2004) and have suggested a continuum of
naming specificity along the posterior-anterior axis of the
inferior temporal cortex (Martin & Chao, 2001). However, a
meta-analysis by Patterson et al (2007) shows subordinate
name activations are usually no more anterior than those for
basic-level naming. They suggested alternatively that
subordinate naming requires activation of more anterior
regions of temporal cortex because of the increased
computational demands of differentiation of overlapping
concepts within a particular category. This argument

Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a useful tool for
determining cortical interactions that take place during
semantic cognition (Pobric et al, 2007). TMS of the anterior
temporal lobe (ATL) induces specificity-graded conceptual
breakdown of stored representations resulting in differential
effects on naming tasks depending on the level of specificity
required. This paper aims to elucidate this effect using the
Rogers et al (2004) model of semantic cognition. TMS effects
are modelled by reducing the gain of the affected units to
simulate reduction in neuronal sensitivity. Results show that
basic-level naming is more robust to rTMS than subordinate
level naming as found by Pobric et al. In addition the model
predicts that superordinate naming should be even more robust
to rTMS than basic level naming. This specificity-graded
breakdown of semantic memory appears to be independent of
learnt word frequency. This supports evidence that the ATL’s
function is that of category differentiation.
K eywords: neuroscience; psychology; cognitive architectures;
concepts and categories; distributed cognition; memory;
semantics; computational neuroscience; computer simulation;
neural networks

Introduction
Semantic memory has become a key area for
neuropsychological and neuroimaging research. There are a
number of characteristic semantic effects such as typicality,
context, and familiarity, which can be used to probe the
organisation of semantic representations.
One characteristic feature of semantic memory is that
when naming an item, there is strong bias towards a ‘basic’
level of categorisation. For example when asked to name a
picture of a brown Labrador, the most common response is
‘dog’, rather than a subordinate name, like ‘Labrador’ or a
superordinate name such as ‘animal’ (see Murphy &
Lassaline, 1997 for a review). A proposed explanation of the
basic-level effect is that of category differentiation, which
arises from a balance between informativeness and
distinctiveness (Murphy & Brownell, 1985). Subordinate
names are the most informative while superordinate names
are the most distinctive.
Neuropsychological and Neuroimaging F indings Much
insight into the neural basis of semantic cognition has been
derived from patients with Semantic dementia (SD) which
in particular occurs in the anterior temporal lobes (ATL) and

508

parallels with the informativeness-distinctiveness account
for naming level effects (Murphy and Brownell, 1985). It is
also consistent with that of Rogers et al (2007) (described
below) which argues that naming-level effects are an
emergent property of the semantic network.

the input-output (I/O) function (e.g. Muellbacher et al,
2000). This is a convenient analogy to make with sigmoid
activation function used in many PDP models. Reduction of
synaptic sensitivity can be simulated by reducing the gain of
this function.

T ranscranial M agnetic Stimulation (T M S) TMS has been
used as an investigative technique in cognitive neuroscience
since the 1980s (reviewed in Walsh & Pascual-Leone,
2003). Unlike passive imaging techniques, TMS can be used
to alter the brain’s dynamics and thus establish causal links
between brain function and cognition.
The TMS paradigm typically used in cognitive
neuroscience is a repeated constant train of TMS pulses
(rTMS) usually at 1Hz for approx. 5-10 minutes.
Participants are usually tested on a behavioural task before
and after TMS. Effects of TMS manifest in changes in
reaction times (RTs) and rarely in obvious behavioural
changes.
rTMS provides new avenues to explore the neural basis of
semantic memory. Pobric et al (2007) applied rTMS to the
ATL and measured RTs for a naming task. Participants were
asked to produce basic level or subordinate level names to
visual images. The results show a significant effect of rTMS
on subordinate naming but not on basic naming.
This finding adds further evidence to indicate the ATL is
required to differentiate overlapping semantic concepts.
Although the extent of the effect of rTMS is much smaller
(effects only manifest in RTs), the mechanisms of
conceptual breakdown are considered analogous.

Computational M odels Parallel distributed processing
(PDP; Rumelhart et al, 1986) is a popular approach to
studying cognition because of its ability to produce models
that learn and have biologically inspired features. There has
been much interest in modelling semantic memory in a PDP
framework, and particularly, in lesioning such models to
simulate symptoms of neurological conditions such as SD
(reviewed in McClelland & Rogers, 2003),
Many of these models have simply tried to model the
behavioural characteristics of semantic memory and have,
until recently, remained divorced from the underlying
cortical structure. In the spirit of the semantic hub theory,
Rogers et al (2004) proposed a model consisting of separate
layers corresponding to different modality-specific
representations in different cortical regions. All of these
regions are linked via the semantic layer (representing the
ATL) which mediates links between modality-specific
features.
The model was trained on items derived from a set of
prototypes, themselves derived from a hierarchical cluster
analysis of semantic norms (Garard et al, 2001). The model
was trained on both subordinate and basic names. However,
it was not specifically tested for naming level effects,
although a range of deficits that correlate with SD were
demonstrated.
Although level effects were not explicitly tested in this
model, Rogers et al (2007) subsequently made predictions
about how such effect would arise because of movement
through the semantic representational space. These
predictions match Murphy and Brownell’s (1985)
distinctiveness-informativeness account. As the network
trains, items rearrange into clusters in the representational
space. These clusters reflect similarities between items:
Items that are very similar organise into dense, tightly
packed clusters. Intra-cluster density is high. Therefore,
concepts within clusters (at the subordinate level) are
informative but not distinctive. Inter-cluster density is low
and therefore concepts between clusters (at the
superordinate level) are distinctive but uninformative. This
type of organisation was shown in a previous model by
Rumelhart & Todd (1993) and by Rogers & McClelland
(2004) but has not yet been tested in the multi-modal
network.

Physiology of T M S There is still debate of how TMS exerts
its disruptive effect. One account is that it introduces
aberrant noise into the neural dynamics (Walsh & Coway,
2000). This does not account for the relative persistence of
TMS effects with no further stimulation, or the robustness
of neural populations to noisy inputs.
Recent evidence suggests synaptic plasticity as the cause
(see Thickbroom, 2007 for a review). Some studies find the
suppressive or facilitatory TMS effects are rate-dependant
(Fitzgerald et al, 2006). High frequency pulse trains (about
5Hz or over) have LTP-like effects, while low frequency
pulse trains, as commonly used for investigation of
cognitive function, result in LTD-like effects.
Huang et al (2007) tested the effects of TMS on LTP/D by
administering participants with an NMDA antagonist;
NMDA being a vital precursor to LTP induction. They
found low-frequency TMS applied to participants given the
NMDA antagonist failed to suppress evoked motor
responses compared those given placebos. Also, Esser et al
(2006) measured ERPs before and after high-frequency
rTMS. They found amplitudes of ERPs recorded near the
stimulation site were significantly higher after rTMS,
indicating an LTP-like effect. The reductions in RT in
behavioural experiments have therefore been attributed to
reduced sensitivity of the cortex to synaptic inputs. Some
studies of TMS on motor cortex have measured changes in

A ims The aim of this project is to simulate the effects of
TMS found by Pobric et al (2007) using the Rogers et al
(2004) model. As well as showing behavioural aspects of
normal and impaired semantic cognition, the model’s multimodal architecture is capable of replicating the experimental
paradigm of Pobric et al (2007). The model will be used to
determine if normal naming level effects are emergent

509

property of the network or dependant on word frequency
(Brown, 1958). The model can then be ‘lesioned’, but rather
than removing connection weights, rTMS is simulated by
reducing the gain of the sigmoid activation function within
the semantic layer. This is aimed to simulate the reduction
in synaptic sensitivity in this region as shown by
physiological evidence.

network. The network simulates ‘continuous’ time over
seven time intervals; each time interval is further divided
into 10 ticks, which are arbitrary units of ‘continuous’ time.
The input function is treated as a derivative of each units
input. To obtain the actual input for each tick, the Euler
method is used to integrate the input function over time.
The weights are initially set at random, and then during
training are modified by a back-propagation algorithm using
the delta rule. While training, the network is presented with
inputs of each item in each modality by clamping the
relevant layers to the relevant stimuli. The network is then
permitted to cycle for 3 intervals. Inputs are then removed
for 2 more intervals and then targets applied for 2 more
intervals. Since there are 10 ticks per interval, the maximum
possible length of each example is 70 ticks. Error
derivatives are only calculated for each unit on each tick for
which the network is given a target. Training is also subject
to a learning rate of 0.005 and a weight decay of 0.0002.
The total training length for the network is 10,000 epochs.
The training examples were selected in a probabilistic
manner, with the constraint that each name should be
presented equally often; because the number of names in
each level does not match the number of items, the
frequency of each name level has to be modified to satisfy
this constraint. For example, there are 48/2=24 examples
presenting the same superordinate name in the training set
and each basic name will be 48/6=8 times more likely
appear in the training set. The frequency of each example is
therefore matched to the number of names in that examples’
naming level. So fsub=48, fbas=6 and fsup=2. The first
experiment was carried out using the flat name frequencies
as above. The second experiment used an artificially inflated
basic-level frequency (fbas=60) to simulate the fact that basic
level names tend to be higher frequency than subordinate
level ones.
Once trained, the network is tested on each item by
clamping the relevant group for 3 cycles. The RT is defined
as the tick at which all units are within a threshold of 0.3 of
their target activations. i.e. the RT is when all ON-target
units have activations above 0.7 and all OFF-target units
have activations below 0.3. This level was found to be

Method
All network simulations are carried out in LENS neural
network simulator (Rohde, 2003) with subsequent analysis
carried out in MATLAB. The model is adapted from that of
Rogers et al (2004). Two frequency manipulations were
made (flat vs. basic-level inflated frequencies). All layers
are connected via bidirectional, dense, asymmetrically
weighted links. Three main type of representation are given:
visual features, verbal descriptions and names. The visual
features are encoded in one layer. The verbal descriptions
are encoded in three layers, subdivided into perceptual,
functional and encyclopaedic descriptions.
The naming layer is expanded slightly from the original
model. (see figure 1). Each name is encoded by the
activation of one unique unit in each layer. During training,
the model is presented with separate examples for each level
of naming and for each modality. Targets for each modality
are given during training and the name appropriate for the
specified level is also given. A name is generated in all three
levels and not restricted to a particular level. This is
equivalent to the free-recall paradigm in experimental
psychology.
The network is trained on 48 items, each associated with
unique subordinate names, 6 basic names (8 items for each
name) and 2 superordinate names (24 items for each name).
All units in the network have a dot product input function
and a sigmoid output function. The input is also subject to
an untrainable bias, which is set to -2 throughout the

Figure 2: Sigmoid activation function of semantic
units (GR=0) and the gain reduction manipulations used
to simulate rTMS.

Figure 1: Structure of the PDP network for the noncompetitive naming simulations. Numbers in brackets
indicate number of units.

510

rigorous enough to prevent potentially ambiguous patterns
of activation being reported as decisive responses, but also
lenient enough to allow naming to be at or near 100%
accuracy.
The effects of rTMS were simulated in the PDP
environment by altering the gain of the sigmoid activation
function to mimic the effect of a reduction in synaptic
sensitivity. Gain reductions of 0 to 0.5 in increments of 0.1
were tested (figure 2).

Subordinate naming shows the strongest TMS effect,
followed by basic naming, with superordinate names
showing the weakest TMS effect. The TMS effect for
subordinate naming becomes significantly higher than for
the other naming levels at a gain reduction of 0.3. The
difference in TMS effect between basic naming and
superordinate naming only becomes significant at a gain
reduction of 0.5 (figure 3c).
With the basic level inflated frequencies, initial RTs for
basic naming are significantly lower than for both
subordinate and superordinate naming, as in human naming.
There is no significant difference between subordinate and
superordinate naming (figure 4a). The mean unit activation
for basic names reaches threshold much sooner than
subordinate and superordinate naming, the rate of ascent of
the basic name activations being higher in the basic-inflated
network than the flat-frequency network (figure 4b).
The effects of gain reduction on RTs are similar to the
flat-frequency network and to the results from Pobric et al.
The TMS effect for subordinate naming becomes
significantly higher than for the other levels at a gain
reduction of 0.3. Meanwhile basic naming, although
showing a similar TMS effect never becomes significant

Results
Significance tests between different levels of naming were
carried out with Welch’s t-tests.
With the flat-frequency network, RTs between all levels
are significantly different (figure 3a), with subordinates
having the highest RT and superordinates having the lowest
RT. This pattern is reflected in the mean unit activation
during trials, with superordinate name activations reaching
threshold first, followed by basic, and then subordinate
naming (figure 3b).
The effects of TMS (as simulated by gain reduction)
reveal a specificity-graded breakdown of naming that is
congruent with the results of Pobric et al ’s behavioural data.
(a)

(b)

**
**

(c)
Subordinate
Superordinate

*

70

Time (ticks)

Figure 3: Results of simulations on network trained on flat frequencies (a) RTs for naming a different levels (b) Time
course of target-ON name unit activations, averaged over all examples. (c) Effects of gain reduction on RT for each
naming level. In (a) and (c) error bars indicate standard error and significant differences between naming levels are
indicated by braces: p<0.05 indicated by * and p<0.001 indicated by **.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Subordinate

**

**

Superordinate

70

Time (ticks)

Figure 4: Results of simulations on network trained on basic-level inflated frequencies. (a) RTs for naming a different
levels (b) Time course of target-ON name unit activations, averaged over all examples. (c) Effects of gain reduction
on RT for each naming level. In (a) and (c) error bars indicate standard error and significant differences between
naming levels are indicated by braces: p<0.05 indicated by * and p<0.001 indicated by **.

511

specificity. If Roger’s et al (2007) predictions hold true, we
can expect to find a pattern of subordinate categories
organized in small and dense (informative but indistinctive)
clusters while superordinate categories being in large and
sparse (distinctive but uninformative) clusters. As a result,
basic level categories would show high, intra-cluster density
(informative) and low inter-cluster density (distinctive).
Based on the speculated cluster structure, Rogers et al
(2007) made predictions about the rate of unit activations:
unit activation of target-ON units are dictated by the
network’s movement through representational space as it
tended towards the target item. Initially, superordinate items
were predicted to activate first, followed by basic and
finally subordinate names. However, the dense clustering of
basic and subordinate names results in subsequent rapid
activations for those levels, and consequently, in basic
names reaching threshold first. The mean unit activations in
the basic-inflated network (figure 4b) shows this predicted
pattern of activation. The rates of initial descent correspond
to the naming levels, with subordinates showing the
sharpest decent. Subordinates and basics subsequently show
faster ascents than superordinate, but because basic names
had a slower initial decent, it reaches threshold before either
subordinate or superordinate.
Again, this pattern was not observed in the flat-frequency
network, suggesting again that this effect is to some extent
frequency-dependant. However, the differing rates of ascent
for superordinates and subordinates in this network indicate
only a partial dependence on frequency. The structure of the
learnt semantic representations also clearly plays a role.
It should be noted that Roger et al’s (2007) prediction was
made for semantic unit activations rather than name units.
The decision to make a response in a semantic task is likely
to involve a network comprising temporal lobe and prefrontal cortex (e.g. Jennings et al , 1997) and not in cortical
regions responsible for modality-specific representations.
The name units themselves only activate once threshold is
reached in the semantic units so one would expect them to
display similar time courses.
Another issue with the model that should be considered is
that there is no delay propagation between units. Although
units activate in a temporally graded manner, the spreading
of activations to other linked units do not. When visible
units are clamped to ON, the activation of the connected
semantic units progress in a graded manner, but then all
other visible units connected via those semantic units also
activate simultaneously. Propagation delays between
cortical populations during cognitive tasks, often connected
via polysynaptic connections, are likely to significantly
contribute to RTs.

compared to superordinates (figure 4c). Nevertheless there
is still a persistent trend for superordinates to be more robust
to TMS effects and it appears it would continue through
greater gain reductions, which is likely to yield a significant
TMS effect for basic names. The robustness of
superordinates to TMS in the basic-inflated network is
surprising as the overall RT for basic naming is much lower
then for superordinate naming (figure 4c) suggesting that it
is an easier task and so should be more resistant to the effect
of rTMS than superordinates.

Discussion
This project aimed to model impairments in semantic
processing as a consequence of rTMS to ATL (Pobric et al,
2007) using a pre-existing PDP framework (Rogers et al,
2004). Results show that the network with inflated basicname frequencies gave rise to both basic-level superiority in
undamaged naming and selective impairment of
subordinate, but not basic level, naming by rTMS. These
results are in accordance with the human data from the
study by Pobric et al (2007). That study did not obtain
results for superordinate naming. However, the model
predicts that superordinate naming should be more stable
than basic-level naming and so will be unimpaired by rTMS
at the dosage levels used in the Pobric et al study. In some
ways this is a surprising prediction as superordinate naming
is slower than basic level naming which might be taken as a
sign that it is a harder task and so should be more
susceptible to TMS. However, it is consistent with the
neuropsychological evidence of SD patients who show
impaired subordinate naming but relatively unpaired
superordinate naming. This suggests that the analogy
previously made between rTMS and SD is valid.
The flat-frequency condition shows that the emergent
naming level effects in the model do not fully account for
the human naming pattern, although Rogers et al (2007)
predicted that they would. Only when basic-level name
frequencies are inflated in the second network, does basiclevel naming superiority arise. This suggests that basic-level
superiority is only partially an emergent property of the
network and also depends on frequency.
Although human-like naming-level effects did not
manifest themselves without frequency manipulation, there
is still a specificity-graded breakdown of conceptual
knowledge caused by rTMS in both networks (figure 3c &
4c). This suggests that the specificity-graded effects of
rTMS are independent of name frequency. These results add
support for Patterson et al ’s (2007) proposition that the
ATL’s role is not so much in the storage of highly specific
information, but in the differentiation of highly overlapping
concepts. It also supports Rogers et al (2007) position that
such an ability is emergent.
Further information about the structure of semantic
representations can be ascertained by examining the
behaviour of the semantic layer during testing. Dimensional
scaling and cluster analysis of the learnt semantic
representations can reveal patterns reflecting naming

Conclusion The basic level superiority effect found in
normal naming and the differential inhibitory effects of
rTMS on naming demonstrated by Pobric et al (2007) have
been successfully replicated in a PDP model based on the
semantic hub theory. The basic-level superiority effect is
largely influenced by increased frequency as previously

512

Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11 , 70-84.
Murphy, G. L., & Lassaline, M. E. (1997). Hierarchical
Structure in Concepts and the Basic Level of
Categorization. In K. Lamberts & D. R. Shanks (Eds.),
Knowledge, Concepts and Categories (pp. 93-131). Hove:
Psychology Press.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P. J., & Rogers, T. T. (2007). Where
do you know what you know? The representation of
semantic knowledge in the human brain. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 8, 976-987.
Petersen, S. E., Fox, P. T., Posner, M. I., Mintun, M., &
Raichle, M. E. (1988). Positron emission tomographic
studies of the cortical anatomy of single-word processing.
Nature, 331, 585-589.
Pobric, G., Jefferies, E., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2007).
Anterior temporal lobes mediate semantic representation:
Mimicking semantic dementia by using rTMS in normal
participants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 104, 20137–20141.
Rohde, D. (2003). LENS: The light, efficient network
simulator (Version 2.63).
Rogers, T. T., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Garrard, P., Bozeat,
S., McClelland, J. L., Hodges, J. R., Patterson, K. (2004).
Structure and deterioration of semantic memory: A
neuropsychological and computational investigation.
Psychological Review, 111, 205–235.
Rogers, T. T., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Semantic
Cognition: A Parallel Distributed Processing Approach .
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Rogers, T. T., & Patterson, K. (2007). Object
categorization: Reversals and explanations of the basiclevel advantage. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 136, 451–469.
Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L., & The PDP Research
Group. (1986). Parallel Distributed Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Thickbroom, G. W. (2007). Transcranial magnetic
stimulation and synaptic plasticity: Experimental
framework and human models. Experimental Brain
Research, 180, 583–593.
Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2003). Neuroimaging studies of
semantic memory. Neuropsychologia, 41, 280–292.
Thompson-Schill, S. L., Aguirre, G. K., D’Esposito, M., &
Farah, M. J. (1999). A neural basis for category and
modality
specificity
of
semantic
knowledge.
Neuropsychologia, 37, 671–676.
Tyler, L. K., Stamatakis, E. A., Bright, P., Acres, K.,
Abdallah, S., Rodd, J. M., Moss, H. E. (2004). Processing
objects at different levels of specificity. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 351-362.
Walsh, V., & Cowey, A. (2000). Transcranial magnetic
stimulation and cognitive neuroscience. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 1, 73–79.
Walsh, V., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2003). Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation: Towards a Neurochronometrics of
Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.

indicated (e.g. Brown, 1958). However, there is also
indication that internal structure of the learned semantic
representations, rather than frequency, is responsible for the
differential rTMS effect on naming. The model also predicts
that rTMS should have a greater effect on basic level
naming than on superordinate naming. Although this
appears counter intuitive, based on superordinate naming
being an apparently harder task, it is consistent with the idea
that there is a central inter-modal hub responsible for
category differentiation.

References
Brown, R. (1958). How shall a thing be called?
Psychological Review, 65, 14-21.
Caramazza, A., & Shelton, J. R. (1998). Domain-specific
knowledge systems in the brain the animate-inanimate
distinction. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 1–34.
Castellani, G. C., Quinlan, E. M., Bersani, F., Cooper, L. N.,
& Shouval, H. Z. (2005). A model of bidirectional
synaptic plasticity: From signalling network to channel
conductance. Learning and Memory, 12, 423-432.
Esser, S. K., Huber, R., Massimini, M., Peterson, M. J.,
Ferrarelli, F., & Tononi, G. (2006). A direct demonstration
of cortical LTP in humans: A combined TMS/EEG study.
Brain Research Bulletin, 69, 86-94.
Fitzgerald, P. B., Fountain, S., & Daskalakis, Z. J. (2006). A
comprehensive review of the effects of rTMS on motor
Clinical
cortical
excitability
and
inhibition.
Neurophysiology, 117, 2584–2596.
Grabowski, T. J., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., Boles Ponto, L.
L., Hichwa, R. D., & Damasio, A. R. (2001). A role for
left temporal pole in the retrieval of words for unique
entities. Human Brain Mapping, 13, 199-212.
Huang, Y.-Z., Chen, R.-C., Rothwell, J. C., & Wen, H.-Y.
(2007). The after-effect of human theta burst stimulation is
NMDA receptor dependent. Clinical Neurophysiology,
118, 1028–1032.
Jennings, J. M., McIntosh, A. R., Shitij Kapur, S., Tulving,
E., & Houle, S. (1997). Cognitive subtractions may not
add up: The interaction between semantic processing and
response mode. NeuroI mage, 5, 229-239.
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational
Analysis of Present-day American Engish. Providence:
Brown University Press.
Martin, A., & Chao, L. L. (2001). Semantic memory and the
brain: structure and processes. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 11, 194-201.
McClelland, J. L., & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel
distributed processing approach to semantic cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310-322.
Muellbacher, W., Ziemann, U., Boroojerdi, B. & Hallett, M.
(2000). Effects of low-frequency transcranial magnetic
stimulation on motor excitability and basic motor
behavior. Clinical Neurophysiology, 111, 1002-1007.
Murphy, G. L., & Brownell, H. H. (1985). Category
differentiation in object recognition: typicality constraints
on the basic category advantage. Journal of Experimental

513

