UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Abstract language, global perception: How language shapes what we see

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7s61x6rn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Krahmer, Emiel
Stapel, Diederik

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Abstract language, global perception: How language shapes what we see
Emiel Krahmer (E.J.Krahmer@uvt.nl)
Department of Communication and Information Sciences, Faculty of Humanities,
Tilburg University, The Netherlands

Diederik A. Stapel (D.A.Stapel@uvt.nl)
Department of Social Psychology, Faculty of Social and Behavioral Sciences,
Tilburg University, The Netherlands
Abstract

Pullum 1991), but recent work has revealed highly
interesting cross-linguistic differences related to, for
instance, spatial orientation (e.g., Majid et al. 2006),
perception of time (e.g., Boroditsky 2001), and perception
of color (e.g., Winawer et al. 2007). Nevertheless, there are
arguably two basic problems with this general approach: (1)
the problem of cross-translation between languages and (2)
the problem that differences between languages may covary
with other characteristics of populations and that such
differences may not solely be attributed to linguistic
differences (e.g., Ji et al. 2004).
These two problems arise when different languages are
compared, but vanish as soon as we try to answer the
question within a given language. The “Does language
shape thought?” question then becomes: can withinlanguage variation lead to differences in thought? There is a
sense in which this is clearly true: as many studies in
psycholinguistics and social psychology have shown, words
may influence how we perceive and evaluate the world. To
give but one recent example (from Labroo et al., 2008):
participants that are exposed to a word like “key,” are
quicker in processing a picture of a lock and evaluate this
lock more favorably. Studies such as these show that a
specific word may influence the perception of a specific
image. Put another way, in such studies (as in the majority
of priming studies), the semantics of the priming words is
assumed to stand in a direct relation to the effect under
consideration (e.g., priming with words like “rude” and
“polite” makes people behave in a more rude or polite way,
Bargh et al., 1996; priming with “warmth” increases
interpersonal warmth, Williams & Bargh, 2008, etc.). In this
paper, however, we do not focus on the semantics of words;
rather we address a more basic question, to wit: can classes
of words (i.e., concrete or abstract ones) influence basic,
general cognitive processes?

We show that the abstractness level of words and sentences
influences basic cognitive processes. In particular, we show
that abstract language causes participants to pay more
attention to global features in a perceptual focus task and
makes them more inclusive on a categorization task, while
concrete language leads to a more detailed perceptual focus
and more exclusive categorizations. These effects are shown
for nouns, adjectives and verbs, as well as for sentences with
ambitransitive verbs.
Keywords: Language, Perception, Linguistic Relativity,
Categorization, Abstract and Conrete Language

Introduction
Some words are abstract, vague and insubstantial, while
others are concrete, definite and easily visualized. This
much is uncontroversial (e.g., Glenberg et al., 2008). But
what, if any, are the cognitive effects of abstract and
concrete language use? Do people perceive the world
differently after having processed abstract and concrete
language? We argue that they do. More specifically, we
show that abstract language results in a more global
perceptual focus and more inclusive categorizations, while
concrete language induces more attention to perceptual
details and more exclusive categorizations. In this paper, we
report on a series of experiments that, to the best of our
knowledge, show for the first time that the abstractness level
of words indeed influences basic cognitive processes.

Language and Thought
Our research fits in with a wider research tradition, asking
whether language shapes thought. Providing a definite
answer to this seemingly straightforward question has
proven to be surprisingly difficult (Boroditsky, 2003: 917).
Probably, the best-known interpretation of the “does
language shape thought?” question is the one due to Sapir
and his student Whorf: the linguistic relativity interpretation
(more commenly known as the Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis),
which states that systematic differences between languages
give rise to systematic differences in thought between
speakers of these languages (Whorf, 1956).
For a long time, research directly addressing the SapirWhorf hypothesis has had a somewhat negative reputation
(consider, for instance, the Eskimo-words-for-snow debate;

Concrete versus Abstract Language
We argue that differences in abstractness-level between
words and sentences have a direct influence on basic
cognitive processes. But what makes language abstract or
concrete? First of all, it is intuitively clear that some words
(“democracy”) are more abstract and others are more
concrete (“office chair”). Moreover, it is also clear that this
distinction does not only apply to nouns, but to other
syntactic categories as well. An adjective such as
“spiritual”, for instance, is intuitively more abstract than,

286

say, an adjective like “blond”. Similarly, in the case of
verbs, it seems fair to say that a verb such as “hit” is more
concrete, since it describes a directly visible action, while a
verb such as “hate” is arguably more abstract, referring as it
does to a more global state which may last for an
unspecified period of time and may be caused by a variety
of reasons (cf. Semin and Fiedler, 1988).
On a sentential level, things are slightly more complex.
Naturally, a sentence with many abstract words is more
abstract than one with many concrete words. But are there
also minimal sentential pairs that differ in their level of
abstractness, while not differing in the number of abstract or
concrete words that they contain? We claim that there are.
For example, it can be argued that sentences with implict
arguments are more abstract than sentences with explicit
arguments. As it happens, ambitransitive verbs (e.g., Dixon
and Aikhenvaid, 2000) offer a perfect opportunity to study
this difference. Ambitransitives are verbs (such as “read”)
that can be used both in an intransitive (“Grandfather reads
with glasses”) and in a transitive way (“Grandfather reads a
book”) without requiring morphologic changes on the verb.
In the intransitive use the direct object is left implicit, while
it is made explicit in the transitive reading.

view (penguins share many global features with birds) and
hence will be more inclusive in categorization, while
participants primed with concrete words will pay more
attention to local differences and as a result will be less
inclusive. These hypotheses are tested in four experiments,
where participants are primed with abstract or concrete
nouns (Experiment 1), adjectives (Experiment 2), verbs
(Experiment 3) and ambitransitives (Experiment 4) via
different priming methods. Following this, participants will
perform both the perceptual focus and categorical
incluviness task, in addition to various self-report measures.

Figure 1: An exmple trial of the Perceptual Focus Task,
with one reference figure (left), a global match (middle) and
a local match (right).

Experiment 1: Nouns
Method

The current studies

Participants Participants were 47 undergraduate students
from Tilburg Unversity who participated for course credits.
All were native speakers of Dutch.

We have just argued that there are multiple ways in which
words and sentences may be assumed to be more abstract or
more concrete. In this paper, we test the hypothesis that the
abstractness level of language influences performance on
two very different, basic cognitive tasks: the perceptual
focus task (Kimchi & Palmer, 1982, see also Gasper &
Clore, 2002) and the categorical inclusiveness task (Isen &
Daubman, 1984, see also Smith & Trope, 2006).
In the first task, participants are confronted with a series
of three abstract geometric figures such as the one depicted
in Figure 1, where participants have to indicate which of
two target figures is most similar to a reference figure. This
reference figure always has a basic geometric shape
comprised of smaller geometric figures of a different shape
(e.g., a square consisting of circles). One of the target
figures has the same global shape as the reference figure but
is build from differently shaped subfigures (e.g., a square
consisting of triangles), while the other has a different
global shape but is build from the same specific subfigures
as the reference figure (e.g., a triangle consisting of circles).
We hypothesize that participants that have just processed
abstract language are more likely to match figures based on
the global, overall shape, while participants confronted with
concrete language will match figures more often based on
the local details of the figures.
The second cognitive task is categorization. Are penguins
birds? Intuitively, penguins are moderate exemplars of the
bird category, having many global bird-like properties (they
have wings and feathers, lay eggs, etc.) but also lacking
some properties (most notably: they don’t fly). We
hypothesize that participants who have just processed
abstract language are more likely to take a global, holistic

Materials Two lists of seven words were compiled, one
with concrete and the other with abstract nouns. The
concrete list included nouns such as “dishwasher” and
“office chair” and the abstract one contained nouns like
“democracy” and “hypothesis”.1 A pre-test confirmed that
people indeed rated these words as highly concrete and
highly abstract respectively. In addition, a control list was
compiled consisting of seven words of varying abstraction
levels and belonging to different syntactic categories. The
influence of nouns on basic perceptual processes was
assessed using a 24-item perceptual focus questionnaire
based on Kimchi and Palmer (1982) and Gasper & Clore
(2002), in which participants had to match one of two
geometrical figures with a reference figure, and a 12-item
categorical inclusion task (with weak, moderate and strong
examplars for four categories) derived from Isen and
Daubman (1984) and Smith and Trope (2006). For the latter
questionnaire, participants had to indicate whether an item
(e.g., penguin) belonged to a given category (bird) on a
scale ranging from 1 (definitely does not belong to this
category) to 9 (definitely does belong).
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the experimental conditions. After they arrived in the
experimental laboratory, they were seated in individual
1

Here and elsewhere English translations of Dutch originals are
given. The complete list of stimuli can be obtained from the
authors.

287

cubicles and told that they would work on a series of
unrelated tasks. A filler task preceded the actual
manipulation, in which participants were shows a random
sequence of 10 letters and asked to form six words of at
least three letters from these. The second task (and
experimental manipulation) consisted of a memory task, in
which participants were asked to memorize the seven words
on their list. They were told they would be asked to recall
these seven words later in the experimental session. Next,
participants performed the perceptual focus and the
categorical inclusiveness tasks (in that order), which were
presented as two more unrelated tasks. After this,
participants performed the memory test; all were able to
recall at least six items correctly. Following this,
participants answered the following question on a scale
ranging from 1 (local) to 9 (global) “When you did the
shape task, to what extent did you focus on local matches
(e.g., a square of triangles goes with a triangle of triangles)
or global (e.g., a square of triangles goes with a square of
squares)?” In addition, participants were asked to indicate
their current mood on a scale ranging from 1 (negative) to 7
(positive) by answering the question “How negative or
positive do you feel at this moment?” This was done to rule
out possible mood confounds on the other questionnaires.
Indeed, analysis revealed that priming had no effect on
mood (F < 1), and therefore this measure is not further
discussed. Finally, on completion of all tasks and questions,
participants were carefully debriefed about the goal and
purpose of the experiment, following the debriefing
procedure for priming experiments (Bargh & Chartrand,
2000). None of the participants indicated suspicion of the
actual goal of the study, and none suspected connections
between the various tasks. After debriefing, participants
were thanked for their participation and dismissed.

focus task, where participants primed with abstract nouns
were more likely to use the global form as a basis for
matching figures (M = 16.2, SD = 3.1) than participants
primed with concrete nouns (M = 11.1, SD = 2.6), with the
control condition (M = 12.6, SD = 1.1) in between, F(2, 44)
= 17.70, p < .001, η2 = .45. As can be seen in Table 1,
participants’ self-reports mirror this pattern, F(2,44)= 13.79,
p < .001, η2 = .39. A partial correlation analysis with
condition as control variable revealed a high correlation
between these two measures (r = .86, p < .001).
Moreover, priming also influenced the average
inclusiveness scores in the predicted manner: participants in
the abstract noun condition were more inclusive (M = 6.6,
SD = 0.9) than participants in the concrete noun condition
(M = 4.9, SD =1.7), with the control condition sandwiched
in between (M = 6.0, SD = 0.9), F(2, 44) = 12.63, p < .001,
η2 = .37.
The first experiment clearly confirmed our hypotheses
about abstract versus concrete language and their impact on
perceptual focus and categorical inclusiveness for nouns. In
the next experiment we will see whether the same applies to
adjectives.

Experiment 2: Adjectives
Method
Participants Participants were 49 undergraduate students
from Tilburg Unversity who participated for course credits.
All were native speakers of Dutch, and all were different
from those who participated in Experiment 1.
Materials Again, two lists of seven words were compiled,
this time with concrete and abstract adjectives respectively.
The former included adjectives like “blond” and “old”, the
latter adjectives such a “hearty” and “idle”. Pre-testing
confirmed that the seven concrete and abstract adjectives
were indeed rated as such by independent participants. The
control condition and the remainder of the materials were as
in Experiment 1.

Design and Analyses The first experiment had a between
participants design with Condition (levels: Abstract,
Concrete, Control) as the independent variable, and number
of global matches on the percepual focus task, average
inclusiveness score on the categorical inclusive task and
global self-report as the dependent variables. To test for
significance, Analyses of Variance (ANOVA) were used.

Procedure The procedure was identical to the one of
Experiment 1, with the sole difference that in Experiment 2
participants in the concrete and in the abstract condition
were asked to memorize seven adjectives instead of nouns.
Again all participants remembered at least six of the words
from the memory test. Priming with adjectives had no effect
on mood (F = 2.82, n.s.). Funneled debriefing showed that
none of the participants suspected priming had an influence
on their scores on any of the dependent measures.

Table 1: [Nouns] Average number of global matches on
the perceptual focus task, local-global self-report scores and
categorical inclusiveness scores as a function of condition
(standard deviations between brackets).

Global match
Self-reports
Inclusiveness

Concrete
11.1 (2.6)
4.9 (1.7)
4.9 (0.8)

Control
12.6 (1.1)
6.1 (0.9)
6.0 (0.9)

Abstract
16.2 (3.1)
7.3 (1.2)
6.6 (0.9)

Design and analyses As above.

Results and discussion
Results and discussion

The results are summarized in Table 2, and are highly
consistent with those of the previous experiment. As
expected, participants primed with abstract adjectives were

Table 1 summarizes the results. As predicted, priming
affected the number of global choices in the perceptual

288

more likely to use the global form as a basis for matching
figures (M = 16.8, SD = 2.9) than participants primed with
concrete adjectives (M = 11.3, SD = 1.8), with the control
again in between (M = 12.5, SD = 1.1), F(2,46) = 18.68, p <
.001, η2 = .49. The self-report scores mirror this result once
again, F(2,46) = 10.05, p < .001, η2 = .30. These two factors
correlate well (r = .71, p < .001).
Priming also influenced the average inclusiveness score in
the expected way. Participants in the abstract adjective
condition are more inclusive (M = 7.0, SD = 1.1) than
participants in the concrete adjective condition (M = 5.1, SD
= 2.1), with the control condition nicely in between (M =
5.8, SD = 1.0), F(2, 46) = 6.53, p < .01, η2 = .22.
Experiment 2 replicated the findings of Experiment 1:
what applies to abstract and concrete nouns also seems to
apply to abstract and concrete adjectives. In Experiment 3,
we investigate whether abstract (state) and concrete (action)
verbs have the same effects.

Table 3: [Verbs] Average number of global matches on
the perceptual focus task, local-global self-report scores and
categorical inclusiveness scores as a function of condition
(standard deviations between brackets).
Global match
Self-reports
Inclusiveness

Concrete
11.3 (1.8)
5.3 (1.8)
5.1 (2.1)

Control
12.5 (1.1)
5.9 (1.0)
5.8 (1.0)

Control
12.8 (1.3)
5.9 (1.4)
5.7 (0.9)

Abstract
15.2 (1.7)
7.2 (1.3)
6.9 (0.8)

Results and discussion
The results for verb priming are summarized in Table 3, and
are remarkebly consistent with those for nouns and
adjectives. Participants primed with abstract (state) verbs
are more likely to make global matches in the perceptual
focus task (M = 15.2, SD = 1.7) than those primed with
control words (M = 12.8, SD = 1.3) or with concrete (action)
verbs (M = 11.0, SD = 1.9), F(2, 39) = 23.6, p < .001, η2 =
.55. The scores for the self-reports show a highly similar
picture, F(2, 39) = 11.78, p < .001, η2 = .38, and indeed the
two correlate strongly (r = .92, p < .001).
For inclusiveness, it was found, as expected, that
participants primed with abstract verbs were more inclusive
(M = 6.9, SD = 0.8) than those primed with concrete verbs
(M = 4.9, SD = 0.8), with those primed with control words
(M = 5.7, SD = 0.9) in between these two extremes, F(2, 39)
= 22.45, p < .001, η2 = .53.
The results for verbs offer clear evidence for our
hypotheses about abstract and concrete language and their
impact on perceptual focus and categorical inclusiveness.
While the observed effects are a little stronger than those for
adjectives, the overall pattern is the same. So far we have
looked at words; in the fourth and final experiment we turn
to sentences.

Table 2: [Adjectives] Average number of global matches
on the perceptual focus task, local-global self-report scores
and categorical inclusiveness scores as a function of
condition (standard deviations between brackets).

Global match
Self-reports
Inclusiveness

Concrete
11.0 (1.9)
4.7 (1.4)
4.9 (0.8)

Abstract
16.8 (2.9)
7.4 (1.2)
7.0 (1.1)

Experiment 3: Verbs
Method
Participants Forty-two undergraduate students, all native
speakers of Dutch, participated for course credits, all
different from those of Experiments 1 and 2.

Experiment 4: Ambitransitives

Materials For Experiment 3, lists of concrete and abstract
verbs were constructed. For concrete verbs, seven action
verbs were selected from examples in Semin and Fiedler
(1988), including “walk” and “laugh”. For the abstract list,
state verbs such as “hate” and “trust” were chosen from
Semin and Fiedler’s inventory. The words in the control
were the same as before, as were the rest of the other
materials.

Method
Participants Participants were 54 undergraduate students,
all native speakers of Dutch who participated for course
credits. None had participated in any of the other
experiments.
Materials For this experiment two lists of seven sentences
of comparable overall length were constructed around
ambitransitive verbs. In the abstract version, verbs were
used in their intransitive form followed by some modifier
phrase, e.g., “Romeo loves with heart and soul” and “He
eats in the canteen”. In the concrete version, the verbs were
used in a transitive way and the modifiers were replaced
with overt direct objects, as in “Romeo loves Julliet” and
“He eats a sandwich.” Care was taken that overall the direct
objects and modifiers were of a comparable abstractness
level, and that the sets of sentences in both conditions were

Procedure For this experiment, priming was done using a
word search puzzle, where participants were asked to find
the seven words on their list in a large collection or
randomized letters. The word search followed the filler task
and preceded the dependent measures, which were the same
as in the previous two experiments. Priming had no effect
on mood (F = 1.97, n.s.). The debriefing revealed that none
of the participants suspected any relation between the
various parts of the experimental set-up.
Design and analyses As above.

289

equally long. Participants were instructed to learn their
seven sentences by heart, and were tested on their recall at
the end of the experiment. All participants remembered six
or seven sentences correctly, although occassionally in
slightly different wordings. The control condition and other
materials were as in Experiments 1 and 2.

inclusiveness task, while participants that were primed with
concrete words made more local matches and were less
inclusive in each of the four experiments. Participants that
were primed with control words always scored in between
these two extremes. It is worth emphasizing that these
effects cannot be attributed to a direct semantic link between
the prime words and the observed effects. Rather these
effects show that classes of words can indeed influence
basic cognitive processes. Our results thus show that
language-internal differences can indeed influence aspects
of thought (perceptual focus, categorization).

Procedure The procedure was identical to that of
Experiments 1 and 2. Priming in the different conditions had
no effect on self-reported mood scores (F = 1.23, n.s.) and
funneled debriefing revealed that none of the participants
had any suspiscions about the experimental set-up and the
relation between the various tasks they had to perform.

Meta-analysis
Does it matter whether participants are primed with verbs,
adjectives, nouns or sentences with ambitransitives? To find
out we ran a statistical meta-analysis, combining data of the
four experiments, which we submitted to a 4 (Experiment)
by 3 (Condition: Concrete, Control, Abstract) ANOVA,
using Tukey’s HSD test for pairwise comparisons. As
expected, condition has a significant influence on the
number of global matches, F(2, 180) = 56.00, p < .001, η2 =
.38 (all pairwise comparisons significant at p < .01), on the
local-global self-report scores, F(2, 180) = 36.83, p < .001,
η2 = .29 (all pairwise comparisons significant at p < .001)
and on the inclusiveness scores, F(2, 180) = 42.98, p < .001,
η2 = .32 (all pairwise comparisons significant at p < .001).
Interestingly, Experiment showed no significant main or
interaction effects on any of the dependent variables (Fs < 1
in all three cases). This shows that the effects reported in
this paper are relatively robust and independent of linguistic
categories.

Design and analyses As above.
Table 4: [Ambitransitives] Average number of global
matches on the perceptual focus task, local-global selfreport scores and categorical inclusiveness scores as a
function of condition (sds between brackets).
Global match
Self-reports
Inclusiveness

Concrete
12.2 (3.1)
5.3 (1.4)
5.4 (1.0)

Control
12.9 (1.7)
6.3 (1.8)
6.3 (0.9)

Abstract
14.9 (2.7)
6.8 (1.5)
6.9 (0.8)

Results
Table 4 summarizes the results, and reveals the same pattern
as before. As hypothesized, priming with abstract,
intransitive sentences (with implicit direct objects) leads to
more global matches in the perceptual focus task (M = 14.9,
SD = 2.7) than priming with concrete, transitive sentences
(with explicit direct objects) (M = 12.2, SD = 3.1), with the
control condition again in between the two (M = 12.9, SD =
1.7). This effect was found to be statistically significant,
F(2, 51) = 5.43, p < .01, η2 = .18. The self-reported scores
reveal a comparable distribution, F(2, 51) = 4.45, p < .05, η2
= .15, and these scores correlate fairly well with the scores
on the perceptual focus task (r = .37, p < .01).
On the inclusiveness task, it was found that, as
hypothesized, participants primed with abstract language
(here intransitive uses) are more inclusive (M = 6.9, SD =
0.8) than those primed with concrete language (transitive
uses) (M = 5.4, SD = 1.0), again with the control condition
between the two (M = 6.3, SD = 0.9), F(2, 51) = 12.94, p <
.001, η2 = .34.

About words
Linguists have long wondered what linguistic categories
really are (e.g., Chomsky, 1970; Croft, 1991; Baker, 2003).
Most agree that nouns, verbs and adjectives truly are
different things. Baker (2003), for instance, argues that
nouns [+N] are used to refer (“have a referential index”),
while verbs [+V] are used to predicate (“have a specifier”),
and adjectives are simply neither nouns nor adjectives [-N, V]. This characterization allows for a general distinction
between classes of words, which has clear consequences for
the syntactic organization of the world’s languages.
However,
from
a
cognitive
perspective,
such
characterizations are not the only ones that matter. As we
have argued in this paper, words also differ along the
abstract-concreteness dimension and this distinction cuts
right across syntactic categories. Interestingly, a distinction
between concrete and abstract words is also made in the
Linguistic Categorization Model (LCM, see e.g., Semin &
Fidler, 1988; Stapel & Semin, 2007), where it is argued that
adjectives are abstract while verbs are more concrete. Our
results indicate that both adjectives and verbs can be
abstract or concrete, and we found that the respective impact
on the two cognitive processes under consideration was not
significantly different for verbs and adjectives.

General conlusion and discussion
In this paper we have shown for the first time that the
abstractness or concreteness of words and sentences has a
significant influence on two different basic cognitive
processes. In particular, we showed that after being primed
with abstract words (be it nouns, adjectives, verbs or
intransitively used ambitransitives), participants, as
predicted, made more global matches in the perceptual focus
task and were more inclusive on the categorical

290

Future research

Dixon, R. and Aikhenvaid, A. (2000), Changing valency.
Case studies in transitivity, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Gasper, K., & Clore, G. (2002). Attending to the big picture:
Mood and global versus local processing of visual
information. Psychological Science, 13, 34-40.
Glenberg, A., Sato, M., Cattaneo, L., Riggio, L., Palumbo,
D. & Buccino, G. (2008). Processing abstract language
modulates motor system activity, The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 61, 905 - 919.
Isen, A. M., & Daubman, K. A. (1984). The influence of
affect on categorization. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 47, 1206 – 1217.
Ji, L., Zhang, Z., & Nisbett, R. (2004). Is it culture or is it
language? Examination of Language Effects in Cross
Cultural Research on Categorization. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 57-65.
Kimchi, R. & Palmer, S. (1982). Form and texture in
hierarchically
constructed
patterns.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 8, 521-535.
Labroo, A., Dhar, R., & Schwarz, N. (2008), Of Frog Wines
and Frowning Watches: Semantic Priming, Perceptual
Fluency, and Brand Evaluation, Journal of Consumer
Research, 34, 819-831.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D., & Levinson,
S. (2004). Can language restructure cognition? The case
for space. Trends in Cognitive Science, 8, 108-114.
Pullum, G. (1991), The Great Eskimo Vocabulary Hoax and
Other Irreverent Essays on the Study of Language
(chapter 19), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Semin, G., & Fiedler, K. (1988). The cognitive functions of
linguistic categories in describing persons: social
cognition and language. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54, 558-568.
Smith, P, & Trope, Y. (2006). You focus on the forest when
you’re in charge of the trees: Power priming and abstract
information processing. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 90, 578-596.
Stapel, D., & Semin, G. (2007). The magic spell of
language: Linguistic categories and their perceptual
consequences. Journal of Personality and Social
Pyschology, 93(1), 23-33.
Williams, L. & Bargh, J. (2008). Experiencing physical
warmth promotes interpersonal warmth. Science, 322,
606-607.
Whorf, B. (1956). Language, thought and reality: Selected
writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf, J. Carroll (Ed.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M., Wu, L., Wade, A., and
Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal effects of
language on color discrimination, PNAS 104, 7780-7785.

At least two questions for future research naturally suggest
themselves. First of all, there is the question what exactly is
the underlying cause of the effects we have described. We
conjecture that the following might be going on. A crucial
point seems to be that abstract words are generally more
difficult to visualize, while concrete words are often very
easy to visualize (to see this, it is worthwhile to just type in
“hypothesis” and “office chair” in Google Image Search and
compare the results). In addition, we assume that linguistic
and perceptual representations are linked (e.g., Barsalou,
1999). Concrete words thus may lead to easier and more
specific visualizations, and hence enable more attention to
detail, while abstract words arguably result in less easily
obtained and more global visualizations. However, the
details of this process are not well understood yet. Second,
what are the consequences of this result? Do people that are
primed with abstract words perform certain tasks differently
from those that were primed with concrete words? We
would predict that due to the differences in perceptual focus,
abstract-primed participants might, for instance, solve
creative puzzles in a different way from concrete-primed
participants.

Acknowledgments
Thanks are due to Per van der Wijst and Hans Broekhuis.
The first author thanks The Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research (NWO, Vici grant 277-70-007).

References
Baker, M. (2003). Lexical Catergories: Verbs, Nouns,
Adjectives. Cambridge Studies in Linguistics 102,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bargh, J., Chen, M. & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of
social behavior: Direct effects of trait construct and
stereotype activation on action. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 71(20), 230-244.
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (2000). The mind in the
middle: A practical guide to priming and automaticity
research. In H.T. Reis & C.M. Judd (Eds.). Handbook of
research methods in social and personality psychology
(pp. 253-285). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
English and Mandarin speakers' conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Boroditsky, L. (2003). Linguistic relativity. In L. Nadel
(Ed.) Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science, (pp. 917 – 922).
London: Macmillan.
Chomsky, N. (1970). Remarks on nominalization. In: R.A.
Jacobs and P.S. Rosenbaum (Eds.) Readings in English
transformational grammar, (184–221). Waltham, MA:
Ginn.
Croft, W. (1991). Syntactic Categories and Grammatical
Relations. University of Chicago Press.

291

