UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Acquisition of Cognitive Skill: Do We Already Have a Theory?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/59653325

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Ohlsson, Stellan

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Acquisition of Cognitive Skill: Do We Already Have a Theory?
Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Chicago
1007 West Harrison Street
Chicago, IL 60607 USA
Keywords: cognitive skill, skill acquisition, unified theory.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by Award
N000140910125 from the Office of Naval Research (ONR),
US Navy. I thank P. Langley and K. VanLehn for inspiring
discussions.

Background The acquisition of cognitive skill is studied in
artificial intelligence, cognitive anthropology, cognitive
psychology,
robotics and other cognitive sciences.
Researchers have produced multiple, apparently competing
theories. I argue that the seemingly diverse theoretical
proposals are in fact components of a unified theory and that
the latter is already in a technical sense complete.

References
Mitrovic, A., & Ohlsson, S. (1999). Evaluation of a
constraint-based tutor for a data-base language.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and
Education, 10, 238-256.
Nokes, T., & Ohlsson, S. (2005). Comparing multiple paths
to mastery: What is learned? Cognitive Science, 29, 769796.
Ohlsson, S. (1993). The interaction between knowledge and
practice in the acquisition of cognitive skills. In A.
Meyrowitz and S. Chipman, (Eds.), Foundations of
knowledge acquisition: Cognitive models of complex
learning. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ohlsson, S. (1996). Learning from performance errors.
Psychological Review, 103, 241-262.
Ohlsson, S. (2008). Computational models of skill
acquisition. In R. Sun (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
computational psychology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Ohlsson, S. & Halpern, A. (1998). Strength adjustment in
hierarchical learning. In M. A. Gernsbacher and S. J.
Derry, (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ohlsson, S. & Mitrovic, A. (2006). Constraint-based
knowledge representation for individualized instruction.
Computer Science and Information Systems, 3, 1-22.
Ohlsson, S., & Rees, E. (1991a). The function of conceptual
understanding in the learning of arithmetic procedures.
Cognition & Instruction, 8, 103-179.
Ohlsson, S., & Rees, E. (1991b). Adaptive search through
constraint violations. Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 3, 33-42.
Ohlsson, S., & Regan, S., (2001). A function for abstract
ideas in conceptual learning and discovery. Cognitive
Science Quarterly, 1, 243-27.
Youmans, R., & Ohlsson, S. (2008). How practice produces
suboptimal heuristics that render backup instruments
ineffective. Ergonomics, 51, 441-475.

Framework for a Unified Theory Improvements in a skill
cannot come out of thin air. A learning mechanism takes
information of some sort as input. For example,
generalization might take a rule but also some positive
examples as input and produce a more general version of
that rule (Information Dependence).
Information that might be available in a skill learning
scenario comes in different types, and each type requires a
different learning mechanism. To learn from positive
examples requires a different mechanism than to learn from
errors, which in turn requires a different process than
learning from direct instruction (Information Specificity).
It is plausible that people evolved to be maximally
effective learners, i.e., we can make use of every type of
information (Maximally Effective Learning). A unified
theory of skill acquisition should therefore include (at least)
one learning mechanism for each information type.
Core of the Theory The types of information available to a
learner during practice include the following nine: (a) Direct
instructions. (b) Declarative knowledge. (c) Weak methods.
(d) Demonstrations/solved examples. (e) Solutions to
analogous problems. (f) Positive outcomes. (g) Negative
outcomes. (h) Internal execution traces. (i) Statistical
regularities in the environment. I claim that this is the
complete list of relevant information types. But cognitive
scientists have already specified learning mechanisms for all
nine information types. In conjunction, those mechanisms
constitute a complete and unified theory.
Discussion There are three implications: First, it is useless
to test psychological models of single mechanisms against
data. Second, adaptive A.I. systems should be equipped to
learn from each type of information. Third, intelligent
tutoring systems are maximally effective when they support
all nine modes of learning.

105

