UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Acquiring Multiword Verbs: The Role of Statistical Evidence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8rz7g9fn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Fazly, Afsaneh
Nematzadeh, Aida
Stevenson, Suzanne

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Acquiring Multiword Verbs: The Role of Statistical Evidence
Afsaneh Fazly, Aida Nematzadeh, and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{afsaneh, aida, suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
In addition to words and grammar, young children learn a large
number of multiword sequences that are semantically idiosyncratic and have particular syntactic behaviour, e.g., expressions
formed from the combination of a verb and a noun, such as take
the train and give a kiss. Given the high degree of polysemy
of verbs that commonly participate in such constructions, an
important question is what cues children use to identify (nonliteral) multiword combinations. We provide evidence that certain statistical cues tapping into the properties of non-literal
expressions are useful in separating these from literal combinations. Moreover, our experiments on naturally occurring
child-directed data show that these cues are easily extractable
from the input children receive.

Introduction
Traditional theories of grammar distinguish between lexical
knowledge (the individual words that a speaker knows) and
grammatical knowledge (the rules for combining words into
meaningful utterances). However, there is a rich range of linguistic phenomena in the less explored area between words
and combinatory rules/constraints. For example, a multiword
lexeme such as take the train has an idiosyncratic semantics
(“use a train as mode of transport”) that suggest its treatment as a lexical unit, but also behaves as a syntactic phrase
(e.g., took a train, take the fast train, take trains all over
Europe). Much research on language has thus focused on
a range of multiword lexemes such as idioms, light verb constructions, and collocations (e.g., Cowie, 1981; Moon, 1998).
Psycholinguists have also shown the importance of contingent frequency effects among words and syntactic patterns in
the learning and processing of language (Nation et al., 2003;
Sosa & MacFarlane, 2002).
In theories of language acquisition in particular, especially
usage-based accounts of language learning (which eschew
complex innate linguistic knowledge), the role of multiword
constructions has been emphasized (e.g., Goldberg, 1995;
Tomasello, 2003). However, computational modelling of language acquisition has continued to focus on various aspects
of word learning (e.g., Li et al., 2007; Regier, 2005; Yu &
Smith, 2006), or grammar learning (e.g., Clark, 2001; Sakas
& Fodor, 2001), with work on intermediate constructions
mostly limited to identifying general properties of verb argument usages (e.g., Alishahi & Stevenson, 2008; Chang, 2004;
Dominey & Inui, 2004).
Thus there is a gap in the study of child language acquisition that has largely left unaddressed questions about the
computational mechanisms that underlie how the child learns
to identify multiword lexemes (i.e., recognizing that meaning is associated with a group of words, rather than single

words plus combinatory rules), and how she determines what
syntactic manipulations of them are valid. In contrast, there
has been significant work in computational linguistics on this
very topic, with development of statistical measures for identifying multiword lexemes in a corpus, and for extracting their
usage properties (e.g., Evert et al., 2004; Fazly et al., 2007).
Our goal here is to explore whether this computational work
on multiword lexemes can be extended in a natural way to
the domain of child language acquisition, where an informative cognitive model must take into account the two issues of
what kind of data the child is exposed to, and what kinds of
processing of that data is cognitively plausible for a child.
In pursuing these questions, we focus in particular on the
acquisition of multiword verbs, such as take the train and give
a kiss. These constructions are a rich and productive source
of predication which children must master in most languages,
doing so at very young ages (Goldberg, 1995). For example, consider the following conversation from the CHILDES
database (Brown, 1973, sarah130a.cha):
*MOT: you’re not gonna take any toys down to the
beach today you know.
*CHI: why?
...
*MOT: we have to take the train.
Here, the mother uses the verb take first in its core literal
meaning, and then within a multiword lexeme in which take
has a non-literal meaning and combines with the particular
argument to express the use of a mode of transportation. The
child’s further responses within this conversation give no indication that she is puzzled by these very different usages
of take. Yet they do pose a very significant puzzle for researchers: It has been noted that children learn highly frequent verbs (such as take) first (Goldberg, 1995), and yet it
is precisely these verbs that are also the most polysemous,
showing a wide range of metaphorical sense extensions in
multiword lexemes, which children must recognize and deal
with.
Research over the last few years has shown that the distinctions among literal and non-literal verb–argument combinations (such as take the toys versus take the train or take a
turn) are in principle learnable based on statistics over usages
of such expressions (Fazly & Stevenson, 2007; Venkatapathy
& Joshi, 2005). However, such work depends on very large
amounts of data (from corpora on the order of 100M words)
and on sophisticated statistical and grammatical calculations
over such data. The goal here is to determine what is learnable through the means available to a child — that is, on the

1222

basis of data in child-directed speech and using simpler, cognitively plausible calculations. In this way, we take a first step
toward computational modelling of acquisition of the various kinds of multiword verbs that children must master early
in language learning, shedding light on the mechanisms that
could underlie a usage-based model of this process.

Multiword Lexemes with Basic Verbs
The highly frequent and highly polysemous verbs referred to
above include what are called “basic” verbs — those that express physical actions or states central to humans, such as
give, get, take, put, see, and stand, among others. These verbs
undergo metaphorical sense extensions of their core physical meanings that enable them to combine with various arguments to form multiword lexemes. We focus here on expressions of the form Vbasic +Ndobj (or simply Vb +N), in which a
basic verb is combined with a noun in its direct object position to form either a literal combination (as in take the toys)
or a multiword lexeme (such as take the train, take a turn).
Multiword lexemes of the form Vb +N are very frequent in
many languages (e.g., Cowie, 1981), and they show a range of
semantic idiosyncrasy, where the semantics of the multiword
lexeme is more or less related to the semantics of the verb and
the noun separately. Thus, Vb +N combinations lie on a continuum (without completely clear boundaries) from entirely
literal and compositional, to highly idiomatic. However, for
convenience we can think of classes of constructions on this
continuum, each identified by a particular way in which the
verb and the noun component contribute to the meaning of
the construction. Four possible Vb +N classes follow, with an
indication of the semantic contribution of the components:
1. give (me) the lion (literal combination or LIT)
• give: physical transfer of possession
• NP: typically a physical entity
2. give (her) time (abstract combination or ABS)
• give: abstract transfer or allocation
• NP: often abstract meaning

These classes of expressions have differing linguistic behaviours that can be cues to the underlying distinctions
among the classes (Fazly & Stevenson, 2007). Specifically,
expressions from each class exhibit particular lexical and syntactic behaviour that closely relate to the semantic properties
of the class. We next elaborate on these properties and behaviours, and describe how they can form the basis for statistical measures for distinguishing the classes.

Usage-based Measures
As a first attempt at distinguishing the different classes of
Vb +N combinations, here we focus on separating literal combinations (items in the LIT class) from the non-literal ones
(items in the ABS, LVC, and IDM classes). We are mainly
concerned about two of the non-literal Vb +N classes, namely
ABS and LVC, as these are more commonly found in childdirected speech (CDS). We examine some of the salient linguistic properties of these classes, and explain how these
clues might be used by a language learner. For each property, we devise simple, frequency-based, statistical measures
that draw on the discussed properties of non-literal Vb +Ns.
As noted earlier, computational linguistic studies have
developed sophisticated statistical measures based on such
properties, which have achieved success in identifying nonliteral combinations when evaluated on large amounts of text
corpus data (e.g., Evert et al., 2004; Fazly et al., 2007). Given
the hypothesized importance of simplicity in language learning (cf. Onnis et al., 2002), our goal here is to use simpler
measures (tapping into similar properties) that are more cognitively plausible, and that are robust when used with smaller
amounts of CDS.
We elaborate here on three groups of relevant properties:
the degree of entrenchment of a Vb +N, the semantic properties of its noun component, and the degree of syntactic fixedness of the combination.

Frequency and Association

These classes are important in the context of child language
acquisition because there is a clear connection between each
class and the meaning of the expressions in the class. This
relation could enable a language learner to make predictions
about the meanings of new expressions based on their likely
class. For example, when a child hears a new expression such
as give a shout, if they recognize that this is likely an LVC,
then they can infer that it roughly means shout.1

Non-literal Vb +Ns often have an entrenched, collocational
status, leading to generally higher frequencies of occurrence
than for particular literal combinations (Evert, 2008). This
is partly due to the fact that a non-literal Vb +N tends to be
limited in terms of its noun possibilities, which are restricted
by the particular metaphorical sense of the verb. In contrast, a
literal Vb +N is a freer combination with a wider range of possibilities for the noun component. The frequency of a Vb +N
may thus provide a clue to a language learner that helps them
decide whether the combination is literal or non-literal.
Computational linguists have developed numerous cooccurrence measures that draw on sophisticated statistical
calculations (Evert, 2008). In order to reflect the cognitive
constraints on a child, here we look simply at the frequency
of co-occurrence of v and n, as in:
.
Cooc(v, n) = f req(v, n| gr = dobj)
(1)

1 The LVC construction is associated with additional meanings,
such as the boundedness of the action.

where gr = dobj specifies that the grammatical relationship
between v and n is direct object.

3. give (the doll) a bath (light verb construction or LVC)
• give: convey/conduct an action
• NP: predicative meaning
4. give (me) the slip (idiomatic combination or IDM)
• give, NP: no/highly abstract contribution

1223

Although we generally expect non-literal combinations to
have higher frequency than literal ones, some literal combinations also appear frequently in the speech children receive.
However, the noun of a non-literal combination is often an
“unusual” direct object that does not appear with many verbs,
due to its abstract nature (e.g., kiss). In contrast, the noun of a
literal combination is typically a concrete entity that may appear as the direct object of many different verbs. In addition
to co-occurrence frequency, we thus also measure the strength
of association between the verb and the noun components of
a target combination, using the conditional probability of v
given n. This measure is expected to determine the extent to
which n is associated with v as opposed to other verbs:
.
CProb(v, n) =
=

P(v|n, gr = dobj)
freq(v, n|gr = dobj)
∑v′ freq(v′ , n|gr = dobj)

(2)

where the denominator is the frequency of n appearing as the
direct object of any verb. This measure requires the child
merely to keep track of the same frequency as in (1) (which
is also the numerator of (2)), but to compare it to the use of
the noun with verbs overall (the denominator of (2)).
The association of a noun with particular basic verbs is
clearly related to the semantic properties of the noun, which
we turn to next.

Semantic Properties of the Noun
There is evidence that children might be sensitive to the semantic differences between the noun in a literal versus nonliteral Vb +N (Quochi, 2007). For example, whereas the noun
in a non-literal Vb +N is often non-referential, abstract, and/or
predicative (as in take time and give a hug), the noun in a literal combination tends to be referential and concrete (as in
take the toys and give a banana). The semantic properties
of the noun in a Vb +N thus may provide a child language
learner with an important cue as to whether the combination
is literal or non-literal. Earlier work has used WordNet2 to
estimate non-referentiality and predicativeness by looking at
the noun’s position in the taxonomy, and its morphological relation to a verb (Fazly & Stevenson, 2007). However, WordNet’s conceptual and lexical organization most likely does not
reflect that of a child. Next, we explain two measures that instead capture these properties with simple statistics over the
surface behavior of the noun.
Non-Referentiality: The referential status of a noun is related to its abstractness, which in turn relates to the participation of the noun in certain syntactic forms (Grant, 2005).
Most prominently, a non-referential (abstract) noun tends to
be preceded by an indefinite determiner (such as a/an) or no
determiner. Here we assume that a noun is non-referential to
the extent that it prefers this pattern of determiner use over
others. To estimate the non-referentiality of the noun in a target hv, ni, we thus look into the likelihood of the occurrences
2 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/

of n in the pattern ptnref = h det:a/an/ NULL ni:
freq(n, ptnref )
.
NRef(n) = P(ptnref | n) =
freq(n)

(3)

where freq(n, ptnref ) is the frequency of occurrence of n in
pattern ptnref , and the denominator estimates the frequency of
n in any pattern.3 Again, this is a simple relative frequency
for the child to determine: of the instances she sees of this
noun, what proportion are in this particular pattern.4
Predicativeness: In estimating predicativeness, we assume
that a child is restricted to a simple observation of how frequently the noun form n is also observed as a verb (e.g., noting that push in give a push is also used frequently as a verb
in CDS). That is:
.
Pred(n) = f req(v′ ), where form(v′ ) = form(n)
(4)

Degree of Syntactic Fixedness
Most non-literal combinations tend to be restricted with respect to their syntactic expression (Cowie, 1981; Everaert
et al., 1995). For example, an LVC such as give a push
tends to mainly appear with the indefinite determiner a and
a singular noun push. An ABS combination such as give a
minute also tends to be restricted in its syntactic patterns;
e.g., most speakers would consider give me minutes or give
me the (next) minute as odd. In contrast, a literal phrase such
as give a banana is much more flexible with respect to the
determiner introducing the noun and/or the number of the
noun — e.g., one can give another banana, give the banana,
or give two bananas. Children are sensitive to the syntactic
behaviour of both words and constructions (e.g., Goldberg,
1995; Tomasello, 2003). It is thus plausible that children recognize the syntactic fixedness of non-literal Vb +Ns, and use
it as a clue for identifying these combinations.
Most LVC and ABS expressions appear in the form
ptpref = hv det:a/an/ NULL ni.5 Measures of this type of syntactic fixedness have required keeping track of probability
distributions over a wide range of items and patterns (Bannard, 2007; Fazly & Stevenson, 2007). Here, we estimate the
degree of syntactic fixedness of a target combination, hv, ni,
with a much simpler measure — the relative frequency of
hv, ni in the preferred pattern:
.
Fixedness(v, n) = P(ptpref | v, n, gr = dobj)
=

freq(v, n, ptpref |gr = dobj)
freq(v, n|gr = dobj)

(5)

Given the item-based nature of children’s verb-argument
learning (Tomasello, 2003), we expect this to be a reasonable
calculation for children.
3 To estimate these frequencies, we look at all occurrences of a
noun irrespective of its grammatical relation to a verb.
4 It has been shown that children learn the semantic category of a
word using the syntactic patterns the word appears in (Brown, 1957).
5 The noun is in the same pattern as for NRef; the difference is
that here the focus is on the degree to which the particular V+N
combination leads to the use of that pattern for the noun.

1224

Table 1: Breakdown of experimental expressions (freq ≥ 5).
Vb
take
give
take and give

Total
108
92
200

LIT

ABS

LVC

ABS + LVC

77
75
152

18
7
25

13
10
23

31
17
48

Experimental Setup
Corpus. We use a subset of the American English portion of the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000), automatically parsed using the parser of Sagae et al. (2007).
We exclude 16 of the corpora from our analysis either because they contain no child-directed transcription (and we
limit our statistics to CDS), or because they contain data
that is explicitly racially and/or socio-economically distinguished (and we are concerned that the language used might
therefore show different statistical patterns). Our final corpus
of child-directed speech contains about 600, 000 utterances,
with around 3.2 million words (including punctuation).
Experimental expressions. From the CDS portion of our
corpus, we extracted Vb +Ns with a frequency of 5 or higher,
formed from either of the two basic verbs take and give (in
all inflected forms). A native speaker of English (an author of
this paper) annotated each expression (not the individual instances of the expression) as literal (LIT), abstract (ABS), light
verb construction (LVC), or idiom (IDM). Expressions for
which different instances may belong to different categories
were given a single category according to the annotator’s assessment of the predominant usage. Erroneous expressions
(and the single idiom in the set) were then removed. Table 1
shows the number of expressions in each individual category,
as well as the total number of non-literal expressions (ABS
and LVC combined).
Evaluation. Each of our statistical measures assigns a numerical score to the expressions that reflects one of the linguistic properties that may be useful to a child in determining
which are literal and which are non-literal. To evaluate the
effectiveness of these measures, we apply a hierarchical agglomerative clustering algorithm that uses the scores to separate all the experimental expressions into two clusters, and
then see how closely those clusters correspond to the actual
labels on the expressions as LIT, or as ABS/LVC. Since we
assume that, in any learning situation, a combination of the
cues might be at work, we use all five measures as input to
the clustering algorithm. To evaluate the clusters, we assign
to each a label (either LIT or ABS+LVC), which is the label
of the majority of items in the cluster, and calculate accuracy
(Acc) and completeness (Comp) as measures of the goodness
of the cluster. Accuracy gives the proportion of expressions
in a cluster that have the same label as the cluster; completeness gives the proportion of all expressions that have the same
label as the cluster that are actually placed in that cluster.
The clustering results show the effectiveness of the measures working together to separate non-literal from literal

combinations. We further analyze each individual measure
to better understand how relevant it is to the acquisition of
multiword lexemes. Recall that the measures are designed
such that each is expected to be higher for the multiword
(non-literal) expressions than for literal ones. We can thus
use each measure to rank the expressions and see whether
ABS + LVC expressions are generally ranked higher than LIT
ones. We do this for expressions using take, using give, and
using either take or give. We use a standard evaluation metric,
namely average precision (AvgPrec), to summarize the performance of each measure at this task. AvgPrec reflects the
goodness of a measure in placing expressions from the target classes (ABS and LVC) before those from the other (LIT),
and is calculated as the average of precision scores at different thresholds. That is, for a given measure, we consider a
threshold at each unique value assigned by that measure, and
calculate the proportion of ABS and LVC expressions with a
score higher than the threshold; AvgPrec is the average of
these proportions over all thresholds.
We also compare the performance of each measure against
a baseline which reflects how hard the task is. We randomly
assign a value between 0 and 1 to each expression in a set,
generating a random ranked list. We repeat this process 1000
times and report the average of the AvgPrec values for each
of these random lists as our baseline.

Results
We first look at the results of clustering the combined set of
experimental expressions using all five measures. We then
analyze the goodness of each individual measure in separating the two types of expressions, both on the combined set,
as well as on take and give expressions separately.

Clustering the Expressions
Table 2 shows the results of clustering on the combined set
of expressions in two conditions: considering all 200 expressions, and considering only the 98 high-frequency ones —
those with a frequency 10 and higher. (Number of expressions of each category in the high-frequency sets are: LIT:
38, ABS: 8, and LVC: 11 for take, and LIT: 30, ABS: 4, and
LVC: 7 for give.) In both conditions, the clustering algorithm
is successful at identifying literals (Acc of 86% and Comp of
92% and 94%). The clustering has a harder time identifying
ABS and LVC expressions. The Acc results are mixed (68%
on all expressions and 83% on high-frequency expressions).
However, Comp is rather low in both conditions, indicating
that there are a good number of ABS and/or LVC expressions
which are mixed with literals (those that are put in the LIT
cluster). A closer look shows that most of the non-literal expressions that are mixed with the literal ones are of type ABS.
Thus, our measures seem to mainly capture properties characteristic of LVCs.

Ranking Using the Individual Measures
Table 3 shows the performance of the individual measures
and that of the baseline in a variety of conditions. We first

1225

Table 2: Clustering results (Acc and Comp). Ci represents
Cluster i, Label is the label assigned to a cluster, which is the
label of the majority class in the cluster.
On 200 expressions with freq ≥ 5
ABS
LIT
Label
Acc
5
18
140
LIT
86%
18
7
12 ABS+LVC 68%
On 98 expressions with freq ≥ 10
LVC
ABS
LIT
Label
Acc
1
9
64
LIT
86%
17
3
4
ABS + LVC
83%
LVC

C1
C2

C1
C2

Comp
92%
52%
Comp
94%
67%

get, even though LVC and ABS have similar baselines (results
are not shown).
Frequency has been shown to have a facilitating effect
in the acquisition of linguistic constructions by children.
Here, we examine the performance of our measures on highfrequency expressions to see whether we observe a similar
facilitating effect on the measures (bottom panel of Table 3).
Only two of the measures (Fixedness and NRef) show a notable improvement on high-frequency expressions.6 These
two measures summarize the syntactic behaviour of a word
or a combination by examining all their usages. For highfrequency expressions (with more usages), it is possible that
the evidence available for these measures is more reliable, resulting in better performance.

Table 3: Performance (AvgPrec) of the individual measures
on expressions with freq ≥ 5, and on those with freq ≥ 10.
On all expressions (freq ≥ 5)
Measure
take
give
take and give
Baseline
.29 ± .04 .19 ± .04
.24 ± .03
Cooc
.53
.38
.51
CProb
.65
.47
.56
NRef
.50
.32
.40
Pred
.60
.57
.62
Fixedness
.57
.31
.43
On high-frequency expressions (freq ≥ 10)
Measure
take
give
take and give
Baseline
.33 ± .06 .27 ± .07
.31 ± .05
Cooc
.57
.41
.54
CProb
.71
.57
.64
NRef
.63
.47
.56
Pred
.67
.66
.68
Fixedness
.86
.49
.66

look into the performances on all expressions (top panel of
the table); performances on the high-frequency expressions
(bottom panel) have a similar trend. All our measures outperform the baseline, with the best measures overall being
Pred and CProb. Fixedness performs well on take, but not as
well on give, perhaps because of the more complex syntactic
behaviour of give (e.g., its common appearance in the doubleobject syntactic construction). NRef is the measure with the
poorest performance, indicating that it is important to examine the syntactic behaviour of a noun within the context of a
Vb +N combination (especially for expressions with take).
The results show that, generally, all measures are good at
separating non-literal expressions from literal ones. To further examine whether the measures differ with respect to their
identification of ABS and LVC classes, we look at the AvgPrec
when only one of the classes (ABS or LVC) is considered as
target. This shows whether both classes are identified with
similar precision, or whether there is a difference between the
two. In all cases (for all five measures, on take expressions
and on give expressions), AvgPrec values for LVC as target are
better (in most cases, much better) than those for ABS as tar-

Discussion
Our results show that, for expressions with both take and give,
two measures achieve the best performance: Pred (the frequency of usages of the noun as a verb) and CProb (the proportion of the usages of the noun as a direct object, with this
particular verb). Although the expressions under study are
verb-based, the best-performing measures are thus ones that
draw on very simple frequencies regarding the noun.
The success of Pred at identifying non-literal expressions is
an indication that, for many such expressions, the noun component appears frequently as a verb in the input children receive. Because the basic verbs in these Vb +Ns can take on a
wide range of meanings, it is not surprising that the predicativeness of the noun would be such a highly salient cue in indicating whether the verb is being used literally or metaphorically. The formulation of Pred is thus a very simple cue that
children could use to help them identify multiword lexemes.
The good performance of CProb suggests that many nonliteral expressions exhibit collocational behaviour — that is,
the frequency of co-occurrence of the two components is
markedly high. However, CProb consistently outperforms
raw co-occurrence frequency (Cooc), showing that it is not
simply collocational behaviour that is key to identifying these
multiword lexemes. Although we normally think of verbs as
selecting for nouns, it is clear from the behaviour of CProb
that, given the polysemy of basic verbs, the noun tends to select for an appropriate verb in these combinations.
The performance of our individual measures is generally
better on expressions with take than on those with give. (This
is also true of the clustering results, though these results were
not reported.) This is the case even on high-frequency expressions with comparable baselines for the two expression sets.
These results predict that children may have a harder time
learning expressions involving give than take. The Fixedness
measure especially performs well on take, but poorly on give,
suggesting that the more complex syntactic constructions that
give appears in (e.g., the double object construction) may
cause children difficulty.
6 AvgPrec of the other measures is better on high-frequency expressions; however, the baseline performance is also higher on these.

1226

Our results (both for clustering and for the individual measures) are also generally better on high-frequency expressions, reinforcing that expressions with more usages might be
easier to learn. However, the best-performing measures work
well even on low-frequency items, indicating that children
could form hypotheses about these expressions even with
very little data. Our ongoing work focuses on both the above
issues — the verb used and the expression frequencies — by
investigating the order of acquisition of different expressions
by children of different ages.
The results also reveal that the measures are better at separating LVCs from LITs, indicating that our measures mainly
tap into properties of LVCs. More research is needed to better
understand the distinguishing properties of ABS expressions.
Overall, our results confirm that many statistical cues relevant to the identification of non-literal expressions are available in the input children receive, and are informative. Moreover, the statistical cues in this study are very simple (using
only simple frequencies) and thus easily accessible to young
children. Future work will need to explore how to embed
these measures into a model of word learning, to show in
detail how children might identify and learn these types of
multiword expressions.

References
Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S. (2008). A computational model
for early argument structure acquisition. Cognitive Sci.,
32(5), 789–834.
Bannard, C. (2007). A measure of syntactic flexibility for
automatically identifying mwes in corpora. In Proc. of the
ACL wkshp on a broader perspective on mwes (pp. 1–8).
Brown, R. (1957). J. of Abnormal Psych., 55(1), 1–5.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: The early stages. Harvard Univ. Press.
Chang, N. (2004). Putting meaning into grammar learning. In
Proc. of the ACL’04 wkshp on psycho-computational models of human lang. acquisition (pp. 17–24).
Clark, A. (2001). Unsupervised induction of stochastic context free grammars with distributional clustering. In Proc.
of CoNLL (pp. 105–112).
Cowie, A. P. (1981). The treatment of collocations and idioms
in learner’s dictionaries. Applied Ling., II(3), 223–235.
Dominey, P. F., & Inui, T. (2004). A developmental model of
syntax acquisition in the construction grammar framework
with cross-linguistic validation in English and Japanese. In
Proc. of the ACL’04 wkshp on psycho-computational models of human lang. acquisition (pp. 33–40).
Everaert, M., Linden, E.-J. van der, Schenk, A., & Schreuder,
R. (Eds.). (1995). Idioms: Structural and psychological
perspectives. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Evert, S. (2008). Corpora and collocations. In A. Lüdeling &
M. Kytö (Eds.), Corpus linguistics. An International Handbook. Mouton de Gruyter. (Article 58)
Evert, S., Heid, U., & Spranger, K. (2004). Identifying morphosyntactic preferences in collocations. In Proc. of the

4th int’l conf. on lang. resources and evaluation (pp. 907–
910).
Fazly, A., & Stevenson, S. (2007). Distinguishing subtypes of
multiword expressions using linguistically-motivated statistical measures. In Proc. of the ACL’07 wkshp on a
broader perspective on multiword expressions (pp. 9–16).
Fazly, A., Stevenson, S., & North, R. (2007). Automatically
learning semantic knowledge about multiword predicates.
J. of Lang. Resources and Evaluation, 41(1), 61–89.
Goldberg, A. E. (1995). Constructions: A construction grammar approach to argument structure. UChicago Press.
Grant, L. E. (2005). Frequency of ‘core idioms’ in the British
National Corpus (BNC). International Journal of Corpus
Linguistics, 10(4), 429–451.
Li, P., Xiaowei, & MacWhinney, B. (2007). Dynamic
self-organization and early lexical development in children.
Cognitive Sci., 31, 581–612.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk (3rd ed., Vol. 2: The Database). MahWah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Moon, R. (1998). Fixed expressions and idioms in English:
A corpus-based approach (R. W. Bailey, N. Osselton, &
G. Stein, Eds.). Oxford Univ. Press.
Nation, K., Marshall, C. M., & Altmann, G. T. M. (2003).
Investigating individual differences in children’s realtime sentence comprehension using language-mediated eye
movements. J. of Experimental Child Psych., 86, 314–329.
Onnis, L., Roberts, M., & Chater, N. (2002). Simplicity:
A cure for overgeneralizations in language acquisition. In
Proc. of the 24th annual conf. of the Cognitive Sci. Society
(pp. 720–725).
Quochi, V. (2007). A usage-based approach to light verb constructions in Italian: Development and use. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Universit‘a di Pisa.
Regier, T. (2005). The emergence of words: Attentional
learning in form and meaning. Cognitive Sci., 29, 819–865.
Sagae, K., Davis, E., Lavie, A., MacWhinney, B., & Wintner, S. (2007). High-accuracy annotation and parsing of
CHILDES transcripts. In Proc. of the ACL’07 wkshp on
cognitive aspects of computational lang. acquisition.
Sakas, W., & Fodor, J. D. (2001). The structural triggers
learner. In S. Bertolo (Ed.), Language acquistion and
learnability (pp. 172–233). Cambridge Univ. Press.
Sosa, A. V., & MacFarlane, J. (2002). Evidence for frequency
based constituents in the mental lexicon: Collocations involving the word of. Brain and Lang., 83, 227–236.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usagebased theory of language acquisition. Harvard Univ. Press.
Venkatapathy, S., & Joshi, A. (2005). Measuring the relative compositionality of verb-noun (V-N) collocations by
integrating features. In Proc. of HLT-EMNLP’05 (pp. 899–
906).
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2006). Statistical cross-situational
learning to build word-to-world mappings. In Proc. of the
28th annual conf. of the Cognitive Sci. Society.

1227

