UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adaptive Resonance as a Neural Basis for Conceptual Semantics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5sz9j7nr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Domijan, Drazen
Setic, Mia

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Adaptive Resonance as a Neural Basis for Conceptual Semantics
Dražen Domijan (ddomijan@ffri.hr)
Department of Psychology, Slavka Krautzeka bb
51000 Rijeka, Croatia

Mia Šetić (mia-setic@ffri.hr)
Department of Psychology, Slavka Krautzeka bb
51000 Rijeka, Croatia

Abstract
Experimental data on the interaction between perception and
conceptual processing in the domain of motion was modeled
by using an adaptive resonance circuit. It was shown that the
same mechanisms that are responsible for stable category
learning also support perceptual simulation of conceptual
knowledge. The model is implemented as a dynamical
system, which is able to switch between perception mode,
where the network dynamics is driven primarily by the
sensory input, and the simulation mode, where the network
dynamics is driven by the conceptual input from the internal
sources. Computer simulations showed that the differences in
reaction times in behavioral studies arise from the match (or
mismatch) between the sensory input and top-down learned
expectations when the network switches between perception
and the simulation mode.
Keywords: Adaptive Resonance Theory; Conceptual
Processing; Perceptual Simulation; Stability-Plasticity
Dilemma; Symbol Grounding.

Introduction
Recent theoretical advances in knowledge representation
suggest that concepts are not independent from perceptual,
motor or emotional contexts, in which their exemplars are
observed. Rather, perceptual representations are reactivated
during abstract conceptual processing and constitute an
important component of comprehension. Barsalou (1999)
proposed a theory of perceptual symbol systems which
posits a perceptual simulation as a mechanism for the
interaction of perception and conceptual knowledge.
According to Barsalou’s (1999) idea about a particular
concept activating the same sensory and memory pathways
that are used during perception of the referent object. In this
way, many properties of the referent object that are not
explicitly mentioned become readily available for inspection
and further processing.
The empirical prediction of the theory is that traces of
perceptual simulation should be evident in behavioral
signatures such as the reaction time data, when the
perceptual stimulus matches or mismatches with the content
of the simulation. For instance, Zwaan, Stanfield and
Yaxley (2002) showed that the implied shape of the object
mentioned in the sentence speeds-up recognition if the
image presented has implied shape. It is interesting to note
that in some situations researchers revealed that perceptual
simulation produces an increase in the speed of processing
(Zwaan, Madden, Yaxley, & Aveyard, 2004), while in other

situations it may produce decrease, that is, slower reaction
times (Estes, Verges & Barsalou, 2008; Kaschak et al.,
2005). Recent brain imaging studies revealed a close
connection between brain areas for perception and for
conceptual knowledge about perceptual attributes such as
color, motion etc. (Martin, 2007).
One critique of the theory of perceptual symbol systems
and related ideas is that they lack a formal specification.
While the theory predictions have been successfully probed
in the empirical studies it still awaits rigorous mathematical
treatment (Barsalou, 2008). At the neural level,
Pulvermüller (1999, 2001) proposed a concept of word
webs which integrate activation in different brain regions
related to the same concept. He suggested that Hebbian
learning is responsible for creating word webs, but this is
not precise enough to explain results from behavioral
studies mentioned above.
How could empirical findings about the relation between
perception and conception be simulated by using a neural
network? We suggest that the Adaptive Resonance Theory
(ART) provides an adequate framework for understanding
the neural basis of conceptual semantics (Carpenter &
Grossberg, 1993). ART was designed to solve the problem
of stability of learning in a non-stationary environment.
Many neural network algorithms are able to detect and
represent statistical regularities in the input. However, when
input statistics is altered (as it often happens in real-life
situations), old codes are erased, despite the fact that they
may still be predictive and useful. For instance, we do not
forget our name or date of birth just because we move to
another city. This is known as a catastrophic interference.
According to Grossberg (1980), the solution to the
problem of catastrophic interference is to compare the
sensory (bottom-up) data with the learned (top-down)
expectations. If the input pattern is matched with one of the
previously learned codes (categories) it is recognized as a
familiar pattern and resonance occurs between the sensory
pattern and the top-down activation. On the other hand, if
there is a large mismatch between the input pattern and the
learned code, a reset signal is issued which resets the whole
system and initiates a search for another learned code that
may match with the input. If there is no learned code that is
sufficiently similar to the input pattern, a new neural tissue
is committed to learn the presented pattern and to establish a
new category. Therefore, the previously learned codes are
protected by the mismatch detection and they will not be

2196

erased in the presence of the novel patterns. Here, we
suggest that the same top-down pathways that are needed to
stabilize learning are also used during conceptual processing
in order to reactivate perceptual patterns associated with
concepts. In other words, the existence of perceptual
simulation is a natural consequence of the brain mechanisms
which prevent erosion of previously memorized patterns.

level. Also, perception could influence simulation when the
network is switched from the perception mode to the
simulation mode. Differences in reaction time data are
explained as a consequence of activation of the gain control
and reset mechanisms which speed-up or slow-down
dynamics of the network.

Model Description
ART is a three-layer architecture with two auxiliary
mechanisms for controlling network activity (gain control
mechanism and reset mechanism) as shown in Figure 1.
Layers are denoted as F0, F1 and F2 (Carpenter &
Grossberg, 2003). F0 is an input layer which registers the
pattern of sensory stimulation. F1 layer reads-out the
sensory pattern from F0 and combines it with the top-down
expectations arriving from the F2 layer. The activation
flows from F1 to F2 and passes through a filter of adaptive
weights. The F2 layer is a winner-takes-all network which
represents the category or the concept that best match the
sensory input. The gain control mechanism, G, enables
distinctions to be made between sensory stimulation and
internal activation. Only sensory stimulation is allowed to
reach the supra-threshold activation and to ignite resonance
between F1 and F2 layers. Finally, the orienting subsystem,
R, watches for the difference between the bottom-up
activation from F0 and the top-down activations from F2. It
produces a reset signal when the difference is larger than a
certain prescribed value. The reset signal shuts-off the
currently active F2 node and initiates a search for another
F2 node that will provide a better match to the sensory
pattern.

Modified ART circuit
In order to explain the results from behavioral studies we
introduced several modifications with respect to the original
architecture. Firstly, we introduced the output nodes, M,
which read-out activity from the F2 layer. These nodes are
designed to mimic accumulation of evidence for particular
alternatives and motor preparation. They are modeled as
leaky accumulator units which integrate incoming signals
until they reach the threshold (Usher & McClelland, 2001).
The network is considered to make a motor response when
one of the nodes in the output layer exceeds the threshold
level of activation. Secondly, we modified properties of the
gain control system in order to distinguish perception from
perceptual simulation. We propose that the perceptual
simulation induces the cycle of mutual activation of F1 and
F2 layers, similar to that observed during perception.
However, an important distinction is that during perceptual
simulation this activation is reduced due to the inhibition
from the gain control unit. Therefore, there is no fullfledged resonance between F1 and F2 as during perception.
Traces of perceptual simulation could influence perception
when the network is switched from simulation mode to the
perception mode. This occurs when the activity of the gain
control unit changes from the low level to the maximal

Figure 1. Modified ART circuit for perceptual simulation.
Perceptual simulation is implemented in the model as a
weak influence of the one ART module on another ART
module responsible for different modality or different
perceptual attribute within the same modality. For instance,
in the Figure 1 we depicted how is visual ART module, F2v, influenced by the auditory ART module, F2-au, as when
we heard a sentence and tried to understand it.
In order to simulate properties of the experimental tasks
mentioned in the Introduction, we need to consider the
interaction between two ART modules. For instance, we
could consider a special ART module for visual modality
which stores schematic representation of objects
encountered in the environment. Another module could
store the auditory name associated with the concept. For
instance, when we hear the word “car” the auditory ART
module recognizes the incoming auditory pattern as a word
describing a concept of the CAR. Therefore, the activated
F2 node in the auditory ART module sends excitatory
activation to other ART modules that encode other features
of the same concept. For instance, it could activate the
visual ART module that encodes the shape of the car, or the
typical motion or color of the car. Here, we will consider
only the visual ART module that encodes motion described
in a sentence. Therefore, when we hear a word and
recognize it as a specific concept, a single F2 node in the
auditory module is active and provides input to the visual
ART module. We do not simulate auditory module

2197

explicitly because it only serves here as an input to the
visual ART module the dynamics of which is studied in
detail.

Formal specification
Network dynamics in the layer, n = {F1, F2}, is described
using competitive shunting formalism

M

dxin
  Axin  ( B  xin ) I in  (C  xin ) J in (1)
dt

where, τM, is the time constant for integration A, is a
parameter that controls the passive decay toward resting
state (or activity leakage), parameter, B, defines the upper
activity limit, and, C, defines lower saturation point for the
cell activity. Therefore, the node’s dynamics is constrained
in the interval [B,-C]. Total excitatory (inhibitory) input to
n

n

the cell is given by, I i ( J i ). A node’s output is rectified
before it can influence other nodes in the network with
yi =max(xi,0).
Mechanics of the activation and signal propagation in the
ART could be described as follows. Sensory input is
registered at F0 and transmitted to F1. Activation of the F1
layer nodes, xF1, is described by their total excitatory input

I iF 1  x gain ( yiF 0   w ji y Fj 2 )

F2

F2 nodes are also driven by the self-excitation, yi

input from another (auditory) ART module, y
, which
induces perceptual simulation. Detailed justification for this
type of connection is given below. In order to simulate
adaptation after prolonged exposure to the sensory pattern,
we introduce the term, z, which gates the total excitatory
activity to the F2 nodes. When the network is in the
simulation mode, z is a constant with value 1 because
activity level is low and there is no adaptation in the amount
of transmitter release. However, when the network spent
certain amount of time in the perception mode, z, is
temporarily switched from 1 to 0 in order to simulate
sensory adaptation, that is, reduced responsiveness of the
node due to the exposure to the prolonged stimulation. Such
process reduces activity of the winning node and enables
transition to the simulation mode. It should be noted that
sensory adaptation occurs only during the perception mode
because, only in this case, nodes’ activity is so strong to
produce lack of available neurotransmitter. In the simulation
mode, node’s neurotransmitters recuperate and reinstate full
capacity for signal transmission. Sensory adaptation enables
simulation of the empirical evidence that perceptual
simulation is disrupted if it is preceded by the perceptual
experience which matched with the content of the
simulation (Kaschak et al., 2005).
Inhibitory component of the F2 node activity is given by

(2)

j

J iF 2    ji y Fj 2  yiF 2 ( x res  1  x gain )

(3)

j i

F0 is not explicitly represented in the model. Instead, the
stead-state activity of the F0 layer, denoted as, yF0, is
present in the equation for the F1 nodes and in the equation
for the reset node. Vector, yF0, may assume only two values,
1 if that particular motion is present in the visual field or 0 if
it is not. Term, xgain, describes the influence of the gain
control node which is described below. F1 is also influenced
by the F2 nodes through the pattern of top-down synaptic
weights, wji, from the jth F2 node to the ith F1 node.
The activation from F1 layer is transmitted to F2 through
a filter of bottom-up synaptic weights, wij. F2 nodes, yF2,
compute a similarity measure between the sensory pattern
registered at F1, yF1, and bottom-up weights, wij, as it is
described in the excitatory component of the cell’s
activation

I iF 2  z ( wij y Fj 1  yiF 2  yiF 2au ) .

(5)

j i

and total inhibitory input,

J iF 1   y Fj 1 .

, and

F 2 au
i

The F2 nodes compete with each other through lateral
inhibitory connections and the single F2 node remains
active, which represents the best match to the current input.
The strength of lateral inhibition from nodes within layer F2
to node, i, is controlled by the synaptic weights, ωji. The
winning F2 node sends top-down signals to F1 layer
through a pattern of top-down synaptic weights, wji , as
shown above. Additional inhibitory signals arrive to the F2
layer from the node for reset, xres, and gain the control node,
xgain. These signals are modulated by the activity of the F2
node itself. In this way, the reset signal could influence only
the active node and all other nodes are left intact. In a
similar manner, inverse of the activity of the gain control
node, 1-xgain, inhibits the target F2 node when the network is
in a simulation mode. On the other hand, when the network
is in a perception mode, this term vanishes and the node is
allowed to attain its maximal firing rate (i.e., B) which leads
to a full resonant state.
Finally, F2 output is registered at motor nodes, xM, which
are modeled as leaky accumulator cells as

(4)

j

M

2198

dxiM
  xiM  2 yiF 2  0.5 yiM   y Mj
dt
j i

(6)

Where, τM, is the time constant for integration, yF2, is
M
i

input from the corresponding F2 node, y , is selfexcitation which enables accumulation of evidence and,

 y Mj , is lateral inhibition from other accumulator cells.
Motor (output) cells generally have slower dynamics with
respect to other network elements. Motor neurons are
considered to make an overt response when their activity
reaches a threshold, T.
Gain control node, xgain, is implemented simply as
gain

dx
dt

  x gain  0.1  0.9 * I

(7)

With I=1 if perception mode is active and I=0 if
simulation mode is active. A node for reset signal, xres, is
described with

 1  x gain   yiF 0 yiF 1 


dx res
i
  x res  H 

F0
dt
D   yi


i



(8)

Where H(x) is a Heaviside function with H(x)=1 if x<p
and H(x)=0 if x>p. Parameter, p, is a network vigilance
which controls how sharp must the match between the
bottom-up activation and the top-down expectation be in
order to produce resonance. If the mismatch is greater than
allowed by the p, the reset signal inhibits the currently
active F2 node and enables another F2 node to become
active. Inverse of the gain signal is added here in order to
prevent activation of the reset signal during simulation
mode. Therefore, reset should be activated only in the
perception mode. Pair wise multiplication between vectors
yF0 and yF1 enables computation of the match between the
sensory pattern and the top-down expectancy pattern.
Parameter, D, is a small constant which prevents infinite
growth of the ratio in eqn 8.
The ART family of networks is primarily designed to
explain properties of category learning in non-stationary
environment (Carpenter & Grossberg, 2003). Here, we were
focused on the dynamical aspects of the network behavior
and we do not explicitly model learning. That is, we
assumed that appropriate connection weights were learned
in advance and in computer simulations they are supplied as
a fixed set of parameters.

Simulation
In order to illustrate the network behavior we numerically
solved equations 1, 6, 7, and 8 using 4th order Runge-Kutta
method. Parameters were set as follows: A=.1; B=C=1,
D=.1; p=0.6; τ=2; τM=10; ωji =2 for all i and j, T=2 if the
network entered into the perception mode or T=0.5 if the
network entered into the simulation mode for all nodes in
the motor layer. Network behavior is robust with respect to

the parameter changes because crucial network components
such as the gain control and reset nodes produce
qualitatively distinct signatures on the network output. All
network layers contained two nodes. Bottom-up and topdown connections between F1 and F2 are given by

 1 0
 .
wij  w ji  
 0 1

(9)

One node encodes motion toward the observer and
another node for the movement away from the observer.
The sensory layer (F0) could be considered to reside in the
MT or MST cortices which are known to be involved in
perception of global movements. First we will consider how
perceptual simulation influences perceptual decision in a
simple condition of discriminating between movement
toward the observer or away from the observer.
During auditory presentation of a sentence as in the
experiment of Zwaan et al. (2004), category nodes in F2
layer of the auditory ART module are activated in response
to words in the sentence. This activation triggers perceptual
simulation in the visual ART module containing nodes for
movement (toward and away). Perceptual simulation
activates F1 nodes corresponding to simulated motion (e.g.,
motion mentioned in a sentence) via top-down connections
from F2 to F1 in the visual ART module. It should be noted
that visual ART module is in a simulation mode which
means that its gain control mechanism disables F2 nodes
from reaching their maximal activity amplitude. On the
other hand, auditory ART module is in a perception mode
because it directly perceives a pattern of sounds
corresponding to spoken words. Perceptual simulation is
distinguished from direct perception by the activity level of
the nodes within a specific ART module.

Results
In the sentence “The shortstop hurled the softball at you”
there is implied motion of the ball toward the observer. If
the sentence is followed by a picture of the ball moving
toward an observer, the response to the ball motion will be
faster compared to the presentation of the ball moving in the
opposite direction. Figure 2A and 2B illustrates this
difference. Perceptual simulation starts at t=0 after hearing
the sentence. At t=30 motion stimulus in one of two
direction is presented to the network, that is, one of the xF0
nodes is set to 1. At the same time, network enters the
perception mode by switching the xgain from 0.1 to 1.
When there is a mismatch between the motion direction
mentioned in the sentence and the actual movement (fig.
2A), a reset signal is issued to the F2 layer which inhibits
the currently active F2 node. After that, another F2 node is
activated based on the sensory input alone. However, due to
the fact that erroneous F2 node was active for a certain
period of time, F2 node encoding the correct motion will
need more time to achieve resonance. This is evident in the

2199

activation of the motor output nodes which integrate signals
from F2 nodes.
On the other hand, when there is a match between F2 and
F0 layers there is no need for a reset and the correct F2 node
is activated and starts to resonate in a shorter period of time
(fig. 2B). This is reflected in the output layer as a faster
response or faster threshold crossing for the initiation of the
motor response. If the spoken sentence implied opposite
motion like in “You hurled the softball at the shortstop”
neural dynamics of the nodes for the perception of
movement (toward and away) would exhibit opposite
trajectories.
The opposite pattern of results arise if perception precedes
simulation as in experiment of Kaschak et al. (2005). In this
case, motion is perceived before the simulation starts and
the task for the participant is to judge the sensibility or
grammaticality of the sentences. When the sentence “The
car approached you” is presented, the sensibility judgment
will be faster if it is preceded by a motion in an opposite
direction (away) rather than in the same direction as implied
by the sentence (toward). A possible reason for this effect is
sensory adaptation, which desensitizes currently active
nodes so that they will be less responsive to repetitive
stimulation.

Figure 2. Neural dynamics of perceptual simulation in the
mismatch and match condition. When perceptual simulation
precedes perception, mismatch condition (A) prolong the
reaction time compared to the match condition (B). When
perception precedes simulation, mismatch condition (C)
produce shorter reaction time when compared to the match
condition (D). Solid line – motion away from the observer;
dashed line – motion toward the observer.
We implement adaptation as a reduction in
neurotransmitter release from F1 and F2 nodes which
temporarily disable activation of F2 node responsible for

encoding the perceived motion. Therefore, if the sentence
requires simulation of the motion toward the observer and
we simultaneously perceive motion in the same direction,
the time needed to construct simulation and to reach
decision will be longer compared to a situation where the
perceived and the simulated motions are different (compare
figure 1C and 1D). Of course, the time to recuperate from
the adaptation for F2 nodes is set arbitrary and it is possible
that the recuperation from the adapting state lasts shorter
than required by this computer simulation. However, it
should be mentioned that there are other ways in which
active F2 node could be silenced after the network enters the
simulation mode. For instance, it is possible that an
inhibitory signal from the gain modulation node to the F2
nodes is much stronger at the beginning of the simulation
which will disable rapid development of simulation when
the same node is previously used in perception.
In the simulations C and D we did not use separate motor
neurons to represent decision about sensibility of the
sentence. We assumed that the sensibility judgments are
directly related to the activity of F2 nodes for motion
perception. During perceptual simulation these nodes will
be active and contribute to the accumulation of evidence
that the sentence is sensible. On the other hand, lack of
activity in the visual ART module could contribute to the
accumulation of evidence that the sentence is not sensible.
We can speculate that nodes for the sensibility judgment
operate in a similar manner as the nodes for the movement
preparation, that is, they will integrate input signals until
they will reach threshold. Therefore, if the perceptual
simulation starts earlier in time in the visual ART module, it
will also speed up decision of the sensibility of the sentence.
Of course, in the real sentence comprehension, other
attributes are also present and utilized for the construction
of meaning. All these perceptual attributes might also have
their corresponding ART module which will simulate or
reactivate perceptual traces associated with their category or
F2 nodes. Such distributed activation across different ART
modules which converges toward nodes for the sensibility
judgment might be considered as a simplified construction
of the meaning of the sentence.
Simulation of the experiment of Zwaan et al. (2004)
depicted in figure 2A and 2B raised a concern regarding the
difference between the simulated motor output and the
response made by the experimental subjects. In the model,
the response indicates whether there is a movement toward
or movement away from the observer. On the other hand, in
the experiment, subjects were instructed to check whether
two objects presented sequentially were the same or
different. The model could simulate this task by introducing
a separate ART module for shape analysis. This module
would compare two objects by processing first object and
after its disappearance; corresponding F2 node would make
a prediction regarding the shape of the second object.
Prediction will be observable in the pattern of activity
across F1 layer which will be compared to the sensory data
when the second object appears.

2200

How such comparison unfolds in time in the F1 layer is
shown in figure 3. T1 corresponds to the presentation of the
first object (i.e., outline of the softball). T2 corresponds to
the interstimulus interval between the presentation of the
first and the second object. During this time window, F2
node encoding softball reads-out its spatial pattern onto F1
layer. Such read-out is modulated by the expected size of
the object. If the sentence implies movement away from the
observer, expected pattern will be smaller compared to the
original shape presented during T1. If the following shape
matches with the expectation, decision that the objects are
the same will be accelerated (fig 3, top row). On the other
hand, if the sentence implied movement toward observer,
expectation will not match with incoming sensory pattern
(fig 3, bottom row) and the decision that the objects are the
same will be slowed due to the lateral inhibition in the F1
layer and the reset signal.

Figure 3. Simulation of the F1 layer of the hypothetical
ART module for the shape perception which made object
comparison task. T1 – presentation of the first object. T2 –
interstimulus interval between object’s presentation. T3 –
presentation of the second object.

Discussion
We simulated the differences in reaction time in the shape
discrimination task of Zwaan et al. (2004) and sensibility
judgments in the experiment of Kaschak et al. (2005) by
using real-time implementation of the ART circuit.
Operations of the ART circuit have been used previously to
explain a wide range of behavioral, neuropsychological and
electrophysiological data (Carpenter & Grossberg, 1993;
Grossberg, 1982). The gain control mechanism and reset
mechanism enable us to provide mechanistic explanation of
why perceptual simulation has a different effect on reaction
time in match and mismatch condition and why the reverse
pattern of results occur in different experimental settings. In
this way, we provide a computational account of how
interaction between perception and conceptual processing is
achieved by using cortical mechanisms responsible for
stable category learning (Carpenter & Grossberg, 2003).
Further research will explore the extension of the present
approach to the interaction between language understanding

and action planning, that is, simulation of the actionsentence compatibility effect (Borreggine & Kaschak, 2006;
Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002).

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Bial Foundation grant
80/06 and by the Croatian Ministry of Science, Education
and Sport grant 009-0362214-0818.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577–660.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Borreggine, K.L., & Kaschak, M.P. (2006). The actionsentence compatibility effect: It’s all in the timing.
Cognitive Science, 30, 1097-1112.
Carpenter, G. & Grossberg, S. (1993). Normal and amnesic
learning, recognition, and memory by a neural model of
cortico-hippocampal
interactions.
Trends
in
Neurosciences, 16, 131-137.
Carpenter, G.A. & Grossberg, S. (2003). Adaptive
resonance theory. In M.A. Arbib (Ed.), The Handbook of
Brain Theory and Neural Networks, 2nd Ed, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 87-90.
Glenberg, A.M., & kaschak, M.P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565.
Grossberg, S. (1980). How does a brain build a cognitive
code? Psychological Review, 87, 1-51.
Grossberg, S. (1982). Processing of expected and
unexpected events during conditioning and attention: A
psychophysiological theory. Psychological Review, 89,
529-572.
Kaschak, M. P., Madden, C. J., Therriault, D. J., Yaxley, R.
H., Aveyard, M., Blanchard, A. A., & Zwaan, R. A.
(2005). Perception of motion affects language processing.
Cognition, 94, 79-89.
Martin, A. (2007). The representation of object concepts in
the brain. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 25-45.
Pulvermüller, F. (1999). Words in the brain’s language.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 253-336.
Pulvermüller, F. (2001). Brain reflections of words and their
meaning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 517-524.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J. L. (2001). On the time course
of perceptual choice: The leaky competing accumulator
model. Psychological Review, 108, 550-592.
Zwaan, R.A., Madden, C.J., Yaxley, R.H., & Aveyard, M.E.
(2004). Moving words: dynamic representations in
language comprehension. Cognitive Science, 28, 611-619.
Zwaan, R. A., Stanfield, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2002). Do
language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes of
objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.

2201

