UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adding Distractors Improves Performance by Boosting Top-Down Control

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0z53h0x1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Juvina, Ion
Taatgen, Niels

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Adding Distractors Improves Performance by Boosting Top-Down Control
Ion Juvina (ijuvina@cmu.edu) & Niels A. Taatgen (taatgen@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Abstract

-

The attentional capture account (Kahneman &
Chajczyk, 1983; Mitterer et al., 2003) states that the
extra stimulus captures attention on some of the
trials, thus causing the Stroop distractor to interfere
less often with the Stroop target.
- The visual interference account (Brown et al., 1995;
MacLeod & Bors, 2002) proposes that recognition of
two or more words occurs in parallel. The extra
words cause degradation of the early visual percept
of the Stroop distractor impairing its recognition, thus
making it less able to interfere with the Stroop target.
Both accounts postulate bottom-up mechanisms
(attentional capture or visual interference) to be responsible
for the Stroop dilution effect. The improvement in
performance seems to be caused by deteriorating the
automatic reading of the word feature of the Stroop
stimulus. In other words, the extra stimuli make the
distractor less interfering. However, the Stroop task is
known to have a top-down component as well (Herd,
Banich, & O'Reilly, 2006). None of the studies with which
we are familiar was concerned with the impact of the extra
stimuli on the top-down component involved in the Stroop
task, which is selecting and processing the target.

The effect of adding to-be-ignored extra stimuli to a modified
Stroop task is investigated. Adding extra stimuli of the same
kind as the distractor causes a temporary improvement in
performance (Stroop dilution), whereas adding extra stimuli
of the same kind as the target causes an improvement in
performance that is only detectable when the extra stimuli are
removed (post-treatment). An attempt is made to explain
these different outcomes in light of the existing theoretical
accounts of the Stroop dilution effect. A computational model
that accounts for the observed data is proposed. Results
suggest that a top-down control mechanism compensates for
lateral inhibition effects, particularly when they have a
potentially disruptive influence on performance. This boost of
control seems to last longer than needed, causing performance
improvements in a post-treatment condition. A further
implication of these results is that the top-down control
function is trainable.
Keywords: Stroop dilution; lateral inhibition; top-down
control.

Background
One of the typical functions of our cognitive control system
is interference resolution by protecting the execution of
task-relevant sequences of actions against interference and
distraction. The Stroop task is a landmark task for studying
cognitive control and interference resolution (MacLeod,
1991; Miyake, Friedman, Emerson, Witzki, Howerter,
Wager, 2000). In this task the participant is presented with a
sequence of words written in various ink colors and
instructed to name the ink color of each word. There are
three conditions: (1) congruent, when the word meaning and
the ink color are congruent, for example, the word "red" is
written in red ink; (2) incongruent, when the word meaning
and the ink color are incongruent, for example, the word
"red" is written in green ink; and (3) neutral, when the word
meaning does not refer to a color name, for example, the
word "desk" written in any color. Typically, it takes more
time to name the color of an incongruent word and less time
to name the color of a congruent word than to name the
color of a neutral word.
A common augmentation of the Stroop paradigm is
obtained by adding to-be-ignored extra stimuli to the
classical Stroop trial. Typically, these extra stimuli are
words and they determine an increase in performance on the
Stroop task, a phenomenon frequently referred to as Stroop
dilution (Brown, Roos-Gilbert, & Carr, 1995; Cho, Lien, &
Proctor, 2006; Kahneman & Chajczyk, 1983; MacLeod &
Bors, 2002; Mitterer, La Heij, & Van der Heijden, 2003).
Two main theoretical accounts have been proposed for the
Stroop dilution effect:

Experiment
In order to study the impact of the extra stimuli on the topdown component of the task, we added a separate condition
with extra stimuli of the same kind as the target (extra
colors). The hypothesis is that the extra words would cause
an increase in performance (Stroop dilution), whereas the
extra colors would cause a decrease in performance. The
reasoning behind the latter is that the extra colors would
disrupt target identification while leaving the distractor with
its full interfering potential.
We are also interested to know what impact these changes
in performance have on a post-treatment condition when the
extra stimuli are removed. We hypothesize that, if the
changes are solely due to bottom-up mechanisms
(attentional capture or visual interference), performance at
post-treatment should return to its pre-treatment levels. If
post-treatment performance is differentially or similarly
affected by the two treatments (extra colors vs. extra words),
then other mediating or modulating processes might be
involved.

Method
This experiment is part of a larger project aimed at
investigating the cognitive control aspects of multitasking.
We are interested in interference control in tasks that

353

involve perceptual, cognitive, and motor components; the
vocal component of the Stroop task does not interest us in
this study. For this reason we have considered using a
manual version of the Stroop task. However, the typical
manual Stroop task, in which each color is mapped on a
unique manual response, has been shown to produce
reduced levels of interference and fast decrease in
interference with practice (see MacLeod, 1991, for a
review). The reduced interference is probably caused by the
direct association that is formed with practice between the
perception of colors and the associated manual responses.
Thus the mapped key presses loose their dimensional
overlap with color concepts (Kornblum, 1994) because the
retrieval of a color name is bypassed. When memory
retrievals are bypassed, the main source of interference in
the Stroop task, that is reading and retrieving color names,
no longer exists.
We asked participants to select the right answer from two
options given on the screen, thus reintroducing words as
source of interference. This way, naming a color involves
going through a verbal step. Having to select names of
colors presented on screen makes the manual Stroop task
more compatible with the standard (vocal) Stroop task, by
bringing back its semantic and linguistic components.
Interference arises from the possibility to retrieve an
incorrect color name as in the vocal variant of the task. Each
response option has an equal probability to appear on the
left or right sides of the stimulus, thus preventing the
selection process from becoming automated.

Stimuli Stimuli were color names (red, blue, orange and
green) and neutral words colored with one of the four colors
denoted by the mentioned color names. The neutral words
were 10 common English words unrelated semantically or
phonologically to any of the color names. Stimuli were
presented one at a time in the center of the screen. Two
response options were also displayed flanking the stimulus
on its left and right sides. Response options were noncolored (i.e., in black) color names. One response option
contained the correct answer and the other one an incorrect
answer. In the incongruent condition the incorrect answer
was identical with the distractor word.
Figures 1 and 2 show a typical set of stimuli from a trial
in the extra colors condition and a trial in the extra words
condition, respectively. In the extra colors condition, three
color-patches were presented above the stimulus. The extra
colors were drawn at random from a set of eleven colors that
included the four target colors.

Figure 1: A typical set of stimuli in the extra colors
condition.

Participants Sixty-three participants were recruited from
Carnegie Mellon University’s community via a website
advertisement. Participant age ranged from 18 to 47 years
with an average of 22. There were 22 women and 41 men.

In the extra words condition, three words were presented
above the stimulus. The extra words were drawn at random
from a set of eleven words that included the four names of
the target colors. The location of stimuli on the screen was
kept constant.

Design The three classical trial types of the Stroop task –
incongruent, congruent and neutral – were administered
within participant, in equal proportions, and randomly
mixed. The participants were assigned at random to two
experimental groups: the extra colors group and the extra
words group. The total of 602 trials were divided in three
blocks as follows:
- The pre-treatment block was composed of 231 trials
without extra stimuli.
- The treatment block was composed of 232 trials. In
this block, the participants received extra colors or
extra words depending on which experimental group
they were assigned to.
- The post-treatment block was composed of 139 trials
of the same kind as the pre-treatment trials.
The three blocks were administered within participant,
that is, all participants went through all three blocks of
trials. The pre- and post-treatment control blocks were
intended to measure whether the changes in performance
caused by the added extra stimuli lasted when the extra
stimuli were removed.

Figure 2: A typical set of stimuli in the extra words
condition.
Procedure Instead of verbally naming the color of the
stimulus as in the classical Stroop task, participants were
instructed to select as fast as possible the response option
that matched the color of the stimulus from the two options
presented on the left and right sides of the stimulus by
pressing a key for each option. The session started with a
short computer-guided tutorial that emphasized the correct
response. Before the treatment block, participants were

354

instructed that the extra stimuli are to be ignored since they
might interfere with the execution of the main task. During
the task no feedback was provided. The task was self-paced.

Results
The data of one participant were excluded from analysis,
because the latencies exceeded 2000 ms on average (this
criterion had previously been used to exclude data from
analysis in Miyake et al., 2000; Cho et al. 2006). As a
consequence of this exclusion, each group was composed of
31 participants. A number of trials (4.52%) were excluded
from analysis because they had very low (lower than 300
ms) or very high (higher than 2000 ms) latencies.
A first analysis was intended to check if our modified
version of the manual Stroop task produced levels of
interference comparable with the classical vocal Stroop task.
Table 1 shows the mean latencies and accuracies obtained in
our study. They are in the same range as the values obtained
in studies that used the vocal version of the Stroop task
(Cho et al., 2006; see also MacLeod, 1991, for a review).

Figure 3: Task performance (mean latency) for each
group across the three blocks. The vertical bars around the
mean values depict 95% confidence intervals.
The pattern of results shown in Figure 1, particularly the
interaction between block and group, suggests that the
treatment in Block 2 (extra colors versus extra words) does
have an influence on performance. However, in order to be
properly interpreted, the effect of our manipulation must be
separated from the main effect of block, that is, the general
improvement in performance across the three blocks for
both groups. Most likely, this is a practice effect that is
independent of our manipulation and, thus, can be
subtracted out.
Subtracting out the general practice effect was
accomplished through the following procedure:
- A regression line was estimated for each participant
with the aid of simple linear regression with latency
as dependent measure and trial number as predictor.
Thus, the value of the regression coefficient of the
predictor (the slope) indicated the size of the practice
effect in each participant, with larger negative values
indicating steeper learning.
- For each participant and for each trial, an adjusted
value of the latency was calculated as the difference
between the actual latency and the product of trial
number with the value of the learning slope of that
participant.
- As a result of this procedure, each data point was
discounted with an amount that corresponded to the
general improvement in performance due to practice
as estimated for each participant. The outcome of this
procedure is depicted in Figure 4.
As shown in Figure 4, subtracting out the general practice
effect has preserved the relative positions of the data points.
Repeating the LME analyses presented above reveals
similar t and p values for all effects except for the main
effect of block, which can be taken as indication that the
general practice effect has successfully been removed from
the data.

Table 1: Accuracies and latencies by trial type.
Accuracy
Latency (s)

Incongruent
0.92
1.012

Congruent
0.99
0.866

Neutral
0.98
0.909

For the following analyses, only the correct trials were
retained (96.09%). The data were submitted to a Linear
Mixed Effects (LME) analysis with latency as a dependent
variable, group (extra colors and extra words) and block
(pre-treatment, treatment and post-treatment) as fixed
factors, and a hierarchical grouping structure with condition
(incongruent, congruent and neutral) nested in participant.
This type of analysis is superior to the classical analysis of
variance (ANOVA) in that it supports analysis of
hierarchical effects and repeated measures, thus adequately
handling data where observations are not independent
(Garson, n.d.).
Figure 3 shows the mean latencies for the two groups
across the three blocks. The LME analysis reveals a
significant main effect of block (t=-11.77, p=0.00 and t=23.77, p=0.00, respectively), that is, latency decreases from
block 1 (pre-treatment) to block 2 (treatment) and further to
block 3 (post-treatment). There are also two significant
interactions between group and block (t=-4.95, p=0.00; and
t=2.35, p=0.02, respectively). The main effect of group is
not significant, although it is qualified by the two significant
interactions between group and block. Thus, separate LME
analyses show that, although both groups improve
performance from block 1 to block 2, the group receiving
extra words has a larger improvement (t=-19.08, p=0.00)
than the group receiving extra colors (t=-11.25, p=0.00).
Analogously, although both groups improve performance
from block 2 to block 3, the extra colors group has a larger
improvement (t=-13.54, p=0.00) than the extra words group
(t=-4.34, p=0.00).

355

theoretical accounts, Stroop dilution seems to be a direct
consequence of the fact that the extra stimuli are of the same
kind as the distractor (i.e., words). They compete with the
distractor for perceptual or attentional resources. As a
consequence, the distractor is degraded and interferes less
with the target. According to this account, if the extra
stimuli were of the same kind as the target (i.e., colors), one
would expect a decrease in performance, that is, a reverse of
the dilution effect (i.e., increase in latency). This was our
hypothesis for the extra colors group, and it was not
supported by the data. The increase in latency in the
treatment condition for the extra colors group was
insignificant.
What is the reason for this unexpected result? Assuming
that the existing theoretical accounts of the Stroop dilution
effect were valid, the color dimension of the Stroop stimulus
would compete with the extra colors and become harder to
identify. Since we have no good reasons to question the
existing theoretical accounts, we assume that the target has
indeed become harder to identify but the cognitive system
has reacted by allocating more resources to the target
identification process. Since the target was already under the
focus of top-down control (as the Stroop task requires), we
assume that the system reacts by boosting its top-down
control signal. It is a known property of our top-down
control system to be able to modulate other perceptual and
cognitive processes (Gazzaley, Cooney, McEvoy, Knight, &
D'Esposito, 2005). The net effect of these two influences is
zero, that is, performance does not change as compared to
the pre-treatment condition.
More convincing evidence that a control boost has indeed
occurred comes from the post-treatment block. Performance
of the two groups goes in opposite directions. For the extra
words group, performance goes back to its level at pretreatment. This is in line with the existing accounts of the
Stroop dilution effect, proving that it is indeed a pure
bottom-up effect – it lasts as long as the extra words are
displayed. For the extra colors group, performance goes to
its highest level, that is, latency significantly decreases
below its pre-treatment level. Given that the general
learning effect had been removed, there would be no reason
for such a significant change in performance at posttreatment unless something happened at treatment,
presumably a boost in top-down control.

Figure 4: The result of removing the general practice
effect. The remaining differences and interactions are
likely to be determined solely by the treatment. Thus, the
extra words group improves performance in block 2
(treatment) as compared with block 1 (pre-treatment), but
this improvement does not extend to block 3 (posttreatment). The extra colors group improves performance
only in block 3 (post-treatment). The vertical bars around
the mean values depict 95% confidence intervals.
The adjusted latencies allow us to better understand the
effect of our manipulation. The transformed data were
submitted to separate Linear Mixed Effects (LME) analyses
for each group with adjusted latency as a dependent
variable, block (pairs of pre-treatment, treatment and posttreatment) as fixed factor, and a hierarchical grouping
structure with condition (incongruent, congruent and
neutral) nested in participant.
For the extra words group, there is a clear improvement in
performance (i.e., decrease in latency) when extra words are
added (t=-6.49, p=0.00). When extra words are removed
(block 3) performance returns to its pre-treatment value
(block 1) and this change is also significant (t=4.93,
p=0.00).
For the extra colors group, there is no significant change
in performance when extra colors are added (block 2), but
there is a significant improvement in performance (i.e.,
decrease in latency) when the extra colors are removed
(block 3). Latency in block 3 (post-treatment) is
significantly lower than in block 1 (t=-4.69, p=0.00) and
block 2 (t=-5.01, p=0.00).

Computational Model
Building a computational model of the top-down
modulation of the Stroop dilution effect is a useful
endeavor; it helps us refine the theories on cognitive control
and it generates questions and predictions for further
research. The model we present here was developed with
the aid of the latest version of the ACT-R1 cognitive

Discussion
Adding extra stimuli to a task that already has a high level
of interference would be expected to decrease performance
by increasing information load and interference. This
expectation has been disconfirmed by the Stroop dilution
effect, which has been documented by several authors and
replicated in our experiment. According to the existing

1
Adaptive Control of Thought – Rational. The ACT-R6
modeling software is available at http://act-r.psy.cmu.edu/. The
Lisp code of the model presented here is available for download at
http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/ijuvina/Publications.htm.

356

architecture (Anderson, 2007). ACT-R is a hybrid (symbolic
and sub-symbolic) cognitive architecture used to develop
cognitive models of various tasks. The architecture is
composed of specialized modules (vision, memory, motor,
etc.) coordinated by productions rules. The symbolic
elements of the architecture (procedural rules, declarative
memories) have associated sub-symbolic quantities
(activations, utilities) that govern their availability and their
manifestation in model’s behavior.
The focus of our modeling efforts is on the top-down
modulation of Stroop dilution. For this reason, other aspects
of the Stroop task are treated very briefly. Whenever
possible, we have used modeling ideas and techniques that
have been proposed by other authors (Altmann & Davidson,
2001; Cohen, Dunbar, & McClelland, 1990; Herd, Banich,
& O'Reilly, 2006; Lovett, 2005; Roelofs, 2003).
The following is a verbal trace of the model behavior at
pre-treatment. The model perceives the stimulus and
temporarily represents its color and word dimensions. These
representations spread activation toward their associated
words and concepts in memory. For example, if the stimulus
is the word “red” in blue color (incongruent condition), the
word “red” and the concept of blueness will be activated in
memory. In order to reflect the fact that humans have higher
practice at reading words than at naming colors, word
representations have higher strengths of association with
their corresponding memory elements than color
representations. A consequence of this in our example is
that the word “red” gets retrieved as a potential response. At
this point, if memory retrieval were sufficient for
performing an action, the model would commit an error,
responding red instead of blue. However, the behavior of an
ACT-R model is guided not only by perception and memory
retrievals but also by firing of production rules of the kind
“if condition, then action.” In this case, a production rule
detects the wrong retrieval and requests a new retrieval
directed at the right color concept. The same mechanism of
detecting a wrong retrieval is implemented in other models
of the Stroop task (Altmann & Davidson, 2001; Lovett,
2005). Since memory retrievals take time, responses to
incongruent stimuli take longer than responses to neutral
stimuli. In the congruent condition, both representations
spread activation toward the same element in memory, thus
increasing its activation and speeding up its retrieval. In
addition, for congruent stimuli, the first retrieval is
sufficient for generating a correct response, even when it is
guided solely by the word dimension of the stimulus.
When the extra stimuli are added (treatment block), the
model perceives and represents them in a short-term storage
structure from where they can spread inhibition toward
memory elements of the same kind. When the extra stimuli
are words, they inhibit the words in memory, including the
word corresponding to the distractor. As a result, the
probability that the distractor word will be retrieved
decreases. Since the target will be retrieved more often,
performance increases. When the extra stimuli are colors
they inhibit the color concepts in memory, including the

concept corresponding to the target color. An inhibited color
concept would be retrieved more slowly, potentially causing
a decrease in performance. However, the retrieval of the
target color concept is not slowed down by the extra colors
because a task control unit boosts its activation. Thus, the
task control unit compensates for the decrease in activation
of the target color concept caused by lateral inhibition from
the extra colors.

Figure 5: Fit of the computational model to the data. The
vertical bars around the mean values depict 95% confidence
intervals for the data.
When the extra stimuli are removed (post-treatment), their
inhibitory effect on memory elements is discontinued. In the
extra words condition, the model goes back to its pretreatment behavior. In the extra colors condition, the model
preserves the boost in activation of the target color concept
by the task control unit that was initiated in the treatment
block. Figure 5 shows the fit of the model to the empirical
data. In order to simulate the general learning effect that was
observed in the data, parameters controlling the speed of
perceptual encoding and memory retrieval have been varied
across blocks and separately for each group.
Although there is no space here to show it graphically, the
model accounts reasonably well for the latencies of
incongruent, congruent and neutral conditions across blocks
for each group (R2=0.82, mean deviation=0.038 seconds for
the extra colors group; R2=0.85, mean deviation=0.029
seconds for the extra words group).

General Discussion and Conclusion
Although they differ on details, the two existing accounts of
the Stroop dilution effect (visual interference and attentional
capture) postulate the same general principle: stimuli of the
same type tend to compete against each other allowing a
single stimulus of a different type to be identified faster.
This principle is known in the visual search field as the
“pop-out effect” (Desimone & Duncan, 1995). We have
modeled the Stroop dilution effect as a lateral inhibition

357

process that implements the general principle of competition
among stimuli of the same type. Different implementations
of the same principle are found in ACT-R models of visual
salience (Tamborello & Byrne, 2007) and memory retrieval
(Van Maanen & Van Rijn, 2007).
Lateral inhibition would predict a reverse Stroop dilution
effect when color patches instead of words are displayed as
extra stimuli. Our data did not support this prediction. In
order to reconcile the dilution from extra words with the
lack of inverse dilution from extra colors, we postulated a
modulating effect of top-down control. The essential
difference between the extra words and extra colors
conditions is that the former affects the distractor and the
latter affects the target. The target is under the focus of topdown control, and it is presumably protected against lateral
inhibition. Moreover, evidence from the post-treatment
block suggests that a boost in top-down control has occurred
at treatment. We model this boost in top-down control by an
increase in activation spread from a task control unit that
favors the target dimension against the distractor dimension
of the stimulus.
What triggers such a boost in top-down control? We do
not have yet a good theoretical and computational solution
for this problem. Perhaps the control boost is triggered by
the negative impact that the extra stimuli have on
performance. Our model should be able to assess its
performance on-the-fly and adjust its parameters
accordingly. Why does the boost last after the harmful extra
stimuli have been removed? How long does it last? These
questions are being addressed in our current research and
modeling efforts.

Cohen, J. D., Dunbar, K., & McClelland, J. L. (1990). On
the control of automatic processes: A parallel distributed
processing account of the Stroop effect. Psychological
Review, 97, 332-361.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural Mechanisms of
Selective Visual Attention. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 18, 193-222.
Garson, G. D. (n.d.). Linear Mixed Models. In Statnotes:
Topics in Multivariate Analysis: Retrieved 05/21/2008
from
http://www2.chass.ncsu.edu/garson/pa765/statnote.htm.
Gazzaley, A., Cooney, J. W., McEvoy, K., Knight, R. T., &
D'Esposito, M. (2005). Top-down enhancement and
suppression of the magnitude and speed of neural activity.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(3), 507-517.
Herd, S. A., Banich, M. T., & O'Reilly, R. C. (2006). Neural
Mechanisms of Cognitive Control: An Integrative Model
of Stroop Task Performance and fMRI Data. J. Cognitive
Neuroscience, 18(1 ), 22-32.
Kahneman, D., & Chajczyk, D. (1983). Tests of the
automaticity of reading: Dilution of Stroop effects by
color-irrelevant stimuli. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 9(4),
497-509.
Kornblum, S. (1994). The way irrelevant dimensions are
processed depends on what they overlap with: The case of
Stroop- and Simon-like stimuli. Psychological Research,
56(3), 130-135.
Lovett, M. C. (2005). A Strategy-Based Interpretation of
Stroop. Cognitive Science(29), 493-524.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a Century of Research on the
Stroop Effect: An Integrative Review. Psychological
Bulletin, 109(2), 163-203.
MacLeod, C. M., & Bors, D. A. (2002). Presenting two
color words on a single Stroop trial: Evidence for joint
influence, not capture. Memory and Cognition, 30(5),
789-797.
Mitterer, H., La Heij, W., & Van der Heijden, A. H. C.
(2003). Stroop dilution but not word-processing dilution:
Evidence for attention capture. Psychological Research,
67, 30-42.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H.,
Howerter, A., & Wager, T. D. (2000). The unity and
diversity of executive functions and their contributions to
complex "frontal lobe" tasks: A latent variable analysis.
Cognitive Psychology, 41, 49-100.
Roelofs, A. P. A. (2003). Goal-referenced selection of
verbal action: Modeling attentional control in the Stroop
task Psychological review, 110, 88-124.
Tamborello, F. P., & Byrne, M. D. (2007). Adaptive but
non-optimal visual search behavior in highlighted
displays. Journal of Cognitive Systems Research, 8, 182–
191.
Van Maanen, L., & Van Rijn, H. (2007). An Accumulator
Model of Semantic Interference. Cognitive Systems
Research, 8(3), 174-181.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Office of Naval Research
grant N00014-08-10541 and Air Force Office of Scientific
Research grant FA95500710359. We thank Shahla Marie
Hosseini for her comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

References
Altmann, E. M., & Davidson, D. J. (2001). An integrative
approach to Stroop: Combining a language model and a
unified cognitive theory. Proceedings of the Twenty-Third
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp.
21-26). Hillsdale, NJ.
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How Can the Human Mind Occur in
the Physical Universe? New York: Oxford University
Press.
Brown, T. L., Roos-Gilbert, L., & Carr, T. H. (1995).
Automaticity and word perception: Evidence from Stroop
and Stroop Dilution Effects. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 21, 13951411.
Cho, Y. S., Lien, M.-C., & Proctor, R. W. (2006). Stroop
Dilution Depends on the Nature of the Color Carier but
Not on Its Location. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 32(4), 826-839.

358

