UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Ecological Valence Theory of Human Color Preferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9fr2s1z1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Palmer, Stephen E.
Schloss, Karen B.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Ecological Valence Theory of Human Color Preferences
Karen B. Schloss (kschloss@berkeley.edu)
Stephen E. Palmer (palmer@cogsci.berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-1650 USA

Abstract

to objects, institutions, and events associated with those
colors. We then describe the Berkeley Color Project and
some results that support our ecological valence theory and
challenge Hurlbert and Ling’s (2007) cone-contrast theory.
In particular, we find that average color preferences in our
data are much more closely related to the weighted affective
valence estimate (WAVE) of color-associated objects than it
is to the retinal cone contrasts proposed by Hurlbert and
Ling.

Although color preference is an important aspect of human
behavior, little is known about why people like some colors
more than others. In this paper we probe this issue both
theoretically and empirically. First, we discuss Hurlbert and
Ling’s (2007) cone-contrast theory, which posits a
physiological explanation based on opponent cone outputs
and gender differences. We then present an ecological valence
theory that color preferences reflect people’s cumulative
emotional responses to environmental objects/events strongly
associated with particular colors. Finally, we present data that
challenge Hurlbert and Ling’s model on multiple counts and
support an ecological valence approach.

Sensory Physiological Approach

Keywords: color; aesthetics; preference; ecological valence

Color preference is an important aspect of human behavior.
It influences a wide spectrum of decisions people make on a
regular basis, including the products they buy, the clothes
they wear, the way they decorate their homes and offices,
and how they design their personal and professional
websites, to name but a few examples. One reason why
color preference plays such a prominent role in decisionmaking is that color is among the most customizable
features of man-made objects. Although color is, in some
sense, a superficial quality that seldom influences the
practical function of artifacts, there is a good reason why
clothes, cars, ipods, and carpet come in such a wide variety
of colors: most people prefer to surround themselves with
colors they like.
There has been much research on which colors the
average person prefers, some of which has been published
in the scientific literature (e.g., Eysenck, 1941; Granger,
1955; Guilford & Smith, 1959) and some of which is no
doubt locked in confidential file cabinets of the corporate
world. Until recently, research on color preference has
primarily focused on describing which colors humans prefer
without shedding light on why people prefer the colors they
do. This level of analysis is sufficient for designers, whose
goal is to produce aesthetically pleasing products. For
cognitive scientists, however, who are interested in why
people have the color preferences they do – and indeed, why
people have color preferences at all – simply describing
preferences is not enough.
We begin by reviewing Hurlbert and Ling’s (2007) conebased theory of color preference, which argues that it is
related to the relative activation of opponent processes
derived from retinal cone responses. We then introduce an
ecological valence theory, which proposes that color
preferences reflect people’s cumulative emotional responses

Hurlbert and Ling (2007) recently introduced an explanation
for human color preference based on retinal cone responses.
They were able to account for a large portion of the variance
in average color preference for their set of test colors using
linear combinations of cone contrasts – specifically, L-M
and S-(L+M), where L, M, and S indicate the output of
cones that are most sensitive to long, medium and short
wavelengths of light, respectively – calculated for the test
color relative to its neutral gray background. The L-M axis
roughly corresponds to a red-to-cyan dimension and the S(L+M) axis roughly corresponds to a purple-to-chartreuse
dimension (although Hurlbert and Ling refer to the former
as “red-green” and the latter as “blue-yellow”). They found
that both male and female preferences weighted highly
positively on the S-(L+M) axis, because both prefer purpler
colors over chartreuser1 colors. Weights on the L-M axis
differed as a function of gender, however: females weighted
positively, preferring redder colors, and males weighted
negatively, preferring cyaner1 colors.
Hurlbert and Ling suggested that this gender difference in
L-M (red/cyan) preferences is based on a hardwired
biological mechanism that evolved in the context of
“hunter-gather” societies. In particular, they argue that
females like redder colors because their visual system has
specialized to be attracted to ripe berries and fruit against a
background of green foliage.
There are both theoretical and empirical problems with
their account, however. First, their theory provides no
explanation for their most robust finding: that both males
and females robustly prefer purpler colors to chartreuser
colors. Second, their theory explains why females should
like redder colors, but does not explain why males should
like cyaner colors. Even if males never picked berries and
1
Please forgive the odd terminology here. We use “chartreuser”
and “cyaner” rather than “more chartreuse” and “more cyan”
because of the ambiguity the latter introduces in terms of the
number of colors in these categories.

2663

fruit – a dubious assumption, at best – it is unclear why they
would be attracted to cyan, especially since the game for
which they searched visually would often be seen against a
background of green foliage, just like berries and fruit.
Third, the data on which Hurlbert and Ling’s theory is based
come from a narrow color sample that explicitly excludes
highly saturated colors, unique hues (red, yellow, green and
blue), and other easily nameable colors (orange, purple,
white, black, gray, and brown). Indeed, their eight hues
form essentially just two classes of colors: 4 variants of pink
and 4 variants of green. Although these colors may be good
choices for testing a cone-contrast theory of color
preference, they do not constitute a representative sample of
the full range of colors humans can and do experience.
Finally, their model predicts specific constraints on patterns
of hue preference due to its opponent-based structure. In
particular, it implies that people should never
simultaneously prefer redder colors and cyaner colors nor
purpler colors and chartreuser colors, because these pairs lie
at opposite ends of the two opponent cone-based
dimensions. For all these reasons we felt that different
theoretical and empirical approaches to color preference
were worth pursuing.

water) and repulsed by colors associated with objects to
which they have negative reactions (e.g., browns with feces
and rotten fruit). If this theory is correct, then preference for
a given color should be closely related to the affective value
of the objects and events that people associate with that
color. This hypothesis is easy to formulate, but difficult to
test. Nevertheless, we report evidence that provides striking
support for it in Experiment 2, where we estimate the
ecological valence of color-associated objects and use them
to predict the preference data for 32 chromatic colors
sampled systematically from the full spectrum in
Experiment 1.

The Berkeley Color Project

An Ecological Valence Approach
In this paper we propose an ecological valence theory of
color preference. It is grounded in people’s emotional
responses to colored environmental objects rather than on
particular hardwired contrasts between cone outputs. The
ecological valence theory is perhaps most easily framed by
an analogy between color preferences and food preferences.
Because humans do not have direct sensory access to the
nutritional content of potential foodstuffs, they must rely on
the output of genetically evolved taste receptors as a
surrogate for actual nutritional value. Through both
evolutionarily and individual learning mechanisms,
organisms determine what tastes are edible and nutritious
(e.g., sweet and/or fatty substances) and what tastes are
inedible and/or noxious (e.g., bitter substances) via feedback
from the consequences of eating episodes. Just as organisms
are more likely to survive and reproduce if they eat goodtasting substances and avoid bad-tasting ones, so too
organisms may be more likely to survive and reproduce if
they are attracted to objects and situations associated with
good-looking colors and avoid objects and situation
associated with bad-looking colors. The consequences of
color-based preferences are not as strongly drawn as those
of taste-based preferences, but it nevertheless seems
reasonable that similar evolutionary and associative-learning
mechanisms would operate in the color domain.
The ecological valence theory thus assumes that an
individual’s color preferences at a particular time are
determined by their combined affective response to
environmental objects and situations associated with each
color. Accordingly, people should be attracted to colors
associated with objects and situations to which they have
positive reactions (e.g., blues with clear sky and clean

The Berkeley Color Project (BCP) is a large-scale study
aimed at understanding human color preference. (See
Palmer and Schloss (in preparation) for a full description.)
We used a massive repeated measures design in which the
same set of 48 participants were tested on the same 30 tasks
using the same set of 37 colors (see below). This allowed
direct comparisons across tasks, with each participant
serving as his or her own control. Tasks included preference
ratings of homogeneous squares of color, preference ratings
of colors of objects (e.g., t-shirts, walls), preference ratings
of color pairs in concentric squares, ratings of color
harmony for color pairs, ratings of color-emotion
associations, and ratings of the colors’ colorimetric structure
(e.g., red/green, blue/yellow), to name but a few. In this
paper we focus on preference for 32 single chromatic colors
(excluding black, white, and grays) and how they can be
predicted from factors such as cone contrasts (Hurlbert &
Ling 2007) and colorimetric judgments. We compare these
models with a model based on weighted ecological valence
ratings in Experiment 2.

Experiment 1: Preference for Single Colors
In the first experiment we obtained preference ratings for 32
single colors presented on a neutral gray background. We
then tested several different models to predict average
preferences across individuals, one based on cone contrasts,
one based on colorimetric ratings (red-green, blue-yellow,
light-dark, and saturation).

Method
Participants All tasks in Experiment 1 were completed by
48 participants selected to fill a 2 x 2 design balanced for
gender (male, female) and artistic expertise (low, high). All
participants were screened for color deficiency using the
Dvorine Pseudo-Isochromatic Plates, and none were found
to be color deficient. All participants gave informed
consent, and the Committee for the Protection of Human
Subjects at UC Berkeley, approved the protocol.
Design A massive repeated measures design was employed
in which each participant completed all 30 experiments with
the same set of 37 colors. Experiments were divided over a
series of eight sessions, only a subset of which will be
discussed in this paper.

2664

The BCP’s 37 colors included four hues approximating
the unique hues (red (R), green (G), yellow (Y), blue (B))
and their approximate angle bisectors (orange (O),
chartreuse (H), cyan (C), purple (P)), at four
saturation/brightness levels (saturated (S), light (L), dark
(D), and muted (M) 2). There also were five achromatic
colors including black, white and three intermediate grays.
Colors were translated into CIE 1931 xyY coordinates from
Munsell space using the Munsell Renotation Table
(Wyzecki & Stiles,1967). Figure 1 shows our 37 colors
projected onto an equal luminance plane in CIELAB color
space.

S, L, and M colors, showing that the pattern of hue
preferences across these cuts was essentially the same (F(7,
329) = 2.02, p > .05). The D cut did, however, interact with
the other three cuts (F(7,329) = 17.87, p < .001). Dark
orange (brown) and dark yellow (olive) were significantly
less preferred than orange and yellow in the average of the
other three cuts (F(1,47) = 11.74, 41.06, p < .001,
respectively), whereas dark red and dark green were more
preferred than red and green in the average of the other cuts
(F(1,47) = 15.41, 6.37, p < .001, .05, respectively).

Figure 2: Mean preference for the 32 chromatic colors
Figure 1: The BCP’s 37 colors projected onto a plane of
equal luminance in CIELAB color space.
Procedure In all tasks discussed here, participants were
presented with a random order of the 37 individual colors on
a neutral gray background. Each color remained on the
screen until a task-dependent rating was made along a 14
cm (400 px) line. The next trial began 500ms later. For the
color preference task, participants rated how much they
liked each color on a scale from “not at all” at the left end of
the line to “very much” at the right end. For the
colorimetric task participants rated how red vs. green,
yellow vs. blue, light vs. dark, and saturated vs. desaturated
each color appeared to be. Trials were blocked by
colorimetric dimension.

Figure 3 shows the average preference ratings separately
for male and female participants. The shape of the hue
functions do not differ much across genders, and there is no
gender difference for either L or D colors (F < 1).

Results and Discussion
Color Preference The average results for the color
preference task are plotted in Figure 2, which shows
preference for the saturated (S), light (L), muted (M) and
dark (D) “cuts” in color space as a function of hue.
Preferences for the S, L and M cuts produced relatively
smooth functions with a peak at blue and a trough at
chartreuse. The L and M colors were equally preferred (F <
1), with the S colors at a higher level of preference than the
average preference for L and M colors (F(1,47) = 9.20, p <
.01). There was no interaction between hue and cut for the
2

Non-bold S, L and M refer to saturated, light, and muted
colors; bold L, M and S to retinal cone-types.

Figure 3: Mean preferences among the 32 chromatic colors
for males and females, plotted for S, L, M, and D colors.
There was, however a reliable interaction between males
and females for the M and S cuts (F(1,46) = 11.42, p < .01).
Males gave S colors higher preference ratings than M colors
(F(1,23) = 24.18, p < .001), whereas females liked M and S
colors equally. Males liked M colors less than females

2665

(F(1,46) = 5.85, p < .05) and S colors more, although the
latter difference was not significant.

model performed much better than the cone contrast model,
accounting for 57% of the variance in our preference
ratings: 34% for blueness-yellowness (similar to the S(L+M) dimension of the cone contrast model), an additional
17% for saturation, and a further 6% for lightness-darkness.
Redness-greenness was not included in the model.
Although this model explains substantially more variance
than the cone contrast model, it does not predict the striking
difference in hue preference for the colors in the D cut,
relative the S, L and M cuts. It also does not provide any
explanation of why people prefer the colors they do; it only
describes an approximation to the pattern of preferences we
found. We will address both points in Experiment 2.
Individual differences were further examined using
cluster analysis to separate participants into subgroups based
on similar hue preferences (see Figure 5). The input to the
cluster analysis was obtained by correlating preference
ratings for the eight hues (averaged over cuts) for each pair
of participants. These pair-wise correlations were then used
as distance metrics in the cluster analysis (Carroll, 1976).

Modeling Color Preference We first attempted to account
for the variance in average preference ratings using Hurlbert
and Ling’s (2007) cone contrast model. We calculated the
contrasts for the L-M, and S-(L+M) opponent systems (see
Figure 4) using equations provided by Eskew, McLellan, &
Giulianini (1999). Consistent with Hurlbert and Ling’s
findings, there was a significant correlation between
preference for our 32 chromatic colors and the output of the
S-(L+M) system (r = .44, p < .05). No additional variance
was accounted for by the L-M system however. A multiple
linear regression model using all three factors as predictors
accounted for only 19% of the variance in our color
preference ratings.
This contrasts dramatically with
Hurlbert and Ling’s (2007) finding that these variables
accounted for 70% of the variance in their preference data.
This discrepancy is almost certainly due to the salient
differences between our stimuli, which included unique,
highly saturated, nameable colors, and theirs, which avoided
unique, highly saturated, nameable colors.

Figure 5: Hue preferences (combined across cuts) for three
clusters of participants based on similar hue preferences.

Figure 4: Cone contrasts for the L-M and S-(L+M) axes as
a function of the 8 hues of the Berkeley Color Project.
We conducted the same analyses for males and females
separately to see whether our data replicated their finding
that females weighted positively on the L-M axis and males
weighted negatively. Both males and females in our study
weighted negatively on the L-M axis, with small negative
correlations for both genders (r = -0.12, -0.12, t(23) = -2.44,
-2.40, respectively, p < .05), showing that both genders
among our participants prefer cyaner to redder colors, to the
extent that they have any preference over this dimension.
In the second model we attempted to predict our average
color preference ratings from our average colorimetric
ratings: red/green, yellow/blue, light/dark and saturation.
Although these dimensions are not rooted in a known
biological system, as the LMS cone contrasts are, they are
based explicitly on salient dimensions of perceptual
experience (i.e., the Hering-based dimensions of the Natural
Color System (NCS) color space; Hård & Sivik, 1981). This

We examined these three hue functions separately to
determine whether color preferences always vary in
opposition as the cone-contrast theory requires. Following
Hurlbert and Ling (2007), we computed the correlation
between each observer’s data and the cone-contrasts (Eskew
et al., 1999): the colors’ coordinates on the two opponent
axes (L-M and S-(L+M)), which vary in opposition as the
cone-contrast theory requires, and the absolute value of
these same coordinates (|L-M| and |S-(L+M)|), which vary
conjointly in conflict with the cone-contrast theory. Table 1
shows the results. The data show modest, but highly reliable
conjoint variation as well as opponent variation. This
finding casts doubt on the viability of cone-opponency as
the primary determinant of color preference.

2666

Cone Contrast

rcluster 1

rcluster 2

rcluster 3

-0.05

-0.02

-0.63***

0.17

0.66***

0.30*

|L-M|

-0.07

0.12

-0.03

|S-(L+M)|

0.23*

-0.38***

-0.30**

L-M
S-(L+M)

* p<.05, ** p<.01, ***p<.001
Table 1. Average of each participant’s correlation between
cone contrasts and hue preferences for Clusters 1, 2, and 3.
Significance levels are based on t-tests comparing
individuals’ correlations within each cluster to zero.

Experiment 2: Weighted Affective Valence
Estimates (WAVEs) of Colors
Experiment 2 was conducted to test a key prediction of the
ecological valence theory outlined in the introduction. The
theory postulates that color preference is determined by the
cumulative valence of people’s affective responses to
“things” that are strongly associated with colors. In this
section we outline how we calculated the WAVEs for
verbally described physical objects and test how well they
predict color preferences.

Method
Participants There were 74 participants in the objectdescription phase of this experiment and 98 in the valencerating phase, none of whom participated in both tasks or in
the color preference task of Experiment 1. All were students
in psychology courses, participated to fulfill a partial course
requirement, and gave informed consent. The experimental
protocol was approved by the Committee for the Protection
of Human Subjects at UC Berkeley.
Procedure In the object-description phase, participants
were presented with each of the 37 colors on a computer
screen as a square on a neutral gray background, one at a
time in a random order. Each color remained on the screen
for 20 seconds, during which participants wrote verbal
descriptions of as many “things” as they could that they
associated with that particular color. Participants were
instructed to name objects whose color would be generally
known (e.g., not the color of some particular music album)
and not to name objects that could be any arbitrary color
(e.g., T-shirts, crayons, or paint).
All of the 4744 object descriptions were filtered by the
following exclusion rules: A description was eliminated if it
(a) could be any color (e.g., crayons, cars), (b) was an
abstract concept instead of a physical object (e.g., peace,
winter), (c) was a color name instead of an object (e.g., “Cal
Blue”, “teal”), (d) was clearly dissimilar to the color on the
screen (e.g., “grass at noon” for dark purple), or (e) was
provided by only a single participant for the given color.
The remaining 1062 descriptions were then categorized to
reduce the number of items to be rated in the valence-rating

phase. Descriptions that referred to the same object were
combined into a single category (e.g., the category “rain
clouds” included descriptions such as “storm clouds,”
“clouds before rain,” and “clouds (on rainy days)”). In
addition, descriptions were combined into a superordinate
category plus exemplars when many exemplars referred to
the same type of object. For instance, “purple flowers (e.g.,
lavender, violets, lilacs, irises)” was used instead of separate
categories for each type of purple flower. The final list
contained 280 categories of object descriptions.
In the object-valence phase, participants were presented
with each of the 280 object descriptions one at a time in
black text on a white background on the computer screen.
Their task was to rate how positive/appealing each object
was on a scale from “negative” to “positive.” The same linemark rating task was used as in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
The WAVE value was calculated for each color by
multiplying the mean affective rating of each object
description by the frequency with which that object
description was reported for that color, and then taking the
average of these weighted valences across all object
descriptions for that color. The correlation between the
WAVE and color preference was very high (r = 0.82),
accounting for 67% of the variance with a single predictor.
It thus outperformed the cone contrast model (36%) and the
colorimetric model (57%), each of which included three
predictors.
Not only is the WAVE the best single predictor of
average color preference, but it nicely captures many of the
key features of the color preference data. The WAVE
captures the peak at blue, the trough at chartreuse, the
higher preference for saturated colors, and the large dip
around dark yellow (see Figure 6).

Figure 6: Weighted Affective Valence Estimates (WAVEs)
of objects associated with the 32 chromatic colors.
Even more important, it provides an explanation of color
preferences that goes significantly beyond merely redescribing the data; it implies that people’s particular
aesthetic responses to colors are caused by their affective

2667

responses to objects and situations associated with that
color. Although the present evidence is purely correlational,
it seems unlikely that causality runs in the opposite
direction. If color preferences caused object preferences
(rather than vice versa), affective ratings of same-colored
objects (e.g., chocolate and feces) should be highly similar.
Clearly, this is not necessarily true. It is also possible there
is some mediating factor that influences the relationship
between color preference and WAVE, but this also seems
unlikely. Future experimental work will be conducted to
rule out these alternative explanations.
The most obvious shortcoming of the WAVE predictions
is that they fail to capture the increased preference for dark
red relative to saturated, light, and muted reds. This occurs
largely because blood was very frequently reported for dark
red and because blood had a negative valence.

Conclusions and Future Directions
In this paper we showed that, as predicted by an ecological
valence theory, people’s emotional responses to objects they
associate with particular colors are highly and positively
correlated with their aesthetic preferences for those colors.
This suggests that, due to evolutionary and/or individual
learning, people like colors that are associated with objects
and situations that are affectively positive for them and
dislike colors that are associated with objects and situations
that are affectively negative. This is an advantageous
mechanism in that it tends to maximize people’s affective
state, biasing them to seek objects and situations they like
and to avoid objects and situations they dislike.
We also found evidence against Hurlbert and Ling’s
(2007) cone-contrast model as a complete theory of color
preferences. Not only does it account for a much smaller
portion of the variance than the WAVE data, but one of its
key predictions (opposition between preferences for colors
at opposite poles of the L-M and S-(L+M) axes) does not
hold for a significant fraction of our participants. Moreover,
we failed to replicate their finding that females prefer red to
cyan, whereas males prefer cyan to red. Nevertheless, it is
possible that a simple, innate cone-based mechanism plays a
role in a full explanation of color preferences, since
associative learning and innate biases are not mutually
exclusive. Within the ecological valence theory, an innate
initial bias towards some colors and away from others is
possible given sufficient evolutionary pressure. This might
be implemented in the S-(L+M) cone-opponent system if
the consequences for interacting with objects colored
towards the S pole of the axis are more positive.
Thus far we have found that average color preference
reflects average affective valence of color-associated
objects. This is an important result, but we also find large
individual differences, probably depending on innumerable
personal experiences accumulated over a lifetime, many of
which are idiosyncratic. The ecological valence approach to
color preference suggests effective ways to test this account:
identify a subgroup of people who are likely to share
experiences with particular colors, measure the affective

valences for their associations to those colors, and find out
whether the predicted correlations hold. For example,
members of athletic teams at UC Berkeley develop strong
positive feelings about Berkeley and strong negative
feelings about Stanford, Berkeley’s arch-rival. Members of
athletic teams at Stanford develop the opposite emotional
connections. The ecological valence theory makes the clear
prediction that these emotional responses will become
associated with their corresponding school colors (blue and
gold for Berkeley; red and white for Stanford) and cause
particular interactions between color preference and
educational institution: Berkeley athletes should show
increased preference for blue and gold and (perhaps)
decreased preference for red and white whereas Stanford
athletes should show increased preference for red and white
and (perhaps) decreased preference for blue and gold. In
future work we plan to test such predictions by studying
various such sub-populations whose positive (or negative)
associations with particular colors should allow numerous
tests of the ecological valence theory of color preference.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mike Webster for his help in achieving accurate
color presentations on our computer monitors, Joseph
Austerweil for his help in data analyses, Christine Nothelfer,
Rosa Poggesi, and the rest of the Palmer Lab for their help
in running subjects and innumerable other aspects of this
project. We also thank Amy’s Natural Frozen Foods, NSF,
and Google for their financial support.

References
Carroll, J. D. (1976). Spatial, non-spatial and hybrid models
for scaling. Psychometrika, 41, 4, 439-463.
Eysenck, H.J. (1941). A critical and experimental study of
color preferences. American Journal of Psychology, 54,
385-391.
Eskew, R. T., McLellan, J. S., & Giulianini, F. (1999).
Chromatic detection and discrimination. In Colour
Vision: From Genes to Perception. University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Granger, G. W.(1955). An experimental study of colour
preferences. Journal of General Psychology, 52, 3–20.
Guilford, J. P. & Smith, P. C. (1959). A system of colorpreferences. The American Journal of Psychology, 73 (4),
487-502.
Hård, A. & Sivik, L. (1981). NCS - Natural Color System:
A Swedish standard for color notation. Color Research &
Application, 6 (3), 129 – 138
Hurlbert, A. C., & Ling, Y. (2007). Biological components
of sex differences in color preference. Current Biology,
17, (16), 623-625.
Palmer, S. E., & Schloss, K. B. (in preparation). An
ecological valence theory of color preferences.

2668

