UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogical Transfer from Interaction with a Simulated Physical System

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7f8941jr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Day, Samuel
Goldstone, Robert

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogical Transfer from Interaction with a Simulated Physical System
Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)

Samuel B. Day (day9@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychology, 1101 East 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
In two studies, we find that participants are able to transfer
strategies learned while interacting with a simulated physical
system to a dissimilar and less perceptually-concrete domain.
Interestingly, performance on the transfer task was completely
unrelated to explicit knowledge of the structural
correspondences between the systems. We suggest that direct
interaction with a concrete system may lead to a kind of
procedural knowledge that provides a good basis for
analogical transfer.

Introduction
There is no question that analogical reasoning is a powerful
tool for learning. It allows us to look past the simple surface
details of a situation, and to focus instead on underlying
structure—how the components of a system fit together and
relate to one another. In so doing, it allows us to make
structurally-sound inferences about new situations, and
provides the opportunity to draw on our wealth of existing
knowledge. These processes may occur in any kind of
situation. Practice problems from mathematics and physics
classes are often solved by seeking out prior examples that
share the same principles, even if the specific objects and
situations described are concretely very different. On a
larger scale, there are many stories of important scientific
progress relying on apt analogies, such as Rutherford’s
model of the atom developing from an analogy with the
structure of the solar system.
However, research has repeatedly shown that people have
a very difficult time taking advantage of this tool. Unless
the structural commonalities are somehow pointed out to
them, people generally fail to notice that two situations from
different domains are analogous. For example, Gick &
Holyoak (1980, 1983) provided participants with a concrete
example of a problem being solved with a convergence
strategy, in which several small forces converged at a single
location, and summed to produce a large effect. When the
participants were subsequently asked to solve an analogous
problem from a different domain, however, they were very
unlikely to spontaneously recognize the relevance of the
prior example, and therefore failed to transfer the solution
strategy. The problem was not with the soundness of the
analogy itself—when given a hint to think about the prior
example, participants were quite good at making use of the
relevant strategy. Rather, the issue seemed to be their ability
to spontaneously see the connection between the episodes.
This general pattern has been shown repeatedly across a
wide range of materials.
What underlies this difficulty? One factor that is often
cited is the concrete content of the episodes themselves.
Although the terminology may vary somewhat, most

research on analogical transfer has distinguished between
the “deep,” abstract, structural aspects of an episode, which
are directly relevant for transfer, and the superficial
“surface” content, which includes the concrete, domainspecific details of a particular example. For instance, in
Rutherford’s model of the atom, the abstract structure of
multiple entities that revolve around a more massive core is
relevant for analogical mapping, while details such as the
color and the temperature of the sun are considered
irrelevant “surface” features.
One way in which concrete information might impair
analogical transfer is simply through competition with the
relevant abstract structure. A consistent finding in the
literature is that people are very likely to be reminded of a
prior episode if it shares concrete features with a current
situation, while remindings solely due to shared abstract
structure are much more rare (e.g., Gentner, Rattermann &
Forbus, 1993; Ross, 1984). Furthermore, even when an
appropriate analog has been retrieved from memory, its
application to a current problem can be impaired if the
concrete features of the entities involved mismatch. For
instance, Ross (1987, 1989) reported that superficial
similarity between objects in two mathematical problems
could reduce transfer performance if those objects played
different roles in the two problems.
There is also evidence suggesting that reducing
concreteness may facilitate abstract understanding and
improve reminding and transfer, at least in some situations.
For example, Clement, Mawby & Giles (1994) found that
analogical retrieval was improved substantially when the
situations were described with very abstract, domain-general
terms, rather than more concrete and specific terminology.
Goldstone & Sakamoto (2003) found that for participants
who performed more poorly in general, the use of a less
concrete training task significantly increased transfer. And
one of the most robust methods for improving analogical
transfer—asking participants to compare two potential
analogs before solving a new problem—is presumed to
succeed due to the creation of a more abstract, less concrete
representation of their common structure (e.g., Gick &
Holyoak, 1983; Gentner, Loewenstein & Thompson, 2003).
Together, these findings seem to suggest that concrete
information represents a clear impediment to transfer
between dissimilar situations, largely by overshadowing the
relevant abstract structures. On the other hand, many
researchers have suggested an important relationship
between low-level perceptual processes and high-level,
abstract representations. For example, Goldstone &
Barsalou (1998) argue that most of our abstract conceptual
abilities are ultimately grounded in perceptual processes
(see Barsalou, 1999, for a more extreme version of this
view). Others have suggested that many specific abstract

1406

concepts, such as time (Boroditsky, 2000) and mathematics
(Lakoff & Nuñez, 2000), are conceptualized through
analogies to more concrete knowledge.
Underlying much of this thinking is the belief that human
cognition is largely designed to perceive and act on the
physical world, and that our more abstract conceptual
abilities are built on this foundational architecture. As Clark
(1998) puts it, “Biological brains are first and foremost the
control systems for biological bodies.” This suggests a very
different set of assumptions about the role that concreteness
might play in knowledge transfer. Specifically, it suggests
that knowledge acquired via interaction with highly
perceptual systems that follow the laws of the physical
world—arguably the most “concrete” kind of knowledge we
possess—might in fact represent an ideal base for transfer to
more abstract domains.
In the current studies, we explore this possibility. In the
course of interacting with a computer-simulated physical
system, participants in our studies learn strategies for
achieving specific goals within that system. We examine
the extent to which they are then able to transfer these
learned strategies to a dissimilar, highly abstract task.
A related question involves the ways in which any such
transfer might differ from the kinds of analogical processes
that are usually studied. Our representations of interactions
with the world are generally more procedural and less
explicit than the kinds of representations involved in studies
of analogy, which tend to be very explicit and text-based. In
Experiment 2, we examine participants’ explicit awareness
of the analogical correspondences between the two tasks.

Experiments
Both experiments examined whether participants would be
able to take a strategy developed through interaction with a
physical system and transfer it to a more abstract, dissimilar
domain. Specifically, all participants (in the experimental
conditions) first interacted with a simulation involving the
oscillating motion of a ball that was suspended between two
elastic bands. Although the general operations of this
system were consistent with participants’ naïve physical
theories, the actual strategies necessary to elicit a desired
behavior from the system were often less than intuitive, and
generally required a fair amount of trial and error. Next, all
individuals participated in an ostensibly unrelated task,
which involved regulating the population of city. While this
second simulation differed considerably from the first, both
in terms of its content and its visual display, the system was
governed by the same underlying principles as the first task.
In both tasks, participants were asked to accomplish a
specific goal, which required the development of an
appropriate strategy. Our primary manipulation was in the
relationship between the goals for the two tasks. For some
participants, the two goals were analogous, and thus
required analogous strategies to achieve. For other
participants, the two goals were structurally dissimilar, with
each requiring a unique strategy. If participants are in fact
able to transfer their learning from the interaction with the
physical system to the dissimilar and less perceptuallyconcrete population task, we should find facilitation for
those participants with consistent, analogous goals.

Experiment 1
Participants. 63 Indiana University undergraduates
participated in this study for partial course credit.
Materials and Design. In the first task, participants
interacted with a simulation of a physical system, a ball that
was suspended between two elastic bands that were attached
on either side. The bands stretched horizontally in either
direction, and each was attached to a stationary pin (see
Figure 1). The motion of the ball was fairly realistic, and
was easy to grasp intuitively, with greater distance from
either pin leading to more “stretching” of the band and
greater force pulling toward that pin. Computationally, the
ball moved according to some simple physical rules—its
natural tendency was to continue along a constant vector,
which could be altered by accelerating forces from the two
bands. This acceleration increased as a linear function of
length of the bands, reflecting a stronger force from each
band as it was stretched farther. (In order to increase the
realism of the display, the width of each elastic band
decreased as its length increased, simulating its tension.).
Thus, motion away from one of the stationary pins would
increase this distance, causing increasing acceleration
toward that pin. This would result in the ball slowing down
and eventually moving back toward the pin. However, the
existence of two opposing forces meant that the ball’s
position would tend to oscillate: movement toward either
pin would also tend to be movement away from the opposite
pin, thus increasing acceleration in that opposing direction.
For simplicity, neither gravity nor friction was included in
the model, resulting in perpetual motion.
Participants were first asked to take a few minutes to
explore and familiarize themselves with the behavior of the
system. Participants were able to click on the ball and drag
it to any position within the display (both horizontally and
vertically), and then observe the motion that resulted when
the ball was released. Participants proceeded at their own
pace, and were allowed to interact with the simulation for as
long as they wished.
The experiment then proceeded to the training phase of
the task. In this phase, participants were no longer able to
drag the ball to a new location. However, they were given a
new way to manipulate its behavior: a fan that blew directly
rightward across the ball, introducing an additional force in
that direction. Since all potential forces acting on the ball in
this phase were horizontal (the ball’s starting position was
between the two pins), the ball’s path in this phase was
constrained along a single horizontal line. The fact that the
tension from the two bands was symmetrical meant that all
motion was essentially an oscillation around the midpoint
between the two pins.
Each participant was asked to accomplish one of two
goals: either to cause the ball to reach the pin on the far
right, or to cause the ball to “stabilize” directly between the
two pins. In other words, each participant needed to
consistently increase or decrease the amplitude of the ball’s
oscillations through the appropriate use of the fan. In the
described system, when the ball is traveling to the right, the
force from the fan will add to its net velocity, causing it to
travel slightly farther in that direction (and thus increasing
its amplitude). When the ball is traveling to the left,

1407

Fan
Oscillating motion
Figure 1: Schematic of training task. The task simulated a ball suspended between two elastic bands. During
familiarization, participants could move the ball both vertically and horizontally. During training, however, all
forces on the ball were horizontal, leading to oscillating horizontal motion. Participants attempted either to move the
ball to the far right pin, or to stabilize the ball in the middle, through appropriate use of force from the fan.

however, the force from the fan will oppose its velocity,
slowing the ball’s movement in that direction and thus
decreasing its amplitude. Constant application of the fan
would thus lead to no net change in the ball’s amplitude,
and would not help in achieving either goal. The optimal
strategies are therefore to activate the fan only during the
rightward part of its oscillation to increase its amplitude and
reach the far pin, or only activate it during the leftward part
of its oscillation to decrease its amplitude and allow it to
stabilize in the middle (participants were not informed of
these strategies). Participants were required to complete this
task seven times. Upon completion, they were told to ask
the experimenter to start the next, ostensibly unrelated part
of the session. (A Flash implementation of the basic ball
task is available online at: cognitrn.psych.indiana.edu/
complexsims/Oscillatingball.html).
Participants were told that the next task involved a
computer simulation of how a city’s population could vary
over time, and how it could be influenced by media
advertisement. According to the instructions, the city in
question was large enough to comfortably hold 500,000
residents. If there were fewer people than this, the city
would become more attractive to outsiders because of
abundant housing and low traffic congestion. With more
than half a million residents, the city would become less
attractive because of crowding, crime, and expense. Thus,
the city’s appeal would increase whenever the population
was below this optimum level, and would decrease when the
population was above this ideal. Furthermore, the amount of
the change in appeal would be greater as the distance from
500,000 increased. Unlike the previous task, the interface
for the population simulation was entirely textual, and
proceeded in discrete time steps rather real (continuous)
time. At each time step, participants were given numerical
values for the city’s population, its current appeal (which
could be positive or negative), and the change in its appeal
from the previous time step (which could also be positive or
negative). This information was presented in a scrolling text
display, which also allowed the information from the
previous four steps to remain visible on the screen.

Participants in this task were also given one of two goals
to accomplish: either to cause the population to reach
1,000,000, or to cause the population to stabilize around its
optimal value of 500,000. To achieve these goals,
participants decided whether or not to introduce media
advertisement for the city at each time step, which would
temporarily increase its appeal. Participants were required to
complete this task three times.
Although the content of the first and second simulations
was quite different, the principles governing their operation
were essentially identical. The city’s population is
analogous to the position of the ball at a given point in time.
The city’s “appeal” therefore maps onto the velocity of the
ball, representing the numerical change in population from
one time step to the next. Similarly, “change in appeal” is
analogous to acceleration, describing the degree to which
the change in population is increasing or decreasing.
Finally, media investment plays the same role as the fan,
allowing the participant to add a unidirectional force at any
point in time. The behavior of the system is therefore
qualitatively the same as that of the ball simulation. The
population tends to oscillate around the “midpoint” of
500,000, and adding media advertisement when the
population is rising or falling will respectively increase or
decrease the amplitude of this oscillation.
The dependent variable in this study was the number of
time steps required to complete the population task
(averaged across the three attempts). Our primary interest
was in whether solution strategies acquired in the first,
concretely physical simulation would transfer to the highly
abstract (and dissimilar) population task, resulting in shorter
average solution times. Specifically, we predicted that
solution times in the population task would be shorter when
the goals of the two tasks were mutually consistent (i.e., Fan
both had the goal of maximizing the amplitude, or both had
the goal of stabilizing the amplitude) rather than
inconsistent (e.g., maximizing the ball’s location and
stabilizing the population, or vice versa). Thus, the study
had a 2 (goal consistency) × 2 (population task type)
factorial design.

1408

Results and discussion. Participants were required to
complete the two simulations within a one-hour
experimental session. While most participants completed
the ball task within 10 minutes, many found the population
simulation quite challenging and failed to finish within the
allotted time. Since ability to complete the simulation is
obviously a good indicator of how difficult each participant
found the task, and since it is directly related to our
dependent variable of solution time, these participants were
included in the analyses. Each was conservatively given a
score of 2000 time steps for their unfinished attempts
(slightly less than the longest time that any participant took
to complete the task, 2174 steps). 24 participants were
assigned this maximum score.
A 2 × 2 (goal consistency × test type) factorial ANOVA
revealed a reliable difference between conditions (F(1, 59)
= 10.89, p < .001). A main effect of test type (F(1, 59) =
28.78, p < .001) reflected the fact that participants took
considerably longer to complete the population stabilization
task than the population maximizing task (averages of 1324
and 318 time steps, respectively). More relevant to our
current interests was the main effect of goal consistency
(F(1, 59) = 4.14, p < .05). Participants required reliably
fewer trials to complete the population task when it required
achieving a goal that was analogous to that of the training
task, and thus required an analogous solution strategy (632
vs. 999 trials). Given that so many participants failed to
complete the transfer task, it also makes sense to analyze the
results in terms of simple completion rates. Overall,
significantly more participants were able to finish the
population task when its goal was consistent with the prior
task than when it was inconsistent (75% vs. 48%; χ2(1, N =
63) = 4.73, p < .05).

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 provides evidence that representations of
perception-action schemes may provide a good source for
analogical transfer to more abstract domains. Given the
concreteness of the base domain and the dissimilarity
between the two simulations, this finding runs somewhat
counter to common wisdom about analogical transfer. We
propose that the interactive and physical (although
simulated) nature of the training task differentiates the
current studies from much of the previous literature that has
found such poor cross-domain transfer.
This raises some interesting questions about the nature of
the transfer that we are observing, and how it might differ
from that found in most studies of analogical processing. In
fact, one such possible difference is implicit in the design of
the study itself. We hypothesized that participants might
transfer an abstract solution strategy—a specific method of
interacting with a system—from a very concrete domain.
This is consistent with our intuitions about the kind of
information that is being acquired. However, it might have
been reasonable to predict alternatively that participants
would map their knowledge of the entire set of rules
governing the system, not just a particular strategy, since the
two systems were essentially isomorphic. This should have
led to facilitation in all conditions, and thus little or no
difference between the groups. Of course, it is possible that

both of these kinds of transfer are operating. The second
experiment uses a control condition to examine this
possibility.
Another intriguing potential difference between our
effects and those found in more traditional kinds of transfer
studies is the role of explicit knowledge of the
correspondences between the tasks. There is general
agreement in the literature that analogical reasoning begins
with reminding of a prior analogous case, followed by a
mapping process, in which correspondences are established
between the components of the two representations (e.g.,
Forbus, Gentner & Law, 1995; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997).
Although the issue of explicit awareness is not generally
discussed, it seems to be assumed that the processes
involved are largely explicit, with individuals having direct
access to the output of their analogical processing (though
see Day & Gentner, 2007a). However, the information that
is transferred in the current studies seems in some ways
more related to procedural knowledge (Squire, 1987) than
the semantic and episodic knowledge that are the basis of
most analogy research. As such, it is possible that it might
be similarly resistant to explicit examination. In the current
experiment, we examine this possibility by asking
participants about their awareness of the relationship
between the tasks, both through open-ended questions and
through a correspondence-matching task.
Participants. 91 Indiana University undergraduates
participated in this study for partial course credit.
Materials and Design. The overall structure of this
experiment was very similar to that of Experiment 1, with a
few important differences. First, we included a control
condition to explore the possibility that exposure to an
analogous system was benefiting all participants, regardless
of the consistency of the goals between the two tasks. The
control task required participants to guide a spacecraft to its
home planet through the appropriate placement of an
“attractor” in space. The attractor exerted an attractive force
on the spacecraft which was inversely proportional to the
distance between them; thus, as the craft moved closer to
the attractor, its acceleration toward the attractor increased.
The spacecraft in question would otherwise follow a set
trajectory—participants had no method of moving the craft
other than the placement of the attractor. The task therefore
required participants to find the particular placement of the
attractor that would cause the ship’s trajectory to curve until
it reached the destination planet. Thus, the control task
contained the fundamental mechanical elements of the
experimental conditions—motion along a constant vector
that is altered by accelerating forces from a stationary
point—but the overall structure of the system was quite
different. If it is only the procedural strategy that is being
transferred, control group performance should be roughly
equivalent to the inconsistent goal condition. If, on the other
hand, participants are benefiting from their exposure to the
analogous structure in general, then we should find that
those in the control condition perform more poorly than
both of the experimental conditions. The experiment
therefore had a 3 (task consistency: analogous with same
goal, analogous with different goal, non-analogous control)
× 2 (population task type) factorial design.

1409

We also took steps to simplify the population task
somewhat. As reported, a significant number of participants
in the first experiment failed to complete the task within the
one-hour session. While this is interesting from a theoretical
perspective, and provides useful data about the relative
difficulty of the task for the different experimental groups, it
also introduces a fixed ceiling for solution times, and may
therefore be obscuring some interesting variance in the data.
We therefore added a simple visual display—a line graph,
with population on the y-axis and time steps on the x-axis—
to both versions of the population task in order to facilitate
the tracking of population changes over time.
After the population task, we took two measures to
determine participants’ explicit understanding of the
relationship between the tasks. (These tasks were not
administered to the control group, since their tasks were not
analogous). First, we asked a series of open-ended questions
to assess awareness that there was any relationship between
the ball and population tasks. Participants were first asked
for their general response to the tasks, and whether they had
noticed anything interesting or unusual about them. Next
they were asked how similar they found the two tasks, and
to describe any similarities they had noticed. Finally, if
participants reported that they had found the tasks similar,
they were asked to report when in the session they had first
noticed this similarity. Next, participants completed a
matching task, in which they selected which component
from the population task corresponded with a particular
component from the ball task. For example, “fan”
corresponded to “media investment.” The ball task
components were presented one at a time, to minimize
responses based on a “process of elimination” across the
entire set. Six correspondences were matched in total.
Results and discussion. In spite of attempts to simplify the
population task, several participants still failed to finish
within the allotted time (29 out of 91). As in the first
experiment, these participants were given solution times of
2000 time steps.
A 3 × 2 (goal consistency × test type) factorial ANOVA
revealed a reliable difference between conditions (F(5, 85)
= 9.93, p < .001). A main effect of test type (F(1, 85) =
36.94, p < .001) again reflected the fact that participants
took reliably longer to complete the population stabilization
task than the population maximizing task. More
importantly, we again found a main effect of the
relationship between the task goals (F(2, 85) = 3.57, p <
.05). Post hoc analyses using Tukey’s HSD procedure
revealed reliable differences between the consistent- and
inconsistent-goal groups (447 vs. 870 trials; p < .05) and
between the consistent-goal and the control group (447 vs.
932 trials; p < .05), but found no difference between the
control and the inconsistent-goal conditions (p = .97). A
similar pattern emerges from analysis of completion rates:
79% of participants in the consistent-goal group
successfully completed the population task, compared with
57% and 58% in the inconsistent and control groups, and
the difference between the two analogy groups is significant
(χ2(1, N = 58) = 4.38, p < .05).

Experiment 2 therefore replicates the basic finding of
Experiment 1, with participants completing the transfer task
significantly faster if it required a strategy that was
analogous to that of the training task. Additionally, these
results show that there was no facilitation for simply
interacting with and learning the rules of an analogous
system, since the inconsistent-goal group performed no
better than the control condition. Rather, the transfer seemed
to be in the form of knowledge of particular strategies for
interacting with the system, perhaps a type of procedural
knowledge. However, that knowledge was clearly in a
sufficiently abstract form to allow transfer to a very
dissimilar task and domain.
Next, we analyzed participants’ responses to the openended questions and the correspondence-matching task.
Open-ended responses were coded and assessed for whether
participants reported noticing any relevant structural
commonalities during the course of the tasks. Similarities
that were not relevant to the analogous structure were not
counted (e.g., “Both involved clicking the mouse button”),
nor were similarities that participants reported noticing after
completion of the population task. The correspondencematching tasks produced scores between 0 and 6, reflecting
the number of correct matches.
In spite of the added visual display, which made the
oscillating movement of the population quite salient, only
about 1/3 of the participants in the experimental groups (17
out of 58) reported noticing any structural commonalities
between the tasks (based on the open-ended questions). This
is consistent with prior findings of poor explicit reminding
between dissimilar analogous situations, even when they are
in close temporal proximity. Not surprisingly, those
participants who noticed that the two tasks were analogous
performed better overall on the transfer task (t = 2.26, p <
.05). However, when looking at those who did versus did
not recognize the analogy separately, we found similar
advantages for consistent over inconsistent-goal conditions,
though neither recognition group was statistically reliable
on its own: 164 vs. 529 time steps (t(15) = 1.67, p = .11) for
those who recognized some commonalities between tasks,
602 vs. 1007 time steps (t(39) = 1.53, p = .13) for those who
did not (there was no interaction between condition and
recognition of commonalities).
Similarly, there was absolutely no correlation between
accuracy in correspondences and performance on the
transfer task for either condition (R2 < .01, p = .99), nor was
transfer related to any particular correspondence item.
Remarkably, even the most seemingly fundamental
correspondences were uncorrelated with transfer
performance (by point-biserial analysis), including the
mappings between “fan” and “media investment” (R2 < .01,
p > .7) and between “ball location” and “population” (R2 <
.01, p > .9). This lack of correlation was not the result of a
restricted range in the matching task scores, since average
accuracy on those items was roughly 50% (.42). Thus,
although recognizing the existence of a deeper relationship
between the tasks was related to better overall performance,
this recognition did not appear to affect levels of analogical
transfer (in terms of consistent vs. inconsistent conditions),

1410

nor did explicit recognition of the specific structural
correspondences between the two systems.

General Discussion
In these two studies, we find evidence for analogical
transfer from a simulated concrete physical system. We
believe that participants’ active participation in the
oscillating ball task led to a fairly “visceral” understanding
of how to interact with and accomplish certain goals within
that system. This procedural knowledge was then able to act
as a base for analogical transfer to an abstract and dissimilar
domain. Interestingly, although awareness of a deeper
connection between the two tasks was associated with
improved performance on the transfer task, explicit
knowledge of the actual correspondences between the
domains was unrelated to task performance. These findings
are consistent with suggestions that low-level perceptual
and motor processes, as the foundation of the cognitive
system, are able to serve as a basis for much more abstract
conceptual understanding.
This research also raises some interesting issues about the
most preferable conditions for transfer. As discussed, there
is considerable research suggesting that concreteness may
sometimes present an impediment to analogical reasoning.
This suggests that transfer should operate best from a fairly
abstract, amodal mental representation (even if this
representation was initially acquired through generalization
across multiple concrete instances, as through comparison).
On the other hand, proponents of a more situated and
embodied approach to cognition would predict that
representations that are acquired through direct interaction
with systems that follow natural physical laws—arguably
the most “concrete” representations we possess—often
provide the best means of understanding more abstract
concepts. Although further research will clearly be needed
to directly compare these alternatives, the current findings
are at least consistent with this latter approach.
The fact that performance on the transfer task was
unrelated to explicit knowledge about the correspondences
between the two systems was particularly interesting.
Analogical reasoning is generally thought of as involving
fairly slow, deliberate, and intentional processes. In finding
that structural knowledge may be acquired and applied
without an explicit understanding of that application, we are
demonstrating a different kind of transfer than is generally
considered—and perhaps a kind that is even more pervasive
in daily life (also see Day & Gentner, 2007a&b).
The goal of understanding and facilitating knowledge
transfer is clearly an important one, both for psychologists
and educators. We believe that the current studies provide
the beginnings of an interesting way of considering the role
of concrete, perceptual, motoric knowledge in the
understanding of more abstract domains.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577–609.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75, 1–28.
Clark, A. (1998). Embodied, situated, and distributed
cognition. In W. Bechtel, & G. Graham (Eds.), A
companion to cognitive sciences (pp. 506–517). Malden,
MA: Blackwell Publishers Inc.
Clement, C. A. , Mawby, R. & Giles, D. (1994). The effects
of manifest relational similarity on analog retrieval.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 396–420.
Day, S. B. & Gentner, D. (2007a). Nonintentional
analogical inference in text comprehension. Memory and
Cognition, 35, 39–49.
Day, S. B. & Gentner, D. (2007b). Hidden structure:
Indirect measurement of relational representation.
Proceedings of the Twenty-ninth Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC:
A model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science,
19, 141–205.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 393–
408.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 524–575.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306–355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1–38.
Goldstone, R. L., & Barsalou, L. (1998). Reuniting
perception and conception. Cognition, 65, 231–262.
Goldstone, R. L., & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46, 414–466.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427–466.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. (2000). Where mathematics comes
from: How the embodied mind brings mathematics into
being. New York: Basic Books.
Ross, B. H. (1984). Remindings and their effects in learning
a cognitive skill. Cognitive Psychology, 16, 371–416.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 13, 629–639.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarities: Different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 15, 456–468.

1411

