UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogical Episodes are More Likely to be Blended than Superficially Similar Ones

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1c81d63z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Feldman, Veselina
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogical Episodes are More Likely to be Blended than Superficially Similar Ones
Veselina Feldman (vfeldman@nbu.bg)
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
The paper contrasts two cases of blending between episodes:
blending of episodes that share a lot of elements and their
properties (superficially similar episodes) and blending of
episodes that are dissimilar at the surface level but share the
same structure of relations. Classic theories and models of
blending would predict that superficially similar episodes are
more likely to be blended since there is a bigger overlap
between the feature vectors representing them. In contrast, the
AMBR model of analogy-making and memory predicts that
analogical episodes are more likely to be blended. The data
from the psychological experiment are in favor of the AMBR
model: people blend structurally similar episodes much more
often than superficially similar ones.
Keywords: memory, analogy; memory distortions (blending),
psychological experimentation.

Memory Distortions and the Possible
Mechanisms of Memory Construction
If we vividly recall an episode of a romantic night in the
mountains walking hand in hand in the snow and looking at
the dazzling stars on the dark sky and talking about poetry
and love we can ask ourselves “was this real?” or was I
dreaming. If we want to spoil the illusion we can explore it
carefully by asking our partner a variety of questions and
comparing our memories for the event. Most probably, it
will turn out that some of the details that we vividly
remember are in fact not true, that we are blending various
episodes and some of these details come from another
occasion, e.g. another romantic night with the same partner
walking on the beach rather than in the mountains. The
detail itself is real and that is why it is so vivid, simply it is
not from the same episode. The vividness of this
recollection, however, makes us strong believers in this
illusory memory. It is hard to accept that it was not true.
Much evidence has been collected that people do distort
the real episodes and strongly believe in false memories. Sir
Frederic Bartlett was the first one to demonstrate memory
distortions (Bartlett, 1932) as result of using generalized
schematic knowledge and using it for the reconstruction of
the event. Loftus & Palmer (1974) provided additional
evidence for the role of generalized schematic knowledge in
constructing memories – they demonstrated that depending
on the schema activated the events are reconstructed in
different ways. Further on, Loftus and her colleagues
(Loftus, 1977, 1979, 2003) have shown that people blend
several events (like a slide show and a story) together, a real

episode and an imagined one, a personal experience and an
advertisement, etc. In all these cases the participants in the
experiments proved to be very unreliable eyewitnesses –
they were picking elements from one episode and
implanting it into another still believing they have perfect
memory of the event. Neisser (1981) offered the case study
of John Dean’s memory demonstrating a lot of inaccuracies.
Later on Neisser and Harsh (1992) studied the so called
“flashbulb memory” about a highly emotional event, in this
case the incident with Challenger, and have shown that
people wrongly recollected the events several years later
(compared to their immediate memory which was collected
at the time of the incident) and still believed they had vivid
and accurate memories of the event and they were telling a
lot of false details most probably taken from another event.
Nystrom and McClelland (1992) managed to produce
similar effects in the lab by causing people to blend
sentences they have studied earlier. Deese (1959) and
Roediger & McDermott (1995) demonstrated that people
can wrongly recollect a word being in the list of studied
words if it is strongly associated with many words in the
list.
There is vast literature nowadays that supports and
extends these findings with data from psychological
experiments, brain imaging and brain lesion explorations,
ecological autobiographical studies, etc. (Schacter, 1995,
1999; Moscovitch, 1995; Kokinov & Hirst, 2003).
There is, however, a problem. Since the time Neisser
(1967) announced and formulated the constructive approach
to human memory suggesting that memory is a constructive
process rather than a storehouse, there are very few
proposals how this construction can possibly happen. This
lack of theoretical grounding of the experimentation makes
the field moving forth and back in various directions
without clear predictions and explanations.
Among the few existing memory models that can possibly
explain and reproduce episode blending there are the
CHARM model, proposed by Metcalfe (1990) with the
explicit goal to explain Loftus’ data; the TODAM model,
proposed by Murdock (1982, 1993, 1995), and the
Complementary Learning and the Trace synthesis models,
proposed by McClelland and his colleagues (McClelland,
McNaughton, & O’Reilly, 1995, Nystrom & McClelland,
1992). Although quite different from each other in many
respects, they share a common idea – the episodes are
represented by feature vectors and if two vectors are very
similar to each other an error can easily occur in recalling it.
In TODAM and CHARM the errors are caused by the fact

1930

that all memory traces are added up to a single memory
trace and therefore if two traces are overlapping quite a bit
then they interfere with each other and are distorted during
the encoding process. The Trace synthesis model, and its
cousin the Complementary Learning Model, on the contrary,
explain the memory errors by a wrong activation pattern
during recall. One potential problem is that all these models
represent episodes as a list of features without internal
structure, without relations among their elements. It may
turn out that this is not a problem at all if the structure does
not play any role in the memory distortion process.
However, some experimental data suggest that structure
does play a role in the reconstruction process. Thus Kokinov
and Zareva (2001) and Zareva and Kokinov (2003)
demonstrated that blending can occur even between
dissimilar episodes. This kind of very complicated blending
is not explainable within the above models since the features
representing the two episodes are very different and
therefore the two memory traces will hardly overlap. These
studies were provoked by a strange prediction of the AMBR
model of analogy-making and memory (Kokinov, 1998;
Kokinov & Petrov, 2001; Grinberg & Kokinov, 2003) that if
two dissimilar episodes are connected to each other by a
double analogy with a third one, these two episodes may
become blended. The experimental studies cited above
confirmed the prediction of the model.
Even though AMBR made a prediction that was
experimentally confirmed and that is not easily reproducible
in other models, AMBR still needs further experimental
exploration. The double analogy blending is a very specific
and complicated case that is not so easily observed in
everyday life (although it should often happen since we
often make analogies between remote domains and many of
them with the same target, it would be difficult to dig it out
and describe it).
Thus in the current study we are using much simpler
material, which is much closer to our everyday life and
would be easier to be traced. The idea is simple. Everyday
we are learning hundreds of stories and we are experiencing
thousands of events, some of these stories and experiences
are highly similar on the surface (the same persons take
place, the same objects are around us, the same properties of
the objects are present, etc.) and therefore could be expected
to correspond to highly similar feature vectors and thus the
CHARM, TODAM, and CLS models will potentially
predict that they are easily distorted by being blended with
each other. On the other hand, AMBR would predict that
those episodes that are structurally similar, even though they
might be superficially dissimilar, will be more easily
blended. In other words, if we see a remote analogy between
two episodes that would be a greater force to blend them in
memory rather than if they are merely the same but
structurally different.
The main idea of the current experiment is to ask
participants to study several stories, some of which are
superficially similar but structurally different, and others are
superficially dissimilar, but structurally similar, and then
several days later to ask them to retell the stories and to see
which of the stories will become more distorted, i.e. which
pairs of stories will be more often blended.

Experiment
The goal of this experiment is to explore and contrast
various possible sources of intrusion in our memories for an
event and more specifically whether analogical episodes
play a special role in that. We would like to contrast
superficially remote but structurally similar analogs to
superficially similar but structurally dissimilar cases as
possible sources of implanted memories.

Hypothesis
Our hypothesis is that analogical episodes will be more
probable sources of intrusions than superficially similar and
than dissimilar ones.

Design
The experiment has a within group design and the
manipulated variable is the type of similarity between the
target episode and the potential source of intruders:
• Analogous episode: an episode that is structurally
isomorphic to the target but does not share elements
with it.
• Similar episode: an episode that shares a number of
elements with the target and, thus, is superficially
similar to it, but which does not share the same
structure, i.e. the relations between the elements are
different.
• Dissimilar episode: an episode that shares neither
elements, not relations with the target.
The dependent variable is the proportion of intruded
elements when reconstructing the original target story.

Procedure
Each participant read four stories and had to answer some
general questions about their style and how intriguing they
were. Three days later the participants were asked to retell
the four stories in as much detail as they can. This was
surprising to the subjects since they were not instructed to
remember the stories. The participants were instructed that
they would be paid proportionally to the amount of correct
details they could recall from each story.

Stimuli
The four stories (A, B, C, and D) were carefully designed in
such a way that two pairs of them were structurally
analogous to each other (A~B and C~D), two other pairs
were superficially similar, but did not share the same
relational structure (A≈C and B≈D), and finally the last two
pairs were dissimilar both in terms of structure and surface
(A≠D and B≠C).
The superficial similarity was achieved by sharing some
elements like the main characters (people vs animals),
objects (brumbles, robins, falcones, etc), locations (old
bridges), states (frightening), etc. These elements were
identical in the two stories (compare the vertically aligned
stories in Figure 1).
The analogical episodes did not share identical objects
and locations, but they shared the same system of relations
(the actions performed by the characters and the causal
relations between them). The relations were rarely named

1931

the same way, i.e. the same words were rarely used for the
description of the action (to reduce superficial similarity),

bored

Bear1

Grandma

older

Human2

Bear3
Getting
dark
when

went

reached

old

Pears
found

broken

bridge
in

nest

bush

sun

tunnel
on

Pears

pick

took

tree

protect
scared

in

forest

brambles

Robin

Falcon

startled

help

help

bored

Goat1

clearing

reached
blocked

hot

in

went

for

fixing

wooden
eggs

Human3

brother

Cake
found

House
chores

Father

Father

brother

for

had

Human1

Grandma

older

Bear2

simply the actions were similar and the causal structure –
the same. See the horizontally aligned stories in Figure 1.

had

Human1

Goat2

sister

House
chores
had
Human2

sister

Falcon
Grandma
Cake

reached

went

to

old

made

over
hot

both

who where

whom
old

bridge

wooden

Grateful
offer

in

both
heard

made

noise

Human3
who where

sky

who
disentangled
what
brambles

made

made
Robin

who
freed

moan

Goat3

forest

sun
Getting
dark

heard

freed
whom

when

reached

went

to

meadows

bring
who

Fair

Got stuck

old

Touched
invitation

Got stuck

Figure 1. A schematic and abridged representation of the stories. The pink and blue colored elements are shared by the analogous stories (horizontally aligned), while the yellow and green ones by the superficially similar stories (vertically aligned).

1932

The macro structure of the four stories is similar: in all
four cases the main characters went somewhere with a goal
in their mind, but were distracted by some event, they
stopped to fix the problem and helped someone.
And here are the stories themselves.
Little Bear and Older Brother Bear
Grandma Bear was sick and sent Little Bear and his Older
Brother Bear shopping for products. She was going to make
them a tasty cake, because they took loving care of her
while she was getting better.
The little bears set off, but when they reached the old
wooden bridge, they saw that some of the boards were
broken. They could not continue onwards, so Older Brother
Bear got down to work and started fixing the bridge. He
needed to hurry because it was getting dark and their mother
would be mad if they got home late, in the dark.
While he was waiting, Little Bear noticed a nest with eggs
in the nearby bushes. He decided to take the eggs, so that
they did not have to go to the shop for them. However, the
mother robin turned out to be close by and started flying
close to the ground near him, screeching in an attempt to
protect her nest. Little Bear got scared and started crying.
The Older Brother Bear heard the sudden racket, ran to
help him and saw Little Bear curled up under the fluttering
bird. He rushed to protect his little brother and pushed him
the bushes. After that, he hugged him and calmed him
down.
The little brothers Bobby and Marto
Lately Bobby’s father had a lot of house chores and no
time to pick the pear tree at the cottage. So, he decided to
send Bobby and his brother Marto to pick the pears before
they rotted. The children had nothing to do anyway; they
could do something useful in this way.
The sun was shining hot and they decided to take the
shady path through the forest. As they were walking,
however, they reached a tunnel blocked up by stones. Marto
started clearing the stones so that they could pass through.
Meanwhile, it occurred to Bobby that he could find some
pears in the forest and tell their father that they had picked
the pear tree. He went searching and soon saw a pear tree.
He climbed the tree and started picking the fruit. Suddenly,
however, a scared falcon appeared among the branches. It
startled Bobby, who staggered and cried out in distress, but
managed to hold on to a branch and hung onto it.
Marto heard the cry and ran towards him. He made his
way through the brambles, climbed the tree and managed to
help his brother. After they got down, Marto made sure that
Bobby was all right.
The goat kids Lili and Mimi
The goat kids Lili and Mimi had been walking all day in
the colorful forest meadows. They were on their way to their
grandmother, who was sick, and they were bringing her
some tasty cake. However, it was beginning to get dark and
they started worrying that they had got lost. They should
have arrived at their grandmother’s house a long time ago.
Suddenly, they heard a quiet moan coming from behind
the nearby trees. They stopped and looked at each other in
fear. However, they were good kids and could not just go on
their way. They got nearer to where the noise was coming

from and heard a cry for help. They ran towards it and saw a
goat that was stuck between the broken boards of an old
wooden bridge and could not get free.
They helped the old goat and set him free. He was very
grateful and offered to accompany them to their
grandmother’s house, since it was getting dark. So, the little
kids and the goat continued on their way singing and
laughing. A robin was fluttering around them and chirping
together with them along the forest path.
The little sisters Ellie and Annie
The little sisters Ellie and Annie were on their way to the
nearby village, where the Annual Fair was. They had looked
forward to this day because they had got bored staying in
the village. They had nothing interesting to do and only
house chores all day long.
So, the day came and they started on their way to the fair.
It was a very hot day. The sun was shining hot and there
was only a single falcon in the sky. The sisters decided to
have a rest in the shade of the forest. As they were about to
take off, they heard a noise. They looked at each other in
wonder and tried to see where the noise was coming from.
They made their way quietly and what did they see? An old
woman had got stuck in the thorny bushes of the nearby
brambles.
Ellie and Annie went to help her, carefully disentangled
the bushes and freed the old woman. She was touched and
in return for their good deed, invited them to spend the night
at her place, since they had strayed from the road because of
her.

Participants
Our sample consisted of 29 participants (16 male and 13
female) who were paid for their participation in the
experiment. They were students from NBU aged from 19 to
29 (average 24).

Results and discussion
Each story was decomposed in advance into basic elements
and each of these elements was labelled (A1, A2, …, B1,
B2, …, C1, C2, …, D1, D2, …). The stories were roughly
containing the same number of elements each (21-22). The
stories recalled by the participants were recorded with a
voice recorder and then transcribed. Then each protocol was
blindly encoded by two independent experts – labelling each
of the elements of each story with the unique labels listed
above. Thus for each story we obtained a series of labels
(e.g. A1, A2, B4, A5, A6, A7, C3, A15, A16, A21). If the
sequence contains labels originating from two or more
different stories this means that the participant has blended
the two (three) stories. The specific measure that was used
as dependent variable is the proportion of intruders within
the whole list of recollected items in a specific story. In the
example above we have 2/10 intruders and 8/10 correct
responses. Again in the example above we have equal
number of intruders from the analogical case (1/10) and the
superficially similar one (1/10). Figure 1 shows the
proportion of correctly and incorrectly recalled items from
the stories. It turns out that there is a fairly high percentage
(22.50%) of incorrectly recalled elements – intruders from

1933

the other stories (intruders from sources other then the 4
stories were not encoded, so potentially the number of
intruders could be even higher). In summary, almost one
fourth of the elements were incorrect and a consequence of
blended episodes. Please, take into account that even
theoretically it is not possible to have more than 50% of
intruders, since in that case the subject would be retelling
the other story and the intruders will be again less than 50%.
Percentage of Correct and Implanted Elements

22.50%
correct
implanted

77.50%

Figure 2. Amount of blending in the recall task after three
days of retention interval. Almost one fourth of the recalled
elements were incorrect and originating from another story.
Now the really interesting question comes: are the
implanted elements randomly coming from various other
stories as a kind of noise, or are they predominantly coming
from the most similar episode (sharing characters, objects,
locations), or from a more distant but analogous episode.
The data are presented in Figure 3 and they are very clear.
The result shows that the highest percentage of implants
(15%) comes from the analogical story and they are double
as much as the sum of the percentages of implants coming
from the other two types of stories (7.5%). The main effect
of the type of source story is significant [F(2,27)= 13,285,
p<0.001]. The only significant difference in the pair-wise
comparison is between the analogous source and the other
two sources [p<0.001]. This is exactly what was expected.
Amount of Blending: Proportion of Intrudors from the
Corresponding Type of Story
0.25

Means

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
analogous

similar

dissimilar

Figure 3. Amount of blending in the recall task after three
days of retention interval. There is a main effect of the type
of source story from which the implant came in [F(2,27)=
13,285, p<0.001], and the only significant difference in the
pair-wise comparison is between the analogous sources and
the other two types of sources [p<0.001].

General Discussion
We contrasted two alternative types of explanation of where
memory distortions come from and more specifically what
are the mechanisms of memory construction that will more
likely produce the type of blending errors that we often
observe in human memory of past events. According to
classic theories (such as interference theory) and classic
models (such as CHARM, TODAM, Trace synthesis, CLS)
blending occurs when two events are represented with
highly similar vectors (there is a large overlap of the
representing features) and as results of this the two vectors
cannot be accurately disentangled and reconstructed. In
contrast, the AMBR model views recall as reconstruction by
analogy, i.e. a new episode is constructed analogous to the
old one. In this construction process there is a competition
between various elements originating from various episodes
to be transferred over to the target question. Now, if two
episodes are sharing the same structure than the competition
is higher since each of the two sets of hypotheses will be
strongly supporting each other. That is why the very
existence of analogous episodes in memory results in
greater possibilities for blending. In addition, when an
analogy between two episodes is established in the past, this
results in building permanent links between the episodes in
LTM. This makes it even more probable that the two
episodes will be activated together and therefore start to
compete with each other. All these mechanisms predict that
the higher the structural similarity between two episodes,
the greater the chances of blending. Therefore, unlike
classic theories, AMBR predicts that if all other chances are
equal, it will be more probable to blend structurally similar
episodes, even when they are semantically more distant,
than superficially similar episodes.
The experiment presented in this paper tests this
prediction and tries to tell apart and contrast the two
alternative views. Four stories were constructed that would
have equal number of similarities, but in one group of pairs
the similarities will be more superficial (mainly similarities
in the objects, their semantic categories, their properties,
locations, etc., but also some similar relations, which,
however, are not systematically bound into the same
structure), and in the other group of pairs the similarities are
mostly at the system level – the same structure of relations
(including causal relations, actions).
The results from the experiment show that first of all,
people do blend quite a lot the stories – almost one forth of
the produced story elements were incorrect and they were
originating from one of the other studies stories. If we
would take account of the elements originating from general
knowledge or other episodes (learnt outside of the
experiment) the results would be even more frustrating for
those who believe in the accuracy of human memory. The
second important conclusion from the experiment is that the
structural similarity plays much more important role in
human memory than all classic memory theories predict.
People blend mostly elements from analogous episodes, and
far less from superficially similar episodes. This is not to
say that AMBR is a correct model of human memory, but it
provides evidence that it was useful in predicting new
memory phenomena.

1934

Acknowledgments
This research was supported financially by the ANALOGY
project (NEST program, contract 29088) funded by the EC.
We are thankful to Petia Milcheva and Kristina Nenova for
their help in the data collection process.

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1932) Remembering: A Study in
Experimental and Social Psychology. Cambridge
University Press
Deese, J. (1959) On the prediction of occurrence of
particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 58: 17–22.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure–mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. Rattermann, M., & Forbus, K. (1993). The roles
of similarity in transfer:Separating retrievability from
inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 524-575
Grinberg, M., Kokinov, B. (2003). Simulation of Episode
Blending in the AMBR Model. In: Proceedings of the 4th
European Cognitive Science Conference. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ.
Holyoak K. & Koh K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory and Cognition,
15 (4), 332-340
Holyoak K. & Thagard P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355
Hummel, J. & Holyoak, K. (1997). Distributed
representation of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466
Kokinov, B. (1994a). The DUAL cognitive architecture: A
hybrid multi-agent approach. In A. Cohn (Ed.),
Proceedings of the Eleventh European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. London: John Wiley & Sons
Kokinov, B. (1994b). A hybrid model of reasoning by
analogy. In K. Holyoak & J. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in
connectionist and neural computation theory: Vol. 2.
Analogical connections. Norwood, NJ: Ablex
Kokinov, B., & Petrov, A. (2001). Integration of Memory
and Reasoning in Analogy-Making: The AMBR Model.
In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kokinov, B., Zareva, N. (2001). Episode Blending as Result
of Analogical Problem Solving. In: Proceedings of the
23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Kokinov, B., Petkov, G., Petrova, N. (2007) ContextSensitivity of Human Memory: Episode Connectivity and
its Influence on Memory Reconstruction. In Kokinov, B.,
Richardson, D, Roth-Berghofer, Th., Vieu, L. (Eds):
CONTEXT 2007, LNAI 4635, Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg, pp. 317 – 329
Kokinov, B., Hirst, W., eds. (2003). Constructive Memory.
Sofia: NBU Press.
Loftus, E. (1977). Shifting human color memory. Memory
and Cognition, 5, 696-699.
Loftus, E. (1979). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Loftus, E. (2003) Our changeable memories: Legal and
practical implications. Nature Review Neuroscience 4(3):
231–234.
Loftus, E.; Palmer J. (1974). Reconstruction of Automobile
Destruction : An Example of the Interaction Between
Language and Memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior 13: 585-589.
McClelland, J. (1995). Constructive memory and memory
distortions: A parallel distributed processing approach. In
D. Schacter (Ed.), Memory distortions: How minds,
brains and societies reconstruct the past. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press
McClelland, J.L., McNaughton, B.L., & O’Reilly, R. C.
(1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in
the hyppocampus and neocortex: Insights from the
successes and failures of connectionists models of
learning and memory. Psychological Review, 102, 419457.
Metcalfe, J. (1990). Composite holographic associative
recall model (CHARM) and blended memories in
eyewitness testimony. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 119, 145-160.
Moscovitch, M. (1995). Confabulation. In D. Schacter (Ed.),
Memory distortions: How minds, brains, and societies
reconstruct the past. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press
Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89, 609-626.
Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1993). TODAM2: a model for the
storage and retrieval of item, associative, and serial-order
information. Psychological Review, 100, 183-203.
Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1995). Developing TODAM: three
models for serial-order information. Memory &
Cognition, 23, 631-645.
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. New York:
Appleton Century Crofts.
Neisser, U. (1981). John Dean’s memory: A case study.
Cognition, 9, 1-22.
Neisser, U. & Harsch, N. (1992). Phantom flashbulbs: False
recollections of hearing the news about Challenger. In E.
Winograd & U. Neisser (Eds.), Affect and accuracy in
recall:Studies of “flashbulb memories” (pp. 9-31).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Nystrom, L., McClelland, J. (1992). Trace synthesis in cued
recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 591-614
Roediger & McDermott (1995) Creating false memories:
Remembering words not presented in lists. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition 21(4): 803–814.
Schacter, Daniel L. (ed.) (1995). Memory distortion: how
minds, brains, and societies reconstruct the past.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schacter, Daniel L. (1999). The seven sins of memory:
insights from psychology and cognitive neuroscience.
American Psychologist 54, 182-203.
Zareva, N., Kokinov, B. (2003). Blending of Non-Similar
Episodes as a Result of Analogical Mapping with a Third
One. In: Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.

1935

