UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are Tims hot and Toms not? Probing the effect of sound symbolism on perception of facial
attractiveness
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8kf191dm
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Hartung, Franziska
Klenovsak, Daniel
Santiago dos Santos, Luenya
et al.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

  Are Tims hot and Toms not? Probing the effect of sound symbolism
                             on perception of facial attractiveness
                                                Franziska Hartung
                                        Ludwig Maximilians University Munich
                                                 Daniel Klenovsak
                                        Ludwig Maximilians University Munich
                                         Luenya Santiago dos Santos
                                        Ludwig Maximilians University Munich
                                                   Carolin Strobl
                                        Ludwig Maximilians University Munich
                                                Dietmar Zaefferer
                                        Ludwig Maximilians University Munich
Abstract: Amy Perfors attracted much attention in 2004 by showing that the sounds of a given name affected the
perceived attractiveness of its bearer. Back vowel names (Sue) made women appear more attractive, whereas males
benefited from front vowel names (Tim). Being at variance with strict Saussurean arbitrariness and in line with
the reality of sound symbolism, these findings inspired us to try a replication with German names under a modified
design where more variables, including gender of subjects, were controlled. Male names were paired with male
faces and female names with female faces in a randomized way. In contrast to Perfors, we found that the subject’s
gender and not that of the pictured person determined the relationship between vowel quality and perceived facial
attractiveness. Whatever the determinants of her findings: German women clearly prefer Toms over Tims, and males
vice versa. Possible explanations for this difference will be discussed.
                                                           3221

