UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categorisation of Sexual Orientation: a Test of Essentialism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7bz0z05x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Braisby, Nick
Hodges, Ian

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categorisation of Sexual Orientation: a Test of Essentialism
Nick Braisby (Nick.Braisby@winchester.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Winchester, Winchester, SO22 4NR, UK

Ian Hodges (I.Hodges@wmin.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Westminster, London, W1B 2UW, UK

Abstract
Psychological essentialism is an important strand of
theorising within the study of categorisation, according to
which people believe, and act as if, category membership is
determined by the possession of an essence. Many authors
have developed this position by arguing that people believe
and behave as if essentialism is true of social categories. This
paper reports the results of a study investigating people’s
categorization of sexual orientation. Contrary to essentialism,
behavioural and not genetic factors were deemed more
important in categorizing sexual orientation. These results
suggest that the extent of essentialising about such social
categories may be over-estimated, and that a similarity-based
view may be more appropriate.
Keywords: essentialism, categorization, sexual orientation

Introduction
Psychological essentialism is an important strand of
theorising, according to which people believe, and act as if,
category membership is determined by the possession of an
essence (Medin & Ortony, 1989). People are deemed to
believe that objects have essences, that essences are causally
responsible for other properties such as appearance, and that
essences are responsible for category or kind membership.
There has been much empirical support for psychological
essentialism (see Gelman, 2004). Many studies of the
categorisation of natural kinds have suggested people act as
if they give priority to innate, hidden and causally more
central features supporting the idea that a belief in
essentialism, and a judgment as to an exemplar’s possession
of putative essential properties, determines categorisation.
For example, Barton & Komatsu (1989) found that
transforming function mattered more for artifacts than
natural kinds, but that transformations of molecular (or
chromosomal) structure mattered more for natural kinds.
Other studies have pitted putative essential properties
against conflicting appearance or behavioural properties to
see which influence categorization more. Rips (1989)
described a transformation in which a bird-like animal
developed the appearance of an insect as a consequence of
exposure to radiation. Participants judged the animal still to
be a bird, but more similar to an insect. Keil (1989)
describes the results of similar studies with children, e.g.,
making a raccoon look and behave like a skunk through
being painted and implanted with an odour sac. While
younger children tended to categorise this as a skunk, older
children considered it a raccoon still. Gelman & Wellman

(1991) similarly showed 4 and 5 year olds’ categorization of
natural kinds was influenced more by insides than outsides,
and that children believe the properties of category members
to be governed by their innate potential.
At the heart of the essentialist doctrine is a commitment to
the idea that people’s knowledge of a category’s essential
properties, including which are essential, is always fallible
and subject to revision (cf. Kripke, 1980; Putnam, 1975,
1977). Putnam (1977) expressed this idea in his Division of
Linguistic Labour, in which people are differentially
involved in the semantic task of determining the reference
of natural kind terms. Lay-people should defer to expert
authorities, typically those scientists who have a greater
knowledge of the properties of kind members and better
judgment as to which of those properties are essential.
Despite essentialism being committed to the fallibility of
knowledge of natural kinds, there is considerable
convergence in the literature on the idea that, for biological
kinds, the possession of the right kind of DNA is essential.
Many authors directly or indirectly make the same
assumption that the essences of biological categories are
likely to be genetic (e.g., Ahn et al., 2001; Gelman &
Wellman, 1991; Putnam, 1977; Strevens, 2000). As Haslam
& Whelan (2008) put it, “All tigers and all things made of
silver share deep similarities – genetic material in one case
and an atomic structure in the other – and these essential
similarities determine their identity” (p. 1297).
In spite of the evidence seeming to support essentialism,
there is also a body of work presenting difficulties with it,
either presenting data that appear recalcitrant from an
essentialist point of view or counter-arguments to an
essentialist interpretation.
Malt (1994), for example,
showed that categorization of instances of water is not fully
explained by the proportion of H2O people believe the
instances contain: non-waters such as tea and saliva were
judged to contain a greater proportion of H2O than waters
such as swamp water, and hard water (see also Markman &
Stilwell, 2001). Braisby, Franks & Hampton (1996)
considered the original argumentation developed by Kripke
and Putnam, such as Putnam’s famous case of twin-Earth
(Putnam, 1975, 1977).
Braisby, Franks & Hampton
presented participants with scenarios that described
discoveries concerning the putative essence of biological
and chemical kinds. They showed that while in many cases
participants agreed with the essentialist intuitions, in several
critical test cases the participants tended to disagree with
essentialism. Braisby (2004) found that people did not, in

2956

general, defer to expert authorities in their categorization of
natural kinds; many people were steadfast in maintaining
their categorization judgments in spite of those of experts,
and those people who switched their judgments to align with
the views of experts, also showed a tendency to do so when
presented with the views of non-experts. Even the oft cited
work of Gelman & Wellman (1991) is disputed: in a series
of studies designed to examine essentialist beliefs in
children, Lloyde, Braisby & Brace, 2003, failed to replicate
the findings of Gelman & Wellman, instead revealing a
pattern of context-sensitivity in children’s judgments.
There has also been much theoretical dispute over
psychological essentialism. Strevens (2000) has argued that
the evidence that has been cited in support of psychological
essentialism can be just as well explained without reference
to essentialist belief (see Ahn et al., 2001 for a rejoinder).
In spite of the conflicting views of the literature, there has
been considerable recent interest in extending the scope of
essentialism. Though the original essentialist arguments of
Kripke and Putnam were based on natural kinds, it has since
been argued that key features of natural kinds are possessed
by other types of category, and that essentialism applies
equally in these cases. For example, there has been much
debate concerning the status of emotions as natural kinds
(e.g., Charland, 2002; Panksepp, 2000). As Haslam &
Whelan (2008) put it, “‘psychological essentialism’ does
seem to be a fact of human cognition” (p. 1297).
Rothbart and Taylor (1992) argued that people typically
treat social categories as though they are natural kinds.
Others have developed this position by arguing that people
beliefs about such categories are essentialist. Hegarty &
Pratto (2001), investigating categories of sexual orientation,
found that people’s beliefs could be explained in terms of
two negatively correlated dimensions: immutability and
fundamentality. They also found that these dimensions
were differently associated with prejudice: more favourable
attitudes were linked to immutability while more prejudiced
attitudes were related to fundamentality.
In a series of studies, Haslam and colleagues have also
argued that people adopt essentialist beliefs with regard to
social categories, and that these beliefs play a role in
underpinning prejudice. Haslam, Rothschild & Ernst (2000)
asked participants to rate 40 different categories on ten
items, nine of which were designed to tap aspects of
essentialist belief. A principal components analysis (PCA)
suggested two underlying dimensions to people’s beliefs,
one corresponding to the notion of a natural kind, the other
to the notion of reification or entitativity.
Haslam,
Rothschild & Ernst (2002) then employed eight of these
nine items in what they called an Essentialist Beliefs Scale.
Participants rated the three categories of ‘black people’,
‘women’, and ‘gay men’ on these eight items using a 1-9
scale. PCA yielded a two factor solution to the structure of
their beliefs, similar to the two dimensions identified by
Haslam et al. (2000). They also found a complex relation
between these essentialist beliefs and prejudice, as measured
by participants’ responses to a number of scales relating to

prejudice. Further analysis revealed that some natural kind
items (discreteness) and some anti-essentialist beliefs (nonnaturalness and mutability) were associated with anti-gay
prejudice. No links were found between natural kind beliefs
and prejudice towards black people and women.
Haslam & Levy (2006) adapted this method again,
employing items from the Essentialist Beliefs Scale as well
as items from Hegarty & Pratto (2001). They found
evidence for a three dimensional structure to people’s
beliefs, with dimensions relating to immutability,
discreteness, and cultural/historical universality. They also
found that this structure explained people’s beliefs about
male and female homosexuality equally well.
While Haslam and colleagues have uncovered an
important feature of people’s beliefs, they appear not to
have considered deference as a criterion for essentialism and
do not explicitly acknowledge opposing explanations of
seemingly essentialist beliefs. This may be unsurprising
given that this body of work is largely correlational in
nature, relying on questionnaires to assess people’s general
beliefs, and on factor analyses of their responses in order to
identify possible underlying dimensions. As such, the
studies do not investigate the microstructure of cognition
and as such do not reveal whether people’s categorization
can be explained by psychological essentialism.
Specifically, these studies do not ask participants to
engage in categorisation, but instead to express their beliefs
about categorisation.
While the latter are certainly
important, and a rounded theory of categorisation should
offer some account of these, it is also possible that such
meta-cognitive beliefs may not accurately relate to people’s
behaviour. Indeed, the premise of deference, itself a
hallmark of essentialist belief, is that people may revise
their beliefs about category membership in the light of new
information (from expert authorities). Thus, meta-cognitive
beliefs about categorisation may be subject to revision;
indeed, they may be entirely tentative. Even if they are
firmly held, one or two carefully chosen examples of
categorisation thought experiments may lead to revision of
these beliefs. Thus, it is arguably of greater import to ask
the question as to how people actually categorise instances
relative to these social categories – only then may we
determine whether categorisation is indeed essentialist.
Therefore the literature contains two lines of evidence
concerning the essentialism or otherwise of i) people’s
categorization of natural kinds; and ii) people’s beliefs
about social categories. However, these ideas cannot
currently be tied together. In particular, there is no evidence
that people’s categorization of social categories accords
with psychological essentialism. We set out to explore the
idea that social categories are essentialist. Rather than
examine participants’ general beliefs about categories, we
adopted a cognitive approach of investigating what factors
influence people’s categorisation of exemplars into social
categories. We focused on the categories of sexual
orientation because of the findings of Haslam et al. (2002)
who found a strong linkage between natural kind beliefs and

2957

prejudice only for this particular social category. We also
reasoned that this would be a familiar domain to our
University-based participants, in part because there has been
much speculation in the media as to a potential genetic basis
for homosexuality. Lastly, to our knowledge, there has been
no prior cognitive study of the categorisation of sexuality.
The experiment involved presenting a range of clear cases
and borderlines of sexual categories. As in previous studies,
borderlines were designed to pit apparently conflicting
essential and superficial properties against one another – the
key question being which affect categorization more. The
influence of various factors on categorisation was examined.
One factor – the presence or absence of a hypothetical gene
marker for homosexuality – should, according to the form of
genetic essentialism we examined, be relevant to
categorisation, and would therefore influence people’s
categorisations. Other factors – sex and age, for example –
should not be relevant to categorisation according to this
genetic essentialism, since they are not candidates for a
genetic essence nor are they caused by such an essence. By
including clear cases and borderlines we sought to assess the
whether essentialist beliefs were strong enough to alter the
categorisation of clear cases, or only of borderlines. Finally,
we also examined response times since even if an effect is
too weak to alter categorization decisions, it may yet make
those decisions more difficult and protracted.

Method
Design
The experiment adopted a fully within-subjects design with
the factors Genetics (Gene marker, No marker), Sex (male,
female), Age (in 20s, in 50s), Sexual interest (Same sex,
Other sex), and Romantic interest (Same sex, Other sex).

Participants
97 undergraduate Psychology students volunteered to
participate. 53 were taking part in an Open University
residential school; 44 were from the University of
Westminster, participating for partial course credit.

Genetics). In Table 1, there are two clear cases of
Homosexuality (Clear (Ho) – female and male,
respectively), two clear cases of Heterosexuality (Clear(He)
– female and male, respectively), two cases of Borderline 1
(where the scenario describes someone with heterosexual
sexual interests, but homosexual romantic feelings) and two
cases of Borderline 2 (defined by the opposite pattern).
Table 1. The Eight Types of Exemplar

Sex
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male

Exemplar Type
Borderline 1
Borderline 2
Clear (He)
Clear (Ho)

Procedure
The experiment was presented using the experiment
generator program E-Prime (Schneider, Eschmann &
Zuccolotto, 2002). Participants were first presented with
instructions and an example scenario describing a putative
individual. They were then asked to categorise the sexuality
of the described individual by answering Yes or No to each
of three independent categorisation questions: is the person
described i) straight/heterosexual; ii) gay/homosexual; iii)
bisexual? It is possible therefore for a participant to
categorise an individual as belonging to all or none of these
categories, or a combination of some and not others.
Participants were then presented with the 32 experimental
scenarios in random order, with the same three questions for
each. Response times were recorded. They were also told
to “assume for all of these scenarios that scientists have
discovered what they claim is a genetic marker for
homosexuality” and to come to a judgment on the basis only
of the information given.

Results

Materials
32 scenarios were constructed fully crossing all levels of the
5 within-subjects factors. These were Genetics (Gene
marker, No marker), Sex (male, female), Age (in 20s, in
50s), Sexual interest (Same sex, Other sex), and Romantic
interest (Same sex, Other sex). The scenario structure is as
follows: “X is a [man/woman], in [his/her] [20s/50s].
[He/she] has had sexual relationships ONLY with
[women/other men/men/other women] and had deep, loving
romantic
attachments
ONLY
to
[women/other
men/men/other women] and [has/does not have] the genetic
marker for homosexuality.”
Thus there were eight types of case (defined by Sex,
Sexual interest and Romantic Interest), with four examples
of each (corresponding to the four combinations of Age and

Object of Interest
Sexual
Romantic
Other sex
Same sex
Other sex
Same sex
Same sex
Other sex
Same sex
Other sex
Other sex
Other sex
Other sex
Other sex
Same sex
Same sex
Same sex
Same sex

Data were scored in terms of the number of Yes responses.
For brevity, answers to the third categorization question
(bisexual) are not reported here; their omission has no
bearing on the following results. Data were analysed by a
repeated measures ANOVA with Genetics (2), Sex (2), Age
(2), Exemplar type (4), and Question (2) as within-subject
factors. The inclusion of Question as a factor allowed a
comparison of straight/heterosexual and gay/homosexual
categorizations. Exemplar type has four levels: Borderline
1, Borderline 2, Clear (He), Clear (Ho) defined by the
combinations of romantic interest and sexual interest.
Where appropriate, Greenhouse-Geisser adjustments to the
F statistics have been made.
The effect of Question was significant, with the
proportion of Yes responses varying according to the

2958

categorisation question: Straight/Heterosexual (mean =
0.34), Gay/Homosexual (mean = 0.43): F(1,96) = 32.42, p <
0.001, ήp2 =.25. Thus people considered it more likely that
the exemplars described in the scenarios were members of
the Gay/Homosexual category. This perhaps is to be
expected given that half of the scenarios describe cases
where a (gay) gene marker is present, and is suggestive that
participants do not see the absence of a (gay) gene marker as
a positive indicator of Heterosexuality. There was also an
interaction between Exemplar type and Question: F(1.88,
366.86) = 427.24, p < 0.001, ήp2 =.82, as shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Responses by Question and Exemplar Type
Exemplar type
Borderline 1
Borderline 2
Clear (He)
Clear (Ho)

Heterosexual
0.29
0.09
0.93
0.05

Homosexual
0.25
0.49
0.02
0.96

Borderline 1 cases were equally likely to be considered
members of the Gay/Homosexual and Straight/Heterosexual
categories; by contrast, Borderline 2 cases were much more
likely to be regarded as members of the Gay/Homosexual
category (and hardly at all as members of the
Straight/Heterosexual category). This is striking given the
symmetry of the scenarios. Sexual interest in same sex
categories seems to determine that someone cannot be in the
Straight/Heterosexual category. However, the same degree
of sexual interest in the opposite sex does not decisively
mean that someone is not in the Gay/Homosexual category.
The presence of putative gene markers affected the way in
which the categorisation questions were answered, with an
interaction between Gene marker and Question, as shown in
Table 3: F(1,96) = 28.07, p < 0.001, ήp2 =.23
Table 3. Responses by Gene marker and Question
Gene Marker
Absent
Present

Heterosexual
0.36
0.31

Homosexual
0.40
0.46

It is notable that even in the Absent cases, where there is
no (gay) gene marker, participants are more likely to
categorise the exemplars as belonging to the
Gay/Homosexual category than the Straight/Heterosexual
category – this despite the symmetrical construction of these
scenarios in terms of the crossing of all other factors.
Nevertheless, the interaction is as expected with the
presence of a (gay) gene marker increasing the likelihood of
exemplars being categorised as Gay/Homosexual and
decreasing the likelihood for the Straight/Heterosexual
category. However, this effect depends upon Exemplar
type, as revealed by the interaction between Exemplar type,
Gene marker and Question, as shown in Table 4:
F(2.74,263.44) = 4.74, p < 0.005, ήp2 =.05.
The effect of the gene marker is most notable for

Borderline 1, where its presence results in a fall in the
likelihood of a Straight/Heterosexual categorisation and a
larger increase in the likelihood of a Gay/Homosexual
categorisation. By contrast, the corresponding changes for
Borderline 2, whilst in the same direction, are more modest.
Also of interest are the changes for the Clear (He) cases,
where the presence of the marker leads to a reduction (from
ceiling) in the likelihood of a Straight/Heterosexual
categorisation and virtually no increase (from floor) in the
likelihood of a Gay/Homosexual categorisation.
The
changes in the categorisation of the Clear (Ho) cases are
even more modest, but arguably reflect the fact that
categorisation as Gay/Homosexual is already at ceiling and
cannot increase further, and that for Straight/Heterosexual is
at floor and cannot decrease further. The asymmetry
between the borderline cases, however, is not expected, and
suggests that the presence of a gene marker has an effect
that is mediated by other factors, such as the type of
borderline (i.e., the nature of romantic and sexual interest).
Table 4. Responses by Exemplar type, Gene marker and
Question
Exemplar type
Borderline 1
Borderline 2
Clear (He)
Clear (Ho)

Gene Marker
Absent
Present
Absent
Present
Absent
Present
Absent
Present

Heterosexual
0.32
0.26
0.10
0.07
0.97
0.88
0.05
0.04

Homosexual
0.19
0.31
0.44
0.53
0.01
0.03
0.95
0.97

No effect of Sex was predicted, largely because an
essentialist point of view predicts an effect of genetically
essential properties, or properties believed to be caused by
such essential properties. There is no reason to expect an
effect of Sex. However, Sex interacted with Question, as
shown in Table 5: F(1,96) = 15.76, p < 0.001, ήp2 =.14.
Table 5. Responses by Sex and Question
Sex
Female
Male

Heterosexual
0.35
0.33

Homosexual
0.41
0.45

Males were more likely than females to be categorized as
gay/homosexual, and less likely to be categorized as
straight/heterosexual. There was a three-way interaction
between Exemplar type, Sex and Question, as shown in
Table 6: F(2.59,248.21) = 10.82, p < 0.001, ήp2 =.10.
Whereas the above general pattern holds for the
Borderlines, for the Clear (He) case, males were less likely
than females to be categorized as gay/homosexual, and more
likely
than
females
to
be
categorized
as
straight/heterosexual. These effects were independent of the
sex of the participant, as revealed by a further analysis in

2959

which sex of participant was entered as a between-subjects
factor. There was no significant effect of sex of participant,
nor any interactions involving this factor.
Table 6. Responses by Exemplar type, Sex and Question
Exemplar type
Borderline 1
Borderline 2
Clear (He)
Clear (Ho)

Sex
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male

Heterosexual
0.34
0.24
0.10
0.08
0.91
0.94
0.04
0.05

Homosexual
0.23
0.27
0.43
0.55
0.04
0.01
0.95
0.97

The above analysis suggests that the influence of factors
is at its greatest for the borderline cases, but that these are
often in different directions. There are relatively modest
effects if any for clear cases of category membership. A
similar analysis to the above, restricted to the two types of
borderline case, and ignoring clear cases, revealed the same
effects and interactions as reported above, suggesting that
the effects arise primarily because of the way in which
borderlines are categorized.
Response time data were also analysed by a repeated
measures ANOVA with Genetics (2), Age (2), Sex (2),
Exemplar type (4), and Question (2) as within subject
factors. Participant group was not entered as a betweensubjects factor as initial analysis suggested no significant
differences between the groups.
There was a significant effect of Question, with response
times for Straight/Heterosexual far exceeding those for
Gay/Homosexual: F(1,94) = 28.70, p < 0.001, ήp2 =.23;
mean Straight/Heterosexual = 4641ms, Gay/Homosexual =
2988ms. There was an effect of Exemplar type, with the
response times for borderlines exceeding those of clear
cases; F(2.17,204.23) = 11.85, p < 0.001 ήp2 =.11;
Borderline 1 = 4596ms, Borderline 2 = 4379ms, Clear (He)
= 3383ms, Clear (Ho) = 2903ms. This is a characteristic
pattern of categorisation response times (cf. Rips, Shoben &
Smith, 1973) suggesting that the Borderline 1 and 2 are
genuinely borderline members of the categories. This effect
interacted with Question, as shown in Table 7:
F(2.01,188.82) = 2.98, p = 0.05, ήp2 =.03.
Table 7. RTs (msec) by Exemplar type and Question
Exemplar type
Borderline 1
Borderline 2
Clear (He)
Clear (Ho)

Heterosexual
5190
5428
4496
3453

Homosexual
4002
3330
2270
2352

The response time data confirm the status of the
borderlines for the Gay/Homosexual category and
Straight/Heterosexual category, but also suggest that within

the latter, the Clear (He) case is not so easy to categorise as
the Clear (Ho) case. Lastly, there was an interaction
between Gene marker and Example, as shown in Table 8:
F(1.85,173.70) = 8.42, p < 0.001, ήp2 =.08. The presence of
the gene marker speeds categorisation of the Clear (Ho) case
and Borderline 1, but slows categorisation of the Clear (He)
case, and has little impact on the Borderline 2 case.
Table 8. RTs (msec) by Exemplar types and Gene marker
Example
Borderline 1
Borderline 1
Borderline 2
Borderline 2
Clear (He)
Clear (He)
Clear (Ho)
Clear (Ho)

Gene Marker
Absent
Present
Absent
Present
Absent
Present
Absent
Present

Response Time
5594
3597
4425
4332
2926
3840
3415
2390

These data confirm the pattern of categorization
responses, in that Borderlines 1 and 2 were regarded by
participants as genuine borderlines but are subject to
different influences, with genetic influences being modest
for Borderline 2 and more pronounced for Borderline 1.

Discussion
Overall these data provide confirmation that genetic factors
can influence category judgments for sexual orientation
categories. In particular, the presence or absence of a
putative ‘gay gene’ marker, has the potential to alter the way
in which borderline cases may be categorized. However,
the extent of this influence is modest indeed, and these data
do not point to genetic factors having over-riding
importance or centrality in categorizing sexual orientations.
In particular, though the presence of a genetic marker
alters categorization responses, borderline cases continue to
be judged as borderline, and clear cases remain clear. The
contrast with the oft-cited examples due to Keil and Rips is
illuminating. They found that appearance and behavioural
factors could be overturned by deeper, more essential
properties when categorizing biological kinds – a bird was
still categorized as a bird despite being transformed to
appear like an insect. However, with sexual orientation
categories our findings are opposed – the presence of a
genetic marker does not overturn the influence of the
behavioural factors of romantic and sexual interest.
Moreover, the influence of genetic factors is not uniform.
Presence of a genetic marker has the greatest influence on
Borderline 1, cases of individuals displaying heterosexual
sexual interest, but homosexual romantic interest. Thus, the
influence on categorization depends on the interplay of
behavioural and genetic factors, not genetic factors alone.
In addition to the modest influence of genetic factors,
there are other findings of note. First, our results reveal an
asymmetry between heterosexual and homosexual
categories. The heterosexual category appears to be more

2960

narrowly defined. Whereas same-sex sexual interest leads
to a reasonable proportion of gay/homosexual
categorizations, other-sex sexual interest leads to a much
lower proportion of straight/heterosexual categorizations.
Thus, whilst same-sex sexual interest may be judged as
incompatible with heterosexuality, in a way that same-sex
romantic interest is not, other-sex sexual interest is not
judged as incompatible with homosexuality.
Second, these results reveal an asymmetry in the way that
males and females are categorized. Males are seen as less
likely than females to be straight/heterosexual, and more
likely than females to be gay/homosexual, this being
especially true of borderlines. These effects are also
modest, with similar effect sizes to those of genetic factors.
In conclusion, our findings show that, in categorizations,
behavioural properties concerning romantic and sexual
interest are more central and defining than putative genetic
properties, with sex and genetics only gently modulating the
influence of these behavioural properties. This pattern is at
odds with that seen in the case of biological natural kinds,
and that has been taken as evidence for psychological
essentialism. We therefore suggest that, even if people
possess genetically essentialist meta-beliefs about sexual
orientation, their categorizations are not genetically
essentialist. Instead, their categorizations are consistent
with similarity-based views of concepts, wherein
categorization is the product of matching with a multidimensional array of different properties.

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to Maria Flynn for her help in
collecting the data reported here.

References
Ahn, W. K., Kalish, C., Gelman, S. A., Medin, D. L.,
Luhmann, C., Atran, S., et al. (2001). Why essences are
essential in the psychology of concepts. Cognition, 82(1),
59-69.
Barton, M. E., & Komatsu, L. K. (1989). Defining Features
of Natural Kinds and Artifacts. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 18(5), 433-447.
Braisby, N. R. (2004). Deference and Essentialism in the
Categorization of Chemical Kinds. In, Alterman R., &
Kirsch, D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.: Mahwah, NJ.
Braisby, N., Franks, B., & Hampton, J. (1996).
Essentialism, word use, and concepts. Cognition, 59, 247274.
Charland, L. C. (2002). The Natural Kind Status of
Emotion. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 53(4), 511-537.
Gelman, S. A. (2004). Psychological essentialism in
children. Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(9), 404-9.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and
essences: Early understandings of the nonobvious.
Cognition, 38, 213-244.

Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2000). Essentialist
beliefs about social categories. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 39, 113–127.
Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2002). Are
essentialist beliefs associated with prejudice? British
Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 87–100.
Haslam, N., & Levy, S. (2006). Essentialist beliefs about
homosexuality: Structure and implications for prejudice.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 471–485.
Haslam, N. & Whelan, J. (2008).
Human natures:
Psychological essentialism in thinking about differences
between people. Social and Personality Psychology
Compass, 2/3, 1297-1312.
Hegarty, P. & Pratto, F. (2001). Sexual orientation beliefs:
Their relationship to antigay attitudes and biological
determinist arguments. Journal of Homosexuality, 41,
121-135.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and necessity . Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Lloyde, J., Braisby, N. & Brace, N (2003). Seeds of Doubt:
Are Children Taught to be Essentialists? In: F.
Schmalhofer, R.M. Young & G. Katz (Eds.), Proceedings
of EuroCogSci03. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Malt, B. C. (1994). Water is not H2O. Cognitive Psychology,
27, 41-70.
Markman, A.B., & Stilwell, C.H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 13(4), 329-358.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Panksepp, J. (2002). Emotions as natural kinds within the
brain. In M. Lewis and J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.),
Handbook of Emotions, 2nd edn. New York: Guildford
Press.
Putnam, H. (1975). The meaning of ‘meaning.’ In H.
Putnam, Mind, language, and reality: Philosophical
papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, H. (1977). Meaning and reference. In S. P.
Schwartz (Ed.), Naming, Necessity and Natural Kinds.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Rothbart, M., & Taylor, M. (1992). Category labels and
social reality: Do we view social categories as natural
kinds? In G. R. Semin & K. Fiedler (Eds.), Language and
Social Cognition (pp. 11–36). London, UK: Sage.
Schneider, W., Eschmann, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime user’s guide. Pittsburgh, PA: Psychology Software
Tools, Inc.
Strevens, M. (2000). The essentialist aspect of naive
theories. Cognition, 74(2), 149-175.

2961

