UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cerebral dominance for self information in handwritten shapes-An ERP study
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vp6r781
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Masataka, Nobuo
Miura, Yui
Sawada, Reiko
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

     Cerebral dominance for self information in handwritten shapes-An
                                                 ERP study
                                                 Reiko Sawada
                                                  Kyoto University
                                                    Yui Miura
                                                  Kyoto University
                                                Nobuo Masataka
                                                  Kyoto University
Abstract: Previous researchers have shown that perception of bodily self (e.g. face, body part and voice) is related
to brain activity in the right hemisphere. Like a voice, handwriting is produced by human motor-movement. We
investigated the neural basis for the processing of the self information in handwriting. Symmetric patterns served
as stimuli. The participants drew these patterns with a graphic tablet while not able to see them. To investigate
the link between self perception and trajectory patterns, we inverted their handwritten shapes both horizontally and
vertically. We measured event related potentials (ERPs) during observation of self and non-self (self inversion and
others handwriting). Two weeks after writing, they observed self and non-self handwriting. Right-lateralized ERPs
were recorded only to self handwriting but not to inverted stimuli or others handwriting. These results showed that
self processing of products of motor-movement also involves brain activity in the right hemisphere.
                                                         2072

