UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children’s Understanding of Counterfactual Alternatives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6t16v163

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
McCloy, Rachel
Strange, Paul

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Understanding of Counterfactual Alternatives
Rachel McCloy
(r.a.mccloy@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Reading, U.K., RG6 6AL

Paul Strange
(paul.s.strange@hotmail.co.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Reading, U.K., RG6 6AL

Abstract
This study examines how children integrate information about
counterfactual alternatives in making judgments. Previous
research in adults had shown that they make judgments on the
basis of comparisons between factual events and
counterfactual alternatives. We suggest that children adopt a
summative strategy instead, where they focus on the
presented outcomes, both real and counterfactual, and base
their judgments on the overall affective quality of these
outcomes. Results from a single experiment comparing
adults’ and children’s responses to a counterfactual judgment
task show that children do tend to use a summative strategy as
opposed to the comparative strategy adopted by adults. These
results were further supported by participants’ justifications of
their judgments, which were alternative focused for the
adults, but outcome focused for the children. The results are
discussed in relation to complexity-based theories of the
development of human reasoning.
Keywords: Counterfactual;
children; reasoning.

development;

complexity;

Introduction
The ability to consider alternatives is a key component of
human rationality (e.g., Byrne, 2005). Both children and
adults are frequently exposed to situations where their
ability to consider alternative outcomes is an important
determinant of their interpretation of these situations. A
recent and important example is a government road safety
advertisement that shows what happens following a car
crash and then rewinds to show an alternative outcome if the
young passengers had been wearing seatbelts prior to the
crash (www.dft.gov.uk/think/). Findings from empirical
research with adults suggest that they would experience
negative emotions in response to such an advertisement, as a
consequence of comparing what actually happened with its
more positive alternative (e.g., Markman, Gavanski,
Sherman & McMullen, 1993; Medvec, Madey & Gilovich,
1995). However, it is not clear that children necessarily
make the same comparison and therefore whether they
would experience similar negative emotions. In this study,
we will investigate similarities and differences between
adult and children’s consideration of alternatives, along with

the effects of these considerations on individual judgments,
emotional responses and decisions.
Varieties of Counterfactual Thinking When people think
about how things could, should or would have been
different if other events had happened, they are considering
what are known as counterfactual alternatives (i.e.,
alternatives states of affairs that are contrary to what
actually occurred). The consideration of such alternatives
has been shown to have profound consequences for people’s
judgments, their emotions and their decisions (e.g., Roese,
1994; Davis, Lehman, Wortman, Silver & Thompson, 1995;
McCloy & Byrne, 2002). Counterfactual alternatives can be
categorized in a number of ways. When we imagine a state
of affairs that results in an outcome which was better than
what actually occurred (e.g., “If I had been driving more
slowly, I wouldn’t have crashed the car”), this is known as
upward counterfactual thinking (Markman, et al., 1993).
This can be compared with downward counterfactual
thinking, where we imagine alternative states of affairs that
would have resulted in a worse outcome than what actually
occurred (e.g., “If I hadn’t been wearing my seatbelt, I
would have been seriously injured”; Markman et al., 1993).
Upward and downward counterfactual thinking have
different consequences for our judgments, emotions and
decisions. Following negative outcomes, imagining how
things could have been better (an upward counterfactual)
can make people feel worse about what happened to them,
whereas imagining how things could have been worse (a
downward counterfactual) can make people feel better about
the same event (Roese, 1994; Medvec, et al., 1995).
Although they can make people feel worse about negative
events, upward counterfactual thoughts have a functional
component, in that they may help people prepare for the
future, by suggesting alternative courses of action which
may lead to positive outcomes (Roese, 1994; Epstude &
Roese, 2007).
A further distinction can be made between “pure”
counterfactuals, where a change to antecedent events results
in a different outcome to what actually occurred (whether
that be better or worse than the actual outcome), and

1627

semifactual thoughts (Goodman, 1973), where, although
antecedent events have changed, the same outcome occurs
(e.g., “even if I had studied harder, I would still have failed
the exam”). Counterfactual and semifactual thoughts also
have different consequences. Thinking counterfactually
about a past event can make that event seem more causal of
subsequent outcomes, whereas thinking semifactually about
the same event can reduce how causal that event is seen as
being (McCloy & Byrne, 2002). The same pattern holds for
how controllable past events are seen as being (McCloy,
2000). Counterfactual and semifactual thoughts also have
different consequences for how much we regret past events.
Where upward counterfactual thoughts can increase the
regret felt for past events, semifactual thoughts can reduce
the amount of regret that people report (McCloy & Byrne,
2002).
Children’s understanding of counterfactual alternatives
As described above, when adults make comparisons
between reality and different counterfactual alternatives,
their reactions show a number of regularities. However,
recent research into children’s counterfactual thinking
suggests that they may not understand these counterfactual
alternatives in the same way that adults do.
Past research on children’s counterfactual thinking has
shown that even very young children show some
understanding that past events could have happened
otherwise, with children as young as two using phrases such
as almost in describing a series of events (e.g., “the car
almost hit the deer”; Harris, 1997). Although children
younger than six years old rarely produce spontaneous
counterfactual assertions (Kuczaj & Daly, 1979), they can
make reference to imaginary alternative events when
making judgments about how events are caused or how they
could be prevented (Harris, German & Mills, 1996). Despite
this, children show different patterns from adults on a range
of counterfactual thinking tasks (e.g., German & Nicols,
2003; Guttentag & Ferrell, 2004; Meehan & Byrne, 2005).
This suggests that, although children may be able to
construct counterfactual alternatives, they may not deal with
these alternatives in the same way as adults (Beck,
Robinson, Carroll & Apperly, 2006; Riggs & Beck, 2008).
One particularly interesting study is that by Guttentag and
Ferrell (2004), who looked directly at how children and
adults deal with different counterfactual alternatives. They
presented their participants with scenarios concerning two
children who become ill after eating a pudding (because
someone else had sneezed on it). In each case the child
could have chosen an alternative pudding. For one child, the
alternative pudding would not have resulted in illness (an
upward counterfactual alternative), whereas for the other
child, it would also have resulted in illness (as it too had
been sneezed on; a semifactual alternative). Adult
participants judged that the child whose alternative would
have resulted in a better outcome would feel worse about
their choice than the child whose alternative would have
resulted in the same outcome. However, five year old

children showed the opposite pattern, instead suggesting
that the child for whom both alternatives would have
resulted in the same negative outcome would feel worse
than the child for whom the alternative would have resulted
in a better outcome. Guttentag and Ferrell proposed that
children, rather than making an upward comparison to the
better alternative as adults do, instead summed across
possible outcomes in making their emotion judgments (two
negative outcomes versus one negative outcome and one
positive outcome).
Guttentag and Ferrell’s study suggests that children may
not integrate information across counterfactual possibilities
and factual events in the same way as adults. This could
explain why adults and children show different patterns in
counterfactual thinking tasks (e.g., German & Nichols,
2003; Meehan & Byrne, 2005). In this study we test whether
children’s understanding of counterfactual alternative
outcomes is, in fact, summative in nature.

Experiment
Method
Participants and Procedure We tested 34 seven-year-old
children in Year 3 of primary school (13 males, 21 females)
and 22 adult volunteers (mean age 21 years; 6 males, 16
females). All participants were presented with two scenarios
concerning a game, one of which resulted in a positive
outcome for the protagonist with the other resulting in a
negative outcome. All participants were tested individually.
For child participants the scenarios were read out loud by
the experimenter, and the children were presented with
pictures illustrating the different states of affairs described
in the scenario. Half of the child participants made
judgments about the positive scenario first, and the other
half made judgments about the negative scenario. Children
made their answers to the judgment task verbally and their
answers were recorded by the experimenter. They were also
asked by the experiment to justify their answers, and these
were again recorded. For adult participants, the scenarios
were presented in a booklet, along with the judgment
questions and space for recording justifications of choices.
Again, half of the adult participants received the positive
scenario first, and the other half received the negative
scenario first.

Materials and Design. Participants were presented with
scenarios describing three child protagonists who take part
in a game. In the game, each child selects three boxes from
a barrel (some boxes contain prizes and some boxes do not
contain prizes). Each child then chooses one of these three
boxes to keep. If the box they choose contains a prize they
get to keep the prize, and if it does not they receive nothing.
In the negative outcome condition, all three children open
their chosen box to find that they have not won a prize.
Each child is then shown what was in the other two boxes

1628

that they selected from the barrel. For one child, the other
two boxes both contain prizes (1). For the second child, one
box contains a prize and the other does not (2). For the third
child, neither of the other two boxes contains a prize (3).
The structure of the positive outcome condition is the same,
except that, on opening their chosen box, each child finds
that they have won a prize. The structure of the tasks is
shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Structure of the situations described in the
experimental materials.
For the negative scenario, participants were asked to put
the three children described in the story in order of how
unhappy they felt. For the positive scenario, participants
were asked to put the three children described in the story in
order of how happy they felt. When they had made each
ranking, participants were asked to explain why they had
chosen this order.
Based on previous studies with adults we predicted that
adults would based their judgments of unhappiness
(negative scenario) and happiness (positive scenario) on
comparisons between the achieved outcome and the
counterfactual alternatives presented (i.e., the content of the
other two boxes). For the negative scenario, we therefore
predicted that the adults would rank Child 1 as feeling the
most unhappy, as both alternatives presented would have
resulted in better outcomes than what actually happened
(two boxes with prizes). We predicted that adults would

rank Child 3 as feeling the least unhappy, as both
alternatives presented would have resulted in the same
outcome as what actually happened (two empty boxes).
Child 2, who had one alternative that would have resulted in
a better outcome, and one that would have resulted in the
same outcome (one box with a prize and one empty box)
would be ranked by adults as falling in between the other
two. For the positive scenario, we predicted that adults
would rank Child 3 as feeling the most happy, as both of the
alternatives presented would have resulted in a worse
outcome. We predicted that adults would rank Child 1 as
feeling least happy, as both of the alternatives presented
would have resulted in the same outcome. Child 2 would,
again, be ranked be ranked by adults as falling in between
the other two in terms of happiness.
We predicted that children would adopt a different
strategy to that of adults in making their judgments in such
situations. If children, rather than making comparisons
between the achieved outcome and counterfactual
alternative outcomes, are instead summing across outcomes
we would predict that children would show different
patterns in their rankings from those of adults for both the
negative and the positive scenarios. For the negative
scenario, we therefore predicted that the children would
rank Child 3 as feeling the most unhappy, as the actual
outcome and the alternatives presented would all result in
negative outcomes (3 negative outcomes). We predicted that
children would rank Child 1 as feeling the least unhappy, as,
although the actual outcome was negative both alternatives
presented would have resulted in a positive outcome (1
negative outcome). Child 2, who had one alternative that
would have resulted in a positive outcome, and one that
would have resulted in a negative outcome (2 negative
outcomes) would be ranked by children as falling in
between the other two. For the positive scenario, we
predicted that children would rank Child 1 as feeling the
most happy, as all of the boxes that they had selected,
whether chosen or not, would result in a positive outcome (3
positive outcomes). We predicted that children would rank
Child 3 as feeling least happy, as, although the actual
outcome was positive, both of the alternative boxes
presented would have resulted in negative outcomes (1
positive outcome). Child 2 would, again, be ranked be
ranked by adults as falling in between the other two in terms
of happiness (2 positive outcomes).
We also predicted that adults and children would differ in
their justifications of their choices. Adults’ justifications
should focus on comparisons between the actual outcome
and the alternatives. Children’s justifications should instead
focus on the affective qualities (positive or negative) of the
potential outcomes, without comparison between them.

Results
For the negative scenario, the pattern of results was exactly
as we had predicted (see Figure 2). Of our 22 adult
participants, 20 judged that Child 1 would feel most

1629

100

100

91

90
76

80
70

Percentage

unhappy and Child 3 least unhappy with Child 2 falling in
between (order 1-2-3; 91%). None of the adult participants
chose the opposite order (order 3-2-1; 0%). A Page’s trend
test shows a significant trend to rank the protagonists in the
order 1-2-3 in adult participants (L(3, 22) = 305; χ2(1) =
38.2, p < 0.001). Of our 34 child participants, only 6 chose
the order most often chosen by adult participants (1-2-3;
18%). The most common pattern amongst our child
participants was to judge that Child 3 would feel the most
unhappy and Child 1 the least unhappy with Child 2 falling
in between (order 3-2-1; 71%). A Page’s trend test shows a
significant trend to rank the protagonists in the order 3-2-1
in child participants (L(3, 34) = 441; χ2(1) = 16, p < 0.001).
A Fisher’s exact test shows that the frequency of choice of
these two main patterns of rankings (1-2-3 and 3-2-1) is
significantly different between adult and child participants
(p < 0.000).

60
50

Adult
Child

40
30
20

15
9

10

9

0
0

1,2,3

3,2,1

other

Rankings

Figure 3. Pattern of rankings for the positive outcome
scenario.

91

90
80

71

Percentage

70
60
Adult

50

Child

40
30
20

18
9

10

12

0

0
1,2,3

3,2,1

other

Rankings

Figure 2. Pattern of rankings for the negative outcome
scenario.

For the positive scenario, the pattern of results was also as
we had predicted (see Figure 3). Of our 22 adult
participants, 20 judged that Child 3 would feel most happy
and Child 1 least happy with Child 2 falling in between
(order 3-2-1; 91%). None of the adult participants chose the
opposite order (order1-2-3; 0%). A Page’s trend test shows
a significant trend to rank the protagonists in the order 1-2-3
in adult participants (L(3, 22) = 305; χ2(1) = 38.2, p <
0.001). Of our 34 child participants, only 5 chose the order
most often chosen by adult participants (3-2-1; 15%). The
most common pattern amongst our child participants was to
judge that Child 1 would feel the most happy and Child 3
the least happy with Child 2 falling in between (order 1-2-3;
76%). A Page’s trend test shows a significant trend to rank
the protagonists in the order 3-2-1 in child participants (L(3,
34) = 449; χ2(1) = 24.7, p < 0.001). A Fisher’s exact test
shows that the frequency of choice of these two main
patterns of rankings (3-2-1 and 1-2-3) is significantly
different between adult and child participants (p < 0.000).

These results suggest that, while adults are using a
comparative strategy in making their judgments, relying on
the contrast between factual outcomes and counterfactual
alternatives, children are adoption a different strategy.
Children instead sum across outcomes, both factual and
counterfactual, in making their judgments choosing as the
most unhappy those with the most potential negative
outcomes (for the negative scenario) and as the most happy
those with the most positive outcomes (for the positive
scenario).
An examination of the justifications provided by our adult
and child participants also supports our predictions. For the
negative scenario, all of the participants whose ranks
showed the order 1-2-3 (20 adults and 6 children) referred in
their justifications to a comparison between the factual
outcome and the counterfactual alternatives. Those whose
ranks showed the order 3-2-1 (24 children) instead focused
on the outcomes, both factual and counterfactual. These
participants suggested that Child 3 would be the most
unhappy because none of the boxes that they selected
contained a prize, and that Child 1 would be the least
unhappy because 2 of the 3 boxes that they had chosen
contained a prize. For the positive scenario, all of the
participants whose ranks showed the order 3-2-1 (20 adults
and 5 children) again referred in their justifications to a
comparison between the factual outcome and the
counterfactual alternatives. They indicated that Child 3
would feel relief and feel lucky at their “against the odds”
win. Those whose ranks showed the order 1-2-3 (26
children) instead focused on the outcomes. These
participants suggested that Child 1 would be the most happy
because all of the boxes that they selected contained a prize,
and that Child 3 would be the least happy because 2 of the 3
boxes that they had chosen did not contain a prize.

1630

Discussion
The results of this experiment indicate that children
integrate information about counterfactual alternatives in a
different way to adults. The judgments made by our adult
participants suggest that they are using the contrast between
factual events and counterfactual alternatives in making
their judgments. This is in line with previous work on adult
counterfactual thinking (e.g., Markman, Gavanski, Sherman
& McMullen, 1993; Medvec, Madey & Gilovich, 1995).
The pattern of judgments made by the children in our study
suggests that they do not make use of comparisons between
factual events and counterfactual alternatives in making
their judgments. Instead they focus on the outcomes
presented, both factual and counterfactual, and base their
judgments on the overall affective character of these
outcomes (the proportion of positive to negative outcomes).
This experiment was designed to follow up the suggestion
of Guttentag and Ferrell (2004) that children adopt such a
summative strategy in their counterfactual judgments. It was
explicitly designed to test for such a strategy by
systematically varying the proportions of negative and
positive outcomes presented to participants. We also
extended the work of Guttentag and Ferrell by examining
scenarios in this task with both negative and positive
outcomes. This allowed us to look at children’s
understanding of counterfactual alternatives that are both
better (upward counterfactuals) and worse (downward
counterfactuals) than the outcomes of factual events.
Our hypotheses were further supported by the evidence
from participants’ justifications for their choices. Adult
participants made reference to comparisons between what
actually happened and what could have happened otherwise
in their justifications. Most of the children in our study
instead focused on the outcomes presented, both real and
potential, and justified their choices based on the overall
affective character of these outcomes. The small number of
child participants who showed adult-like patterns in their
judgments (6 for the negative scenario, 5 for the positive
scenario), rather than focusing on the outcomes, showed
evidence of making comparisons in their justifications,
suggesting that their pattern of results were the result of
their making similar inferences to those of the adult
participants.
Why might children employ a different strategy to that of
adults? We would argue that a summative strategy is
simpler than a comparative strategy, as it requires only that
the participant keep track of the affective status of potential
outcomes. A comparative strategy, in contrast, requires not
only that a participant keeps track of the affective status
(positive or negative) of potential outcomes, but also that
they make comparisons between them in order to make a
judgment. This account is in line with other theories that
suggest that take a complexity-based account of the
development of children’s reasoning competence (e.g.,
Andrews & Halford, 2002; Halford & Andrews, 2004) and
apply this further to account for patterns in adult reasoning
(e.g., Halford, Baker, McCredden & Bain, 2005).

Our findings have some potential practical implications. If
we take the example of the road safety campaign mentioned
in the introduction, our results may suggest that presenting a
positive alternative of how things could have gone better
may not effectively elicit the desired negative affect and
intentions for future behavior that it would in adults (c.f.,
Roese, 1994), as these responses are dependent on a
comparison between the two alternative states of affairs
presented. Information campaigns aimed at children must
take into account their understanding of alternative states of
affairs. Further research could examine whether young
children adopt similar summative strategies in other tasks
where they must integrate information across multiple
alternatives, for example, in judging the quality of
decisions.

References
Andrews, G., & Halford, G.S. (2002). A cognitive
complexity metric applied to cognitive development.
Cognitive Psychology, 45, 153-219.
Beck, S.R., Robinson, E.J., Carroll, D.J. & Apperly, I.A.
(2006). Children's Thinking About Counterfactuals and
Future Hypotheticals as Possibilities. Child Development,
77, 413-426.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2005). The Rational Imagination: How
people create alternatives to reality. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Davis, C.G., Lehman, D.R., Wortman, C.R., Cohen Silver,
R. & Thompson, S.C. (1995). The undoing of traumatic
life events. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
21, 109-124.
Epstude, K., & Roese, N. J. (2008). The functional theory of
counterfactual thinking. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 12, 168-192.
German, T. P., & Nichols, S. (2003). Children’s
counterfactual inferences about long and short causal
chains. Developmental Science, 6, 514-523.
Goodman, N. (1973). Fact, Fiction and Forecast. (3rd
Edition). New York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Guttentag, R. E. & Ferrell, J. M. (2004). Reality compared
with its alternatives: Age differences in judgments of
regret and relief. Developmental Psychology, 40(5), 764775.
Halford, G.S., & Andrews, G. (2004). The development of
deductive reasoning: How important is complexity?
Thinking & Reasoning, 10, 123-145.
Halford, G.S., Baker, R., McCredden, J.E., & Bain, J.D.
(2005). How many variables can humans process?
Psychological Science, 16, 70-76.
Harris, P.L. (1997). On realising what might have happened
instead. Polish Quarterly of Developmental Psychology,
3, 161-176.
Harris, P. L., German, T., & Mills, P. (1996). Children’s use
of counterfactual thinking in causal reasoning. Cognition,
61, 233-259.

1631

Kuczaj, S.A., & Daly, M.J. (1979). The development of
hypothetical reference in the speech of young children.
Child Language, 6, 563-579.
Markman, K.D., Gavanski, I., Sherman, S.J., & McMullen,
M.N. (1993). The mental simulation of better and worse
possible worlds. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 29, 87-109.
Medvec, V. H., Madey, S. E, & Gilovich, T. (1995). When
less is more: Counterfactual thinking and satisfaction
among Olympic athletes. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 69, 603-610.
Meehan, J.E. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2005). The Temporal Order
Effect in Children’s Counterfactual Thinking. In Bruno
G. Bara, Lawrence Barsalou, and Monica Bucciarelli,
eds., Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Stresa.
McCloy, R. (2000). Thinking about what might have been:
Cognitive Processes in counterfactual and semifactual
thinking about controllable events. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Dublin, Trinity College.
McCloy, R. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2002). Semifactual “even if”
thinking. Thinking & Reasoning, 8, 41-67.
Riggs, K.J. & Beck, S.R. (2008). Thinking developmentally
about counterfactual possibilities. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 6, 463.
Roese, N. J. (1994). The functional basis of counterfactual
thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
66, 805–818.
.

1632

