UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children’s Use of Disfluencies for Pragmatic Inference in Lexical Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9cn8r4xf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Aslin, Richard
Kidd, Celeste
White, Katherine S.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Use of Disfluencies for Pragmatic Inference in Lexical Development
Celeste Kidd, Katherine S. White, and Richard N. Aslin
{ckidd, kwhite, aslin}@bcs.rochester.edu
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, Meliora Hall
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract
In early lexical development, children must learn to map spoken
words onto their respective referents. Since multiple objects are
typically present when any word is used, a child is charged with
the difficult task of inferring the speaker’s intended referent.
Previous research has uncovered various cues children may use in
this task, including contextual and social cues. We investigate a
previously unexplored cue for inferring speaker intention during
word learning: speech disfluencies. Disfluencies (such as “uh” and
“um”) occur in predictable locations, such as before words that are
infrequent and words that have not been previously mentioned. We
conducted an eye-tracking study to investigate whether young
children can make use of the information contained in disfluencies
to infer a speaker’s intended referent. Our results demonstrate that
young children (ages 2;4 to 2;8) are sensitive to disfluencies. More
critically, they show that children appear to use disfluencies
predictively as a cue to reference and to speaker intention as the
disfluency is occurring. We also examined potential sources of
learning about disfluencies in CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000) and
found that disfluencies, though rare, occur regularly and with
increasing frequency over time in child-directed and childproduced speech. These results reveal that young children attend to
speech disfluencies relatively early in lexical development and are
able to use the disfluencies to infer speaker intention during online
comprehension.
Keywords: Language development; lexical development;
word learning; pragmatic inference; speech disfluency.

Introduction
Word learning is fundamental to language acquisition, but
the successful mapping of auditory events (spoken words)
onto referents (objects in the world) is not always
transparent. While some labeling contexts are unambiguous
(e.g., holding a cookie and saying “cookie”), most contexts
involve multi-word utterances and multiple objects in the
child’s visual field. Thus, extra-linguistic cues, such as
inferring speaker intention, can play a crucial role in word
learning. The inability to correctly infer speaker intent, as in
autism, can lead to catastrophic failures of communication
(Preissler & Carey, 2005).
Previous work has explored various cues available to
learners that could aid in determining speaker intention.
Social cues, such as parent-child joint visual attention and
pointing, provide cues to word learners about the intended
referent (Butterworth, 1980; Southgate, 2002). By 18
months, children are even able to make use of information
conveyed by the speaker’s eye-gaze (Baldwin, 1991).
Discourse context may also aid in determining a speaker’s
intended referent (Frank et al., 2009).

In addition to these externally available cues, young
children appear to make certain assumptions that facilitate
rapid lexical development. One assumption of particular
relevance is that of mutual exclusivity (Markman, 1990).
Experimental evidence suggests that young word learners
assume a one-to-one mapping between words and referents,
starting as young as 15 months of age (Halberda, 2003;
Markman, Wasow, & Hansen, 2003).
Here we investigate a previously unexplored cue for
inferring
speaker
intention:
speech
disfluencies.
Disfluencies (e.g., “uh” and “um”) could be a potentially
powerful cue to reference for several reasons. First,
disfluencies occur in highly predictable locations—
specifically, before unfamiliar or infrequent words, and
before words that have not previously been mentioned in the
prior discourse. Thus, rather than being noise, disfluencies
provide information which is potentially useful for
discovering what a speaker intends to refer to. Since
disfluencies occur before an object is labeled, they could
enable a child to anticipate upcoming referents and therefore
enhance the speed of spoken word recognition.
Disfluencies are known to be a reliable property of speech
between adults. Fox Tree (1995) estimated that about 6
disfluencies occur per 100 words, excluding pauses (which
are not necessarily disfluencies). Shriberg (1996) found that
disfluencies occur every 7 to 15 words in conversation
between adults, depending upon which corpus (SWBD or
AMEX) was used for the analysis. The rate of disfluency
varies as a function of several factors: speaker familiarity,
utterance length, and speech rate (Shriberg, 1996).
Disfluencies come in a variety of different types,
including repetitions, substitutions, insertions, deletions, and
speech errors. We focus here on the most common type of
disfluency, the filled pause—“uh” and “um” in English
(Shriberg, 1996). This type of disfluency is particularly
common before infrequent and previously unmentioned
words (Arnold & Tanenhaus, 2007). Consider the following
example of a filled pause from the Sachs corpus in
CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000):
(1)

*CHI: Telephone ?
*MOT: No, that wasn't the telephone, honey.
That was the, uh, timer.

The disfluency occurs before the less frequent word and
previously unmentioned object, “timer”. Such disfluencies
are thought to result from a delay in lexical retrieval (Clark
& Fox Tree, 2002; Fox Tree & Clark, 1997).

1494

There is evidence that adults use disfluencies online
during sentence comprehension. Arnold and colleagues
demonstrated that adults can use disfluencies to anticipate
that an upcoming referent is likely to be new to the
discourse (Arnold et al., 2004; Arnold, Fagnano, &
Tanenhaus, 2003) or less frequent (Arnold, Hudson Kam, &
Tanenhaus, 2007). In a series of eye-tracking experiments,
adults were biased to look at discourse-new or unfamiliar
objects when labels were preceded by a disfluency.
In the present study, we explore whether young children
can use disfluencies to infer the identity of an upcoming
referent.

During the third critical phase, children were instructed to
look at one of the two objects (familiar or novel) with either
a fluent or a disfluent command (Table 1). Whether the
target object was familiar or novel, and whether the
command was fluent or disfluent, was balanced throughout
the experiment, such that four trials of each type occurred
for each child. The assignment of particular item pairs to
each condition was counterbalanced across participants.
Table 1: Trial type examples.
Fluent
Disfluent

Experimental Data
Methods
Participants Sixteen parents from the Rochester
community volunteered their toddlers. The parents were
recruited through mailings, posted flyers, and web ads. The
children ranged in age from 2;4 to 2;8 (M = 2;6), had no
reported hearing deficits, and were from monolingual,
English-speaking homes. Participants received either $10 or
a toy as compensation.
Stimuli The stimuli consisted of 16 pairs of items, each
containing one familiar item (e.g., ball) and one novel item
(e.g., dax). The 16 familiar items were selected from among
the earliest acquired English words in the MacArthur-Bates
Communicative Development Inventories (Dale & Fenson,
1996). The novel items were picked to match the familiar
items in visual complexity. Each novel item was assigned a
novel word. Novel words were matched to the familiar
words in syllable length, word onsets, and stress patterns.
Apparatus Eye-tracking was performed using a tablemounted Tobii 1750 eye-tracker with a 17-inch monitor.
The stimuli were presented using Psyscope running on a
Mac Mini with an Intel Core 2 Duo processor.
Procedure Each child was seated on a parent’s lap with the
child’s eyes approximately 23 inches from the Tobii
monitor. The parent wore headphones playing music to
mask the auditory stimuli and prevent influence on the
child’s behavior. The experiment consisted of 16 trials, each
preceded by an attention-getter in the center of the screen.
For each trial, an object pair was displayed (e.g., a ball and
a dax). Whether the novel item appeared on the left or right
was balanced across the entire experiment. Each trial
consisted of three phases: two discourse phases and one
critical phase. In the first discourse phase, the object pair
appeared and 500 ms later a recorded voice introduced the
familiar object (e.g.,“I see the ball!”). After 1,000 additional
ms, the object pair disappeared. The second discourse phase
began 500 ms later with the reappearance of the same object
pair. The discourse again referred to the familiar object
(e.g., “Ooooh! What a nice ball!”). The objects disappeared
1,000 ms after the recorded voice ended.

Familiar target
I see the ball!
I see thee, uh, ball!

Novel target
I see the dax!
I see thee, uh, dax!

If young children are able to make use of the information
contained in a disfluency to anticipate that an upcoming
referent is likely to be novel and/or previously unmentioned,
we would expect to see more looks to the novel object
during the period of disfluency. Thus, we used looks to the
novel object during the 2-second window prior to the onset
of the target word as our dependent measure. (In the
disfluent trials, this is the period of time when the
disfluency is occurring.) The object pair appeared at the
beginning of this 2-second window and remained on-screen
for 5 seconds.
In the disfluent trials, the earliest sign of the disfluency is
at the determiner—“thee” in disfluent trials versus “the” in
fluent speech. Thus, the determiner was chosen as the onset
of the window of interest. Because our focus was on
anticipatory looking to the target, the window of interest
ended at the onset of the target word.
Due to the nature of disfluencies, the disfluent command
took longer to execute; consequently, the linguistic material
in the window of interest varied across fluent and disfluent
trials. To compensate for this difference, the command
“Look!” was repeated in all trials. Thus, in all trials, children
had been instructed to look at the screen before the object
pair reappeared and the window of interest began. The first
“Look!” instruction was successful in directing children’s
attention to the screen: on 88.4% of trials, children were
looking at the screen immediately prior to the onset of the
window of interest.

Results
To ensure that children looked reliably at the appropriate
object after it was named, we calculated for each trial type
(fluent, disfluent) the proportion of time the child looked at
the target item during the 2 seconds after the target was
named. On trials in which the target was familiar, the mean
proportion of looking to the target during this window was
75.6%. Thus, children reliably mapped familiar words to
familiar objects. During trials in which the target was novel,
the mean proportion of looking to the target was 75.2%,
demonstrating that children mapped novel words to novel
objects as reliably as they mapped familiar words to familiar
objects. Taken together, these results show that children

1495

consistently arrived at the target object, regardless of the
trial type.
Next, we calculated the proportion of looks to the novel
object at each time point during the critical phase of the
fluent and disfluent trials. Figure 1 shows the resulting
timecourse plot for trials in which the target was novel. As
predicted by our hypothesis, children looked more towards
the novel object during the 2-second window of interest
(before the onset of the target word) in the disfluent trials
than they did in the fluent ones. This suggests that children
were able to make use of the information contained in a
disfluency to anticipate an upcoming novel referent. Figure
2 shows the timecourse plot for trials in which the target
was the familiar object. In these trials also, children looked
more towards the novel object during the window of interest
in the disfluent trials than in fluent ones. This suggests that
the disfluency set up the expectation of an upcoming novel
referent, though that expectation was erroneous in these
familiar-object trials. However, both Figures 1 and 2 show
that, after the onset of the target word, children correctly
identify the target picture.
The timecourse plots suggest that children were sensitive
to the presence of the disfluency and were biased to
interpret that disfluency as signaling that the upcoming
word would refer to the novel/previously unmentioned
referent. To test that hypothesis, we compared looks to the
novel object across fluent and disfluent trials in the 2-

second window of interest before the onset of the target
word. During disfluent trials, children looked at the novel
object for 1158 ms. During fluent trials, children looked at
the novel object for 893 ms. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test
found this difference to be highly significant (p < 0.008).
This result suggests that children are sensitive to
disfluencies and use them predictively to infer that an
upcoming referent is likely to be novel and/or previously
unmentioned.
However, an alternative explanation for this result is that
children simply paid more attention overall to the display
(both objects) during disfluencies. To further examine
whether disfluencies cause preferential looking to the novel
object, we compared the average proportion of total looking
time to the novel object during the same temporal window
of interest. Children looked at the novel object 66% of the
time in the disfluent trials, as opposed to 54% of the time in
the fluent trials. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test found this
difference to be highly significant (p < 0.005). Further, the
proportion of looking time to the novel object was
significantly above chance in the disfluent trials (p < 0.001),
whereas in the fluent trials, children’s looking to the two
objects did not differ from chance (p > 0.37). These results
demonstrate that disfluencies cause a selective increase in
attention to the novel objects, suggesting that children use
disfluencies online to create expectations about the
speaker’s intended referent.

Figure 1: The proportion of looks to the novel object over time for the critical phase of the trials with novel targets.

Figure 2: The proportion of looks to the novel object over time for the critical phase of trials with familiar targets.

1496

Disfluencies in child-directed and childproduced speech
The results of our eye-tracking study indicate that young
children learn that speech disfluencies contain information
about upcoming referents, but, at present, the source of this
learning is unknown. As discussed above, disfluencies are
abundant in speech among adults. Young children’s
demonstrated sensitivity to disfluencies, then, could indicate
that they learn about disfluencies from adult-directed
speech. In fact, some experimental evidence demonstrates
that young children (1;10) attend to disfluencies in speech
between adults (Soderstrom & Morgan, 2007). This
hypothesis may seem particularly attractive given that childdirected speech is characterized by a slow speech rate and
short utterances, both of which correlate with more fluent
speech. This fact may explain why fluency is widely
regarded as a hallmark of child-directed speech.
The true frequency with which disfluencies occur in
child-directed speech, however, is unclear. Although childdirected speech is undeniably more fluent than adultdirected speech, disfluencies occur in speech to children
more than is typically recognized. An informal search of
CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000) revealed several types of
disfluencies involving filled pauses in child-directed speech.
Consider the following examples:
(2) *MOT:

Should I take the, uh, bologna ?

(3) *MOT:

Well are you gonna marry Batman—uh,
Robin? Or is Donna going to marry
Robin?

(4) *MOT:

No, that's not Fozzie, that's, uh… Fozzie's
the bear.

Figure 3: Log probability of a filled pause in child-directed
speech (upper) and child-produced speech (lower) in
CHILDES, plotted by age with standard errors.

The above examples from child-directed speech represent
many of the types of disfluencies reported to occur in adultdirected speech. Example 2 contains a simple filled pause
before an infrequent word, bologna. Example 3 contains a
filled pause followed by a substitution for an incorrect word,
Batman. Example 4 contains a filled pause (presumably
produced while the mother attempts to retrieve an obscure
Muppet’s name) followed by an abandonment of the first
sentence (sometimes called a “deletion” in the adult
literature on disfluencies). If such disfluencies are a reliable
property of child-directed speech, they could serve as a
sufficient source of learning for children.
An analysis of child-directed speech in CHILDES was
conducted to evaluate whether disfluencies are a reliable
property of speech to children. Only transcripts containing
two participants (target child and adult caretaker) were
included to ensure that extracted disfluencies were directed
at the target child, and not to an older sibling or another
adult. The average probability of a filled pause was
calculated for speech to children at each age.
Figure 3 (upper) demonstrates the regularity with which
filled pauses occur in speech to young children. At age 2,

filled pauses occur at an approximate rate of 1 every 1,000
words. For comparison, Shriberg (1996) estimated the rate
to be 1 every 50 words in adult-directed speech from the
Switchboard corpus. Further, the plot demonstrates that
children hear filled pauses more frequently as they get older
(Spearman’s rank correlation 1, rho = 0.85, p < 0.002), in
accord with the fact that caretakers tend to use longer, more
complicated utterances with older children.
One important caveat is that only transcribed filled pauses
can be detected in the CHILDES transcripts. Since these
parent-child interactions were not transcribed specifically
for the purpose of analyzing speech disfluencies (with the
exception of the Soderstrom corpus), it is likely that
transcribed disfluencies represent only a subset of those that
occurred. Thus, this analysis may not accurately reflect the
absolute rate. It does, however, suggest that disfluencies are
a reliable feature of speech to children, and that disfluencies
become increasingly more frequent with age.
Thus far, we’ve established that children could learn the
distributional properties of disfluencies from either adult- or
child-directed speech. We would like to address one more
possibility—namely, that children gain an understanding of
disfluencies through their own productions of disfluencies.
Consider the following child-produced disfluencies from
CHILDES:
(5)

1

*CHI (2;5): This, uh, this…
*MOT:
What? Show me .
*CHI:
This, uh, this—uh, this.

In this type of analysis, the value of rho depends on the bin
size. To ensure enough data was available for each bin, we used a
bin size of 6 months.

1497

*MOT:
*CHI:
*MOT:

Show me.
This. Uh, this!. This! This!
What is it? What is he looking at ?

(6)

*CHI (3;0): I want some breakfast? Uh, de, uh, uh,
de—I ,de –I get two breakfasts out .

(7)

*CHI (3:2): I wanna get some candy from— from
Scotty for Valentine.

In the above examples, children produced disfluencies in
association with presumed lexical retrieval difficulties.
Figure 3 (lower) shows that the probability of a filled pause
increases in child-produced speech from CHILDES with
age2 (rho = 0.94, p < 0.001). At age 2, the rate is
approximately 1 every 230 words. Thus, a child’s
understanding of disfluencies may also change as a result of
detecting regularities in her own productions.

Discussion
Many contemporary theories model word learning as a
process of learning the arbitrary association between sounds
and meanings (Frank, Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2008;
Siskind, 1996; Yu & Ballard, 2007). The results of our
experiment demonstrate that young children's ability to
match sounds with meanings is considerably more general:
they are able to match disfluencies with a speaker's intended
referent, a property of communication that is not directly
observed. These results raise several important issues.
First, it is unclear whether novelty or discourse status is
driving these effects. Adults’ interpretation of disfluencies is
affected by both of these factors. In our study, the novel
objects were both previously unmentioned and novel. Work
in progress attempts to uncover which of these—or both—
drives the effect.
Second, what children understand about disfluencies is an
open question. Clark and colleagues have suggested that
speech disfluencies signal to the listener that a speaker is
having difficulties producing speech (Clark & Fox Tree,
2002). Furthermore, there is some evidence that adults
respond to disfluencies in part because they understand that
the disfluency is driven by the speaker’s processing
difficulties. For example, Arnold, Hudson Kam, and
Tanenhaus (2007) demonstrated that adult listeners do not
use disfluencies predictively to infer an upcoming referent if
they are told the speaker has a type of brain damage that
causes disfluent speech.
It is possible that children, too, engage in this type of
causal reasoning. Children may be aware that disfluencies
are the result of processing (specifically, lexical access)
difficulties, and therefore look for a referent that is likely to
have caused difficulties. While this reasoning almost
certainly does not happen consciously, children may
nonetheless have learned that disfluencies occur because of
2

As in the earlier analysis on child-directed speech, rho was
calculated using a bin size of 6 months.

speaker difficulty, and that speaker difficulty often arises
with novel referents. If so, we might expect children—like
adults (Arnold et al., 2007)—to alter their interpretations
when disfluencies can be attributed to an external cause.
Of course, children could potentially show the patterns
demonstrated here without any explicit understanding of the
linguistic processing mechanisms involved. Disfluencies
might simply be associatively linked through experience to
novel referents. That is, disfluencies could be treated just
like words that mean “look at the novel referent”. This
theory does not assume intermediate stages of processing or
conceptual reasoning: the association between a disfluency
and a meaning is direct and quick. Such an account would
predict that children could not alter their interpretation of
disfluencies based on whether they were perceived as
internally or externally driven.
Both accounts are plausible, given what is known about
infants’ and young children’s capabilities. Infants and
children are known to be capable statistical learners (e.g.,
Fiser & Aslin, 2001; Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996),
which could enable them to detect correlations between
disfluencies and referent novelty in the environment. Young
children are also able to engage in pragmatic inference (e.g.,
Behne, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2005) and even very young
children are able to infer the intentions and difficulties of
others (Warneken & Tomasello, 2006). Therefore, it is
possible that children have access to this type of reasoning
during online sentence processing.
If children learn about disfluencies from their
environment, does their environment provide them with
enough data to detect these relationships? Our corpus
analyses demonstrate that disfluencies are a reliable feature
of speech to young children. Since disfluencies are
prosodically salient, even infrequent occurrences could
provide young children with enough evidence to learn about
the information they convey. Prosodic information is
available to infants extremely early—even before lexical
boundary information. In fact, acoustic analyses by
Soderstrom and colleagues (in press) find that disfluencies
in speech to infants and children are exceptionally
prosodically salient—longer and higher in pitch than those
that occur in speech to adults. Thus, a child could learn the
distributional properties of disfluencies by accumulating
evidence from infrequent examples over time. Of course,
children could also learn about disfluencies by attending to
speech among adults.
While statistical learning is one potential mechanism by
which children could learn to use disfluencies in processing,
it is also possible that they learn to use them from their own
productions. The results of the CHILDES search above
showed that even young children produce disfluencies. Thus
it is possible that children gain the understanding that
disfluencies signal processing difficulty by producing
disfluencies themselves.
Together, the results of this study indicate that young
children (1) have learned that disfluencies contain
information, (2) attend to disfluencies in speech, and (3) can

1498

make use of the information contained in disfluencies online
during comprehension in order to infer speaker intention.

Acknowledgments
The first author was supported by a National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. The research
was supported by a National Institutes of Health grant (HD37082). We thank Johnny Wen and Steven T. Piantadosi for
assistance with analyses; Suzanne Horwitz, C. Michael
Lindsey, Kristen Graziano, Fahria Omar, Emily Richards,
Lee Kehoe, Lindsay Woods, and Rosemary Ziemnik for
recruiting and scheduling subjects; and Jennifer Arnold,
Michael Tanenhaus, Elissa L. Newport, Mohinish Shukla,
Casey Lew-Williams, Anne Pier Salverda, Michael C.
Frank, Melanie Soderstrom, Eve V. Clark, Jesse Snedeker,
Herbert H. Clark, Michael S. DeFreitas, and Meredith
Brown for advice, comments, and suggestions.

References
Arnold, J. E & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2007). Disfluency effects
in comprehension: how new information can become
accessible. In E. Gibson & N. Pearlmutter (Eds.),
Referential processing in adults and children. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Arnold, J. E., Tanenhaus, M. K., Altmann, R. J., &
Fagnano, M. (2004). The Old and Thee, uh, New.
Psychological Science, 9. 578-582.
Arnold, J. E., Fagnano, M., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2003).
Disfluencies Signal Theee, Um, New Information.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 32(1), 25-36
Arnold, J. E., Hudson Kam, C. L., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(2007). If You Say Thee uh You Are Describing
Something Hard: The On-Line Attribution of Disfluency
During
Reference
Comprehension.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 33, 914-930.
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants’ contribution to the
achievement of joint reference. Child Development, 63,
975-890.
Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Oneyear-olds comprehend the communicative intentions
behind gestures in a hiding game. Developmental
Science, 8, 492-499.
Butterworth, G. & Cochran, E. (1980). Towards a
Mechanism of Joint Visual Attention in Human Infancy.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 3(3),
253-272.
Clark, H. H. & Fox Tree, J. E. (2002). Using uh and um in
spontaneous speaking. Cognition, 84(1), 73-111.
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28, 125-127.
Fiser, J. & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12, 499-504.

Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. (2008). A
Bayesian framework for cross-situational word learning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 20.
Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., &
Fernald, A. (2009). Continuity of Discourse Provides
Information for Word Learning. In D. S. McNamara & J.
G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Cognitive Science Society. Amsterdam, the Netherlands:
Cognitive Science Society.
Fox Tree, J. J. (1995). The effects of false starts and
repetitions on the processing of subsequent words in
spontaneous speech. Journal of Memory and Language,
34, 709-738.
Fox Tree, J. J., & Clark, H. H. (1997). Producing “the” as
“thee” to signal problems in speaking. Cognition, 62(2),
151-167.
Halberda, J. (2003). The development of a word-learning
strategy. Cognition, 87(1), B23-B34.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints childen place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14(1), 57-77.
Markman, E. M., Wasow, J. L., & Hansen, M. B. (2003).
Use of the mutual exclusivity assumption by young word
learners. Cognitive Psychology, 47(3), 241-275.
Preissler, M. A., and Carey, S. (2005). The role of
inferences about referential intent in word learning:
Evidence from autism. Cognition, 97(1), B13-B23.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Shriberg, E. E. (1996). Disfluencies in SWITCHBOARD.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken
Language Processing, Addendum (pp. 233-251).
Philadelphia, PA.
Siskind, J. M. (1996). A computational study of crosssituational techniques for lerning word-to-meaning
mappings. Cognition, 61(1), 39-91.
Soderstrom, M., Blossom, M., Foyel, I., & Morgan, J. L. (in
press). Acoustical cues and grammatical units in speech to
two preverbal infants. Journal of Child Language.
Soderstrom, M. & Morgan, J. L. (2007). Twenty-twomonth-olds discriminate fluent from disfluent adultdirected speech. Developmental Science, 10, 641-653.
Southgate, V., van Maanen, C., & Csibra, G. (2007). Infant
Pointing:
Communication
to
Cooperate
or
Communication to Learn? Child Development, 78(3),
735-740.
Warneken, F. & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic helping in
human infants and young chimpanzees. Science, 31,
1301-1303.
Yu, C. & Ballard, D. A unified model of word learning:
Integrating statistical and social cues. Neurocomputing.
70(13-15), 2149-2165.

1499

