UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children’s Understanding of Approximate Addition Depends on Problem Format

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5x4704f0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gibson, Matthew H.
Keultjes, M. Claire
McNeil, Nicole M.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Understanding of Approximate Addition Depends on Problem Format
M. Claire Keultjes (mkeultje@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, 118 Haggar Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Matthew H. Gibson (matthewgibsonnd@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 118 Haggar Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Nicole M. McNeil (nmcneil@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, 118 Haggar Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA
Abstract

Barth and colleagues (2005) were among the first to
provide evidence that young children use the approximate
number system to reason about large numbers
arithmetically. In Barth et al.’s approximate addition task,
children see sets of animated dot events that represent
addition problems. First, a set of blue dots appears on the
left side of the screen and moves down behind an occluder.
Then, another set of blue dots appears on the left and moves
behind the occluder. Finally, a set of red dots appears on the
right side of the screen and moves down beside the
occluder. The blue and red dots differ by a specific ratio
(e.g., 4:7, 3:5, 2:3, or 4:5 depending on the study).
Children’s goal is to judge whether there are more blue dots
or more red dots. Five-year-old children are able to identify
whether the sum of the blue dots is larger or smaller than the
number of red dots at a rate significantly greater than
chance. These results have been used to suggest that
children can use their approximate number system to reason
arithmetically before they learn arithmetic in school.
Until recently, early competence with approximate
arithmetic was assumed to be limited to nonsymbolic
stimuli, such as dots or tones, in which the mapping
between the stimuli and the numerical magnitude is concrete
(Barth et al., 2005; cf. Levine, Jordan, & Huttenlocher,
1992). However, a recent study by Gilmore et al. (2007)
demonstrated early competence with symbolic number. The
term “symbolic” here is used to refer to abstract
representations of number (e.g., Arabic numerals and
number words) that do not directly involve sets of concrete
stimuli. In Gilmore et al.’s symbolic approximate addition
task, the events unfold similarly to those in Barth et al., but
the events are presented in the context of a boy and girl
receiving candies. Instead of dots or actual candies, children
see bags (of candy) with Arabic numerals written on them.
Children’s goal is to judge who gets more candies. Again,
five-year-old children are able to identify whether the sum
of the candies presented on the left side is larger or smaller
than the number of candies presented on the right side at a
rate significantly greater than chance. Thus, children seem
to be able to draw on their approximate number system
when performing symbolic arithmetic. These findings are
consistent with the view that children map symbolic
numbers onto their approximate number representations as

Recent studies suggest that five-year-old children can add and
compare large numerical quantities through approximate
representations of number. However, the nature of this
understanding and its susceptibility to influence from
canonical, learned mathematics remain unclear. The present
study examined whether children’s early competence depends
on the canonical problem format (i.e., arithmetic operations
presented on the left-hand side of space). Children (M age = 5
years, 3 months) viewed events that required them to add and
compare large numbers. Events were shown in a canonical or
non-canonical format. Children performed successfully on all
tasks, regardless of format; however, they performed better
when problems were presented in the canonical format. Thus,
children’s approximate number representations support
arithmetic reasoning prior to formal schooling, but this
reasoning may be shaped by learned mathematics.
Keywords: cognitive development; mathematical cognition;
approximate arithmetic; competence/performance

Mathematics is important to our lives, whether we are
engineers testing the strength of a beam or parents splitting
four cookies between five children. Thus, it is no surprise
that scientists have a long history of studying the
foundations of mathematical thinking. After decades of
research in this area, there is growing consensus that
humans and nonhuman animals share a non-verbal system
for representing approximate number (Dehaene, 1997;
Brannon, 2006; Feigenson, Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004;
Gordon, 2004; Gallistel & Gelman, 2000). This approximate
number system operates according to Weber’s Law and
appears to be functional in infants as young as 6 months old
(Brannon, Abbot, & Lutz, 2004; Lipton & Spelke, 2003; Xu
& Spelke, 2000). This means that babies, children, and
adults detect a difference between two numerical quantities
based on the ratio between the quantities, not on their
absolute difference. Some researchers have even suggested
that this approximate number system supports arithmetic
reasoning early in life without influence from learned
mathematics (Barth, La Mont, Lipton, & Spelke, 2005;
Gilmore, McCarthy, & Spelke, 2007; McCrink & Wynn,
2004). In the present study, we examine whether aspects of
learned mathematics influence children’s use of the
approximate number system to reason arithmetically.

329

early as age five (Lipton & Spelke, 2005; Temple & Posner,
1998).
The idea that the approximate number system plays a role
in knowledge of symbolic mathematics is not new.
Researchers have long argued that learned forms of
mathematics, from Arabic numerals to basic addition facts,
are automatically mapped onto preexisting approximate
number representations (Dehaene, 1997; Dehaene, Dupoux,
& Mehler, 1990; Moyer & Landauer, 1967, but see Ansari,
2008 for an alternative view). According to this account,
understanding of symbolic mathematics is mediated by the
approximate number system (Gallistel & Gelman, 2005;
Halberda, Mazzocco, & Feigenson, 2008). This account
generally implies that the influence is unidirectional
(approximate numerical reasoning influences symbolic
mathematical reasoning, not vice versa). Consistent with
this view, some researchers have suggested that the
approximate number system is a “core” system that lays the
groundwork for higher-order mathematical knowledge
(Dehaene, 1997; Feigenson et al., 2004).
Some findings, however, challenge the notion that the
approximate number system is automatically deployed when
reasoning about symbolic mathematics. For example, Booth
and Siegler (2006) asked children to estimate solutions to
large number symbolic addition problems, such as “Is 34 +
29 closest to 40, 50, or 60?” This task should be easy for
five- and six-year-old children if they draw on their
approximate number representations because they have the
acuity to discriminate numbers differing by a 5:6 ratio
(Halberda & Feigenson, 2008). However, kindergarteners
only selected the more accurate estimate on 36% (SE = .03)
of the problems (chance = 33%). First graders performed
better, but they still only selected the more accurate estimate
on 52% of the problems. These results suggest that children
may not always utilize their approximate number system
when reasoning about symbolic arithmetic problems. They
also leave open the possibility that children’s knowledge of
symbolic, learned mathematics may affect when and how
the approximate number system is used. Several researchers
seem to be open to this view: Gallistel and Gelman (2005)
discuss possible bidirectional effects between the
approximate and symbolic number systems over the course
of development; Ansari (2008) speculates that the
acquisition of symbolic representations may alter preexisting approximate number representations; and Dehaene
(1997) suggests that poor instruction in exact, symbolic
mathematics may suppress children’s use of the
approximate number system in mathematical reasoning.
In the present study, we examined whether an aspect of
learned, symbolic mathematics affects children’s
performance on approximate addition tasks. Specifically, we
tested whether children’s success on approximate addition
tasks depends on the canonical problem format. Research
has shown that children’s understanding of and performance
solving exact arithmetic facts depends heavily on the
canonical problem format, which has arithmetic operations
on the left-hand side of space and the “answer” on the right-

hand side (e.g., 3 + 4 = 7, Behr et al., 1980; Baroody &
Ginsburg, 1983; Seo & Ginsburg, 2003). Children’s
behavior on a variety of math tasks suggests that children
have internalized this canonical “operations on left side”
format (McNeil & Alibali, 2004, 2005). For example, when
children are asked to check the “correctness” of math
sentences written by a child who “attends another school,”
most mark sentences such as 10 = 6 + 4 as “incorrect” and
change them to 6 + 4 = 10, 4 + 6 = 10, or even 10 + 6 = 4
(Cobb, 1987; see also Behr et al., 1980, Baroody &
Ginsburg, 1983; Rittle-Johnson & Alibali, 1999). Similarly,
when children are asked to reconstruct a problem such as
“3 + 5 = 6 + __” after viewing it briefly, many write “3 + 5
+ 6 = __” (McNeil & Alibali, 2004). Children’s
misinterpretation of non-canonical problem formats such as
“__ = 6 + 4” and “8 + 4 = __ + 5” appears as early as first
grade (Carpenter, Franke, & Levi, 2003).
It is not known whether young children’s understanding
of approximate addition tasks also depends on the canonical
format because previous studies have only presented
problems in the canonical format. At first blush, it seems
that the problem format should not affect performance
because the approximate number system “[does] not emerge
through learning or cultural transmission” (Feigenson et al.,
2004, p. 307), and researchers have argued that success on
approximate addition tasks does not depend on experience
with learned, symbolic arithmetic (Barth et al., 2005;
Gilmore et al., 2007). However, several studies have shown
that experience with learned, exact symbolic mathematics
has the potential to change how children represent
approximate numerical quantities (Opfer & Siegler, 2007;
Siegler & Opfer, 2003). This work leaves open the
possibility that children’s success on approximate addition
tasks may also depend on the canonical problem format.
It is important to test whether or not children’s
performance on approximate addition tasks depends on the
canonical format not only because it can shed light on
potential bidirectional effects between learned, exact
symbolic mathematics and the approximate number system,
but also because it can provide much needed data about the
nature of children’s early understanding of arithmetic. When
children misinterpret non-canonical problem formats, it
reveals their tendency to interpret addition events (x + y = z)
operationally, rather than relationally. The term
“operational” here should not be confused with Piaget’s use
of the term. It is used in mathematics education to refer to
children’s tendency to see x + y = z as a directional process
with x + y producing the result z, rather than as an
equivalence relation between x + y and z. This type of
operational thinking is problematic because makes it
difficult for children to learn algebra down the road (Knuth,
Stephens, McNeil, & Alibali, 2006). We already know that
elementary school children interpret exact arithmetic facts
this way (Baroody & Ginsburg, 1983; Carpenter et al.,
2003; McNeil & Alibali, 2005); however, we do not know
whether children exhibit this bias prior to formal schooling
when relying on their approximate number representations.

330

Based on children’s success on approximate arithmetic
tasks in previous studies, it is tempting to conclude that
young children understand the general principles of
arithmetic, including the equivalence relation inherent in the
structure, regardless of problem format. However, the
problems in all previous studies were presented in the
canonical “operations on left side” format, so children could
have succeeded with only an operational, directional view.
The next logical step is to test if young children can also
succeed on approximate arithmetic problems presented in a
non-canonical format. We tested the effect of the canonical
problem format on children’s performance on approximate
arithmetic tasks in an experiment designed to replicate and
extend the experiments of Barth et al. (2005) and Gilmore et
al. (2007). Children solved approximate addition problems
presented either in the canonical format with the operation
on the left-hand side of space, or in a non-canonical format
with the operation on the right-hand side.

Canonical “operations on left side” problem format

“Look, here come
some blue dots.”

“Now they’re
covered up.”

“Here come some
more blue dots.”

“Now they’re all
back there.”

“And here come
some red dots.”

“Are there more
blue dots or
more red dots?”

Non-canonical problem format

Method
Participants
Participants were 60 children (M age = 5 years, 3 months;
27 boys and 33 girls). The study was conducted at childcare
centers located on two college campuses in the Midwest.
The centers are open to the community, but they use a
weighted lottery system, with equal first precedence given
to children of staff, students, and faculty at the universities.
Tuition is based on a sliding scale, and 30% of children
receive some form of reduced tuition.

Design
Children participated in one of four conditions in a 2
(number representation: non-symbolic or symbolic) x 2
(problem format: canonical or non-canonical) factorial
design. In the non-symbolic condition, number was
represented by arrays of dots. In the symbolic condition,
number was not represented by sets of concrete stimuli,
such as dots, but by Arabic numerals (e.g., 10) and the
corresponding words (e.g., “ten”). In the canonical problem
format condition, the two values to be added were presented
first on the left side of the screen, and then the comparison
value was presented on the right side of the screen. In the
non-canonical problem format condition, the comparison
value was presented first on the left, and then the two values
to be added were presented on the right (see Figures 1 and
2). All problems, regardless of format, were read from left
to right by the experimenter.

“Look, here come
some red dots.”

“And here come
some blue dots.”

“Now they’re
covered up.”

“Here come some
more blue dots.”

“Now they’re all
back there.”

“Are there more
blue dots or
more red dots?”

Figure 1: Example of a nonsymbolic, approximate addition
problem presented in the canonical format (top panel) and
the non-canonical format (bottom panel)
followed by 8 test problems presented at a 2:3 ratio. The
procedure used in each condition is described next.
Non-symbolic condition. The procedure was a replication
of Barth et al. (2005). Children were told that they would be
playing a game in which they would guess whether there
were more blue dots or more red dots. They were then
presented with animated events accompanied by a narrative
(see Figure 1). The animated events consisted of arrays of
5-51 dots (either 2 mm or 3 mm) in virtual enclosure of one
of two sizes (7 x 5 cm or 9 x 6 cm). As in Barth et al.
(2005), dot size, total contour length, summed dot area, and
density were negatively correlated with number on half of
the trials; on the remaining trials, the correlations were
reversed. Blue dots were the same size within trials. In the
canonical condition, an occluder appeared on the bottom
left of the screen (1300 ms). A set of blue dots then moved
in from the upper left side of the screen (1300 ms) and down
behind the behind the occluder (1450 ms). After a pause

Procedure
Testing took place in a quiet room in the daycare. All
problems were presented as animated events on a Mac
Laptop with screen resolution 1440 x 900. The problems
were the same as those used at a 2:3 ratio by Barth et al.
(2005) and Gilmore et al. (2007). This ratio is appropriate
for children ages 4-5 (Halberda & Feigenson, 2008). All
participants received four practice problems at a 1:5 ratio,

331

presented first on the left side before the two sets of blue
dots were presented on the right side. On half of the trials,
the number of blue dots exceeded the number of red dots,
and on the other half, the number of red dots exceeded the
number of blue dots.

Canonical “operations on left side” problem format

“Tom gets 25 candies.”

“Then he gets 20 more.”

“Mary gets 30 candies.”

“Who got more candies,
Tom or Mary?”

Symbolic condition. The procedure was a replication of
Gilmore et al. (2007). Children were introduced to two
characters, Tom and Mary, and were told they would have
to figure out who gets more candy. They were then
presented with animated events accompanied by a narrative
(see Figure 2). In the canonical condition, a boy and a girl
were presented on each side of the screen. One blue bag of
candies appeared above the head of the character on the left
(1500 ms). Then, a second blue bag appeared (1500 ms).
Finally, one red bag appeared above the character on the
right. An Arabic numeral was written on each bag. In the
non-canonical condition, the procedure was the same,
except the red bag appeared above the character on the left
side and the two blue bags above the character on the right
side. On half of the trials, there were more candies in the
two blue bags, and on half of the trials there were more
candies in the red bag. Also, Tom had more candy on half
of the trials, and Mary had more candy on half the trials.

Non-canonical problem format

Results
“Mary gets 30 candies.”

“Tom gets 25 candies.”

“Then he gets 20 more.”

“Who got more candies,
Tom or Mary?”

Children performed significantly above chance on the
problems, M = 5.60, t(59) = 10.24, p < .001. This result
held for the youngest half of participants (M age = 4 years,
10 months), M = 5.47, t(31) = 6.42, p < .001, and for the
oldest half of participants (M age = 5 years, 8 months), M =
5.75, t(27) = 8.34, p < .001. Children performed
significantly above chance in every condition: non-symbolic
canonical format, M = 5.64, t(13) = 5.34, p < .001; nonsymbolic non-canonical format, M = 5.00, t(13) = 2.46, p =
.03; symbolic canonical format, M = 6.19, t(15) = 8.92, p <
.001; and symbolic non-canonical format, M = 5.50, t(15) =
6.21, p < .001. Across all conditions, only two (of 60)
children answered fewer than four problems (out of 8)
correctly. Thus, consistent with Barth et al. (2005) and
Gilmore et al. (2007), young children were able to add two
values together and compare that sum to a third value,
regardless of whether number was represented nonsymbolically or symbolically. Moreover, they were able to
do so even when the problems were not presented in the
canonical format.
We performed a 2 (number representation: non-symbolic
or symbolic) x 2 (problem format: canonical or noncanonical) ANOVA with number correct (out of 8) as the
dependent measure. Results revealed a main effect of
2
problem format, F(1, 56) = 4.89, p = .03, η p = .08. Children
performed better when problems were presented in the
canonical problem format (M = 5.92, SE = 0.21) than when
they were presented in the non-canonical problem format
(M = 5.25, SE = 0.21). Neither the main effect of number
representation, nor the interaction between number
representation and problem format was significant, F(1, 56)

Figure 2: Example of a symbolic, approximate addition
problem presented in the canonical format (top panel) and
the non-canonical format (bottom panel)
(1300 ms), another array of blue dots moved in from the
upper left side and behind the occluder with the same
timing. After both sets of blue dots were behind the
occluder, a set of red dots moved in from the upper right
side of the screen (1300 ms) and came to rest beside the
occluder (1450 ms), after which the question was posed:
“are there more blue dots or more red dots?” Half of the
children saw the problems presented in this way, and the
other half saw the same sequence with two occluders, one
for the blue dots and one for the red dots. Preliminary
analyses revealed no significant effect of the number of
occluders, so the data were collapsed in the main analysis.
The events in the non-canonical condition were the same as
those in the canonical condition, except the red dots were

332

= 3.01, p = .09 and F(1, 56) = 0.01, p = .94 respectively.
Results were unchanged when controlling for age: main
effect of problem format, F(1, 55) = 4.82, p = .03; main
effect of number representation, F(1, 55) = 1.92, p = .17;
interaction, F(1, 55) < 0.01, p = .96.

grade, they continue to gain experience and practice with
the canonical problem format (McNeil, 2007). If experience
with and internalization of this format negatively affects
children’s ability to deploy their approximate number
system in the face of non-canonical problems, then the
discrepancy in performance on canonical versus noncanonical approximate addition problems should be even
greater for older elementary school children than it was for
the five-year-old children in the present study.
Of course, we do not yet have empirical evidence to
support this prediction, and it is possible that the opposite
pattern could hold. Indeed, other environmental factors may
play an important role in children’s ability to deploy their
approximate number system, and at least some of these
factors could, theoretically, work to hinder children’s
performance on canonical approximate addition problems.
For example, as children begin formal instruction in
arithmetic, they not only gain experience with the canonical
problem format, but also learn that their goal is to determine
the “right answer.” The “right answer” is almost always an
exact value, as opposed to an approximate one (e.g.,
children will not be given credit for answering “9” to the
problem 4 + 4 = __). If children learn to devote all of their
resources to getting the right answer when they are
presented with a canonical arithmetic problem, then their
ability to deploy their approximate number system may
suffer on these problems (cf. Dehaene, 1997). According to
this account, the difference between performance in the
canonical and non-canonical versions of approximate
addition tasks may decrease—and possibly even reverse
direction—over the course of the elementary school years.
Future research should examine theoretically relevant
aspects of the environment and how they affect children’s
ability to deploy their approximate number system.
More generally, the results of the present study highlight
the classic tension between competence and performance.
Just as we cannot dismiss the fact that children may have
richer conceptual knowledge of arithmetic than they are able
to show when asked to solve exact symbolic arithmetic
problems (e.g., Gilmore & Spelke, 2008), we also cannot
dismiss the possibility that children who perform well on
approximate addition tasks may nonetheless have important
limitations in conceptual knowledge that might be revealed
in certain testing situations (e.g., Booth & Siegler, 2006). As
Sophian (1997) argued, to truly understand the nature of
developing knowledge, “we need to pay attention not just to
the conditions in which performance is best, but also to
those in which children have more difficulty” (pp. 290-291).

Discussion
Children successfully added and compared large
numerical quantities. Surprisingly, they did so not only
when problems were presented in the canonical “operations
on left side” format, but also when problems were presented
in a non-canonical “operations on right side” format. These
findings add to the evidence suggesting that young children
can draw on their approximate number representations to
understand the logic of large number addition, even before
they receive formal arithmetic instruction in school (Barth et
al., 2005; Gilmore et al., 2007). The findings also provide
some initial support for the notion that children understand
the equivalence relation inherent in the structure of
arithmetic before they enter school, and only develop the
operational bias after receiving formal arithmetic instruction
(McNeil, 2007). Teachers may be able to build on this early
understanding of equivalence to improve children’s
comprehension of non-canonical problem formats when
working with exact symbolic arithmetic problems in school.
Although children successfully solved approximate
addition problems regardless of format, they did perform
significantly better when problems were presented in the
canonical “operations on left side” format. This finding
supports the view that children’s use of the approximate
number system may be susceptible to early influence from
the environment. Although there are other possible
explanations for this finding (e.g., disproportionate attention
to the left-hand side of space that is either innate or learned
through early experiences with non-mathematical stimuli), it
is consistent with the suggestion that there may be
bidirectional effects between the approximate and symbolic
number systems (e.g., Gallistel and Gelman, 2005).
Specifically, experiences with exact, symbolic arithmetic
problems may shape children’s ability to reason
arithmetically based on their approximate number system.
When young children see arithmetic problems in books,
on toys, or during TV shows, the problems are typically
presented in the canonical “operations on left side” format
(e.g., 1 + 1 = 2). The internalization of this convention may
facilitate children’s performance on both exact and
approximate mathematics problems that are presented in the
canonical format. However, it may hinder performance on
problems presented in non-canonical formats, and it may
ultimately lead to the conceptual difficulties with the equal
sign that children develop in elementary school (e.g.,
Baroody & Ginsburg, 1983; McNeil, 2007).
According to this account, we should expect to see the
difference in performance between the canonical and noncanonical versions of approximate addition tasks to increase
over the course of the elementary school years. This is
because as children progress from kindergarten to third

Acknowledgments
This paper is based, in part, on a senior honors thesis
conducted by Gibson under the direction of McNeil.
Preparation of this paper was supported, in part, by Grant
R305B070297 from the Institute of Education Sciences.
Thanks to April Dunwiddie, and the children, parents,
teachers, and administrators at the Early Childhood
Development Center.

333

References

Knuth, E. J., Stephens, A. C., McNeil, N. M., Alibali, M. W.
(2006). Does understanding the equal sign matter?
Evidence from solving equations. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 37, 297-312.
Levine, S. C., Jordan, N. C., & Huttenlocher, J. (1992).
Development of calculation abilities in young children.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 53, 72-103.
Lipton, J. S., & Spelke, E. S. (2003). Origins of number
sense: Large-number discrimination in human infants.
Psychological Science, 14, 396-401.
Lipton, J. S., & Spelke, E. S. (2005). Preschool children’s
mapping of number words to nonsymbolic numerosities.
Child Development, 76, 978-988.
McCrink, K., & Wynn, K. (2004). Large-number addition
and subtraction by 9-month-old infants. Psychological
Science, 15, 776-781.
McNeil, N. M. (2007). U-shaped development in math: 7year-olds outperform 9-year-olds on equivalence
problems, Developmental Psychology, 43, 687-695.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2004). You'll see what
you mean: Students encode equations based on their
knowledge of arithmetic. Cognitive Science, 28, 451-466.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2005). Why won't you
change your mind? Knowledge of operational patterns
hinders learning and performance on equations. Child
Development, 76, 1-17.
Moyer, R. S., & Landauer, T. K. (1967). Time required for
judgments of numerical inequality. Nature, 215, 15191520.
Opfer, J. E., & Siegler, R. S. (2007). Representational
change and children's numerical estimation. Cognitive
Psychology, 55, 169-195.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Alibali, M. W. (1999). Conceptual
and procedural knowledge of mathematics: Does one lead
to the other? Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 175189.
Seo, K.-H., & Ginsburg, H. P. (2003). "You've got to
carefully read the math sentence...": Classroom context
and children's interpretations of the equals sign. In A. J.
Baroody & A. Dowker (Eds.), The development of
arithmetic concepts and skills (pp. 161-187). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Siegler, R. S., & Opfer, J. E. (2003). The development of
numerical
estimation:
Evidence
for
multiple
representations of numerical quantity. Psychological
Science, 14, 237-243.
Sophian, C. (1997). Beyond competence: The significance
of performance for conceptual development. Cognitive
Development, 12, 281-303.
Temple, E., & Posner, M. I. (1998). Brain mechanisms of
quantity are similar and 5-year-old children and adults.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 95,
7836-7841.
Xu, F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Large number discrimination
in 6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74, B1-B11.

Ansari, D. (2008). Effects of development and enculturation
on number representation in the brain. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 9, 278-289.
Baroody, A. J., & Ginsburg, H. P. (1983). The effects of
instruction on children's understanding of the "equals"
sign. Elementary School Journal, 84, 199-212.
Barth, H., La Mont, K., Lipton, J., & Spelke, E. S. (2005).
Abstract number and arithmetic in preschool children.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 102,
14116-14121.
Behr, M., Erlwanger, S., & Nichols, E. (1980). How
children view the equal sign. Mathematics Teaching, 92,
13-15.
Booth, J. L., & Siegler, R. S. (2006). Developmental and
individual differences in pure numerical estimation.
Developmental Psychology, 41, 189-201.
Brannon, E. M. (2006). The representation of numerical
magnitude. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 16, 222229.
Brannon, E. M., Abbott, S. & Lutz, D. J. (2004). Number
bias for the discrimination of large visual sets in infancy.
Cognition, 93, B59-B68.
Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., & Levi, L. (2003). Thinking
mathematically: Integrating arithmetic and algebra in
elementary school. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Cobb, P. (1987). An investigation of young children's
academic arithmetic contexts. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 18, 109-124.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The Number Sense. Oxford University
Press.
Dehaene, S., Dupoux, E., & Mehler, J. (1990). Is numerical
comparison digital: Analogical and symbolic effects in
two-digit number comparison. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 16,
626-641.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core systems
of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 307-313.
Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (2005). Mathematical
cognition. In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The
Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning.
Cambridge University Press.
Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (2000). Non-verbal
numerical cognition: From reals to integers. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4, 59-65.
Gilmore, C. K., McCarthy, S. E., & Spelke, E. S. (2007).
Symbolic arithmetic knowledge without instruction,
Nature, 447, 589-592.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical cognition without words:
Evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306, 496-499.
Halberda, J., & Feigenson, L. (2008). Developmental
change in the acuity of the “number sense”: The
approximate number system in 3-, 4-, 5-, 6-year-olds and
adults. Developmental Psychology.
Halberda, J., Mazzocco, M. M .M., & Feigenson, L. (2008).
Individual differences in non-verbal number acuity
correlate with maths achievement. Nature, 455, 665-668.

334

