UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children's Understanding of Ruler Measurement and Units of Measure: A Training Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5cz2r7vj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Deitz, Kevin
Huttenlocher, Janellen
Kwon, Mee-Kyoung
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Understanding of Ruler Measurement and Units of Measure:
A Training Study
Susan C. Levine (s-levine@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 S. University Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Mee-kyoung Kwon (mkwon@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 S. University Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Janellen Huttenlocher (hutt@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 S. University Avenue
Chicago, IL 600637 USA

Kristin Ratliff (krratliff@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 S. University Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Kevin Deitz (deitz@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, 5848 S. University Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Abstract
An understanding of measurement and units of measurement
is important in mathematics and science. However, children
in the United States perform very poorly on measurement
items on standardized mathematics tests compared to students
in other countries. We examine understanding of linear
measurement and units of measurement in 2nd grade students
and carry out a training study aimed at improving their
understanding, drawing on research showing that structural
alignment is important in promoting learning. We find that
students do not improve when training consists of measuring
items aligned with a ruler, either when discrete units are
coordinated with this activity by overlaying them on the ruler
or when students engage in aligned ruler measurement and
measurement with discrete units separately. However, we do
find significant improvement when children measure objects
that are misaligned and then aligned with the start of the ruler
and discrete units are coordinated with ruler use.
Keywords:
Mathematics
development;
cognitive
development; structural alignment; linear measurement; units;
ruler

Introduction
Measurement links the abstract world of number to the
concrete world of objects, which have continuous properties
such as linear extent, area, and volume. An understanding
of measurement is important in mathematics and science
achievement as well as in everyday life.
Despite the
importance of measurement, American children score lower
on items assessing measurement knowledge than on items
assessing knowledge of other mathematics topics.
Children’s difficulty understanding measurement is
reflected in their persistent difficulty on NAEP linear
measurement questions (86% errors in Grade 3; 78% Grade
4; 51% Grade 7; and 37% Grade 8; Carpenter et al., 1988;
Lindquisit & Kouba, 1989). A part of their difficulty on

such tests appears to be a lack of understanding of what a
unit of measurement is.
Children are introduced to linear measurement early in
elementary school. Central aspects of classroom instruction
include practice measuring with conventional measurement
instruments such as rulers and thermometers as well as
practice measuring with nonstandard units such as
paperclips. The question of whether conventional
measurement instruments or discrete non-conventional units
are more effective in teaching children about measurement
is a matter of debate (e.g., Boulton-Lewis, 1996; Nunes,
Light, & Mason, 1993). What is clear, however, is that
children who are taught using the instructional methods in
wide use in the United States, which make use of both of
these types of measurement experience, are not gaining a
deep understanding of measurement and measurement units.
Rather, they seem to be gaining a set of procedural skills
that make them appear to understand measurement.
The shallowness of children’s understanding can be seen
by examining children’s performance on a simple task in
which an object is misaligned with the “0”-point on a ruler
(see Figure 1). Children typically make two types of errors
on such problems (Lehrer, Jenkins, & Osama, 1998). One
involves reading off the number on the ruler that aligns with
the rightmost part of the object, i.e., responding “5 inches”
in the case of the example in Figure 1. This type of error
reflects reliance on a procedure that works perfectly as long
as the object to-be-measured is aligned with the “0” point of
a conventional ruler, but fails when the object is misaligned
with this “0” point (Kamii, 2006; Martin & Strutchens,
2000). The other type of error involves counting the hash
marks rather than the intervals or units that an object
encompasses, i.e., responding “4 inches” for the crayon
shown in Figure 1. This error type reflects an attempt to
focus on units but a lack of understanding that the relevant

2391

1

3

2

3

4

4

5

7

6

8

7

5

Figure 1: Example of a misaligned pre-test/post-test item.

units are inch-long intervals rather than hash marks. Again,
this strategy works if the to-be-measured object is aligned
with the ruler but not if it is misaligned. Children may
acquire only a shallow understanding of linear measurement
because of the kind of instruction they are receiving. That
is, the measurement instruction they receive does not make
use of structural alignment and comparison, which has been
shown to be a powerful learning mechanism (Gentner,
1983; Gentner, Loewenstin & Hung, 2007; Loewenstein &
Gentner, 2001). Under typical instructional conditions,
children perform well when asked to measure with a ruler,
merely reading off the number that aligns with the rightmost
number on the ruler or counting hash marks, both of which
will yield the correct answer if the object to be measured is
aligned with the 0-point on the ruler. They also may
perform well when measuring with discrete objects such as
paper clips, meant to demonstrate the fundamental
importance of units to measurement. However, because
these measurement activities are not structurally aligned, the
child may view them as separate and unrelated. Further,
because they are not asked to measure the same objects
when they are aligned and misaligned with the beginning of
the ruler and to compare the answers obtained, they may fail
to understand that the answers must be the same. Thus,
because typical mathematics curricula do not invite
comparisons between discrete units and the ruler nor
comparisons between misaligned and aligned ruler
measurements, children may fail to learn that ruler
measurement is actually measurement with discrete units
arrayed on a continuous instrument.
In the research reported below we examine the
effectiveness of an instructional technique that is grounded
in research showing that structural alignment is a powerful
learning mechanism that allows children to map between
different instances and arrive at deeper understandings (e.g.,
Gentner, 1983; Gentner et al., 2007; Loewenstein &
Gentner, 2001). Our premise is that in the context of typical
classroom instruction on measurement, children are not
comparing activities that involve discrete units to activities
that involve ruler measurement and have no opportunity to
compare aligned and misaligned ruler measurement. Thus,
when measuring with conventional instruments such as

rulers they are employing procedural routines rather than
conceptual knowledge of units. Because these procedures
work well with the typically presented problems that
involve aligning a ruler with a to-be-measured object, these
procedures are reinforced. Moreover, because children’s
procedures typically produce the correct answer, teachers
may believe that children have conceptual understanding of
measurement. The cracks in their knowledge only become
apparent when they are given novel problems such as the
kind of misaligned ruler problem shown in Figure 1.
We predict that our experimental condition will allow the
child to understand what linear units are and that ruler
measurement involves counting these units. The instruction
we use explicitly links measurement with discrete units to
measurement with rulers. In addition, it shows the child that
if the correct interval units are counted, the same
measurement result is obtained whether the object being
measured is aligned or misaligned with the ruler. Through
structural alignment, the child is invited to compare ruler
measurement with the discrete units that underlie it. This
starkly contrasts with the situation that arises during typical
classroom instruction, where the child is left to his/her own
devices to draw analogies between ruler measurement and
measurement with discrete units and has no experience with
misaligned ruler problems.
The study reported below follows a pre-test, training,
post-test design. Following the pre-test (Session 1), we
taught children about units of measurement, and examined
their learning by giving them an immediate post-test
(Session 2). One week later we examined the retention of
this learning by giving them a delayed post-test (Session 3).
The training consists of two components that we
hypothesize are important to increasing children’s
understanding. One of these components involved
superimposing discrete one-inch units on a ruler. The
superimposition of units on the ruler structurally aligned the
ruler with the units (unlike the typical paper clip activity)
and highlighted that linear units are intervals. After students
responded on misaligned ruler items, typically incorrectly,
we superimposed discrete units on top of the portion of the
ruler that was aligned with the object being measured. After
the child correctly counted the units to determine the length
of the object, we moved the object to the “0” point on the
ruler. This last step aligned the number of units obtained
when units were counted when the object was misaligned
with the ruler to the number of units obtained when the
object was aligned with the “0” point of the ruler. We
hypothesize that this step is critical in helping children
conceptualize linear ruler measurement as a means of
determining the number of units long an object is, rather
than as a rote procedure of reading off the rightmost number
on the ruler.
The effectiveness of this experimental training condition
is assessed by comparing it to two control training
conditions, one of which incorporates the typical
measurement exercises from 2nd grade mathematics texts,

2392

and the other of which examines one aspect of the
experimental condition, superimposition of units in the
context of aligned ruler measurement. A third control
condition, currently in progress, examines the other aspect
of the experimental condition, comparing the measurement
of objects that are initially misaligned with the start of the
ruler and then aligned with the start of the ruler, but without
the superimposition of discrete units. Preliminary results
for this condition are considered in the Discussion section
below.

Experimental Condition
(Units combined with aligned and unaligned
ruler measurement)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Control Condition 1
Control Condition 2
(Traditional Classroom :
(Units combined with aligned
Units and aligned ruler
ruler measurement)
measurement shown separately)

Methods

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

AND

Subjects
Fifty three second grade students, attending a private school
in Chicago, were randomly assigned to each of the three
conditions (range = 7.5 to 8.8 years; mean age = 8.0 years).
There were 18 children in the Experimental Condition (8
boys, 10 girls); 17 children in Control Condition 1 (7 boys,
10 girls); and 18 children in Control Condition 2 (7 boys, 11
girls).

Procedure
All participants received a measurement pretest during the
first session. During the second session, which occurred
within a week of the first session, children received training
and the immediate measurement post-test (Post-test 1). One
week later, they received a delayed measurement post-test
(Post-test 2). The pre-test and post-tests consisted of a
multiple choice paper and pencil test in which children were
given 16 measurement items (8 aligned and 8 unaligned).
Each pretest and posttest item consisted of a picture of a
ruler and a crayon that varied in length which appeared
above the ruler, either at the “0” point, or in various
misaligned positions. All items started and ended with a
whole inch. Four numerical choices were provided below
the ruler, one of which was the correct answer, one of which
corresponded to the read off strategy, one of which
corresponded to the counting hash marks strategy, and the
other of which was a non-lure response.
In the second session, children received one of the
training conditions (Experimental, Control 1, Control 2). In
the Experimental Condition, the experimenter showed the
child a stick that was placed just above the ruler at various
points and asked the child how many units long the stick is.
The experimenter then placed discrete one-inch long units
(e.g. translucent red rectangular "chips”) on top of the part
of the ruler that was aligned with the stick, and again asked
the child how many units long the stick is. After that, the
experimenter moved the stick to the “0” point and the chips
were placed on the part of the ruler that was aligned with the
stick in its new position. This allowed the child to compare
the measurements obtained in the unaligned and aligned
positions and to see that they are the same. Each child was
given 8 training trials, each involving a stick of a different

KEY
Unit chips
The arrow symbol shows that a stick
is moved to the aligned position after
a child measures the stick in the
misaligned position

Figure 2: Depiction of the Experimental Condition, Control
Condition 1 and Control Condition 2.
length. In Control Condition 1, each child received 8 trials
measuring sticks aligned with a ruler and 8 trials measuring
sticks with discrete units. These activities were done
separately, as is typically the case in school, rather than in a
coordinated manner such as that used in the Experimental
Condition. The two types of measurement were
administered in a blocked, counterbalanced order. In
Control Condition 2 the child received 8 trials in which each
stick was presented aligned with the 0-point of the ruler.
The child was asked how many units long the stick is, and
after they answered, was asked to place the units on top of
the ruler to see if they were correct. See Figure 2 for a
depiction of the training conditions.

Results
The mean proportion of misaligned items correct (M =
.28, SD = .38 at pre-test; M = .43, SD = .46 at post-test 1; M
= .45, SD = .47 at post-test 2) was lower than that of aligned
items correct (M = 1.00, SD = 0.00 at pre-test; M = 0.98, SD
= .07 at post-test 1; M = 1.00, SD = 0.00 at post-test 2).
Since performance on aligned items was virtually perfect at
all three time points, we carried out a mixed-model
ANOVA to examine effect of condition on children’s
performance on misaligned items. Condition (Experimental,
Control 1, Control 2) was the between subjects factor and
Time of Test (Pretest, Post-test 1, Post-test 2) was the within
subjects factor. Results revealed a main effect of Time of
Test (F (2,100) = 6.832, p < .005) and an interaction effect
of Condition x Time of Test (F (4, 100) = 3.929, p <.01).

2393

Main strategy (Experimental Condition)
Pre-test

0.8

Proportion of children

Mean Proportion Correct

1
Post-test1 (same day)
Post-test2 (one week delay)
0.6
0.4
0.2

1.00
0.80

Units
Hash
Reading-off

0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00

Pre-test

Post-test 1

Post-test 2

0
Experimental

Control 1

Control 2

Main strategy (Control Condition1)
Proportion of children

CONDITIONS

Figure 3: Mean proportion correct on unaligned problems
Correct on pre-test, post-test1, post-test2 (one week later)
for the Experimental Group, Control Group 1 and Control
Group 2.

1.00
0.80

Units

0.60

Hash

0.40

Reading-off

0.20
0.00

Pre-test

Discussion
Our findings show that young elementary school children
benefit from instruction that makes comparisons between
aligned and misaligned ruler measurement and coordinates
the use of discrete units with unit markings on a ruler.
Moreover, the results show that the kind of instruction that
is typically used in classrooms, which makes use of separate
activities involving aligned ruler measurement and
measurement with discrete units is not effective in
promoting the understanding of interval units. Indeed, even
coordinating discrete units and aligned ruler measurement
did not result in a significant improvement on misaligned
ruler problems. Finally, our results show that children who
count hash marks on misaligned ruler items are more
prepared to learn about interval units than those who merely
read off the rightmost number on the ruler on these items.
Thus, hash mark counting, although an incorrect strategy,

Post-test 1

Post-test 2

Main strategy (Control Condition 2)
Proportion of children

The main effect of Condition (p =.217) was not significant.
Bonferroni tests revealed no differences between
performance of the various groups at pre-test, ps >.9. The
Experimental Group performed significantly better on
unaligned items at post-test 1 t(50) = 3.559, p <.05 and posttest 2, t(50) = 3.329, p <.05 than at pretest (see Figure 3).
There was no significant difference between performance of
the Experimental Group at Post-tests 1 and 2, p = .40. In
contrast, the two Control Groups did not show significant
improvement between pretest and post-test 1 (Control
Group 1: p = .9; Control Group 2: p = .6) or between pretest and post-test 2 (Control Group 1: p = 1; Control Group
2: p = .18).
Our analyses also showed that the success of training in
the Experimental Condition depended on the child’s
measurement strategy at pre-test. In the experimental
condition, 7 out of 8 children who used hash marks strategy
at the pre-test changed their strategy to counting units
(inches) whereas none of children (0/5) who employed the
read-off strategy in the experimental condition changed their
strategy after training (Figure 4).

1.00
0.80

Units

0.60

Hash

0.40

Reading-off

0.20
0.00

Pre-test

Post-test 1

Post-test 2

Figure 4. Proportion of children in Experimental Condition,
Control Condition 1 and Control Condition 2 using each
strategy at pretest, and proportion using each strategy at
post-test 1.
represents an important intermediate knowledge state.
Why is the experimental training condition successful
while the control training conditions are not?
We
hypothesize that misaligned ruler measurement is helpful
because it highlights the fact that the length of an item
cannot be determined by merely reading off the rightmost
number on a ruler. Further, combining the misaligned ruler
measurement with discrete units shows children that
counting the hash marks is not what measurement is about –
rather it is about counting units. Finally, moving the object
back to the 0-point shows that child that the answer obtained
by reading off the rightmost number on the ruler on aligned
problems derives from counting units. Thus, it moves
children from the shallow understanding of how to measure
with a ruler to the deeper understanding of what ruler
measurement is about and why it works. In contrast to the
Experimental Condition, Control Condition 1 mimics
typical instructional strategies used in classrooms. Aligned
ruler measurement shows the child that he/she can read off
the rightmost number on the ruler and get the right answer.
Measuring objects with discrete units such as paper clips
has the potential to show the child that measurement is
about counting interval units. However, it may not be easy
for the child to link ruler measurement and measurement
with discrete units because they are not perceptually

2394

aligned, an important feature of effective instruction (e.g.,
Loewenstein & Gentner, 2001). Control Condition 2
involves aligned ruler measurement and laying the units
right on top of the ruler, which seems like it has the
potential to be helpful because the units and the ruler are
aligned. However, in this condition, the child can merely
read off the rightmost number on the ruler to obtain the
correct answer. Thus, showing the child that counting the
discrete units yields the same answer may be viewed more
like a parlor trick than about a deeply significant aspect of
measurement. In an ongoing study, Control Condition 3, we
are examining whether the comparison of misaligned and
aligned ruler measurement used in the Experimental
Condition would be effective without the use of
superimposed discrete units.
Our preliminary results
suggest that this aspect of our Experimental Condition may
be critical as those participants who have been assessed
show significant gains at Post-test 1.
We suggest that the current findings are likely to have
implications that extend beyond the case of ruler
measurement. There are many situations in which we need
to measure continuous extents. One example occurs when
we apply distance scales such as 0.5 inch = 100 miles to
assess the distance between locations shown on a map. The
scale is not aligned with the distance we are interested in
measuring and we not only need to apply it iteratively, but
also to scale up the distance we measure on the map
according to the scale factor. A sound understanding of
units of measure also is critical to solving problems that
commonly occur in mathematics and science, which often
necessitate unit conversions. This is another kind of
misalignment that may only be appreciated as critical if a
strong understanding of measurement and measurement
units is built from the earliest stages of learning.
Our future plans include extending this work to younger
children and to classroom teaching environments. We also
plan to study children’s ruler measurement when object
extents fall between inch markers. In this work we will ask
whether children who succeed at unaligned whole unit
measurement, perform with equal facility on aligned and
unaligned problems involving fractional units. Researchers
have posited that an understanding of the real numbers can
be scaffolded by integrating numerical schemas with
concrete non-numerical schemas such as the fullness of
beakers (e.g., Moss & Case, 1999; Resnick & Singer, 1993,
Sophian, 2007). We suggest that ruler measurement, if
understood well, is a potentially fertile schema for
improving young children’s understanding of the real
numbers and fractions because it provides an opportunity to
link numerical values that are difficult to conceptualize to a
concrete, ecologically valid, number line representation.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF grant SBE-0541957,
the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC). The

researchers thank the University of Chicago Laboratory
Schools for their participation in this research.

References
Boulton-Lewis, G.M., Wilss, L.A., & Mutch, S.L. (1996).
An analysis of young children’s strategies and use of
devices in length measurement. Journal of Mathematical
Behavior, 15, 329-347.
Carpenter, T., Lindquist, M., Brown, C., Kouba, V.,
Edward, A., & Swafford, J. (1988). Results of the Fourth
NAEP Assessment of Mathematics: Trends and
Conclusions. Arithmetic Teacher, 36, 38-41.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-maping:
A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Hung, B. (2007).
Comparison facilitates children’s learning of names for
parts. Journal of Cognition and Development, 8, 285-307.
Kamii, C. (2006) Measurement of length: How can we
teach it better? Teaching Children Mathematics, 13, 154158.
Lehrer, R., Jenkins, M., Osana, H. (1998). Longitudinal
study of children’s reasoning about space and geometry.
In R. Lehrer and D. Chazan (Eds.), Designing learning
environments for developing understanding of geometry
and space (pp. 137-167). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Lindquist, M., & Kouba, V. (1989). Measurement. In M.
Linduist (Eds.). Results from the Fourth Mathematics
Assessment of the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (pp. 35-43). Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
Loewenstein, J. & Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial mapping in
preschoolers. Close comparisons facilitate far mappings.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 2, 189-219.
Martin, W.G. & Strutchens, M.E. (2000). Geometry and
measurement. In E.A. Silver & P.A. Kenney (Eds.),
Results from the seventh mathematics assessment of the
National Assessment of Educational Progress (pp. 193234). National Council of Teachers of Mathematics:
Reston, VA.
Moss, J. & Case, R. (1999). Developing children’s
understanding of the rational numbers: A new model and
experimental curriculum.
Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 30, 122-147.
Nunes, T., Light, P., & Mason, J. (1993). Tools for thought:
The measurement of length and area. Learning and
Instruction, 3, 39-54.
Resnick, L.B. & Singer, J.A. (1993). Protoquantitative
origins of ratio reasoning. In T. Carpenter, E. Fennem, &
T. Romberg (Eds.), Rational numbers: An integration of
research (pp. 107-130), Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Sophian, C. (2007). The origins of mathematical knowledge
in childhood. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum.

2395

