UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children’s thoughts on unborn babies, Representational redescription in preconceptions of
children on fetal development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/89n0j8p0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Franse, Roos
Raijmakers, Maartje
Van Es, Sara E.
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s thoughts on unborn babies
Representational redescription in preconceptions of children on fetal development
Sara E. van Es1, Tessa J.P. van Schijndel1, Roos Franse2, Maartje E.J. Raijmakers1
1

Department of Developmental Psychology, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
2
Science center NEMO, unit education, the Netherlands
children have a coherently organized body of knowledge
applicable to living things. In contrast, theorists on the
fragmentation side claim that children’s naïve knowledge is
fragmented (DiSessa, 1988). For example, Straatemeier et
al. (in press.) show evidence for children’s fragmented
knowledge about the earth. The current study examines the
question whether children have a coherent theory of fetal
development.
A more specific issue within the coherence site of the
debate is whether children form mental models ‘on the
spot’. A mental model is defined as a mental representation
that is analogous to the state of affairs the model represents
(Johnson-Laird, 1983). Vosniadou et al. (2004) state that the
formation of a mental model is based on observations and
everyday experiences, which are in turn subject to the
constraints of the underlying conceptual structures. Children
form dynamic situation-specific representations, formed onthe-spot for the purpose of answering questions. It is argued
that generative tasks like drawing or making clay models
encourage children to make generative use of the scientific
information that they have at their disposal, and encourage
the on-the-spot formation of mental models, increasing the
coherence of these models. Whether the use of a generative
task indeed increases the coherence of children’s use of a
mental model is another point of focus in this study.

Abstract
This study aims to examine if children have a coherent, naïve
theory or, alternatively, only fragmented knowledge of
prenatal development. Following Karmiloff-Smith's theory of
representational redescription, it examines whether these
theories are influenced by age related constraints in
representational flexibility. Children aged 6-13 (N=317) filled
out a forced-choice questionnaire and completed two drawing
tasks. Examination by latent class analysis indicates that
children do have coherent theories on prenatal development
for the changing morphology, but not for the changing bodily
functions and that coherence of their mental model is
increased by a preceding generative task. The observed
mental models are characterized by different levels of
representational flexibility.
Keywords: fetal development, naïve theory, mental models,
representational redescription, conceptual flexibility.

Introduction
Most children are familiar with newborn babies, which they
have observed. But what ideas do children have of prenatal
development, which they cannot observe?
The literature on children’s preconceptions on fetal
development is scarce. Most studies focus on either
conception (e.g. Bernstein and Cowan, 1975) or birth
models (e.g. Nagy, 1951, Kreitler and Kreitler, 1966).
Discussing the creation of babies, Kreitler and Kreitler
argue that children's views are based on three theories: (1)
the baby is created in the mother's belly from the food she
eats (2) the baby has always existed in the mother's belly (3)
or the baby should be swallowed by the mother.
The more specific topic of fetal development is hardly
focused on, however. The study with the largest emphasis
on prenatal development is done by Zoldosova (2007). It is
a qualitative analysis of drawings and structured interviews.
Even though some misconceptions were found in this study,
the small sample size and the absence of a focus on age
related differences make it difficult to draw firm
conclusions. The purpose of the current study is to gain a
better insight in the preconceptions children have on fetal
development.
Coherent
versus
fragmentated
knowledge.
In
developmental psychology, there exists a general debate
about whether children’s knowledge is coherent or
fragmented. Theorists on the coherence side of this debate
maintain that children’s naïve knowledge is organized into
coherent and consistent theories, which structure everyday
thinking, and are more or less resistant to change (Wellman
& Gelman, 1998). Hatano and Inagaki (1994) describe
young children's naïve theory of biology. They suggest that

Representational Redescription. If children have a
coherent theory of prenatal development, how do these
preconceptions develop? In order to answer this question we
focus on a theory-like perspective on knowledge acquisition
proposed by Karmiloff-Smith (1990). She describes how
knowledge develops through representational redescription.
This model has already found support in several areas of
cognitive development, like language, mathematics, and
physics (Karmiloff-Smith, 1992, Critten et al, 2007, Hollis
and Low, 2005, Pine and Steffler, 2007). It describes the
acquisition of knowledge through sequential phases, starting
with a representation of knowledge in a procedural way,
followed by a re-representation at different levels of
abstraction. This re-representation is the phase of
representational redescription (RR), which means that the
knowledge embedded in the previously efficiently
functioning procedures becomes available as a data structure
to other parts of the cognitive system. According to
Karmiloff-Smith; ‘Development appears to involve
reiterated cycles of representational change, from the
simple running of automatized procedures, to redescriptions
of internal representations specified as a sequentially fixed
list, and then to internal representations specified as a
structured yet flexibly ordered set of features, that is, a

112

manipulable concept’ (Karmiloff-Smith, 1990, p.80, lines
25-29).
In the first level of RR a sequential constraint exists. This
means that children are, for instance, able to draw a human
being, but that this procedure has a fixed sequence. When
asked to draw a human being that does not exist, children
have to operate in some way on their internal representation
of a normal human being. Young children are not able to be
flexible in their representation and stick to their fixed
sequential procedure. Firstly, this results in a restriction in
intra-representational flexibility, limiting the child in respect
to the changes it can introduce into the representation. This
means that only changes within the concept are allowed,
such as adding an extra head to the human being. Secondly,
the sequential constraint results in a restriction in interrepresentational flexibility. This means that the child cannot
link the new representation to other representations outside
the domain. Children cannot for instance add an animals
head to their drawing of a human being. This sequential
constraint becomes more relaxed later in development,
leading to an increase in intra- and inter-representational
flexibility with age. This allows children to access elements
from other conceptual categories and establish interrepresentational connections.
Karmiloff-Smith (1990) used children’s drawings to
explore representational flexibility. She focused on the
constraints children have in their representational flexibility
by looking at what changes children make in their
representation of a concept (e.g. a house), when asked to
draw a non-existing concept (e.g. a fake house). Changes
introduced by the younger children (aged 4-6) involved
deletions and changes in size and shape, whereas older
children (aged 8-10) changed position and orientation of
elements and added elements from other conceptual
categories. This finding supports that representational
flexibility increases with age. In this study we examine if
preconceptions children have on fetal development are
related to the increase of conceptual flexibility with age as
proposed by Karmiloff-Smith.

the hand of a fetus having not five but three fingers in an
early stage. A child in an even later phase of RR would
allow for changes of shape to it’s concept of a born baby. It
would think the hand of a fetus could look entirely different.
This results in four theories we expect children have on
prenatal development, representing the different sequential
stages proposed in the RR theory. First a theory allowing no
change to the concept of a born baby, leading to what we
will call the ‘equal response’ when asked what a fetus looks
like compared to a born baby. Secondly, a theory that shows
only growth, leading to the ‘growth response’. Thirdly, a
theory that only shows deletions, leading to the ‘incomplete
response’. And, fourth, a theory that shows conceptual
changes, leading to the ‘conceptually different response’.
Methodological issues. Studies on prenatal development
have thus far used different methodologies; anecdotal
reports (Freud, 1908), (semi)structured interviews with and
without the use of dolls (Conn, 1947 in Bernstein and
Cowan, 1975), questionnaires and drawing tasks (Nagy,
1951, Kreitler and Kreitler, 1966, Bernstein and Cowan,
1975, Zoldosova, 2007). After a broad exploration of these
methodologies and the methodologies used in other area's
concerning mental models (Straatemeijer et al., in press), it
can be concluded that the most favorable methodology for
the study of children's knowledge on prenatal development
is the creation of a forced-choice questionnaire in which all
mental models are represented. This method has several
advantages; it is a critical test for the existence of coherent
theories; social interaction is minimal reducing a bias;
training of experimenters is not required; the procedure is
standardized; and data can be scored objectively. In the
questionnaire we will use pictures rather than written
responses in order to circumvent problems related to verbal
methodologies. Drawing tasks are also used, allowing the
examination of the effect of a generative method on the
coherence of a mental model.
Statistical analysis. In previous studies on mental models,
methodologies used are comparable to Siegler’s rule
assessment methodology (or shortly RAM, 1981); patterns
of responses to different problem types are compared with
theoretically expected score patterns. These expected
response patterns are based on previous research. Subjects
are attributed to a rule according to the best matching rule
pattern. A high number of successful classifications of
subjects is taken as an index of the fit of the rule system.
In the process of designing the questionnaire RAM is
used. Rules were formulated based on the mental models we
expected to find. Next, items were constructed such that
maximum differentiation was possible between these
expected rules.
In analysis, assignment to mental models depends on the
percentage of correspondence between the expected and the
observed responses. Yet, the use of RAM in analysis of
mental models has several shortcomings. A considerable
problem of RAM is that the assignment of subjects to rules
takes place by an arbitrary criterion of correspondence

Representational Redescription in preconceptions on
fetal development. What ideas do children have of prenatal
development? When asked what a fetus looks like, children
are stimulated to operate in some way on their internal
representation of a born baby. Young children have
difficulty with conceptual change. This results in conceptual
change first consisting of a concept lacking an element.
Only at a later stage, children will allow conceptual change,
which is considered more complex. More specifically, a
child in the earliest stage of RR does not allow for
conceptual change. When a child in the earliest stage of RR
is asked what a fetus looks like, it will answer that it looks
exactly the same as a born baby. A child which allows a
slight bit of representational change could have the
understanding of growth, thinking a fetus looks exactly the
same as a born baby but smaller. A child in a later stage of
RR would allow for a deletion in it’s concept of a born
baby, indicating that the fetus is ‘incomplete’; for instance

113

incomplete response, and 4) the conceptually different
response. The questionnaire starts with an example item,
followed by fifteen questions on prenatal development,
which can be divided into two parts; an early and a late
stage of fetal development. In turn, the items within these
parts concern either morphology or the bodily functions of a
fetus. Topics used in the shape related items were the hand,
the leg, the ear, the foot, the arm, and the eye. Topics used
in the function related items were breathing, drinking and
maintaining body temperature. In the booklet the response
options of the shape related items are depicted in adapted
photographs. The response options of the function related
items are given in a few short, easy to read, words. The
order of the response options is randomized.
An example of an early stage, shape related item is:
This is what the hand of a baby looks like, when it has just
been born. What picture resembles the hand of a baby most,
when the baby still has to stay in the belly of the mother for
a long, long time? [See figure 1]
a) A hand looking exactly the same (equal response)
b) A hand looking exactly the same, but a bit smaller (equal
response, allowing for growth)
c) A hand looking like the hand of a born baby, but it does
not have all the fingers yet (incomplete response)
d) A hand that looks different from the hand of a born baby,
it has a different shape (conceptually different response.

between observed and expected responses. Also the amount
of rules chosen is arbitrary. Moreover, only models that are
formulated beforehand can be detected, meaning that the
detection of alternative, unexpected, models is not feasible.
Additionally, RAM does not provide statistical information
on the goodness of fit of the models to empirical data.
Several researchers (Straatemeier et al., in press; Jansen
and van der Maas, 1997) state that the use of latent class
analysis (LCA) can provide additional information filling
the gaps of RAM. LCA is a standard statistical technique for
models with a categorical latent variable. Many good
introductions are available (McCutcheon, 1987). Parameters
that need to be estimated in LCA are firstly the
unconditional probabilities, which are the a priori
probabilities of being in a latent class (i.e. the proportion of
subjects belonging to class). Secondly, the conditional
probabilities have to be estimated, which are the
probabilities of making a particular response to an item,
given membership of a certain latent class (the probability
of a response in accordance with a mental model, given that
the child adheres to this model). If children have a mental
model on prenatal development, we should find a limited
number of latent classes with conditional probabilities
consistent with the expected mental models.
LCA provides a statistical measure of fit of the models to
empirical data. In LCA there is no statistical test for the best
fitting model, yet model selection is based on a statistical
approach; the model with the lowest BIC (Bayesian
information criterion) and AIC (Akaike's information
criterion) is the best, most parsimonious model. This
determines how many latent classes (mental models) are
needed to fit the data. Models do not have to be formulated
beforehand, so detection of alternative mental models is
possible. A restriction exists to the models we find, which is
inherent to the methodology used in designing the
questionnaire, but the classes we find can also exist out of
children using different combinations of rules not
formulated beforehand.

Figure 1: Item used in the questionnaire

Drawing task on prenatal development. Participants were
asked to make two drawings of a baby; one in an early stage
of development and one in a late stage of development. The
assignment for the first drawing was ‘draw a baby in the
belly of the mother, when the baby still has to stay in the
belly of the mother for a long, long time’. The assignment
for the second drawing was ‘draw a baby in the belly of the
mother, right before it is born’.
Drawing task of a human being. Following the procedure
used by Karmiloff-Smith participants were asked to draw a
fake human being with this instruction; ‘draw a fake human
being. So, not a human being like yourself, but a human
being that does not exist. Maybe you even invented this
human being’.

Method
Participants. We tested 317 children (age: M = 9.35, SD =
1.84) from three different primary schools from different
parts of the Netherlands all providing regular education.
Materials
Questionnaire ‘Children’s preconceptions on prenatal
development’. The questionnaire was designed for children
aged six and older. The question topics are drawn from
results from the LOOL-project1, a project in which children
were asked to draw the developmental stages from an egg
cell to the actual baby. Interesting differences appeared
between the drawings, which were used for the response
categories in our questionnaire. The questionnaire is based
on expected rules resulting from the earlier described
theories. Response options were designed maximizing the
possibility to discriminate between the theories. Four types
of responses directly related to the expected theories were
used: 1) the equal response, 2) the growth response, 3) the

Design and Procedure. The experimental procedure existed
out of three parts; making the questionnaire and the two
drawing tasks. This sequence of tasks was administered
group wise in a classroom setting. The children were tested
under two conditions; either they first filled out the
questionnaire followed by the drawing of the baby (151
participants), or they first made the drawing of the baby,
followed by the questionnaire (166 participants). All
children finished with the drawing task of a fake human
being. The instructions of all tasks were read out loud by the

114

test leader, as well as the questions of the questionnaire.
Additionally, an enlarged version of all tasks was shown on
a screen. All subtests took about twenty minutes.

stage items on hand, leg, drinking, breathing. bIncludes early stage
items on foot, arm, drinking, breathing. cIncludes early stage items
on ear, eye, drinking, breathing. dIncludes late stage items on hand,
leg, drinking, breathing.

Results

Interpretation of the early stage models. The LCA of the
models including early stage items shows a comparable
pattern among the different models including varying sets of
items; two large and two small classes exist. Interpretation
of the different response patterns shows that the two large
classes represent at first a group of children (initial
probability in Model A is 40%) choosing equal responses
options for shape related items and conceptually different
responses for function related items, and a second group
(initial probability in Model A is 55%) choosing
conceptually different options on both shape and function
related items. The third and fourth classes are broadly
represented by children choosing incomplete options for
shape related items. More specifically the two smaller
classes represent firstly a group of children (initial
probability in Model A is 2%) choosing incomplete options
or equal options and secondly a group of children (initial
probability in Model A is 3%) choosing incomplete or
conceptually different options on shape related items. In the
'early stage model 2', a division into two subclasses is not
made in the three class model which has the best fit, but the
division does occur in the same way in the four class model.
It is noticeable that the interpretation is mainly based on the
shape related items, not on the function related items. All
classes show a large probability of choosing the
conceptually different response on function related items,
except for one of the smaller classes represented by
incomplete responses, here also incomplete responses have
a high probability on the item on breathing. Because
interpretation wise there is no large difference between the
three and the four class model we chose to use the four class
model for further analysis, in order to make an easier
comparison with the other models.
Interpretation of the late stage model. With this model four
classes are found, but the majority of children (96,30 %)
gives a correct answer to the questions, showing no
conceptual differences on the shape related items and
conceptual differences on the function related items. In the
responses of the remaining 3,70 % no consistent pattern is
found.

General. As a measure of test-retest reliability, three
parallel questions were added to the questionnaire,
reliability of the parallel items ranged from rS= .50 to rS=
.70. The internal consistency, expressed by Cronbach’s α,
was .85 for all shape related items together and .49 for all
function related items together. The low consistency of the
function related items is partly due to the very little
variation in the late stage function items. It can be
concluded that the psychometric qualities of the
questionnaire are acceptable. The purpose of the
questionnaire is to compare groups, and not to make
individual judgments.
The sequence of the tasks (drawing-questionnaire or
questionnaire-drawing) had an effect on only three out of
the fifteen items in the questionnaire when chi2 analysis was
performed. The differences found did not show a similar
pattern within the direction of these effects, no conclusions
can be drawn on it. For the remaining analysis the data of
the two conditions are taken together. In the analysis the
four response options of the questionnaire were reduced to
three options, merging the 'equal response’ and the ‘growth
response’ to one group, still referred to as the 'equal
response'. This was done since only little and inconsistent
variation was seen between these two response options, and
because this merge minimizes the amount of parameters
allowing for more stringent conclusions.
Coherent model. In order to examine if children have a
coherent model on prenatal development, a latent class
analysis (LCA) was performed. If a coherent model exists,
we should find a limited number of latent classes with
conditional probabilities consistent with mental models,
such as the models we described in the introduction. Using
varying sets of items from the questionnaire in different
models, LCA showed that based on the AIC and BIC values
a four class model consistently shows the best fit (see table
1), and in one case a three class model.
Table 1: latent class models using different sets of items
Pb
df BIC
N of
L2
(L2)
classes
3 class
30.79
.35
60 1588.76
4 class*
20.65
.56
60 1578.62
Early
3 class*
17.81
.68
62 1521.82
stage 2 b
4 class
13.35
.62
62 1534.63
Early
3 class
47.74
.05
59 1862.24
stage 3 c
4 class*
29.41
.29
57 1855.43
Late
3 class
11.85
.14
67 790.71
staged
4 class*
6.32
.43
69 773.65
Note.*Indicates the most parsimonious, best fitting model; L2,
likelihood ratio statistic; pb(L2), p value of L2 obtained by Monte
Carlo bootstrap; df, degrees of freedom; BIC, Bayesian
Information Criterion; no restrictions were added. aIncludes early
Model
N=317
Early
stage 1a

Validation of Model A. Classification based on RAM can
function as a validation of the classification based on model
A; a high correlation is found between the two ways of
classification, rS=.81, p<.001. Classification by RAM
means that children were assigned to the model for which
they had the highest consistency score. The expected
responses patterns we formulated were a group consistently
choosing an equal response, a group consistently choosing
an incomplete response and a group consistently choosing a
conceptually different response. If the data are analyzed
using RAM, only two of these expected response patterns
are found. When using LCA these two main groups are
found, but a third group and even a fourth group are added.

115

As an extra validation of the classes found in Model A,
the other models (B & C) were fitted using different sets of
items from the questionnaire. The correlation between the
classification of class membership based on Model A and
the classification based on Models B and C are moderate
(rS= .65, p <.001, N=317, and rS= .52, p < .001). The
correlation between the classification of class membership
based on Model B and C is also moderate (rS= .54, p
<.001). When using crosstabs to analyze the differences
between the models it appears that the large groups
(children choosing the equal option and children choosing
the conceptually different option) are more or less consistent
(e.g. 83% of children is classified in class according to
model A and B).

sequence on consistency, F(1, 305) = 11.221, p= .001.
Children have a significantly higher consistency score when
a drawing is made before the questionnaire is filled out.

Conclusion and discussion
Coherent model and phases of conceptual flexibility. The
current study supports the existence of mental models of
prenatal development. These models are firstly a fixed
concept; children that do not allow changes to their concept
of a born baby when being asked what a fetus looks like,
secondly an incomplete concept; children including
deletions in their concept of a fetus, and thirdly a different
concept; children including conceptual changes in their
concept. Within these models, the phases of conceptual
flexibility proposed by Karmiloff-Smith are supported. A
specific correspondence between conceptual flexibility and
the mental models will be analyzed in a comparison of the
‘strange person’ drawings with children’s mental models.
On the mental models we found, some of the results were
unexpected. This is mainly the case for the second class of
the LCA. These were children adhering to the 'incomplete'
model, giving incomplete responses. This group chose the
incomplete response more often than children from the other
groups, but did not consistently choose this response. It can
be suggested that this type of change, the incomplete
response, functions as a transition phase to the more
complex conceptual change and because of that shows a less
consistent pattern.

Effect of age. To assess the influence of age on theory-use
according to class membership as assessed by posterior
probabilities of Model A, a χ2 test was performed, showing
a significant effect of age, χ2 (21) = 45,678, p= .001.
Interpretation of the direction of this effect is possible when
looking at figure 2; the amount of children in class 1,
represented equal responses, is largest in the youngest age
group and the amount of children in class 4, represented by
conceptually different responses, is largest in the oldest age
group. So the older children are, the more flexible they are
in their concepts. Class 2 and 3 are represented by children
giving incomplete responses. A comparable pattern is found
when classifications based on models using different sets of
items are used (Model B and C).

Age related differences. When focusing on the age related
increase in conceptual flexibility proposed by KarmiloffSmith, the results indicate that older children more often
have a more flexible response option, suggesting that that
theories of fetal development are indeed importantly
constrained by principles expressed in the representational
redescription theory. The age related fixedness of this
constraint is supported in our study.

Figure 2: age and class membership according to Model A

80
Class 1.

Percentage

60
40

Function versus shape. Unexpectedly, the models resulting
from the interpretation of the conditional response
probabilities is mainly based on the responses on shape
related items. Responses to function related items showed a
less consistent pattern. There is little variation among the
function related items and the variation that does exist is not
consistent. This suggests that children have a coherent
theory on prenatal development of morphology, not on
bodily functioning. In this difference, visual imagination
could play a role. With shape related items a larger effort is
needed within visual representation. Constraints in
representational redescription could be more influential in
information that could be represented as a picture.
Also, it can be suggested that within knowledge on
prenatal development a division can be made in underlying
structure, referring back to the coherence versus
fragmentation debate. Knowledge on morphology seems to
have a coherent structure and knowledge on bodily
functioning seems to have a fragmentated structure. The
difference in internal consistency on different parts of the

Class 4.

20

Class 3.
Class 2.

0
6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13

Age
Mental models 'on the spot'. To examine whether a
preceding generative task does indeed increase the
coherence of a mental model, two conditions were formed
in the design of the study. In one condition children first
made the drawing task on prenatal development followed by
the questionnaire and in the other condition this sequence
was altered.
Consistency is defined as the percentage of equal
responses in the whole questionnaire when a child belongs
to equal response class according to classification based on
highest consistency score, the same accounts for the
incomplete response class and the conceptually different
response class. An ANOVA showed a significant effect of

116

questionnaire support this. A high agreement within
function related items over different stages of prenatal
development (breathing in the early stage and breathing in
the late stage) exists as compared to the agreement between
function related items within one stage (breathing and eating
in the early stage). The response on a function related item
seems to be dependent on the subject of the item, not on the
stage. The shape related items however, show a large
agreement among them within each stage. The response on
a shape related is dependent not on subject, but on the naïve
theory a child has on morphology.

this study also has implications for the educational field.
Teachers in primary schools will get a better understanding
in what mental models children have on prenatal
development and how these develop.
Bernstein, A.C. & Cowan, P.A. (1975). Children's Concepts
of How People Get Babies. Child Development, 46, 77-91.
Critten, S. , Pine, K. & Steffler, D. (2007). Spelling
development in young children, a case of representational
redescription? Journal of Educational Psychology, 99(1),
207–220.
diSessa, A. A. (1988). Knowledge in pieces. In G. Forman,
& P. B. Pufall (Eds.), Constructivism in the computer
age (49-70). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Freud, S. On the sexual theories of children. 1908. In P.
Reef (Ed.), The collected papers of Sigmund Freud. .New
York: Collier, 1963.
Hollis, S. & Low, J. (2005). Karmiloff-Smith’s RRM
distinction between adjunctions and redescriptions: It’s
about time (and children’s drawings). British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 23, 623–644.
Hatano, G. & Inagaki, K. (1994). Young children's naïve
theory of biology. Cognition, 50, 171-188.
Jansen, B.R.J. and Maas, H.L.J. van der (1997). Statistical
Test of the Rule Assessment Methodology by Latent Class
Analysis. Developmental Review, 17, 321–357.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, inference, and
consciousness. Cambridge University Press, UK.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1990). Constraints on representational
change: Evidence from children’s drawing. Cognition, 34,
57-83.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond modularity: A
developmental perspective on cognitive science. MIT
Press.
Kreitler, H. & Kreitler, S. (1966). Children’s concepts of
sexuality and birth. Child Development, 363-378.
Nagy, M. H. (1953). Children's birth theories. Pedagogical
Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology,83, 217-226.
Straatemeier, M., Van der Maas, H.L.J., & Jansen, B.R.J.
(in press). Children's Knowledge of the Earth: A New
Methodological and Statistical Approach.
Vosniadou, S., Skopeliti, I., & Ikospentaki, K. (2004).
Modes of knowing and ways of reasoning in elementary
astronomy. Cognitive Development, 19, 203-222.
Wellman, H. M., Gelman, S. A. (1998). Knowledge
acquisition in foundational domains. In W. Damon (Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Volume 2: Cognition,
perception, and language (pp. 523-573). Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons.
Zoldosova, K. & Prokop, P. (2007). Primary Pupils’
Preconceptions About Child Prenatal Development.
Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology
Education, 3(3), 239-246.

Generative task and coherence of mental models.
Vosniadou et al. (2004) stated that generative methods like
making drawings encourage the formation of mental
models. The hypothesis that the sequence in which children
would make the test (drawing-questionnaire or
questionnaire-drawing) influences the consistency within
their responses on the questionnaire has been supported, a
preceding generative task increases the coherence of a
mental model. It can be opted that children give an ad hoc
explanation at the time of the experiment. If this is the case,
children do so at the beginning of the questionnaire and
subsequently stick with their choice. This can be concluded
from the consistency in the morphology items.
Methodological issues. A point of criticism could be that
due to the limited response options in a forced choice
questionnaire children are more likely to respond according
to a specific model, increasing the chance on finding a
coherent model. However, it appears that forced choice
questionnaires do not necessarily lead to a coherent model
(Straatemeier et al., in press). Our conclusion concerning the
existence of a coherent model is not intrinsic to the
methodology used. Moreover, the questionnaire consisted of
adapted photographs. This could have resulted in a response
bias; children might have just picked the weirdest picture.
The lack of variation in the responses to the late stage items,
children consistently choose the 'normal' equal response
which looks exactly like the born baby provide evidence
against the existence of such a bias. A bias towards the
equal response could also be suggested, caused by the use of
the word 'baby' in the questions. However, variation in the
early stage items contradicts this bias. The data of this study
underscore that more specific conclusions can be drawn
using LCA as compared to RAM.
Previous literature and implications. Taking into account
the scarcity on previous literature on naïve theories on
prenatal development, in can be suggested that our study
adds substantial insights to the subject. A general
implication of this study is that it is essential to study
conceptual flexibility and models that concern acquiring of
knowledge in development. This development is an
indication of how human cognition works. It gives insight
into the initial architecture of the human mind, what
influences it, and how knowledge can change over time
(Karmiloff-Smith, 1992). This provides clues as to what the
adult mind looks like after development. The findings of

1

LOOL is a Dutch project on 'enquiry based learning and
learning by design', lead by Marja van Graft and executed by Roos
Franse in 2005 and 2006 in science center NEMO.

117

