UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Load and Analogy-making in Children: Explaining an Unexpected Interaction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1008j43g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
French, Robert
Thibaut, Jean-Pierre
Vezneva, Milena

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Load and Analogy-making in Children:
Explaining an Unexpected Interaction
Jean-Pierre Thibaut, Robert French, Milena Vezneva
LEAD-CNRS, UMR5022, University of Burgundy, FRANCE
{jean-pierre.thibaut, robert.french, milena.vezneva}@u-bourgogne.fr

Abstract
The aim of the present study is to investigate the
performance of children of different ages on an
analogy-making task involving semantic analogies in
which there are competing semantic matches. We
suggest that this can be best studied in terms of
developmental changes in executive functioning. We
hypothesize that the selection of the common
relational structure requires the inhibition of other
salient features, such as, semantically related semantic
matches. Our results show that children's performance
in classic A:B::C:D analogy-making tasks seems to
depend crucially on the nature of the distractors and
the association strength between the A and B terms, on
the one hand, and the C and D terms on the other.
These results agree with an analogy-making account
(Richland et al., 2006) based on varying limitations in
executive functioning at different ages.
Keywords: Analogy, analogy-making, development;
processing constraints.

Introduction
Analogy-making is, without question, one of the most
singularly important ways in which children gradually
make sense of their world. Extensive work suggests
that analogy-making, in the sense of understanding
and/or generating relations between objects or
situations in the world, is a cognitive ability that
develops only gradually (Gentner, 1988, etc.).
Further, it is well established that, while attributematching precedes relation-mapping in children, the
preference for the latter occurs earlier or later
depending on the child's familiarity with the domains
involved (Gentner, 1988; Rattermann & Gentner,
1998; Goswami & Brown, 1990; etc.).
In this paper we will focus on two central lines
invoked to explain child development. First,
children's development can be explained in terms of
the gradual increase over time of their structured
knowledge of the world (Goswami & Brown, 1990;
Vosniadou, 1995). According to Goswami (1992,
2001), analogical reasoning is already available in
infancy and it is only the lack of conceptual
knowledge in one of the domains involved in the
analogy that prevents children from deriving the
correct analogies. This view separates the knowledge

required to do the analogy from the structure mapping
process itself. A second line of research emphasizes
the role and development of cognitive factors that
come under the heading of "executive functions."
This latter approach claims that young children's
ability to make analogies is tied to improvements in
their executive functions that allow them to better
handle cognitive load as they grow older. It is now
well known that the so-called executive functions
develop until the end of adolescence (Davidson,
Amso, Anderson, and Diamond, 2006). Halford
(1993) relates the ability to do analogy-making to the
ability to handle the cognitive load associated with
dealing with a number of relations simultaneously.
More recently, Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak
(2006) and Thibaut, French, Vezneva (2008) have
stressed the importance of cognitive constraints in
analogy-making.
In addition, analogy-making, in general, requires
retrieving relations that are not immediately available
in working memory when the base situation is
presented. Limitations on the cognitive resources
involved in processing mean that certain types of
analogies, especially, those involving conflicts
between perceptual and relational matches, should be
harder to make. Children have more limited cognitive
resources than adults and, therefore, should find these
analogies more difficult to do. In their studies,
Richland et al. used scene analogy problems
consisting of pairs of scenes illustrating relations
among objects. The authors manipulated featural
distraction by varying the identity of an object in the
second scene of the each pair. So, for example, if the
base scene included a running cat as part of the
relation (i.e., dog chases cat), they added to the target
scene a distractor object (i.e., an object that was not
part of the chase relation) that was either perceptually
similar (a sitting cat) or dissimilar (a sandbox) to the
object of the chase relation in the base scene. Results
revealed that stimuli with the similar distractors
elicited more errors than the stimuli with the
dissimilar ones.

Goals of the present paper
In the what follows, we use the A:B::C:D forcedchoice paradigm from Goswami and Brown (1990).

1048

We will focus on the interaction between children's
semantic knowledge and executive functions. To our
knowledge, there are no studies in which the status of
the semantic knowledge involved in an analogy and
the executive constraints involved by the task are
manipulated. We manipulate semantic knowledge by
controlling the semantic associative strength between
the A and B terms and between the C and D terms.
The cognitive load associated with executive
functioning was manipulated by varying the number
of semantically related distractors in each problem.
We reasoned that if children had to inhibit three
distractor relations, this would engender more
cognitive load than inhibiting a single distractor
relation and. thereby, would lead to more errors.
In the Goswami and Brown (1990) A:B::C:D
forced-choice paradigm children are shown drawings
depicting A, B, C and a set of possible solutions for
D. In their experiment only one of the proposed
solutions was the desired analogical match. Another
proposed solution was a semantically related
distractor match along with the other two proposed
solutions. The analogical matches, however, were
also semantically related to C. In other words, in
order to choose the desired analogical match, the
presence of A:B was frequently not necessary at all.
In their experiment, this was confirmed in a test
condition in which the authors introduced C, without
the A-B pair, and asked children to find a picture
among a set of 4 possible solutions that went with C.
As predicted, a high number of semantically related
choices were selected. However, a comparable
number of analogical matches were also selected (see
Figure 1 in Goswami & Brown, 1990) For example,
when shown a picture of a dog, there were four
possible choices for D: doghouse, bone, cat,
(different) dog.
Here, the a priori semantic
association between dog and doghouse is enough to
elicit the choice of doghouse a high percentage of the
time, whether or not this was preceded by bird:nest.
In light of this, we conjectured that using less
semantically related analogical matches would force
the children to rely more on the relation between the
initial A:B pair, requiring them to move back and
forth between this pair and the possible target pairs in
order to find the correct mappings. This exploration,
which is not necessary if C and one of the solution
choices are too closely related semantically, is
particularly important if mapping is seen as a process
in which the structures and attributes in the base and
target domain gradually become available to
processing and, in particular, do not have a constant
salience throughout processing (Mitchell &
Hofstadter, 1990; Mitchell, 1993; French, 1995).
We, therefore, manipulated two factors — namely,
the associative strengths between the A:B and C:D

pairs, and the number of semantically related
distractors, one or three. For example, in the analogy
bird:nest::dog: ??, the expected solution would be a
doghouse, with bone as a semantically related
distractor and two unrelated distractors in the
condition with one semantic distractor. The
distractors bone, muzzle and cat were used in the
condition with three semantic distractors.
We expected that the use of relational choices with
less of a semantic relation to C and the presence of
more semantic distractors would make the analogies
harder to solve and lead to more errors because, in
both cases, processing loads are increased. In the first
case, where the semantic relation of the solution to C
is weaker, the solution does not come immediately to
mind, and, therefore, requires children to explore each
of the options more carefully. Similarly, in the
condition with three semantic distractors, they have to
inhibit more semantic candidates than in the onedistractor case, thus leading to more errors. These
predictions contrast with the standard "knowledge"
view, that posits that these factors should have only
marginal effects, once the child possess the semantic
knowledge relating A and B, and C and D (Goswami
& Brown, 1990) or the relational priming hypothesis
(Leech, Mareschal, & Cooper, 2008) that equates
analogy-making with a priming phenomenon, where
the prime arises directly and unambiguously from
A:B. This might be the case for strongly semantically
related A:B pairs in which C has no influence on that
relationship, but it is not, in general, the case (French,
2008).

Experiment
We used the traditional A:B::C:? analogy-making
paradigm, i.e., one in which the "relational" choice is
the more valid one. In this experiment, we used line
drawings of existing entities, living things or artifacts.
We called the first pair (A:B) the Base Pair and the
(C:?) pair the Target Pair. The third stimulus (C) had
to be matched with a fourth stimulus (D), such that
the relation between C and D was “the same as” the
relation between A and B. (See Fig. 2). The material
was patterned after Goswami and Brown (1990).
This experiment was a 2 x 2 x 2 mixed design with
Age (4-year-olds and 5-year-olds) as a between
factor, Association strength (strong vs. weak) and
number of semantic distractors (one or three) as
within factors. The dependent variable was the
number of correct relational matches.
Methods
Participants. A total of 32 children took part in this
experiment: 13 4-year-old children (M = 54 months)
and 19 5-year-old children (M = 67 months)
participated in the experiment.

1049

weak association
1 semantic distractor
analogy
problem
wolf : meat ::
goat : ?
man : plate ::
pig : ?
bird : plane ::
fish : ?

3 semantic distractors

distractors
solution

semantic unrelated

grass

horns

envelope, vase

trough

pig's tail

key, pen

boat

fisherman sofa, glasses

analogy problem
child : bed ::
cat : ?
jacket : wardrobe ::
ring : ?
dress : hanger ::
coat : ?

solution

semantic distractors

basket

mouse, whiskers, claws

box

finger, necklace, watch

hook

scarf, sleeve, sweater

strong association
1 semantic distractor
analogy
problem
spider : web ::
bee : ?
bird : nest ::
dog : ?
train : rail ::
boat : ?

3 semantic distractors

distractors
solution
hive

semantic unrelated
motorcycle,
flower
frame

doghouse bone

guitar, apple

water

stool, hat

marine

analogy problem
cow : milk ::
hen : ?
glove : hand ::
shoe : ?
hen : chick ::
horse : ?

solution

semantic distractors

egg

comb, grain, fox

foot

sock, lace, sandal

foal

saddle, stable, mane

Figure 1. Set of analogy problems and distractors used in the Experiment 1
Weak association, 1 semantic distractor

Weak association, 3 semantic distractors

?

unrelated

semantic

unrelated

analogical

?

semantic

semantic

analogical

semantic

Strong association, 1 semantic distractor
Strong association, 3 semantic distractors

?

unrelated

analogical

unrelated

semantic

?

analogical

semantic

semantic

semantic

Figure 2. Example of the four types of analogies used, i.e., weak vs strong combined with 1 vs. 3 distractors.

1050

Materials
The experiment was composed of a total of 13 trials
consisting of 1 practice trial and 12 experimental
trials. Each of the four conditions consisted of 3 trials.
The strength of the semantic association on a 1-to-7
scale of 230 pairs of words corresponding to the
pictures used in the experiment was determined
empirically by 16 university students. On this basis a
group of strongly associated and a group of weakly
associated items were drawn up. A t-test was
performed to ensure that the average values of the
pairs of items comprising each set differed
significantly (see Figure 1 for the list of items,
solution and distractors, and Figure 2 for an example
of each type of trial).
Procedure
The children were instructed to play a game in which
they would be choosing pictures that went together.
When they saw the picture cards, they were asked to
identify them. If they were not able to identify an
object, the experimenter told them the name of that
object and explained to them how it is used. They saw
the A:B pair and the C item in an array with the first
two items grouped together to the left. The C item
was alone on the right. Next to the C item there was a
box containing a question mark for the solution item.
They studied these items and, without seeing the
Target items, were asked to predict what image they
would put in the box with the question mark in order
to complete the pattern. They were then shown the
four Target items and were asked to point to the one
that completed the series of items (cf. Goswami &
Brown, 1990). They were asked to justify their choice
for each trial: “Why did you choose this one?”
In the second part of the experiment, children’s
understanding of the semantic relation between A and
B and between C and D was assessed. They were
shown the A:B pairs and were asked why the two
items of each pair went together. The same was true
for the C:D pairs.

Results
Performance was measured as a percentage of correct
responses. By “correct” we mean the choice of the
item that was the valid relational (i.e., most obvious
relational) match. We eliminated all the trials in
which either the children did not understand the
semantic relation between the A-B terms or between
the C-D terms, to be sure that children did not fail
because they did not have the relevant knowledge for
some of these pairs.
We ran a three-way mixed ANOVA on the data
with Age as a between factor and Association
strength (strong vs. weak) and number of semantic

distractors (one or three) as within factors. The
ANOVA revealed significant main effects for two of
the factors and an interaction between association
strength and number of distractors. Children aged 5
performed better than 4 year-olds, F(1,30) = 4.077, p=
.05, η p2 = 0.12 and strongly associated analogies were

better understood than weakly associated analogies,
F(1 ,30) = 16.76, p<.001, η p2 = 0.36 .
The effect of number of distractors was also
significant, F(1,30) = 9.41, p<.01, η p2 = 0.24 . The
interaction between association strength and number
of distractors association was also significant, F(1,
30)=6.67, p<.02, η p2 = 0.18
proportion
correct
1 semantic distractor
3 semantic distractors

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20

0.25 =
Chance

0.10
0.00

weak association

strong association

Figure 3. Interaction between Association and Number
of Semantic Distractors

Discussion
The key finding is that when the items of the A:B pair
(Base pair) and C:Solution (Target pair) are weakly
associated (e.g., man:plate::pig:trough), increasing
the number of non-solution distractor items that are
semantically related to C has a more deleterious effect
than the same increase when the items of the A:B pair
are strongly associated (e.g., spider:web::bee:hive).
In other words, whether there are 1 or 3 distractors
that are semantically related to C has little effect on
performance if A:B and C:Solution are strongly
associated. On the other hand, going from 1 to 3
distractors that are semantically related to C has a
significant negative effect on performance for weakly
associated Base and Target pairs.
This result makes perfect sense in the framework
of a cognitive load and search space hypothesis. We
would expect that difficulties arise to a greater extent
when the associations are weak and when there are
many semantic competitors. When the choices in the
semantic search space are not dominated by a
strongly associated Base pair and Target pair, the
search for an appropriate answer becomes more

1051

difficult for two reasons: i) because more search is
required and ii) when several semantic competitors
are available during the search, they must be inhibited
in order to come up with only one solution.
In short, this result fits well with the hypothesis
that limitations in children’s processing load capacity
will affect their performance in analogy-making tasks.
As would be expected, there is a small, but
significant, main effect of age between the four- and
five-year-old children, F(1,30) = 4.1 p = .05 (not
shown in the Figure 2). Also, analogies with strongly
associated items in the Base and Target pairs
produced better performance than for weakly
associated items in the Base and Target pairs, and
finally, the effect of the number of distractors on
performance was significant
The most interesting result of this experiment,
however, is the interaction, showing that the
difference between strong and weak associations was
important when the number of distractors was high,
F(1, 30) = 6.67, p<.02, η p2 = 0.18 . This result is in
contrast with Goswami and Brown’s claim that
children should do the analogy once they have the
necessary knowledge allowing them to understand the
relationships between the components that are
involved in it. In the Goswami and Brown’s (1990)
experiment, most analogies were of the strongassociation type. Our results show that this result
changes significantly when the association strengths
between items are weaker. Analogies of the weakassociation type require the search space to be
explored more broadly and lead to higher error rates.
One could argue that in the strongly associated
analogies the A:B pair was not necessary to find the
relation between C and D. In particular, in the Weak
Association/3-distractor
condition
children’s
performance did not significantly differ from chance
(28%, chance = 25%). Recall that we checked to
ensure that for these analogies (and for all analogies
in the experiment) they understood the items and the
relations between the items composing each A-B and
C-D pair. One could argue that in the 1-semantic
distractor condition, young children were at, or close
to, chance with 57% correct answers because the nonsemantic distractors were not a priori semantically
related. However, young children, nonetheless,
selected a significant percentage of these distractors
(around 25% of errors), which suggests that they
analyzed all the distractors as potential solutions.
According to Goswami and Brown’s theory of
necessary knowledge, increasing the number of
semantic distractors or decreasing the a priori
semantic association strength between the analogy
components should not have dramatically lowered
children’s performance. But we can clearly see that
their performance, in fact, did decrease significantly

under these conditions. This is what one would
expect, however, from a cognitive-load model.
The notion that the semantic strength of the
associations involved in an analogy is a major factor
of analogy resolution sets the present work off from
the work done by Goswami and Brown (1990),
Gentner and colleagues (e.g., Gentner, 1983; Gentner
and Toupin, 1986; Gentner and Ratterman, 1991;
Markman, 1996; etc.), Halford (1993), Mix (2007)
and, most recently, Richland et al. (2006). French
(1995, p. 162) discusses this problem as it relates to
computational models of analogy-making. Here we
have begun to explore it experimentally.
We claim that finding an analogy is a gradual
constructive process whereby various alternatives are
chosen based on their activation and are tested,
compared with other alternatives, re-evaluated,
accepted, rejected and inhibited on the way towards a
solution (Hofstadter & Mitchell, 1990; Mitchell,
1993; French, 1995). In cases, typically where the
associations are very strong (e.g., cow:milk :: bee:?
with choices: sting, honey, wasp, hive), the
semantically related distractors sting, wasp, and hive
interfere very little. On the other hand, where the
associations are weak and there are semantically
related distractors, considerably more exploration and
testing of the various alternatives is necessary,
resulting in the far greater effect of the distractors,
resulting in lower performance.
These results support the notion of the
fundamental role in children’s analogy-making of
their developing ability to handle cognitive load.
When confronted with an analogy, they, like adults,
look for potential solutions or construct these
solutions by testing various hypotheses (i.e., features
and relations between features). When there is no
obvious solution, they construct and compare
different possible solutions and gradually construct
appropriate representations of the objects and the
relations between them necessary to do the analogy.
To find a good solution, they have to inhibit other
salient, but less appropriate solutions, while
remaining flexible enough to replace tentative
solutions with ones that appear to be better, while still
be prepared to return to one’s first choice later on.
The point is that this process generates cognitive load
associated with executive functioning. For example, it
is necessary to maintain in working memory previous
solutions and/or the relations and this has a cognitive
cost that is crucially involved in the final choice of a
solution. As mentioned above, certain authors have
discussed this gradual process of the emergence of a
solution (e.g., Hofstadter & Mitchell, 1990; Mitchell,
1993; French, 1995) that takes into consideration
processing constraints in a theoretical framework, but
the current models of child analogy-making that we

1052

are aware of do not make these constraints on
processing explicit.
In conclusion, we have presented work that
demonstrates the role of association strength among
items making up the base and target pairs of
analogies. We have shown how the amount of
negative influence of semantically related distractors
on the performance of children in doing analogies
varies according to the association strengths of the
pairs involved in the analogy. A theory of analogymaking based on mechanisms of cognitive load
appears to provide a relatively straightforward
explanation of these data, whereas it is hard to see
how other theories that are not based on cognitive
load could explain these results.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported in part by European
Commission grant FP6-NEST-029088.

References
Davidson, M.C., Amso, D., Anderson, L.C.,
Diamond, A. (2006). Development of cognitive
control and executive functions from 4 to 13 years:
Evidence from manipulations of memory,
inhibition, and task switching. Neuropsychologia,
44(11), 2037-2078.
Diesendruck, G. & Bloom, P. (2003). How specific is
the shape bias? Child Development, 74, 168–178
French, R. M. (1995). The Subtlety of Sameness,
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
French, R.M. (2007). The dynamics of the
computational modeling of analogy-making. In the
CRC Handbook of Dynamic Systems Modeling. Paul
Fishwick (ed.), Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press LLC.
French, R.M. (2008). Relational Priming is to
Analogy-making as One-ball juggling is to Sevenball Juggling. The Behavior and Brain Sciences.
386-387
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: a theoretical
framework for analogy-making. Cognitive Science,
7(2), 155-70.
Gentner, D . (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping:
The relational shift. Child Development,
59, 47-59 .
Gentner, D. and Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language
and the Career of Similarity. In Perspectives on
Thought and Language: Inter-relations in
Development, ed. Susan A. Gelman and James P.
Brynes. London: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277–300.
Goswami, 1992 Analogical reasoning in children,
Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.

Goswami, U., & Brown, A.L. (1990). Higher-order
structure and relational reasoning: Contrasting
analogical and thematic relations. Cognition, 36,
207-226.
Goswami, U., (2001). Analogical reasoning in
children. In: In The Analogical Mind: Perspectives
from Cognitive Science, D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak,
and B. N. Kokinov (eds.). Cambridge MA: The
MIT Press/Bradford Books. 437–470.
Halford, G. S. (1993). Children’s understanding: The
development of mental models. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Leech, R., Mareschal, D. & Cooper, R. (2008)
Analogy as relational priming: A developmental
and computational perspective on the origins of a
complex cognitive skill. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 31, 357-414.
Markman, A. B. (1996). Structural alignment in
similarity and difference judgments. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 3(2), 227-230.
Mitchell, M. (1993). Analogy-Making as Perception:
A Computer Model. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Mitchell, M. & Hofstadter, D. R. (1990). The
emergence of understanding in a computer model of
concepts and analogy-making. Physica D 42:322–
34.
Mix, K.S. (2008). Children’s equivalence judgments:
crossmapping effects. Cognitive development, 23,
191-203.
Ratterman, M.J. and Gentner, D., (1998). More
evidence for a relational shift in the development of
analogy: Children's performance on a causalmapping task, Cognitive Development 13(4), 453–
478.
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J.,
(2006). Children’s development of analogical
reasoning: Insights from scene analogy problems.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 94,
249–273.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., & Vezneva, M. (2008).
Analogy-making in Children: The Importance of
Processing Constraints. Proceedings of the Thirtieth
Annual Cognitive Science Society Conference, 475480.
Vosniadou, S. (1995). Analogical reasoning in
cognitive development. Metaphor and Symbol, 10,
297-308.

1053

