UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Coherence based reasoning and models of contract law

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7fb3w25s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Close, Natalie
Ellinghaus, Fred
Heathcote, Andrew
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

1

Coherence Based Reasoning and Models of Contract Law
Natalie Close (natalie.close@newcastle.edu.au)
School of Psychology, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, 2300, Australia.

Andrew Heathcote (Andrew.heathcote@newcastle.edu.au)
School of Psychology, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, 2300, Australia.

Fred Ellinghaus (f.ellinghaus@unimelb.edu.au)
School of Law, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.

Ted Wright (ted.wright@newcastle.edu.au)
School of Law, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, 2300, Australia.
Abstract
We report the results of an experiment examining the effect of
the system of rules (law model) that govern the adjudication
of difficult real-world contract law disputes by senior law
students. Participants rated the importance of facts that varied
in relevance to the dispute throughout the course of making a
decision. Similar to the coherence shift noted by other
researchers studying legal decision making, the importance of
facts decreased or increased consistent with their relevance as
dictated by the law model and the participant’s emerging
decision. We simulated these results, and the interaction
between the effects of dispute difficulty and law model on
decision consensus, using a constraint satisfaction network.
Keywords: Legal reasoning; coherence shift; models of law.

Background
Disputes that reach adjudication within a legal system
involve competing arguments of such complexity that an
impartial third party is required to decide the outcome.
Despite high levels of ambiguity, the presiding judge
processes the facts of a case and reaches a decision that they
believe is fair and due. Understanding the cognitive
processes involved in making complex legal decisions is a
developing area in both cognitive science and empirical
legal studies. Cognitive models of legal decision making
have emerged (Holyoak & Simon, 1999; Thagard, 2004;
2006) and the focus has now turned toward examining the
rules that regulate complex legal decisions (Hirsch, 2006).
This form of rule-based decision making can be best
described as deductive reasoning, despite the analogical
nature of rule creation within common law systems (see
Schauer, 2008).

Models of law
Systems of legal rules or law models fall on a continuum
between the general (broad principles) and specific
(detailed rules). The nature of the best law model to govern
legal decision making has been the subject of a longstanding
jurisprudential debate. This debate is centred on the optimal
specificity of legal rules and the influence of specificity on
legal efficiency, utility and certainty. Legal certainty can be
defined as consensus, which is the amount of agreement
between a panel of judges who decide the same dispute.
Legal scholars believe that optimal specificity is achieved

when legal certainty is maximized, that is, when the rules
lead decision makers to a predictable outcome.
Emerging from the specificity debate is the orthodoxy that
the law is best expressed as highly specific detailed rules,
commonly known as the common law, or case law. Detailed
rules are believed to improve the certainty of law by guiding
the user toward a predictable decision (Sullivan, 1992). The
inflexible and highly specific nature of detailed rules
pinpoint particular facts and evidence within a dispute that
should be considered most important to a decision maker,
and also renders many facts formally irrelevant. This
provides adjudicators with a selective view of the facts to
each dispute. Such selectivity has been characterized as
making detailed rules highly efficient, encouraging decision
makers to arrive at a satisfactory rule-bound decision, rather
than embarking on an idealistic and exhaustive search for
the best outcome (Hirsch, 2006).
However, recently an international move towards the
global harmonization of private law has challenged the
economic value of detailed rules. Advocates of legal
codification argue that summarising law into broad
principles has both economic and legal benefits (Fon &
Parisi, 2004). Broad principles are less specific and thus
more flexible, encouraging the decision maker to consider
more facts and evidence as important to the outcome of a
dispute. The broad principle model of law does not allow
the decision maker a selective view of the case, instead
encouraging the judge to consider a wider array of the
dispute facts and evidence.
The codification movement has been supported by
empirical evidence demonstrating that, contrary to orthodox
opinion, broad principles guide an adjudicator’s decisionmaking to outcomes that are no less certain than outcomes
based on detailed rules. Ellinghaus and Wright (2005)
provided law students with the facts from a contract law
dispute and a statement of the relevant law in the form of
either broad principles or detailed rules. They used ten
ambiguous contract law disputes that produced split
decisions by the Australian appellate court; five classified as
easier to decide and five harder. Participants were asked to
decide the outcome of their dispute based on the statement
of law, and consensus was measured by the proportion of
participants agreeing with the majority decision in each
case. For the easy cases consensus was high for broad
principles but only moderate for detailed rules, whereas for

1740

2

harder cases consensus was moderate under both law
models. These results indicate that broad principles promote
greater consensus than detailed rules and that they do so to
the greatest degree, as seems appropriate, in easier cases.

Models of legal decision making
Simon (1998) presented a model of coherence-based
reasoning (CBR) that describes how legal decision makers
turn conflicting facts into coherent arguments that support
an outcome. The model assumes that over the course of
coming to a decision an adjudicator unconsciously
restructures the facts of a dispute into consistent inferences
that support their decision. The CBR model is implemented
as a connectionist constraint satisfaction network where the
facts and inferences relevant to a dispute are represented by
nodes connected by inhibitory and excitatory links.
Excitatory links join nodes representing consistent aspects
of the dispute and inhibitory links join inconsistent aspects.
Node activations are updated in a way that tends to
converge on a coherent representation, where a mutually
consistent set of nodes becomes highly active and
inconsistent nodes are suppressed (Simon, Krawczyk &
Holyoak, 2004). The difference between the initial
activation, which represents the original statement of facts
in the dispute, and final activation, which represents the
decision and supporting inferences, is called a coherence
shift (Simon, Pham, Le & Holyoak, 2001; Simon, Krawczyk
& Holyoak, 2004; Simon, Snow & Read, 2004; for review
see Simon 1998, 2004).
Holyoak and Simon (1999) demonstrated that behaviour
in a judging task was consistent with the CBR model. In
particular, participants’ rating of case-relevant legal
inferences changed over the course of deciding the dispute.
Agreement with eight legal points designed to favor either
the plaintiff or defendant was moderate and undifferentiated
between the parties at the beginning of the decision task
(pretest). However, over the course of decision making
participants organized the legal points into a coherent story
that supported their eventual decision. The product of this
process was a division between participants’ agreement with
points that support the defendant and plaintiff at the
conclusion of decision making (posttest). Points that
cohered with their emerging decision were rated as more
important over time, while the importance of opposing
points was suppressed. By comparing the pretest and
posttest ratings, Holyoak and Simon concluded that, during
the course of decision making, there is a separation between
the initial and final mental model of the task.
Thagard (2006) argued that explanatory coherence
provides a psychologically plausible account of how
competing explanations are evaluated. Thagard (2004) used
a computational model of causal inference (ECHO), which
is related to the CBR model, to simulate a criminal law
dispute. The dispute was tried twice, with the first jury
finding the defendant guilty of murder, but a second jury
acquitting the defendant after additional evidence was
introduced. The ECHO model produced the same change of

decision, demonstrating the ability of the model to represent
some aspects of human decision making.

Testing Coherence in Contract Disputes
We ran an experiment to test whether the CBR framework
could be used to understand the effect of the different law
models on decisions in contract law disputes. In order to
examine the emergence of coherence we asked participants
to rate the importance of facts several times during the
course of deciding a contract dispute taken from Ellinghaus
and Wright (2005). To examine the effect of law model,
different groups of participants were asked to use statements
of the applicable laws to guide their decision making. This
statement was composed of the laws expressed as detailed
rules or as broad principles. We also classified a set of case
facts according to their relevance to the different law models
in order to determine whether any change in the ratings of
these effects over the course of making a decision would be
influenced by the law model being applied.
In particular, facts were classified as a) “Glue”, b) “Broad
Principle” or c) “Detailed Rule”. Glue facts were part of the
case narrative but were not relevant to the outcome of the
dispute under either law model (legally irrelevant). Broad
principle facts should only be relevant to participants using
the broad principles law model to decide their dispute. They
represent legally relevant information, but this information
is dictated as irrelevant by a detailed rule law model.
Detailed rule facts should be important to participants using
both broad principles and detailed rules as both law models
indicated they were relevant to the outcome of the dispute.
If participants arrived at a decision by developing a coherent
set of causal inferences we predicted that under both law
models glue facts should receive increasingly lower
importance ratings and detailed rule facts increasingly
higher importance ratings. For broad principle facts we
predicted that ratings should differ as a function of law
model. Because detailed rules dictate that these facts should
not be taken into account, participants should give them
increasingly lower ratings. In contrast, as broad principles
allow these facts to be considered, they should be
increasingly rated as important by the group using broad
principles to guide their decision.

Method
Participants (N = 107) were JD (graduate law degree) or
LLB (Bachelor of Laws) students from four Australian
universities who could graduate within the next two years.
An invitation to participate was distributed to eligible
students through the office of the Dean at each law school.
Participants were reimbursed for their time with a A$40 gift
voucher for amazon.com. It took approximately 1.5 hours to
complete the experiment.
Materials consisted of six descriptions of contract law
disputes taken from Ellinghaus and Wright (2005), three of
which were classified as easier and three harder to decide.
These cases embody a range of issues pertinent to contract
law. The third and fourth authors (contract law experts)

1741

3

and law model, F(6,618)=2.95, p<.01. Simple effects
analysis of each fact type showed that these interactions
were due to a) increasing ratings with time for detailed rule
facts, F(3,309)=3.26, p=.022, b) decreasing ratings with
time for glue facts, F(3,309)=4.98, p<.01, and c) a
marginally significant interaction between the effects of
time and law model for broad principal facts due to an
increase with time for the broad principal law model group a
decrease with time for the detailed rules law model group,
F(3,309)=2.56, p=0.055.
Table 1: Consensus with the majority (%, corresponding
frequencies given in brackets) for participants who used
either detailed rules or broad principles to judge disputes
classified as easier or harder to decide.

1

For clarity, Figure 1 averages over case difficulty as difficulty did
not participate in any reliable effects except the four-way
interaction among all factors, F(6,618)=2.52, p=.02. Simple effect
analyses of each fact type showed this interaction was due to
ratings of glue facts. In particular, ratings for the two law model
groups in hard and easy cases differed as a function of time in an
apparently unsystematic manner, F(3,309)=3.11, p=.027.

Detailed Rules
64% (16/25)
59% (16/27)

FACT TYPE
D Detailed Rules

B

Broad Principles G Glue
D

5.5

D
D

D

D

D
5.0

D

4.5

Rating

B

B

B

B

B
B

B

4.0

G
G
3.5

G
G

G

Detailed Rules
1

G

G

G

3

4

LAW MODEL GROUP

Results
A Generalized Linear Model analysis of the binary
consensus data was performed assuming a binomial probit
link function (McCullagh & Nelder, 1989). It revealed
significant main effects of case difficulty (Z=2.01, p=.044)
and law model (Z=2.18, p=.03). Simple effects analysis
showed that there was a significantly greater consensus for
broad principles than detailed rules in easy cases (Z=2.18,
p=.03) but no reliable effect of law model for hard cases
(Z=0.56, p=0.57).
Figure 1 shows mean importance ratings for each fact
type throughout the experiment for each law model group1.
There were highly significant interactions between fact type
and time, F(6,618)=5.4, p<.001, and between fact type, time

Broad Principles
89% (25/28)
67% (18/27)

6.0

Easier Disputes
Harder Disputes

3.0

extracted a total of 15 facts from each case, with equal
numbers of each type (Glue, Broad Principle and Detailed
Rule). They also prepared two statements of the law
applying to each dispute drawing on the materials used in
Ellinghaus and Wright. One statement was based on
Australian Case Law (informally known as the common
law). The other statement of law was based on the draft
Australian Contract Code. The primary distinction between
these two models of law is that Australian Case Law is
comprised of numerous detailed rules, while the code
contains only 27 broad principles.
The experiment was presented on the Internet and
accessed remotely by participants at a time of their
choosing. When they entered the site they were randomly
allocated to one of the six disputes and one of the two
statements of law. After reading the dispute description they
rated the importance of 15 facts (5 of each type) taken from
the dispute (Time 1). Ratings were made on a Likert scale
with responses ranging from 1 (Not Important) to 7
(Extremely Important). On all four occasions where facts
were rated the facts were presented in five groups of three,
with one fact of each type in each group. The order of
presentation of the facts was randomized.
Next, participants read a statement of the law they were to
use in judging the dispute. During this time participants
could switch back and forth between their dispute and the
statement of law freely. After again rating the facts (Time 2)
they were asked to assume the role of a judge and to prepare
and record well-reasoned arguments for both parties to the
dispute based on their law statement. The order of argument
presentation was randomized between subjects. After again
rating the facts (Time 3) participants recorded a decision for
one of the parties and provided written reasons for that
decision, based again on the rules of their statement of law.
They then made a final rating of the facts (Time 4).

Broad Principles
2
Time

Figure 1: Rating of fact importance averaged over all
disputes as a function of time (1=after reading the dispute,
2=after reading the law model, 3=after constructing
arguments and 4=after making a decision), for different fact
types and groups using different law models.

Discussion
The results of the experiment indicate that the explanatory
coherence framework can be used to understand the effect
of the different law models on decisions in difficult contract
law disputes. Holyoak and Simon (1999) investigation of
coherence shifts in a legal context examined how agreement
with pro-plaintiff and pro-defendant inferences changed
over the course of coming to a decision. They found that
ratings of agreement with inferences congruent to the
eventual decision increased, whereas agreement decreased
with inconsistent inferences. We used a similar design but
examined ratings of the importance of different types of

1742

4

case facts. We found a phenomenon related to the coherence
shift reported by Holyoak and Simon whereby the relevance
of facts to the eventual decision determined how ratings
changed over the course of making a decision. Our
participants rated facts that were highly relevant to the
inferences that supported their eventual decision (e.g.,
Detailed Rule facts) as increasingly important. Conversely,
facts that were irrelevant to the decision (e.g., Glue facts)
were rated as increasingly unimportant.
Our design also allowed us to investigate how the set of
rules used in adjudication (the law model) affects the
adjudication process. We identified a set of facts (Broad
Principle facts) that were relevant to the decision under one
law model (broad principles) but which are classified as
irrelevant to the decision under the other law model
(detailed rules). Before being introduced to their law model,
participants rated detailed rule facts as most important and
glue facts as least important with broad principle facts
falling in between. Over the course of coming to a decision
these initial differences increased in approximately the same
way under both law model for the most and least important
(i.e., detailed rule and glue) classes of facts. However, the
change for broad principle facts depended on the law model.
When participants based their adjudication on detailed rules,
which classify broad principle facts as irrelevant, their
importance ratings decreased. Conversely, broad principle
facts were classified as increasingly important by
participants who based their adjudication on broad
principles.
In summary, ratings of fact importance, like ratings of
agreement with legal inferences, change over the course of
decision making. These changes depend on the relevance of
the facts to making a decision, with more relevant facts
receiving increased ratings and less relevant facts decreased
ratings. Two factors determined fact relevance in our
experiment. First, after reading a dispute, but before being
given instruction as to the rules by which a decision should
be reached, participants strongly differentiated between the
importance of the three classes of facts which we examined.
Presumably such differences reflect participants apriori
knowledge of law (as our participants were senior law
students). The second factor was the explicit law model by
which they were asked to judge case. Facts that were rated
equally important before seeing the law model either
increased or decreased in importance depending on whether
the law model classified them as relevant or irrelevant.
Although reliable, this effect was small relative to the initial
differences between fact types, indicating that participants’
prior beliefs had a strong effect despite instructions to
participants to base their decisions on their statement of law.
Our results replicated Ellinghaus and Wright (2005) in
that there was greater consensus amongst participants basing
their decision on broad principles than among participants
basing their decisions on detailed rules, mainly due to
greater consensus in easier disputes (see Table 1). This
phenomenon suggests that easier disputes more clearly
favored one or other party relative to harder disputes,

mainly because of facts that would be considered relevant
under broad principles but irrelevant under detailed rules
(i.e., Broad Principle facts). When adjudication is guided by
detailed rules the influence of broad principle facts is
reduced, and so the difference between easy and hard
disputes is also reduced. This effect was a very strong one,
with the difference in the proportion of participants agreeing
with the majority between easier and harder disputes being
more than four times greater under broad principles than
detailed rules. This strong effect contrasts with the effects of
these factors on fact ratings; a weak but reliable effect of
law model and a null effect of hard vs. easy cases.
In the next section we develop a constraint satisfaction
network model of our task influenced by Simon (1998) and
Thagard (2004). The model represents a preliminary
exploration of how the effects of rules which guide
adjudication can be integrated into the CBR framework. At
this preliminary stage, our focus was on determining
whether such a model could show the qualitative pattern of
effects seen in our experiment rather than providing a
quantitative account.

Integrating Law Models & Coherence Networks
Our model development was guided by a desire to
implement the details of our experiment in a simple manner.
To this end we represented the effects of different types of
facts (e.g., Glue, Broad Principle and Detailed Rule), levels
of evidence (e.g., evidence in harder and easier disputes)
and law models (broad principles and detailed rules)
through units which provide constant inputs to a constraint
satisfaction network. Likely a dynamic representation of
these factors (e.g., as units with changing activation) might
provide as good, if not a better account, but we do not
explore that possibility here.
We also sought an abstract and general characterization of
our model by simulating a large number of networks that
captured the variety among participants and cases. To that
end we used probabilistic processes to determine connection
weights for each network, rather than hand coding
connections to represent relationships specific to a particular
case (e.g., Thagard, 2004). Each random network can be
thought of as a particular dispute-participant combination
drawn from a population. Once again, this does not deny the
importance of Thagard’s more veridical approach. To
facilitate such developments in future work we assumed
binary (±1) valued connection weights, which make it
simpler to code such dispute specific relationships.
The constraint satisfaction network consists of two pools
of units representing causal inferences favoring the two
parties to the dispute. Our simulations used 15 units of each
type, but the same pattern of results was found for smaller
or larger numbers. These defendant and plaintiff “story
units” are connected in the standard way for constraint
satisfaction networks: symmetric excitatory connections
within a pool (made with probability pdd and ppp), symmetric
inhibitory between pools (made with probability pdp), and no
self-connections. Unit activations are initially set at a

1743

5

constant low value (we used 0.01) and on each iteration a
story unit is randomly chosen and its activation updated.
Each update can be considered analogous to a participant
considering and adjusting their assessment of the
plausibility of an inference contingent on the state of other
inferences and sources of evidence. Assuming unit i has a
total input:

neti = ∑ j A jW ji
The summation is over units with activations Aj that have
connection weights, Wji, to unit i. The update on iteration t
is:

Ai (t + 1) =

Ai (t ) × d + (1 − d )(1 − Ai (t )) × neti

neti ≥ 0

Ai (t ) × d + (1 − d )(1 + Ai (t )) × neti

neti < 0

This update equation bounds activation between ±1 for d
close to one, which avoids undershoots and overshoots of
these bounds by this discrete update scheme. We used
d=0.99, but found the same results for similar values.
After repeated updates the network will converge so that
further updates do not cause any more change in activation.
At any point a decision can be read off by determining
which pool has the greatest summed activation (i.e., has the
most excited and least inhibited units overall). Depending
on the relative strengths of excitation and inhibition both
defendant and plaintiff units might increase to a steady
positive value (weak inhibition, e.g., both parties have
stories that do not contradict each other) or one pool may
become all positive and the other negative (strong
inhibition, one story is more plausible and contradicts the
other) or something in between (e.g., some for one party are
suppressed even though that party wins, whereas others
remain plausible for the losing party). Our simulations used
equal probabilities of forming excitatory (pdd and ppp) and
inhibitory (pdp) connections and a low value (0.1). The
absolute of level of this probability did not greatly affect the
pattern of results but changes in the relative levels of
excitation and inhibition had strong effects.
We modeled performance before the introduction of a law
model by assuming only inputs from “fact” units. These
units have constant activations of one and excitatory
connections to story units. Units representing the three types
of facts were assumed to have a lower (Glue, pg), medium
(Broad Principle, pb) and higher (Detailed Rule, pd)
probability of being connected to story units. This reflects
the apriori probability that a participant believes a fact type
is related to a causal inference relevant to the dispute. Our
simulations used 15 fact units, with results being similar for
smaller and larger numbers. We also assumed equal
numbers of units of each type; differences in numbers would
have a similar effect to differences in probabilities. The
probability of deciding for either party, and hence dispute
difficulty, is determined by the relative magnitudes of fact
connection probabilities for defendant pd=(pgd,pbd,pdd) and
plaintiff pp=(pgp,pbp,pdp) units. Larger probabilities for a pool
increase the chance that it will develop higher activation and
hence be chosen as victor. The strength of a facts was
measured by the sum of the activations of the story units to

which it connected (i.e., for fact unit j: Sj=Σi AiWji, where Ai
is story activation and Wji is a fact-story weight). Importance
for a class of facts was assumed to be proportional to the
sum of strengths of units within a class divided by the sum
of all strengths.
Rules were also represented by units which, like fact
units, had a constant activation of one. However, in contrast
to fact units, rule units could have excitatory or inhibitory
connections to story units. The probability of an excitatory
connection (r) differed depending on the law model being
simulated, with a connection always being set to inhibitory
if it was not excitatory. For the detailed rules model this
probability for story unit i was set to ri=D/(D+B+G), where
D, B and G are the number of connections which the story
unit receives from Detail Rule, Broad Principle and Glue
fact units. For example, if a story unit received only
connections from detailed rule facts (i.e., it was a pure
detailed rule inference) it must be excited by the rule units,
whereas if it received no such connections it must be
inhibited.
For
the
broad
principles
model
ri=(D+B)/(D+B+G), so, for example, a story unit would be
inhibited if it was connected only to glue facts. As a
consequence of these assumptions the detailed rule units
tended to have a greater inhibitory effect than broad
principle rule units and that inhibition particularly differed
as a function of inputs from broad principle facts (e.g., a
story unit with only broad principle fact inputs must be
inhibited under the detailed rules model but excited under
the broad principles model).
Figure 2 illustrates average results for 10000 networks of
each type under settings that simulated easier and harder
disputes that favored the defendant. For the harder disputes
glue, broad principle and detailed rules to defendant story
unit connections were generated with pd=(.15,.65,.65) and
for plaintiff story units with pp=c(.15,.15,.55). Note that
both broad principle and detailed rule facts favor the
defendant, but to a much greater degree for the broad
principle facts. For the easy cases pd=(.15,.43,.5) and for
plaintiff story units with pp=c(.15,.32,.45) and so the
balance of evidence favoring the defendant is weaker,
although it is still greater for broad principle than detailed
rule facts. Each network was first run though 10 updates
with only fact inputs, with the resulting fact importance
values being the Time 1 points in Figure 2. The network
was then run through a further 40 updates with importance
being read off after updates 15, 25 and 50 (by 50 cycles
importance was no longer changing although story unit
activation did change further after this). Figure 2 also gives
the percentage of networks that had higher total activation in
the defendant than plaintiff story units pools (i.e., that
decided for the defendant and thus exhibited agreement with
the majority) after 50 updates. Because of the large number
of networks simulated the results in Figure 2 are quite
accurate and so there was no need to perform and statistical
tests on these results.
Figure 2 shows a pattern of results that is quite similar in
some aspects to the results of the experiment given in Table

1744

6

1 and Figure 1. Agreement with the majority was greater for
easy than hard cases under both law models but this effect
was more than four times greater for hard than easy cases.
Despite this large effect on decisions the pattern of fact
importance results was quite similar for hard an easy cases.

0.7

Detailed Rules: 60 %

Broad Principles: 65 %

FACT TYPE
B

Broad Principles D

Glue

0.5

0.6

G Detailed Rules

0.4

D
D

B
B

B

B

B

B

G

G

G

3

4

D

0.3

B

D

D
D

Discussion
The results of the simulation are in reasonable agreement
with the data from our experiment given only four
parameters (pbd,pdd, pbp,pdp) were varied to model the effects.
Likely a much closer fit could have been obtained by a
search of this parameter space, and by varying other
parameters. For example, we observed larger changes in
importance with time when inhibition was increased, either
within the story units or by simulating more rule units. In
any case, the present results seem to confirm the usefulness
of coherence based reasoning models as providing a
framework for understanding the effects of law models.

References

0.2

Importance

D

under detailed rules and a small increase for broad
principles. However, the difference between law models
was smaller than in the data.

0.1

G

0.0

LAW MODEL GROUP
Detailed Rules
1

Broad Principles
2
Time

0.7

Detailed Rules: 64 %

Broad Principles: 88 %

FACT TYPE
B

Broad Principles D

Glue

D
D

D
D

D
D

B

B
B

B
B

B
B

G

G

G
G

G
G

3

4

0.3

0.4

D

0.1

0.2

Importance

0.5

0.6

G Detailed Rules

0.0

LAW MODEL GROUP
Detailed Rules
1

Broad Principles
2
Time

Figure 2. Fact importance and percentage of pro-defendant
decisions for easier (top panel) and harder (bottom panel)
cases for detailed rule or broad principle networks.
In moving from the network with only fact inputs (Time
1) to both fact and rule inputs (Time 2) detailed rule facts
were rated as more important and glue facts less important,
although the latter effect was quite small. As in the
empirical data these effects continued but at a decreasing
rate, for later times although for the network glue
importance was less differentiated between law models than
in the data. The change importance with time for broad
principle facts depended on law model with a clear decrease

Ellinghaus, M.P., & Wright, E.W. (2005). Models of Contract
Law: An empirical evaluation of their utility. Sydney:
Themis Press.
Fon, V., and Parisi, F. (2004). Codifications and the optimal
specificity of legal rules.
George Mason Law and
Economics Research Paper, 4(32).
Hirsch, A. J. (2006). Cognitive jurisprudence. Southern
California Law Review, 76, 1331-1370.
Holyoak, K. J., & Simon, D. (1999). Bidirectional reasoning
in decision making by constraint satisfaction. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 3-31.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295–355.
McCullagh, P. & Nelder, J.A. (1989). Generalized Linear
Models, Chapman & Hall.
Schauer, F. (2008). Why precedent in law (and elsewhere) is
not totally (or even substantially) about analogy.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, (6), 454-460.
Simon, D. (1998). A psychological model of judicial decision
making. Rutgers Law Journal, 30, 1–142.
Simon, D., Krawczyk, D. C., & Holyoak, K. J. (2004).
Construction of preferences by constraint satisfaction.
Psychological Science.15(5), 331-336.
Simon, D., Pham, L. B., Le, Q. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (2001).
The emergence of coherence over the course of decision
making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 24, 1250-1260.
Simon, D., Snow, C. J., & Read, S. J. (2004). The redux of
cognitive consistency theories: Evidence judgments by
constraint satisfaction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 86(6), 814-837.
Sullivan, K. M. (1992). The Justices of Rules and Standards.
Harvard Law Review106 (22).
Thagard, P. (2004). Causal inference in legal decision making:
Explanatory coherence vs. Bayesian networks. Applied
Artificial Intelligence, 18, 231-249.
Thagard, P. (2006). Evaluating explanations in science, law,
and everyday life. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 15, 141-145.

1745

