UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Collapsing Content and Process: Mental Representations are not Static and the Brain is not a
Computer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2sm22307

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kravitz, Dwight
Lupyan, Gary

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Collapsing Content and Process:
Mental Representations are not Static and the Brain is not a Computer
Gary Lupyan (lupyan@sas.upenn.edu)

Dwight Kravitz (kravitzd@mail.nih.gov)

University of Pennsylvania
3401 Walnut St. Philadelphia, PA 19104

National Institutes of Health
Bethesda, MD 20892

The assumption
A widespread assumption in the cognitive sciences that
continues to shape theories from low-level perception to
high-level reasoning is that cognitive processes are distinct
from the representations on which they operate. According
to this view, the brain is like a computer in which content
(data) is qualitatively separate from process (operations on
the data). We will argue that this critical assumption is
largely irreconcilable with data from neuroscience and contemporary behavioral studies of perception and attention.

The problem with the assumption
Although there are theoretical, computational, and rhetorical advantages to placing strict divisions between process
and content, recent findings from a number of domains belie
almost every aspect of such a separation.
First, the process-content separation requires that “content” comprise largely static representations. That is, because content representations are in a sense encapsulated
from downstream processes, they should not be affected by
them. Thus, regardless of the high level context of the observer, the content should remain the same. This assumption
is contradicted by behavioral and electrophysiological findings that context has profound impacts at the earliest levels
of perceptual processing. Likewise, there is mounting evidence that visual attention, rather than selecting from underlying static representation, modulates representations across
multiple levels. For example, Kravitz and Behrmann (2008)
have shown that cueing a given object has consequences
that extend throughout the visual scene.
Second, the division of process and content requires a
complex mechanism by which the process can index the
static representations that are assumed to comprise content.
Consider this problem in the domain of visual attention. One
can rapidly attend to any specific item or group of items in a
complex visual scene, ranging in complexity from oriented
lines to complex objects. If attention cannot have direct
access to perception, then such flexibility necessitates that
attention have a very powerful method of indexing its content. We discuss why such indexing is neurally implausible.
Third, the assumption of separation between content and
process has encouraged a modular view of brain organization resulting in a binding problem. In vision, cortical areas
are thought to be specialized to process particular aspects of
visual stimuli (e.g. color in V4, objects in IT). But in order
for one to attend to e.g., a red car in a scene, there must be
some way to bind together outputs of allegedly modular
areas. Recent work has shown that retinotopic position re-

mains an important aspect of visual representations even in
far anterior visual regions (Kravitz, Vinson, & Baker, 2008).
This and related evidence paints a view of the visual system
in which individual regions have some specialization, but
still maintain sensitivity to other perceptual dimensions.
Thus, a system that appears to be composed of distinct
modules may actually be highly interactive, “softassembling” dynamic representations of stimuli that span
many levels of representation.

The solution and its implications
We argue that content and process must arise within the
same system (Lupyan, Kravitz, et al., in prep). One immediate implication of collapsing content and process is that no
representations are truly static or veridical. In this view,
attention functions in situ with perceptual representations.
The effects of context and intent can potentially alter all
content. All representations, even those contained in early
perceptual areas are dynamic and capture a blend of the
state of the world and the internal state of the observer.
Thus, attending to, categorizing, or making a decision about
a stimulus—even one that is physically present in the current environment—alters its representation at all levels.
Working on these assumptions, Lupyan and colleagues
have shown that even low-level visual processing of familiar items is flexibly modulated by prior knowledge such as
the items’ conceptual category as well as the verbal label
associated with the item.
This approach opens new ways of understanding neural
organization: in this view structure is highly reflective of
function, rather than being arbitrary or genetically specified.
Kravitz, D., & Behrmann, M. (2008). The space of an object: Object attention alters the spatial gradient in the surround. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Human Perception and Performance, 34(2), 298-309.
Kravitz, D. J., Vinson, L. D., & Baker, C. I. (2008). How position dependent is visual object recognition? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(3),
114-22.
Lupyan, G. (2007). Reuniting Categories, Language, and Perception. In
Twenty-Ninth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1247-1252). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Lupyan, G. (2008). The Conceptual Grouping Effect: Categories Matter
(and named categories matter more). Cognition, 108 , 566-577.
Lupyan, G., Kravitz, D., Baker, C., Behrmann, M., Elman, J., Goldstone,
R., Lamme, V., Martin, A., McClelland, J., Spivey, M., Plaut, D.,
Thompson-Schill, S. The Dynamic Nature of Mental Representations:
Towards a Collapse of Content and Process. MS in prep
Lupyan, G., & Spivey, M. J. (2008). Now You See It, Now You Don't:
Verbal but not visual cues facilitate visual object detection. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 963-968). Austin, TX.
Lupyan, G., & Spivey, M. (2008). Perceptual processing is facilitated by
ascribing meaning to novel stimuli. Current Biology, 18 (10), R410R412.

2607

