UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparing MOSAIC and the Variational Learning Model of the Optional Infinitive Stage in
Early Child Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5152k0nm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Freudenthal, Daniel
Gobet, Fernand
Pine, Julian

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparing MOSAIC and the Variational Learning Model
of the Optional Infinitive Stage in Early Child Language
Daniel Freudenthal (D.Freudenthal@Liv.Ac.Uk)
Julian M. Pine (Julian.Pine@Liv.Ac.UK)
School of Psychology, University of Liverpool

Fernand Gobet (Fernand.Gobet@Brunel.Ac.Uk)
School of Social Sciences, Brunel University
Abstract

theories are very different. The VLM is a generativist theory
that states that the grammar that children employ to parse
the input varies probabilistically as a function of the amount
of evidence in the input that supports the hypothesis that
they are learning a language with obligatory tense marking.
MOSAIC is a constructivist theory that views OI errors as
incomplete compound finites (modal/auxiliary plus
infinitive constructions). MOSAIC explains cross-linguistic
differences in rates of OI errors in terms of differences in
the rates at which compound finites occur in the input, as
well as the way in which compound finites pattern across
languages.
This paper aims to compare the VLM and MOSAIC by
determining the success of both theories in explaining levels
of OI errors across five different languages. Since both
theories predict that these levels will be correlated with
measures of the distributional statistics of the input, there is
an obvious possibility that the theories will be equally
successful. A further test of the theories is therefore
conducted by looking at an area where the theories clearly
make different predictions: lexical effects on the pattern of
OI errors. According to the VLM, OI errors are caused by
the fact that the child (probabilistically) entertains the
possibility that she is learning a language that does not mark
Tense. Since this is an attribute of the grammar, the VLM
predicts that rates of OI errors should be roughly equal
across the verbs that the child uses. According to MOSAIC,
OI errors are incomplete compound finites that have been
learned from the input. MOSAIC therefore predicts that
children produce OI errors at differential rates for individual
verbs: OI errors will be frequent for verbs that frequently
occur in compound finites, and infrequent for verbs that
rarely occur in compound finites.

This paper compares MOSAIC and the Variational Learning
Model (VLM) in terms of their ability to explain the level of
finiteness marking in early child Dutch, English, Spanish,
German and French. It is shown that both models are
successful in explaining cross-linguistic variation in rates of
Optional Infinitive (OI) errors, although both models
underestimate the error rate in English. A second set of
analyses shows strong lexical effects in the pattern of errors
across all five languages studied. This finding is problematic
for the Variational Learning Model and provides strong
support for the notion that OI errors are incomplete compound
finites as instantiated in MOSAIC.

Introduction
In many languages, children go through a stage in which
they produce non-finite forms in contexts where a finite
form is obligatory in the adult language. Thus, English
speaking children produce utterances such as he go instead
of the correct he goes, while Dutch speaking children
produce utterances such as Papa lopen (Daddy walk)
instead of Papa loopt (Daddy walks). Since these errors
occur at a stage when the child is also producing correctly
marked finite verb forms, they have come to be known as
Optional Infinitive (OI) errors (Wexler, 1994).
Early theories of the OI stage attempted to explain the
finding that children typically produce OI errors in
obligatory subject languages such as English and Dutch, but
not in optional subject languages such as Spanish and
Italian. What these theories failed to explain, however, is
that there is considerable cross-linguistic variation in the
rates at which children produce OI errors even in obligatory
subject languages. For example, Phillips (1995) reports data
from children learning 9 different languages and concludes
that rates of OI errors vary on a continuum from high in
English and Swedish, through medium in French, Dutch and
German to low (but by no means zero) in Spanish, Italian
Catalan and Hebrew. These data present a problem for
theories that assume a qualitative distinction between OI
and non-OI languages as they suggest that the OI stage is
best viewed as a graded quantitative phenomenon.
Two recent theories that attempt to explain quantitative
variation in OI errors are the Variational Learning Model
(VLM; Legate & Yang, 2007), and MOSAIC (Freudenthal,
et al. 2005, 2007). While both theories attempt to explain
cross-linguistic variation as a function of the distributional
statistics of the input, the underlying assumptions of the

The Variational Learning Model
Legate and Yang’s (2007) Variational Learning Model
(VLM) is designed to account for the quantitative, crosslinguistic pattern of rates of OI errors from a generativist
perspective. According to the VLM, children
probabilistically entertain the hypothesis that they are
learning a language that requires tense marking. The
probability associated with this hypothesis varies
dynamically in response to the linguistic input. Thus, if the
child attempts to parse an utterance that is inconsistent with
the grammar (or parameter setting) that the child entertains,
this grammar will be punished, and its associated

514

probability lowered. According to the VLM, children
initially entertain the possibility that they are learning a
language that does not have tense marking (such as
Mandarin Chinese). For children learning tense-marking
languages, this means that they will initially produce
incorrect utterances that lack inflection (i.e. OI errors). As
children are subjected to input that is inconsistent with this
hypothesis, they will gradually abandon this hypothesis in
favour of the correct hypothesis that they are learning a
tense-marking language. As a result, the number of untensed
utterances that they produce will gradually decrease. An
important feature of the VLM is that the speed with which a
hypothesis is abandoned is dependent on the amount of
evidence against that hypothesis that the child encounters in
the linguistic input. Thus, in languages with rich verb
morphology (such as Spanish) children will quickly
converge on the hypothesis that they are learning a tensemarking language. In languages with impoverished verb
morphology (such as English), this will take longer, and
children are expected to produce more OI errors.
Legate and Yang (2007) test their model by analysing
input from three different languages: English, French and
Spanish. They determine the amount of evidence for a
tense-marking language (or a [+Tense] grammar) by
analysing utterances from corpora of child directed speech.
Utterances that contain verb forms that are overtly tensed or
display tense-dependent morphology are counted as
rewarding a [+Tense] grammar, while (verbal) utterances
that do not display tense or tense-dependent morphology
punish a [+Tense] grammar. Applying their analysis to
English, French and Spanish, Legate and Yang find that the
proportions of verbal utterances that reward the [+Tense]
grammar are .53, .70 and .80 respectively. These numbers
correspond well with rates of OI errors for these languages
that are reported in the literature; English is generally
considered a language with high rates of OI errors, French is
an intermediate language, while OI errors in Spanish are
rare. It could, however, be argued that these languages do
not constitute a particularly strong test of the VLM, as they
are relatively far apart on the continuum of OI languages.
One of the aims of this paper is therefore to provide a
stronger test of the VLM by including two additional
intermediate OI languages: Dutch and German.

characteristics of early child speech. The version of
MOSAIC used for the simulations reported in this paper
combines MOSAIC’s utterance-final bias (as described in
Freudenthal et al. 2007) with a smaller utterance-initial bias
(A preliminary version of this model is described in
Freudenthal et al. (2005)). It employs right edge learning, in
which the representation of an utterance is slowly built up
by starting at the end (right edge) of the utterance and
slowly working its way to the beginning of the utterance.
Right edge learning allows MOSAIC to produce
(incomplete) utterance-final phrases, which resemble certain
types of child error, including subject omission errors (e.g.
go to the shops). MOSAIC’s right edge learning is
complemented with a (slower) left edge learning
mechanism. This mechanism, which builds up
representations from the beginning of the utterance, allows
for the association of short utterance-initial phrases with
(longer) utterance-final phrases, resulting in output with
missing sentence-internal elements. MOSAIC simulates OI
errors by producing compound constructions
(modal/auxiliary plus infinitive constructions) with missing
modals/auxiliaries (e.g he (can) go to the shops). MOSAIC
has been shown to successfully simulate differential rates of
OI errors in English, Dutch, German and Spanish. The
differential rates of OI errors in these languages are
explained by the number of compound constructions in the
input and the way in which these compounds pattern.
English, which has many compound constructions, has high
rates of OI errors. Dutch and German do not have very high
rates of compound constructions, but the fact that these
languages are SOV/V2 languages means that non-finite
forms occur in utterance-final position. Since MOSAIC has
an utterance-final bias, early output from MOSAIC contains
many nonfinite verb forms. Spanish has rates of compounds
that are comparable to Dutch and German, but since object
complements occur after verbs in Spanish, the number of
utterance-final non-finites is not very high. Freudenthal et
al. (2007) show that, cross-linguistically, the rate of
utterance-final non-finites is closely related to the
proportion of OI errors that children produce. However,
certain features of the coding scheme used by Freudenthal et
al. (in particular the restriction of English to utterances
containing a 3rd singular subject) mean that a direct
comparison of English with the other languages is not
possible. The present paper introduces a new coding scheme
that overcomes this problem. The present paper also
introduces an additional language (French) in order to
compare MOSAIC and the VLM across 5 languages that
take up different positions on the OI continuum.

MOSAIC
MOSAIC (Model Of Syntax Acquisition In Children) is a
computational model that has already been applied to the
simulation of the OI phenomenon in English, Spanish,
Dutch and German (Freudenthal et al., 2005, 2007).
MOSAIC learns to produce output corpora of increasing
Mean Length of Utterance (MLU) from input consisting of
orthographically transcribed child directed speech.
Importantly, MOSAIC does this without employing any
abstract linguistic knowledge. That is to say, MOSAIC is a
simple distributional analyser that is dependent on crosslinguistic differences in the distributional statistics of its
input to simulate cross-linguistic differences in the

Cross-linguistic rates of Children’s OI errors
Cross-linguistic rates of OI errors in child speech were
determined by analysing corpora of child speech at an MLU
of approximately 2.0 and determining the proportion of
utterances containing a main verb that did not contain any
inflected verb forms (i.e that only contained non-finite verb
forms). The following languages were studied: English,

515

Cross-linguistic predictions of the VLM

Dutch, German, French and Spanish. The children analysed
for the respective languages were drawn from the following
corpora: Manchester (Theakston et al., 2001), Groningen
(Bol, 1995), Leo (Behrens, 2006), Lyon (Demuth &
Tremblay, 2008), and Nottingham (Aguado-Orea, 2004).
Apart from the Leo corpus, all these corpora are available
through the CHILDES data-base (MacWhinney, 2000).
With the exception of English, distinguishing between finite
and non-finite utterances is relatively straightforward as
non-finite forms are easily distinguished from finite forms1.
In English, however, such a procedure is hampered by the
fact that all present tense forms except for the 3rd singular
match the infinitive. Thus, in contrast to the other languages
studied, English OI errors can only be identified in 3rd
singular contexts. In previous work with MOSAIC this
difficulty was solved by restricting the analysis of English
to utterances containing a 3rd singular subject. However, the
present study specifically aims to compare OI rates across
languages. Since the restriction of English utterances to
utterances containing a 3rd singular subject precludes such a
comparison, the child data for English were hand coded and
the context in the transcript was used to restrict the analysis
to all utterances (including subjectless utterances) that were
produced in a 3rd singular context. For the other languages,
where non-finite and finite forms are easily distinguished,
an automated analysis was performed. Table 1 shows the
results of this analysis. As can be seen in Table 1, there is
clear cross-linguistic variation in the rates of OI errors. OI
errors are rare in Spanish and extremely frequent in English
and Dutch, with intermediate levels of error in German and
French.
In order to determine whether the data from these children
are representative for their languages, one additional child
from each corpus was analysed. The proportion of OI errors
for these children were: Anne (English): .87 (109); Peter
(Dutch) .74 (290); Rah (German): .58 (178), Anais (French):
.41 (203), Lucia (Spanish): .05 (62). These numbers suggest
that the data presented in Table 1 are reasonably
representative of children learning these languages, and are
therefore suitable for a comparison of the VLM and
MOSAIC.

The predictions of the VLM were tested by analysing the
child-directed speech from the corpora analysed in the
previous section, and determining the proportion of
utterances that provide evidence that the language that the
child is learning is a tense-marking language (i.e. a language
with a [+Tense] grammar). Whether or not an utterance
provides evidence for a [+Tense] grammar depends on
whether or not the utterance contains verb forms in tensed
position that are either overtly marked for tense or display
tense-dependent morphology. Since languages differ in
terms of the number of verb forms that are overtly marked
for tense, this analysis differs for different languages. The
analysis performed on English, French and Spanish matches
that of Legate & Yang (2007), to whom the reader is
referred for further details. Due to space restrictions, only
the analysis of English is briefly outlined here. In English,
all 3rd singular present tense forms carry the –s morpheme
and are thus counted as rewarding the [+Tense] grammar.
The other present tense forms do not display tensedependent morphology and are thus counted as punishing
the [+Tense] grammar, as are present tense modals. Past
tense modals, as well as (inflected forms of) copula and
auxiliary be and have are marked for tense and thus reward
the [+Tense] grammar. Thus, utterances like He can go, and
They go do not display tense-dependent morphology and
punish the [+Tense] grammar, while utterances like He is
going and He goes reward the [+Tense] grammar. Regular
past tense forms are slightly ambiguous as they match the
participle. In line with Legate and Yang’s analysis such
forms were counted as tensed when they occurred in tensed
position (i.e. in the absence of an auxiliary as in He walked),
and as untensed when they did not occur in tensed position
(i.e. in the presence of an auxiliary as in They have walked).
The latter utterance was thus counted as punishing the
[+Tense] grammar, unless the auxiliary itself was tensed
(He has walked).
Legate and Yang do not perform an analysis of Dutch and
German, and one therefore needs to assess Dutch and
German verb morphology in order to determine what
utterances reward and punish the [+Tense] grammar. Since
Dutch and German verb morphology are almost identical,
the analysis will be illustrated using an example of a
(regular) Dutch verb: werken (work).

Table 1: Cross-linguistic rates of OI errors at an
MLU of approximately 2.0.
MLU
Prop. OI errors
(Total number of
utterances)
Becky (English)
2.17
.97 (98)
Matthijs (Dutch)
2.06
.77 (347)
Leo (German)
2.08
.58 (3967)
Tim (French)
1.96
.32 (250)
Juan (Spanish)
2.17
.20 (305)

Table 2: Conjugation of a regular Dutch verb.
Infinitive: werken
Participle:gewerkt
Present Tense Past Tense
1st singular
Ik werk
Ik werkte
2nd singular
Jij werkt
Jij werkte
3rd singular
Hij werkt
Hij werkte
1st plural
Wij werken
Wij werkten
2nd plural
Jullie werken
Jullie werkten
3rd plural
Zij werken
Zij werkten

1
This is not strictly true for Dutch and German where plural
present tense forms match the infinitive. However, since plural
forms are relatively infrequent, this complication is unlikely to
greatly affect the estimate of error rates.

As can be seen in Table 2, plural present tense forms match
the infinitive and were thus counted as punishing the

516

[+Tense] grammar. Past tense forms and the 2nd and 3rd
present tense singular display Tense (or Tense-dependent
morphology) and were counted as rewarding the [+Tense]
grammar. The 1st singular present tense form, while distinct
from the infinitive, matches the verb stem. In line with
Legate and Yang’s analysis of English, French and Spanish,
such forms were counted as punishing the [+Tense]
grammar. Dutch and German modals differ from English
modals in the sense that they inflect as main verbs (and can
be used as main verbs). Thus, inflected modals (past tense
and singular present tense, except when matching the stem)
were counted as rewarding the [+Tense] grammar.
The inflection of German verbs is almost identical to the
inflection of Dutch verbs, with the following exceptions.
The 1st singular present tense has an –e suffix. Since this
suffix consists of a single schwa (which is often not
pronounced), this form was counted as a [+Tense] punishing
stem. The 2nd singular present tense form has an –st (rather
than –t) suffix. Like the Dutch 2nd singular, this form was
counted as rewarding the [+Tense] grammar. The German
2nd plural present Tense, has a –et, rather than –en suffix.
Since this form does not match the infinitive, it was counted
as rewarding the [+Tense] grammar. One final difference
between Dutch and German is that in Dutch, but not in
German, the 2nd singular present tense –t suffix is dropped
in questions (which are formed through main verb
inversion). Thus, the declarative Jij werkt (You work) is
marked for Tense and rewards the [+Tense] grammar, but
the interrogative Werk jij? (Work you?) is not. This feature
of Dutch results in the number of stems in Dutch input
being higher than in German.
The analysis of the amount of evidence for the [+Tense]
marking grammar was performed in an identical manner for
all five languages. Based on the analysis of the verb
morphology, a list of verb forms that were and were not
marked for Tense was drawn up. Next, an (automated)
search was performed on all parental utterances in the
corpus. All utterances that contained (at least one) verb form
that was marked for Tense were counted as rewarding the
[+Tense] grammar, while utterances that only contained
verb forms that were not marked for Tense were counted as
punishing the [+Tense] grammar. The proportion of
utterances with Tensed verbs then constituted the amount of
evidence for the [+Tense] grammar in that language. Table
3 displays the results of this analysis. The numbers derived
for English, French and Spanish closely match those
reported by Legate & Yang (.53, .70 and .80 respectively)
As can be seen in Table 3, the VLM correctly predicts
the ordering of Spanish, French, German and Dutch.
However, it fails to predict the high levels of OI errors in
English, which actually provides more evidence for the
[+Tense] grammar than Dutch. The VLM therefore predicts
that Dutch children should make more OI errors than
English children, when the data show the opposite pattern.
One possible way of resolving this discrepancy would be to
argue that the present analyses underestimate the amount of
evidence for the [+Tense] grammar in Dutch and German

by treating stems (that do not match the infinitive) as
punishing the [+Tense] grammar when they should be
treated as rewarding the [+Tense] grammar. In fact,
however, treating stems as if they rewarded the [+Tense]
grammar results in a worse rather than a better fit to the
child data. Thus, when Dutch and German stems are treated
as tensed forms, the amount of evidence in Dutch and
German increases to .85 and .83 respectively, levels that are
even higher than the estimates for French and Spanish. This
would result in the VLM predicting low levels of OI errors
in Dutch and German. What’s more, there is no longer a
difference between German and Dutch in the amount of
evidence for a [+Tense] grammar. This means that, if the
VLM treated stems as rewarding the [+Tense] grammar, the
model would fail to predict the differential rates of OI errors
that exist between these languages.
Table 3: Cross-linguistic proportion of tensed
utterances in child-directed speech.
Number
Proportion
of clauses
Tensed
Becky (English)
16138
.54
Matthijs (Dutch)
8176
.49
Leo (German)
18413
.62
Tim (French)
14169
.67
Juan (Spanish)
19044
.81

Cross-linguistic predictions of MOSAIC
MOSAIC’s predictions about cross-linguistic variation in
rates of OI errors were derived by training MOSAIC on the
child-directed speech of the children analysed in Table 1.
The models were trained until their output reached an MLU
of approximately 2.0. The models’ output was then analysed
in the same manner as the child data. Utterances were
divided into utterances containing only non-finite verb
forms (OI errors), and utterance that contained (at least one)
finite verb form (or utterances containing both finite and
non-finite verb forms). Next, the proportion of OI errors was
determined. As with the child analysis, such an analysis is
problematic in English where an OI error can only be
reliably diagnosed in a 3rd singular context. The solution to
this problem was similar to the one employed in the child
analysis (where the corpus was hand coded for 3rd singular
contexts). The entire input corpus (~ 25,000 utterances) was
hand coded to determine which verbs were uttered in a 3rd
singular context. All such verbs were tagged for having
occurred in a 3rd singular context. This made it possible to
differentiate utterances in MOSAIC’s output that had been
learned from a 3rd singular context (e.g. (he can) go-3RD)
from those that had been learned from a non-3rd singular
context (e.g. you can go). Table 4 presents the rates of OI
errors in MOSAIC’s output. As can be seen in Table 4,
MOSAIC performs slightly better than the VLM in that it
correctly predicts the ordering of OI errors across the five
languages: Spanish < French < German < Dutch < English.
It is also apparent, however, that MOSAIC underestimates
the levels of OI errors in English to a far greater extent than

517

it does for the other languages. Thus, like the VLM,
MOSAIC has difficulty explaining the high levels of OI
errors found in English children. The fact that English is a
special case is underscored by an analysis of the proportion
of utterance-final non-finites in the input (.89 for English,
.87 for Dutch, .69 for German, .40 for French and .21 for
Spanish). Rates of OI errors in English children are higher
than the proportion of utterance-final non-finites, whereas
they are lower for all other languages. A possible
explanation for this discrepancy will be discussed in the
conclusions.

French this was not possible (as the children produced few
OI errors), and the sample analysed in Table 1 (at an MLU
of 2.0) was used. Using a sample with few OI errors
inevitably means that the likelihood of finding a significant
correlation is reduced, as the variation in the sample is
decreased relative to a sample where finite and infinitive
uses occur at roughly the same rates.
As in the earlier analyses, the analysis of English was
restricted to utterances produced in 3rd singular contexts. In
addition, in the German and Dutch analyses, plural forms
were counted as finites, rather than as the infinitives they
match. The correlations between children’s infinitive uses
and parental compound uses of individual verbs are
displayed in Table 5. Two correlations are reported for each
language. The first correlation was computed on all verbs
produced by the child. This set includes verbs that were
used only once. Such verbs are likely to contribute to
sampling error as their estimate of finite usage is likely to be
somewhat unreliable. A second correlation was therefore
computed on a restricted set of verbs: verbs that were used
at least three times by the child. This restricted set is likely
to provide a better estimate of the child’s finite and
infinitive usage.

Table 4: Proportion of OI errors in MOSAIC models
MLU
Prop. (N)
Becky (English)
2.07
.72 (119)
Matthijs (Dutch)
1.95
.65 (561)
Leo (German)
1.96
.49 (1508)
Tim (French)
1.95
.32 (510)
Juan (Spanish)
2.08
.15 (1514)

Distinguishing between MOSAIC and VLM
While MOSAIC and the VLM make surprisingly similar
predictions regarding the levels of OI errors in the different
languages, there is an area where the two theories clearly
make different predictions. Since the VLM operates at the
level of the grammar, it predicts that children’s rates of OI
errors will be roughly equal across different verbs. That is,
since the child probabilistically represents the need for verbs
to be tensed in the language it is learning (and this
probability is determined by the amount of evidence for the
[+Tense] grammar in the input), it should apply Tense with
equal probability regardless of the identity of the verb it
produces. According to MOSAIC, the nature of the child’s
output is more directly determined by the input it hears. OI
errors are compound finites with missing modals or
auxiliaries. MOSAIC therefore predicts that the verbs
produced as OI errors will be those that occur in compound
finites in the input, whereas verbs that tend to occur in finite
form in the input will rarely be used in non-finite form.
In order to test for such lexical effects, finite and nonfinite uses of verbs by the children analysed earlier were
tabulated on a verb-by-verb basis. That is, across the
languages we assessed for each individual (main) verb how
often it was used as a correct finite form and an incorrect
infinitive form. Next, the parental speech directed at these
children was analysed to determine how often the target
verbs used by the children were used as a finite form (in a
simple finite utterance) or as an infinitive in a compound
construction. A high correlation (across verbs) between
these rates of finite and infinitive use constitutes strong
evidence that children’s OI errors are not finite
constructions with missing inflection, but rather compound
constructions with missing modals or auxiliaries. Such a
finding would be problematic for the VLM. Where possible
(in English, Dutch and German) the analysis was carried out
on a sample of child speech where finite and non-finite
verbs occurred at roughly equal rates. For Spanish and

Table 5: Correlations between children’s level of finiteness
marking and parental use of compound constructions.
(Number of contributing verbs in parentheses). + = p < .10,
* = p < .05, ** = p < .01
Full set
Restricted set
English
.35* (43)
.55* (15)
Dutch
.71** (102)
.83** (59)
German
.48** (143)
.68** (69)
French
.45** (75)
.57** (37)
Spanish
.40** (69)
.29+ (43)
As can be seen in Table 5, there are clear lexical effects in
all of the five languages. Thus, nine out of ten correlations
are significant at p < .05, and the remaining correlation
(Spanish) is marginally significant (p =.056, two-tailed).
These results are difficult to explain in terms of the VLM,
and provide strong evidence for the claim that OI errors are
learned from compound finites in the input.

Conclusions
This paper set out to test two accounts (MOSAIC and the
VLM) of cross-linguistic differences in the rate at which
children produce OI errors. The analyses reported suggest
that both MOSAIC and the VLM fit the cross-linguistic data
surprisingly well. Both models correctly predict the relative
order of rates of OI errors in Spanish, French, German and
Dutch. However, both models also struggle with the high
rates of OI errors in English. A further analysis showed
clear evidence of lexical effects in the data, which are
predicted by MOSAIC, but are problematic for the VLM.
The reason that the VLM fails to predict the high levels of
OI errors in English appears to be that it operates at too high
a level of abstraction. Thus, while the evidence for tense

518

marking on English lexical verbs is indeed very low (lower
than it is for Dutch), English input actually provides a
substantial amount of evidence for tense marking in the
form of tensed copulas and auxiliaries. According to the
VLM, this evidence ought to drive down the level of OI
errors in English children’s speech, but it does not appear to
do so. The implication is that for a model like the VLM to
explain the data on English, it would need to be made
preferentially sensitive to the very low level of tense
marking on lexical verbs.
The reason that MOSAIC fails to predict the high levels
of OI error in English is that the proportion of utterancefinal verbs that are non-finite in English is simply not high
enough to explain the almost exclusive production of OI
errors during the early stages. One reason why English
might be a special case in this respect is that, in English, the
infinitive is indistinguishable from the bare stem. Since the
only present tense form that is not a bare stem in English is
the 3rd singular, a much higher proportion of lexical verb
forms in the input are either infinitives or forms that are
indistinguishable from the infinitive. This fact is likely to
slow down the process of paradigm building in English and
result in default effects where the child produces a bare
stem/infinitive in the absence of knowledge of the relevant
3rd singular or past tense form. Since MOSAIC is insensitive
to the morphological structure of the verbs that it encodes, it
is clearly unable to simulate this kind of default effect.
Of course, if it is necessary to supplement MOSAIC’s
account of OI errors with some kind of paradigm-building
account in order to explain the English data, one might
wonder whether it is possible to simply replace MOSAIC
with a paradigm-building account (e.g. MacWhinney,
1978). We would argue that there are at least three reasons
for seeing MOSAIC and paradigm building as
complementary rather than competing accounts. First,
although a paradigm-building account provides a very
natural way of explaining OI errors in English, it fares much
less well as an account of OI errors in other languages. This
is because, in languages other than English, infinitives are
typically not the most frequent form in the language, and
tend to carry infinitival morphology that distinguishes them
from other more frequent forms. It is therefore difficult to
see why children learning these languages would default to
the infinitive rather than to the bare stem or to some other
more frequent inflected form.
Second, a paradigm-building account of OI errors would
seem to predict that defaulting to the infinitive would reflect
some more general confusion on the part of the child
between finite and non-finite forms. In fact, however, a key
feature of the OI stage is that, although children produce
infinitives in tensed position, their use of these forms is
highly sensitive to differences in the distributional
properties of finite and non-finite forms in the input. For
example, in Dutch and German, children correctly place
finite forms before their complements and the infinitives in
OI errors after their complements (Wexler, 1994).

Finally, a paradigm-building account offers no obvious
explanation of the lexical effects found in the present study.
These effects, which can be seen in all 5 of the languages
under investigation, suggest that those verbs that occur as
OI errors in children’s speech also tend to occur as
infinitives in adult compound finites. They thus provide
strong support for the idea, instantiated in MOSAIC, that OI
errors are learned from compound structures in the input.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the ESRC under grant number
RES000230211.

References
Aguado-Orea, J. (2004). The acquisition of morpho-syntax
in Spanish: Implications for current theories of
d e v e l o p m e n t . Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University of Nottingham, United Kingdom.
Behrens, H. (2006). The input-output relationship in first
language acquisition. Language and Cognitive Processes,
21, 2-24.
Bol, G. W. (1995). Implicational scaling in child language
acquisition: the order of production of Dutch verb
constructions. In M. Verrips & F. Wijnen, (eds.), Papers
from the Dutch-German Colloquium on Language
Acquisition, Amsterdam Series in Child Language
Development, 3, Amsterdam: Institute for General
Linguistics.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. M. & Gobet, F. (2005). Simulating
the cross-linguistic development of optional infinitive
Errors in MOSAIC. In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou & M.
Buchiarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 702-707).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. M., Aguado-Orea, J. & Gobet, F.
(2007). Modelling the developmental patterning of
finiteness marking in English, Dutch, German and
Spanish using MOSAIC. Cognitive Science, 31, 311-341.
Legate, J. A. & Yang, C. (2007). Morphosyntactic learning
and the development of tense. Language Acquisition, 14,
315-344.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analysing talk (3rd Edition). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B. (1978). The acquisition of
morphophonology. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 43, 1-123.
Phillips, C. (1995). Syntax at age two: Cross-linguistic
differences. In C. Schütze, J. Ganger & K. Broihier (eds.),
Papers on Language Processing and Acquisition. MIT
Working Papers in Linguistics.
Theakston, A. L., Lieven, E. V. M., Pine, J. M. & Rowland,
C. F. (2001). The role of performance limitations in the
acquisition of verb-argument structure: an alternative
account. Journal of Child Language, 28, 127-152.
Wexler, K. (1994). Optional infinitives, head movement and
the economy of derivation in child grammar. In N.
Hornstein & D. Lightfoot (Eds.), Verb Movement (pp.
305-365). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

519

