UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparison-Induced Distortion of Probability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/85p3g4vv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bloomfield, Amber
Choplin, Jessica

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparison-Induced Distortion of Probability
Amber N. Bloomfield (abloomfi@depaul.edu) and Jessica M. Choplin (jchoplin@depaul.edu)
DePaul University Department of Psychology
2219 North Kenmore Avenue
Chicago, IL 60614-3504

magnitude than they actually are (Choplin, 2007). Similarly,
two compared values that differ by more than the CSD will
be remembered as closer together in magnitude than they
actually were (Choplin, 2007). This effect has been
demonstrated with the recalled size of geometric shapes
(Choplin & Hummel, 2002), estimates of personal
performance (Bloomfield & Choplin, 2009) and actual
behavior: the amount of food people eat is affected by the
size of a comparison portion displayed prior to their
receiving their own portion (Choplin & Motyka, 2007).
To understand the influence of comparison language in
value representation, imagine that a speaker tells their
listener “Jane is taller than Marjorie” (see Figure 1). If the
actual difference between their heights differs from the CSD
for “taller” (~2 inches, Choplin, 2007), the comparison may
affect recall of both women’s heights (Choplin & Hummel,
2002). For example, if Jane is 5’7” and Marjorie is 5’4”, this
difference (3”) exceeds the CSD, and Jane’s height may be
distorted (and so recalled) to be shorter than 5’7”, closer to
Marjorie’s 5’4” height, while Marjorie’s height may be
distorted to be taller, closer to Jane’s. Conversely, if Jane is
5’5” and Marjorie is 5’4” (1-inch difference), Jane may be
recalled as taller and Marjorie recalled as shorter.

Abstract
We investigated the role of Comparison-Induced Distortion
(CID) in the representation of risk. Providing comparison
risks has been shown to affect risk perception: one’s own risk
seems higher when higher than the average risk (Klein, 1997)
and lower when lower than average, independent of objective
risk level. In two studies, we examined the effects of a verbal
comparison (e.g. “a higher chance”) on recall of probabilities
very close or far apart in magnitude. We found that compared
probabilities further apart than the difference suggested by
comparison language are recalled as closer together (the
higher risk recalled as lower, the lower risk recalled as
higher), and those closer together than this difference are
recalled as further apart (the higher risk recalled as higher, the
lower risk as lower). Further, we found that participants’
recall for their gender’s risk levels flipped as a result of this
distortion: the objectively lower probability was recalled as
higher than the objectively higher probability. Diagnoses of a
person of the same gender followed probability recall.
Together, these studies demonstrate that the effect of
comparison on risk representation depends on the magnitude
of the difference between compared probabilities.

Introduction
Comparison-induced distortion theory (CID theory,
Choplin, 2007; Choplin & Hummel, 2002) is a theory of
attribute evaluation in which language-based magnitude
comparisons (e.g., “He is taller than she is”) systematically
bias how people evaluate, remember, and estimate attribute
values. Rusiecki (1985) found that participants interpreted a
comparison phrase, such as “taller than,” to imply a
particular range of differences in magnitude between
compared values (e.g. 2-5 inches’ difference for the heights
of two women), with substantial consistency across
participants in the size of the differences inferred. In CID
theory, the magnitude of difference inferred from a
comparison phrase is called the “comparison-suggested
difference” (CSD). The CSD is the implied difference
between values that are compared using a particular word
(e.g. “taller”) or phrase (e.g. “a completely different
ballpark”). This difference may be estimated by asking pretest participants to provide values that are, for instance,
“much more” than a comparison value: the difference
between the comparison value and the median value
provided by these participants is the CSD (Choplin, 2007).
Comparison-suggested differences dictate how a verbal
comparison will affect the representations of compared
values: if two compared values differ by an amount that is
less than that implied by the comparison phrase used to
contrast them, they will be remembered as further apart in

Comparison in risk perception
Risk information, such as having a 1/100,000 chance of
developing a disease, may not be “evaluable,” in that it may
be difficult to interpret how worrisome a risk is or how
much the risk requires action from this information alone

2136

“Jane is taller than Marjorie.”
Comparison-suggested difference taller = 2 inches
Jane
(5’7”)

Marjorie
(5’4”)
Direction of distortion
for Marjorie
Marjorie
(5’4”)
Direction of distortion
for Marjorie

Direction of distortion
for Jane
Jane
(5’5”)
Direction of distortion
for Jane

Figure 1. Predicted direction of comparison-induced
distortion for greater-than CSD compared values (top)
and less-than CSD compared values (bottom).

(Sunstein, 2002). Comparison information is sometimes
provided to help people understand their risk (Fagerlin,
Zikmund-Fisher & Ubel, 2007; Shoenbach, 1987), but may
actually interfere with accurate perception of risk, (Lipkus et
al., 2001). For example, relative risk often affects risk
perception more than does absolute risk. Klein (1997) found
that relative risk had a larger influence on worry judgments
than did absolute risk when participants were provided with
information about their own risk level (probability of
incurring a bad outcome) and information about the average
risk level for that same outcome. Participants read that their
risk was 20% above or below average, and that their own
absolute risk level was 30% or 60% (all factors betweensubject). While no significant difference in disturbance or
perceived risk ratings emerged between the absolute risk
levels (30% vs. 60%), position relative to average affected
ratings significantly: participants were more worried about
the negative outcome when their risk was above average
than when it was below average (Klein, 1997).
Windschitl, Martin & Flugstad (2002) examined the role
of relative risk between social groups in risk recall,
vulnerability ratings, and hypothetical diagnoses for a
member of a particular group (e.g. women vs. men).
Participants provided higher ratings and made more
diagnoses of a disease which affected the group in question
more often than the other group (i.e. had greater relative risk
for the target group). This pattern of responses continued
even when the absolute risk level for the target group was
lower for the disease with greater relative risk (e.g. when the
risk level was 11% for women and 4% for men compared to
another affecting 12% of women and 20% of men,
participants still gave higher ratings and more diagnoses to
the first disease). The authors argued that relative risk
impacts the intuitive assessment of risk rather than the
estimation of numerical risk (e.g. the probability of
acquiring a disease).
Comparison-induced distortion affects recall of compared
values across a variety of domains (Choplin, 2007). While
the effects of risk comparison have been investigated in a
number of studies (Klein, 1997; Fagerlin, et al., 2007;
Harris & Smith, 2005; Lipkus et al., 2001; Windschitl et al.,
2002), no study has looked at the relationship between
magnitude of difference between compared risk levels and
the magnitude of difference suggested by the comparison
language on risk perception. If comparison-induced
distortion occurs for compared risk levels, the introduction
of a comparison risk could lead a target risk level to be
recalled as higher or lower depending on the magnitude of
the difference between the compared values.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 used four disease scenarios adapted from
Windschitl, et al. (2002) to examine the effects of difference
between compared values on risk recall. For two diseases,
men had a higher chance of acquiring the disease, while

women had a higher chance for the other two diseases. We
measured the comparison-suggested difference for the
verbal comparison used to contrast the risk for men and
women. The difference between men and women’s risk
levels was smaller than this CSD for two diseases and larger
for the other two. This manipulation of difference
magnitude was predicted to affect recalled risk levels in a
pattern consistent with comparison-induced distortion: risk
levels separated by a large difference recalled as closer
together (the larger risk level recalled as smaller and the
small level recalled as larger); risk levels separated by a
small difference recalled as further apart (the larger risk
level recalled as even larger, the smaller risk level recalled
as even smaller).

Methods
Materials
Participants read four disease scenarios (one pair affecting
the stomach and one pair affecting the skin) via the
computer. All scenarios described fictitious diseases
affecting men and women at different levels. For instance:
There is a disease called Stomach churn discomfort
(SCD). This disease affects a larger percentage of
women compared to men. This disease affects about
23.8% of women and 11.2% [22.8%] of men. It involves
a sometimes embarrassing allergic reaction that causes
the stomach to make a loud churning noise after a
moderate amount of sugar has been digested.
The difference between the risk level for men and women
was either large (as when 11.2% was shown for the men’s
risk level) or small (as when 22.8% was shown). Large
differences should be larger than the comparison-suggested
difference for “a larger percentage,” while small differences
should be smaller than this CSD. Pairs of probabilities were
counterbalanced for the 4 diseases with the restriction that
women always had the same risk level for both diseases in
the pair (e.g. 23.8% would be the women’s risk level for
both stomach diseases). The presented risk levels for men
and women are shown in Table 1.

Procedure
Participants read and responded to all materials on the
computer. The disease scenarios were randomly presented.
After reading each scenario, participants provided a
potential causal reason for the gender difference. This
measure was intended to encourage deeper processing of the
numerical risk information. After reading all scenarios,
participants engaged in a distracter task then recalled the
risk level for each gender for each disease (e.g. the risk level
for men for Stomach Churn Discomfort then the risk level
for women for this same disease). After completing all
recall items, participants were debriefed and dismissed.

2137

Participants
Difference
size

Participants were 70 undergraduate students at DePaul
University who received partial course credit for their
participation. The data of two participants were eliminated
due to a large number of missing data points.

Large

Results
The difference between the recalled gender’s risk levels for
a disease was divided by the difference between the
presented risk levels to determine whether probabilities
were recalled as further apart, closer together or the same as
presented. As predicted, participants recalled the
probabilities separated by a large difference as closer
together (i.e. the difference was recalled as smaller, by onesample t-test, t(66) = -10.34, p < .001) and those separated
by a small difference as further apart (i.e. the difference was
recalled as larger, t(67) = 5.79, p < .001). This result
demonstrates that when the differences between presented
risk levels is small (i.e. likely to be smaller than the CSD),
the probabilities are recalled as further apart and when the
difference between presented probabilities is large (i.e.
likely to be larger than the CSD), they are recalled as closer
together.
Table 1 displays the average recalled probabilities for
each gender for each pair of compared probabilities.
Recalled probabilities were also divided by presented
probabilities to create a proportion. The magnitude of
difference between the genders’ risk levels significantly
affected whether recalled probabilities for men were larger
or smaller than observed probabilities (F(1,65) = 196.47, p
< .001 when men had a lower risk level, F(1, 59) = 82.86, p
< .001 when women had a lower risk level). When the
actual probability for men acquiring the disease was higher
than that for women, men’s probability was recalled as
higher than presented when the difference between the
genders was small (indicating that the men’s probability was
distorted away from the women’s; t(60) = 4.11, p < .001)
and lower when the difference between the genders was
large (indicating that the men’s probability was distorted
towards the women’s; t(59) = -9.46, p < .001). Similarly,
when the men’s actual probability was lower than the
women’s, that gender’s probability was recalled as higher
when the difference between genders was large (indicating
distortion towards the women’s risk; t(65) = 8.07, p < .001)
and lower when the difference was small (indicating
distortion away from the women’s probability; t(67) = -6.87,
p < .001).
For women, average recalled probabilities were generally
lower than actual probabilities and there was no significant
effect of difference size on recall (when women had a
higher probability, F(1, 66) < 1, n.s.; when women had a
lower probability, F(1, 58) < 1, n.s.).

Discussion of Experiment 1
Participants recalled the probabilities for men and women as
being further apart when they were presented as close

Small

Actual
men

Recalled
men

Actual
women

Recalled
women

11.2%

15.49%

23.8%

20.60%

36.6%

24.16%

17.6%

16.54%

18.8%

23.07%

17.6%

15.97%

22.8%

16.63%

23.8%

21.15%

Table 1. Presented and recalled probabilities for men and
women in Experiment 1.
together (a 1% or 1.2% difference) and as closer together
when they were presented as further apart (a 12.6% or 19%
difference). Analyses revealed that this distortion was due to
distortion of the men’s probabilities and not the women’s:
women’s probabilities were generally recalled as lower than
presented regardless of the size of the difference between
the gender’s probabilities or which gender had the higher
risk. One possible reason for this pattern is that women
make up a larger proportion than men of the Psychology
subject pool at DePaul, and these participants may have
been motivated to recall their own gender’s risk level as
lower. Unfortunately, gender information was not collected
in Experiment 1, so no firm conclusions can be drawn about
the role of gender in this pattern. Also, as can be seen from
Table 1, women’s probabilities were recalled fairly
accurately, with 17.6% being recalled as approximately
16%, and 23.8% recalled as approximately 21%. These
results indicate that participants may have had greater ease
in recalling the women’s probabilities because these
probabilities were repeated twice across the four diseases
(i.e. women had only two unique probabilities across the
four diseases, whereas men had four). In Experiment 2,
unique risk levels were provided for each gender for each
disease.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 improved on Experiment 1’s design. First, all
presented probabilities for both genders were unique across
the four diseases, decreasing the chance that participants
would accurately recall risk levels. Second, men and women
received different versions of the experiment: the only
information that differed between them was the gender
described as having “a higher chance” of acquiring each
disease (men read about men having a higher chance,
women about women having a higher chance). Third, the
comparison-suggested difference for the comparison phrase
“a higher chance” was measured with pre-test participants to
ensure that the small difference magnitude was smaller than
the CSD for this comparison, and the large difference
magnitude was larger. Finally, in addition to recalling their
gender’s risk of acquiring each disease, participants made a
forced-choice diagnosis of a member of their own gender
who had symptoms consistent with both diseases in a pair
(i.e. both stomach or both skin diseases). With this item, we

2138

sought to examine the effects of distortion in probability
recall on judgments.

Methods

were made based on observed objective rate of occurrence,
participants should diagnose the “large difference” disease.

Procedure

Pre-testing
To determine the comparison-suggested difference for “a
higher chance,” 119 pre-test participants imagined a risk
level for a particular disease that was “a higher chance” than
a probability described as the average risk level for the
disease. The median response was approximately 7% higher
than the average risk level. To examine the effects of
comparison-induced distortion on probability recall, “small
difference” risk pairs in Experiment 2 are less than 7%
different and “large difference” risk pairs are greater than
7% different.

Materials
Participants read four disease scenarios that were simplified
versions of diseases used in Experiment 1. Two diseases
affected the skin and two affected the stomach. For instance:
There is a disease called Stomach churn discomfort.
Women have a higher chance of developing Stomach
Churn Discomfort than do men. Women have a 24.7%
chance and men have a 19.6% chance of developing
Stomach Churn Discomfort.
As in Experiment 1, probabilities for the target gender
(women in the example above) and the opposite gender
were separated by a large difference (> 7%) or a small
difference (< 7%). For the each pair of diseases (stomachaffecting and skin-affecting), one disease was a “small
difference” disease, and the other was a “large difference”
disease. The “small difference” disease in each pair always
had an objectively lower chance of affecting the target
gender than the “large difference” disease in the pair (see
Table 2). Corresponding probabilities for the target and
other gender were counterbalanced across the two diseases
in the pair (e.g. a particular stomach disease was the “small
difference” disease for half the participants and the “large
difference” disease for the other half).
After engaging in a distraction task, participants saw the
other gender’s probability of getting each disease and
recalled the target gender’s probability (their own gender)
for both diseases in the pair. After recalling probabilities for
both pairs of diseases, participants made a diagnosis for a
hypothetical person of the target gender. For example:
Josie is a female college student. She has been having
symptoms that are consistent with both Gluten Bloat
Condition and Stomach Churn Discomfort. Her doctor
is certain that she has one of these diseases, but not
both. Which disease do you think Josie has?
This item pitted the perceived risk levels for the diseases in
a pair against one another. In the example above, when
Gluten Bloat Condition was the “small difference” disease,
affecting the target gender at a lower rate, Stomach Churn
Discomfort was the “large difference” disease, affecting the
target gender at a higher rate, and vice-versa. If diagnoses

Participants read and responded to all measures with pen
and paper. The four disease scenarios were presented on
separate quarter-sheets, randomly ordered. Following this
information was a brief distractor task involving “interesting
facts.” Participants then saw the other gender’s probability
of getting each disease within a pair (skin or stomach) and
recalled the probabilities for their own gender. After
recalling probabilities for both diseases in the pair,
participants selected one of the two diseases as the one a
hypothetical patient most likely had. Recalled probabilities
were collected immediately prior to diagnoses to encourage
participants to use probability information to guide their
diagnoses. After completing these items for both pairs of
diseases, participants were dismissed.

Participants
Participants were 124 individuals who agreed to participate
after being approached by the experimenter in public places
in the Chicago area. The data of 7 participants were
eliminated as outliers.

Results
Table 2 displays the average recalled probability for the
target gender (note that probability for the other gender was
presented at recall) for each disease.
For each participant, the recalled probability was divided
by the actual probability to create a proportion, and
proportions were averaged across the two “small difference”
and the two “large difference” diseases. Figure 2 displays
these proportions for “small” and “large difference”
diseases. A repeated measures ANOVA with gender as the
between-subjects factor and difference size as the repeated
measure revealed a significant effect of difference size
(F(1,115) = 226.78, p<.001), but not of gender (F(1,115) =
.134, n.s.). All analyses are collapsed across gender.
For the “small difference” diseases, proportions tended to
be greater than 1, indicated that recalled probabilities were
generally larger than actual probabilities (t(116) = 1.88, p <
.07). For the large difference diseases, proportions were
significantly smaller than 1, indicating that recalled
probabilities were smaller than actual probabilities (t(116) =
Type
Stomach

Difference
size
Small
Large

Skin

Small
Large

Actual (other v.
target gender)

19.6
14.2
28.8
25.2

v. 24.7%
v. 28.6%
v. 32.6%
v. 38.3%

Recalled
target

25.78%
24.11%
32.70%
31.37%

Table 2: Presented probabilities and recalled target
probabilities in Experiment 2

2139

Discussion of Experiment 2

Proportion of recalled to actual

Experiment 2 provides additional evidence that comparisoninduced distortion occurs in probability representation and
influences how probabilities are recalled. When presented
with the other gender’s probability for acquiring the disease,
participants’ recalled probabilities for the target gender
(their own gender) were higher when the difference between
the target and other gender’s probability was small and
lower when this difference was large. This pattern can be
1.1
1
0.9
Small
Large

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Stomach

Skin

Figure 2: Proportion of recalled to actual probability for
small and large difference diseases in Experiment 2

No. of participants choosing

16.26, p < .001).
The more interesting finding regarding recall can be seen
from examining Table 2: participants recalled the
objectively lower-probability disease as having a higher
probability than the objectively higher-probability disease
for both the skin and stomach-affecting pair. Excluding
participants who recalled both diseases as having an equal
chance of affecting the target gender (4 Ps for the skin
diseases, 5 Ps for the stomach diseases), this pattern of was
significantly more common (χ2 (1, N = 113) = 10.79, p <
.01 for stomach diseases; χ2 (1, N = 112) = 6.08, p < .05 for
skin diseases) than was recalling the “large difference”
disease as having a higher probability. Because target risk
levels for the “small difference” diseases were distorted to
be higher in representation, these were recalled as higher
than the “large difference” diseases whose probabilities
were distorted to be lower in representation.
Diagnoses for skin diseases followed probability recall:
the “small difference” disease was significantly more likely
to be diagnosed than the “large difference” disease, χ2 (1, N
= 116) = 5.20, p < .05. Participants more often diagnosed
the objectively lower-probability disease. Participants did
not show a trend for diagnosing either the “small difference”
or the “large difference” disease for the stomach diseases
(χ2 (1, N = 116) < 1, n.s.). Figure 3 shows the counts of
diagnosis choices for the disease pairs. Recalling “small
difference” disease as having a higher probability than the
“large difference” disease was significant for stomach
diseases, so the lack of a significant preference in the
stomach diagnoses indicates that participants may have been
taking other information into account when making this
choice (such as whether the probability presented for all
women applied fully to college-age women, the group to
which the hypothetical patient belonged).

80
70
60
50

small
large

40
30
20
10
0
Stomach

Skin

Figure 3. Diagnosis choices (“small” or “large difference”
disease) for disease pairs in Experiment 2.
explained by the representation of the target gender’s
probability being distorted away from the other gender’s
probability when the difference between them was smaller
than the difference suggested by comparison language and
towards the other gender’s probability when the difference
was larger than this suggested difference. Distortion in
probability representation led participants to flip the higher
probability and lower probability diseases in recall: the
disease with objectively lower probability was recalled as
having higher probability than the objectively higher
probability disease. This distortion in recall led to a trend for
diagnoses of the lower probability disease, indicating that
participants often did believe the lower probability disease
to be more likely to afflict a member of their gender.

General Discussion
Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrated that comparison-induced
distortion (Choplin & Hummel, 2002) affects recall of
compared probabilities. When two compared probabilities
differ by less than the difference suggested by comparison
language (e.g. if the compared probabilities differ by only
3.8%, whereas “a higher chance” implies a difference of
about 7%), the representations of these probabilities are
distorted to be further apart, the higher probability to be
higher and the lower probability to be lower. Conversely,
when compared probabilities differ by an amount that
exceeds the CSD (e.g. 13.1%), the representations of these
probabilities are distorted to be closer together, with the
higher probability distorted lower and the lower probability
higher. Experiment 2 indicates that distortion in probability
representation affects not only recall of these values, but
also decisions made based on the recalled probability
information. The effect of difference size on diagnosis was
also significant for the skin diseases, and this suggests that
comparison may affect decisions arising from perceived risk
of a disease: participants diagnosed the objective lower
probability skin disease that was also the “small difference”
disease (and thus distorted by comparison to have a higher
probability of affecting the target gender than as presented).
Past research indicates that knowing one has a “higher
than average” chance increases concern about the negative
outcome in questions (Klein, 1997; Windschitl et al., 2002).

2140

The findings presented here indicate that this is not the only
possible outcome of a “higher than average” comparison: if
the person’s risk was a large amount higher than the average
person’s risk (e.g. if the difference exceeded 7%), her
representation of her risk might be distorted down towards
the average person’s risk and recalled as lower. Although
this distortion might not dissuade the person from being
more concerned about this particular risk, since her risk is
still “higher than average,” it may play a role in how much
time and resources she devotes to one personal risk
compared to other risks. For instance, she might recall her
risk for developing breast cancer as higher than average but
lower than it actually is because average was considerably
lower (leading to distortion down towards the average risk).
She may simultaneously recall her risk of skin cancer as
higher than average and higher than it actually is because
average was only a small amount lower (leading to
distortion up and away from the average risk). In deciding
where to invest her co-pay costs (i.e. the amount her
insurance charges for a doctor’s visit, tests, etc.), she may
make an appointment with her dermatologist and forgo a
mammogram. In this way, the magnitude of difference
between comparison risks can have lead to behavior that
opposes what would be dictated by actual risk levels.
The diseases described in Experiments 1 and 2 were
fictitious diseases with low severity. In cases where diseases
have high severity (i.e. if breast cancer were described) we
anticipate the same effect of comparison to appear when a
mismatch exists between comparison language and
difference between compared values. However, it is possible
that the way comparison language is understood (i.e. the
comparison-suggested difference for a word or phrase) is
influenced by the severity of the outcome in the same
manner as interpretation of verbal probability phrases is
influenced by severity of an outcome (Harris, Corner &
Hahn, 2009; Weber & Hilton, 1990). Verbal probability
phrases applied to severe events are sometimes interpreted
as referring to a higher probability than when they are
applied to less severe events, particularly when the
probability information would be instrumental in decisions
(Harris et al., 2009). In the case of comparison-suggested
differences, a smaller difference in probability may be
imagined for “a higher chance” when the comparison is
between risk levels for a deadly disease, because even a
small increase in risk for this disease would be a cause for
concern and warrant the phrase “a higher chance.” We are
currently exploring this question and other related questions
regarding comparison-induced distortion of risk levels.

Conclusion
The risk level used for a comparison can impact how the
comparison affects risk perception. Comparison-induced
distortion describes how comparison can influence recall,
evaluation, and estimation of compared values. The
experiments described here demonstrate that comparison
between risk levels is subject to these effects, so the actual
magnitude of difference between compared risks must be

taken into consideration in order to predict how comparison
will impact risk perception.

References
Bloomfield, A. N. & Choplin, J. M. (2009). What it means
to be “better:” The role of comparison language in
social comparison. Proceedings of the 31st Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Choplin, J. M. (2007). Toward a comparison-induced
distortion theory of judgment and decision making. In J.
A. Elsworth (ed.), Psychology of Decision Making in
Education (pp. 55-86). Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science
Publishers, Inc.
Choplin, J. M., & Hummel, J. E. (2002). Magnitude
comparisons distort mental representations of
magnitude. JEP: General, 131(2), 270-286.
Choplin, J. M. & Motyka, L. (2007). The Interaction of
Food-Quantity Differences and Temporal Presentation
on the Amount of Food People Consume. Proceedings
of the 29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Fagerlin, A., Zikmund-Fisher, B. J., Ubel, P. A. (2007). “If
I’m better than average, then I’m ok?”: Comparative
information influences beliefs about risk and benefits.
Patient Education and Counseling, 69, 140-144.
Harris, A. J. L., Corner, A., & Hahn, U. (2009). Estimating
the probability of negative events. Cognition, 110, 5164.
Harris, P. R. & Smith, V. (2005). When the risks are low:
the impact of absolute and comparative information on
disturbance and understanding in US and UK samples.
Psychology and Health, 20(3), 319-330.
Klein, W. (1997). Objective standards are not enough:
Affective, self-evaluative, and behavioral responses to
social comparison information. JPSP, 72, 763-774.
Lipkus, I. M., Biradavolu, M., Fenn, K., Keller, P., Rimer,
B. K. (2001). Informing women about their breast
cancer risks: Truth and consequences. Health
Communication, 13(2), 205–226.
Rusiecki, J. (1985). Adjectives and comparison in English.
New York: Longman.
Schoenbach, V. J. (1987). Appraising the health risk
appraisal. American Journal of Public Health, 77, 347352.
Sunstein, C. (2002). Probability neglect: Emotions, worst
cases, and law. The Yale Law Journal, 112, 61- 107.
Weber, E. U. & Hilton, D. J. (1990). Contextual effects in
the interpretations of probability words: Perceived base
rate and severity of events. JEP: Human Perception
and Performance, 16, 781-789.
Windschitl, P., Martin, R., & Flugstad, A. (2002). Context
and the interpretation of likelihood information: The
role of intergroup comparisons on perceived
vulnerability. JPSP, 82, 742-755.

2141

