UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conceptual and linguistic distinctions between singular and plural generics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1bn86260

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Glucksberg, Sam
Khemlani, Sangeet
Leslie, Sarah-Jane
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conceptual and linguistic distinctions between singular and plural generics
Sarah-Jane Leslie1, Sangeet Khemlani2, Sandeep Prasada3, and Sam Glucksberg2
1

2

Departments of Philosophy and Psychology , Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
3
Department of Psychology , Hunter College, New York, NY 10065 USA
Abstract

particular, Leslie’s theory allows for ‘minority’
characteristic generics such as “ducks lay eggs”, “lions have
manes”, and “cardinals are red”, which are true even though
only a minority of the kind (i.e. the mature members of one
gender) actually possess the relevant property. Her second
category of generics – majority generics such as “barns are
red” – can, for our purposes, be mapped directly onto
Prasada’s category of statistical connections. Leslie also
introduces a third category that predicates especially striking
– often horrific or appalling – properties of the kind. Such
generics, Leslie notes, can be true even though very few
members of the kind in question actually have the property.
Examples of striking property generics include “mosquitoes
carry malaria” and “sharks attack bathers”, which strike us
as true even though very few mosquitoes actually carry
malaria, and very few sharks ever attack bathers.
Like Prasada and Dillingham, Leslie argues that generics
offer a window onto our thinking about kinds in general
terms. In particular, she argues that generics express
cognitively primitive generalizations. She argues that our
cognitive system has a basic and primitive mode of
generalizing information, and that generics allow us to give
voice to these generalizations. They are language’s way of
allowing us to communicate these conceptually fundamental
generalizations (Leslie, 2007, 2008). If generics do indeed
reflect our fundamental way of thinking about kinds – as
Leslie, Prasada, and others such as Gelman (2003) suggest –
then they represent an important topic for psychological
research.
Prasada and Dillingham (2006, 2009) report a variety of
empirical tests that distinguish between their categories of
principled and statistical connections. The question we
begin to address in this paper concerns how Leslie’s
additional categories pattern with regard to these tests. In
particular, we are interested to learn how Leslie’s minority
characteristic and striking property generics behave along
the dimensions explored by Prasada and Dillingham. One’s
prima facie expectation might well be that Leslie’s minority
characteristics will behave rather differently than Prasada’s
principled connections, since the minority characteristics
predicate properties that are only had by a smallish subset of
the kind, whereas principled generics predicate properties
that are had by any normal member of the kind. One might
even expect that the majority/statistical generics would be
more similar to the principled generics than the minority
characteristics would be, since, like the principled generics,
majority/statistical generics generalize properties that are
prevalent amongst members of the kind. If, however,
Leslie’s theory is correct, then the minority characteristics
should pattern much more like the principled generics do,

Prasada and Dillingham (2006, 2009) and Leslie (2007, 2008)
hypothesize that ‘bare plural’ generics (e.g. “tigers are
striped”) are used to express a range of conceptually different
types of generalizations. We investigate whether different
syntactic forms of generics are restricted to expressing only
some of these types of generalizations, and if so, which ones.
In doing so, we also test the relationship between Prasada and
Dillingham's categories of generalizations on the one hand,
and Leslie's on the other. The findings have significant
consequences for our understanding of the conceptual
mechanisms that underlie generics and our ability to think
generally about kinds.
Keywords: generics; concepts; singulars; generalizations;
semantics

Introduction
Generics are sentences that express generalizations without
the use of an explicit quantifier, for example, “dogs have
four legs”, “a tiger is striped”, “ducks lay eggs” and “the
kangaroo hops”. Because generic statements provide the
means for talking about whole kinds or classes of things,
they provide insight into the nature of the conceptual
mechanisms available for representing such multiplicities
and the distinct ways in which they may be characterized in
language and thought (Gelman, 2003; Gelman & Bloom,
2007; Leslie, 2007, 2008; Prasada, in press; Prasada &
Dillingham, 2006, 2009)
In this regard, Prasada and Dillingham (2006, 2009)
identify two types of connections between representations of
kinds and properties, both of which can be expressed as
‘bare plural’ generics, e.g. “dogs have four legs” and “barns
are red”. Principled connections involve properties that are
determined by the kind of thing something is (e.g. having
four legs for a dog). Statistical connections involve
properties that are not determined by the kind of thing
something is, but that are highly prevalent connections to
the kind, e.g., being red for a barn. Principled connections
are proposed to support formal explanations (Fido has four
legs because he is a dog), normative expectations (Fido
should have four legs and has something wrong with him if
he doesn’t), and the expectation that the property will
generally be highly prevalent (most dogs have four legs).
Leslie (2007, 2008) argues for a related, though different,
classification of generics. She identifies three different types
of generics, which she calls characteristic, majority, and
striking. Her category of characteristic generics maps
closely onto Prasada’s notion of a principled connection,
though without the requirement that the property be
expected to be prevalent among the members of the kind. In

479

since they are all expressions of beliefs about what is
characteristic of the kind.
We also wish to explore how Leslie’s striking property
generics behave with respect to Prasada’s tests. Since
striking generics do not predicate information that is
naturally considered to be characteristic of the kind, we
expect that they will fare differently than the characteristic
and principled items, e.g., it strikes us as odd to think that
mosquitoes carry malaria in virtue of being mosquitoes, or
that their being mosquitoes explains why they carry malaria.
We thus expect that the striking items will behave more like
statistical/majority items with regard to Prasada’s tests.
However, Leslie’s theory posits a relation between
characteristic property generics and striking property
generics. She hypothesizes that, in order for us to accept a
striking property generic, we must believe that the members
of kind are, by their nature, disposed to have the property.
Thus, on her view, we accept “mosquitoes carry malaria”
only because there is something about mosquitoes that
disposes them to carry the virus. In light of this connection,
it is possible that striking property generics will do
somewhat better on Prasada’s tests than the
majority/statistical items (Prasada, in press).
We are currently conducting a series of experiments to
test these predictions, and we report the first two
experiments of the series here. These two experiments are
concerned with the distribution of acceptability of Leslie’s
categories across different syntactic forms. Generics in
English come in three distinct syntactic forms. (1)-(3) below
exemplify these three forms:
(1) Tigers are striped
(2) A tiger is striped
(3) The tiger is striped
These three different forms of generics are known as bare
plural (BP) generics, indefinite singular (IS) generics, and
definite singular (DS) generics respectively. Bare plural
generics have received the most attention, and are also the
main focus of Prasada’s and Leslie’s work.
Linguists and philosophers have noted that some
statements that are perfectly acceptable in bare plural form
seem a little odd in definite or indefinite singular form
(Lawler, 1973; Burton-Roberts, 1977; Carlson, 1977; Krifka
et al 1995). The three sentences in the triple (1)–(3) above
all sound perfectly natural to our ears, but this is not so for
the triples (4)–(6) and (7)-(9) on their generic
interpretations:
(4) Barns are red
(5) ?A barn is red
(6) ?The barn is red
(7) Sharks attack bathers
(8) ?A shark attacks bathers
(9) ?The shark attacks bathers
While the BP generics (4) and (7) sound perfectly natural,
the IS and DS versions seem somewhat unnatural. One is
tempted to interpret them as saying something about a
particular barn or a particular shark, rather than saying
something about barns and sharks in general. Prasada and

Dillingham (2009) found that people generally did not like
statistical items in IS form and Prasada and Dillingham
(2006) report an unpublished experiment that found this to
be the case for the DS form.
The IS form is of the most theoretical interest to us,
because it is generally agreed among linguists and
philosophers of language that the IS is felicitous only when
the relation between the subject and the predicate is in some
sense “necessary”, “essential” or “inherent” (Lawler, 1973).
We believe that the correct way to cash out this intuition in
psychological terms is to understand the IS form as
‘selecting’ only those generalized properties that are
characteristic of the kind – that is, only those connections
that are principled (Prasada, in press; Leslie, in preparation).
Thus it is of significant theoretical interest to learn whether
people accept minority characteristics in IS form, since this
would suggest that the connection between kinds and these
less prevalent properties should nonetheless be counted as
principled. The DS form is, unfortunately, poorly
understood, so it is difficult to draw strong theoretical
conclusions from a study of it. We hope, though, that the
data we present here concerning the DS will contribute to a
better future understanding of this elusive form.
We predicted that we would confirm Prasada and
Dillingham’s
finding
that
principled/non-minority
characteristic generics fare well in IS and DS forms, and
that statistical/majority generics would do less well. We
further predicted that Leslie’s minority characteristic
generics would be judged to be acceptable in both IS and
DS forms, while the striking property generics would not.
Since previous work (Khemlani, Leslie, Glucksberg, &
Rubio-Fernandez, 2007; Leslie, Khemlani, & Glucksberg,
submitted) has found that people agree to striking and
majority BP generics less often than they agree to
characteristic generics, our studies were designed to
compare people’s rating of BP generics to their ratings of IS
generics (Experiment 1) and DS generics (Experiment 2), so
as to control for the possibility of globally lower ratings for
striking and majority generics.

Experiment 1: Bare plural vs. indefinite
singulars
We asked a sample of 25 volunteers on the Internet to judge
how natural it was for bare plural and indefinite singular
statements to be understood as generic assertions.

Method
Design. We presented the four different types of predicates,
as described above, one statement at a time. We also
presented statements that were unequivocally incompatible
with generic interpretations, e.g., ‘A kangaroo was hopping
in my backyard,’ but instead tended to receive a specific
interpretation. Statements appeared in either bare plural
form (‘Xs are Ys’) or indefinite singular form (‘An X is a
Y’), generating a 5 (predicate-type: characteristic, majority,
principled, striking, and specific) x 2 (statement-type: bare
plural vs. indefinite singular) repeated measures design.

480

Participants. 25 volunteers participated in the study over
the Internet through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk system for
human interface tasks. All spoke English as their first
language and none had participated in experiments
concerning generics before.
Procedure and Materials. Participants were asked to judge
how natural it was to use each of the ten different types of
assertions to generally characterize the kind they referred to.
For a given assertion such as ‘A lion roars’, participants
were given the prompt: ‘How natural would it be to use this
sentence to characterize lions in general?’ They took the
study over the Internet using an experiment interface written
in Ajax, and registered their response by selecting from a 7point Likert scale (+3 = very natural, 0 = neutral, -3 = very
unnatural). They received 10 items of each type of
predication; half were presented in bare plural form and half
in indefinite singular form. They also received 5 practice
trials to familiarize themselves with the scale. Each
participant received the items in a different random order.

In general, bare plurals received higher naturalness ratings
than did indefinite singulars. Principled generics were rated
higher than were characteristic generics, with majority and
striking predicate types rated even lower. These differences
were assessed via a 5 x 2 within-subjects ANOVA, which
yielded a significant main effect of predication type, F(4,
100) = 87.17, p < .0001, a significant main effect of
statement type, F(1, 24) = 6.77, p < .05, and a significant
interaction, F(4, 100) = 4.25, p < .005. Mean ratings of
generic naturalness express a continuous measure that does
not take into consideration the semantic values of the points
on the scale, i.e., naturalness, neutrality, and unnaturalness.
Table 1: Mean ratings of generic naturalness as a function of
statement and predicate type in Experiment 1.
Statement type
Predicate type
Bare plural
Indefinite singular
Principled
2.46
2.14
Characteristic
1.93
1.72
Majority
0.58
-0.22
Striking
0.28
-0.24
Specific
-1.38
-1.15

Results and Discussion
As a manipulation check, we included statements that
were intuitively not natural ways to express genericity such
as ‘squirrels are in my backyard’ (bare plural form) or ‘a
squirrel is in my backyard’ (indefinite singular form).
Participants responded as expected, and rated specific
statements as natural on only 20% of trials (see Table 1).
The forms of the sentences did not yield differential
responses; participants judged bare plural specific
statements as naturally expressing a generic only 21% of the
time and indefinite singular statements as doing so 20% of
the time (Wilcoxon test, z = .45, p = .66).

That is, it may be meaningful that participants yield more
natural than neutral responses for certain predications. To
examine such patterns, we analyzed participants’ responses
categorically. Points on the Likert scale were collapsed such
that -3 to -1 denoted responses in which participants
believed the assertion was not naturally used to characterize
the category in general; point 0 on the scale denoted the case
in which the participants could not tell whether the assertion
was naturally a generic or not; and points +1 to +3 on the
scale denoted the case in which participants believed that

Figure 1. The distribution of responses in Experiment 1 as a function of predicate type and statement type.

481

the assertion could take on a generic interpretation. The
distributions of the categorical responses as a function of
statement and predication types are shown in Figure 1. We
then made comparisons across pairs of responses to
determine whether a certain statement and predicate type
yielded a different pattern of responses than another by
comparing the differences between naturalness responses
and unnaturalness responses for pairs of interest.
Principled and characteristic predications. Participants
judged principled (e.g., ‘tigers have stripes’) and
characteristic (e.g., ‘ducks lay eggs’) statements as naturally
expressing a generic on 94% and 87% of trials, respectively
(Wilcoxon test, z = 2.27, p < .05). Principled statements
were judged marginally more natural as generics when they
were in bare plural form than when they were in indefinite
singular form (97% vs. 91%, Wilcoxon test, z = 1.80, p =
.07). Characteristic statements were not reliably judged
more natural in bare plural form than in indefinite singular
form (88% vs. 83%, Wilcoxon test, z = 1.58, p = .11).
Naturalness judgments on principled and characteristic
statements were not reliably sensitive to sentential form, and
these statements were judged as natural on the
preponderance of trials.
Majority and striking predications. Majority and striking
predications were judged as naturally expressing a generic
on 47% and 46% of trials respectively (Wilcoxon test, z =
.47, p = .64). Majority statements were judged as more
natural in bare plural form than in indefinite singular form
(59% vs. 34%, Wilcoxon test, z = 3.25, p < .005). Likewise,
striking statements yielded a similar pattern of responses;
they were judged more natural in bare plural form, but the
difference between the two sentential forms was marginal
(51% vs. 41%, Wilcoxon test, z = 1.81, p = .07). As Figure
1 shows, participants tended to rate majority and striking
statements as naturally expressing a generic on most trials
when the statements appeared as bare plurals (59% and 51%
respectively), but did not do so when the statements
appeared as indefinite singulars (34% and 41%
respectively).
These data suggest that principled and characteristic
generic assertions tend to be rated as naturally expressing
generalizations irrespective of statement type, i.e., as bare
plurals or as indefinite singulars. In contrast, majority
predications tended to be rated as less natural, but with the
bare plural form rated as significantly more natural than the
indefinite singular. Finally, striking predications were also
rated as less natural than principled and characteristic
predications in general, with a marginal preference for the
BP form over the IS form. These findings support our
predictions, including our hypothesis that the difference
between how the striking items were rated in BP vs. IS form
would be less than the difference for the majority items
perhaps because striking generics are accepted only if the

corresponding disposition is characteristic of the kind
(Leslie, 2007, 2008; Prasada, in press).
We turn now to definite singular forms to investigate
whether a similar pattern would hold there.

Experiment 2: Bare plural vs. definite singular
We asked a sample of 25 volunteers on the Internet to judge
how natural it was for a series of bare plural and definite
singular statements to be interpreted as a generic.

Method
Design. The experimental design was the same as that used
in Experiment 1: a 5 (predicate-type: characteristic,
majority, principled, striking, and specific) x 2 (statementtype: bare plural vs. definite singular) repeated measures
design.
Participants. 25 volunteers on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
system served as participants. All spoke English as their
first language.
Procedure and Materials. The procedure and materials
were analogous to those used in Experiment 1, but instead
used definite singulars instead of indefinite singulars.

Results and Discussion
As in Experiment 1, specific predicates were rated as
unnatural general assertions, indicating that the participants
were rating the items appropriately (see Table 2).
Participants responded to the specific predications (which
served as a manipulation check here as in Experiment 1) as
predicted, and rated specific statements as natural on only
23% of trials. Participants judged bare plural specific
statements as naturally expressing a generic 21% of the time
and definite singular statements as doing so 26% of the time
(Wilcoxon test, z = 1.59, p = .11).
Table 2: Mean ratings of generic naturalness as a function of
statement and predicate type in Experiment 2.
Statement type
Predicate type
Bare plural
Definite singular
Principled
2.25
1.99
Characteristic
2.12
1.62
Majority
0.68
0.11
Striking
0.28
-0.32
Specific
-1.22
-1.05

Principled generics were rated higher than were
characteristic generics, with majority and striking predicate
types rated even lower. These differences were assessed via
a 5 x 2 within-subjects ANOVA, which yielded a significant
main effect of the type of predication, F(4, 100) = 54.44, p <
.0001, a significant main effect of the type of sentence, F(1,
25) = 6.06, p < .05, and a significant interaction, F(4, 100) =
2.82, p < .05.

482

Figure 2. The distribution of responses in Experiment 2 as a function of predicate type and statement type.
As in Experiment 1, participants’ answers were coded
into natural, neutral, and unnatural response categories.
These data are summarized in Figure 2. We again examined
relevant pairwise comparisons to assess the effects of
sentential form.
Principled and characteristic predications. Participants
judged principled and characteristic statements as naturally
expressing a generic on 89% and 84% of trials respectively
(Wilcoxon test, z = 2.92, p < .005). Principled statements
were not judged reliably more natural as generics when they
were in bare plural form than when they were in definite
singular form (91% vs. 88%, Wilcoxon test, z = .68, p =
.50). Characteristic statements were marginally more natural
in bare plural form than in definite singular form (88% vs.
83%, Wilcoxon test, z = 1.94, p = .05). As in Experiment 1,
naturalness judgments on principled and characteristic
statements were not reliably affected by sentential form, and
these statements were judged as natural on most trials.
Majority and striking predications. Majority and striking
predications were judged as naturally expressing a generic
on 52% and 45% of trials, respectively (Wilcoxon test, z =
1.63, p = .10). Majority statements were not reliably judged
as more natural in bare plural form than in definite singular
form (56% vs. 48%, Wilcoxon test, z = 1.27, p = .20).
Striking statements yielded a similar pattern. They were
judged more natural in bare plural form, but here the
difference between the two sentential forms was reliable
(52% vs. 38%, Wilcoxon test, z = 2.38, p < .05). As Figure
2 shows, Experiment 2 replicated the pattern found in
Experiment 1: participants rated majority and striking
statements as naturally expressing a generic on most trials
when the statements appeared as bare plurals (56% and 52%
respectively), but did not do so when the statements
appeared as definite singulars (48% and 38% respectively).

As expected, principled and characteristic items were
rated highly in both BP and DS form, with the DS form
rated slightly less well than the BP form. The striking items
were rated as less natural overall, and received significantly
lower ratings when they appeared in the DS form, as
compared to the BP form. We were surprised, though, to
find that the majority items were not rated significantly
lower in the DS form. Our participants did not rate items
such as “the barn is red” as less natural on its general
interpretation than items such as “barns are red”.

General Discussion
Our findings by and large supported our predictions, with
one exception. We had expected that principled and
characteristic items would do well in all three forms, though
perhaps with the BP form being slightly preferred. Our
findings did indeed support this prediction. The theoretical
importance of this result is that they suggest that the same
connection type underlies principled and characteristic items
despite the fact that the former involve highly prevalent
properties while the latter involve properties that
characterize only a minority of instances. These data may
suggest that, contrary to Prasada and Dillingham’s (2006,
2009) proposal, principled connections may not license
statistical expectations.
The minority characteristic
predicates used here do characterize principled subsets of
the kinds in question for which we do have statistical
expectations, e.g. male lions are generally expected to have
a mane). However, it would be a mistake to think that the
minority characteristic items express only restricted
generalizations over one gender. Khemlani, Leslie, and
Glucksberg (2009) report evidence at odds with such a
suggestion (for theoretical considerations against this view
see Leslie, 2007, 2008). The minority characteristic generics

483

express generalizations concerning the entire kind, even
though they are made true by only a subset of it.
We also predicted that the striking and majority items
would do significantly less well in IS form, though perhaps
with the striking items doing slightly better than the
majority ones. We found that majority items were indeed
rated significantly lower in IS form than BP form, and that
the striking items were rated marginally lower in IS form.
We had expected a reliable difference in ratings for the
striking items because sentences such as “a shark attacks
bathers” seem less natural than “sharks attack bathers”.
However, we had also noted the possibility that the striking
items would fare a little better than the majority items in IS
form, since striking property generalizations depend
indirectly
on
principled
information
concerning
dispositions. Overall, the data from the IS study supports the
hypothesis that the IS form selects generics which express
principled/characteristic information concerning the kind
(Leslie, in preparation; Prasada, in press).
In the DS form, however, striking items were rated
significantly less natural. We were most surprised to find,
though, that our majority items were not reliably rated as
less natural in the DS form. There was a trend towards their
being rating as less natural, but it was not even marginally
significant. We are somewhat puzzled by this, since “the
barn is red” seems to us a much more awkward way of
expressing a generic than “barns are red”, and we do not
have a good explanation of this finding at present. The DS
form has received the least attention of the three forms, and
is not well enough understood for us to frame a hypothesis
here. We hope our data will contribute to a future
understanding of the DS form.
One notable feature of the data is how much lower the
majority and striking items were rated overall. We are
hesitant to read much into this finding, however, since other
studies have found a high rate of agreement to statements in
those forms (Khemlani et al., 2007; Leslie et al., submitted).
Our question in particular may have promoted a differential
treatment of the items, since it asked people to rate how
natural it would be to use the sentence “to characterize Ks in
general,” where ‘Ks’ denotes the relevant kind. The mention
of “characterizing Ks” may have biased our participants
toward the principled/characteristic items. As Leslie’s term
suggests, these generics predicate properties that are
characteristic of the kind, and not merely accidentally
associated with the kind, as is the case with the
majority/statistical items. Further, the mention of “in
general” may have elicited lower ratings for the striking
items, since they predicate properties that do not hold of the
kind in general, but only of a small minority of the kind. For
these reasons, we hesitate to ascribe any significance to the
fact that majority and striking items received lower ratings
in general here. These factors would not have affected the
difference in ratings of the form of the generic, however,
which is our major concern here.
This study constitutes one of the few empirical
investigations of the different generic forms. As such, it

provides important constraints on the conceptual
mechanisms that may underlie distinct forms of generics,
and suggests that minority characteristic items share some
representational properties with principled items, despite
their prima facie differences. Leslie (in preparation) and
Prasada (in press) hypothesize that the IS form is primarily
restricted to characteristic/principled predications, and our
data are consistent with this hypothesis. In the case of the
more daunting DS, however, the overwhelming attitude
among theorists has been hypotheses non fingo, and so we
can neither confirm nor refute any accounts of the definite
singular generic.

Acknowledgments
This study is based on work supported in part by a NSF Graduate
Research Fellowship awarded to the second author. We are
grateful to Jeremy Boyd, Adele Goldberg, Phil Johnson-Laird,
Mark Johnston and three anonymous reviewers for their many
helpful discussions and suggestions.

References
Burton-Roberts, N. (1977). Generic sentences and analyticity.
Studies in Language, 1.
Carlson, G. (1977). Reference to Kinds in English. Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Gelman, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2007). Developmental changes in the
understanding of generics. Cognition, 105.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of essentialism
in everyday thought. New York: Oxford University Press.
Khemlani, S., Leslie, S.J., Glucksberg, S. (2009). Generics,
prevalence, and default inferences. In Proceedings of the 31st
Annual Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Khemlani, S., Leslie, S.J., Glucksberg, S., & Rubio-Fernandez, P.
(2007). Do ducks lay eggs? How people interpret generic
assertions. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Krifka, M., F. Pelletier, G. Carlson, A. ter Meulen, G. Chierchia,
and G. Link. (1995). Genericity: an introduction. In G. Carlson
and F. J. Pelletier (eds.) The Generic Book. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
Lawler, J. (1973). “Studies in English generics.” University of
Michigan Papers in Linguistics, 1(1).
Leslie, S.J., Khemlani, S., & Glucksberg, S. (submitted). All ducks
lay eggs: The generic overgeneralization effect.
Leslie, S.J. (2007). Generics and the structure of the mind.
Philosophical Perspectives, 21 (1).
Leslie, S.J. (2008). Generics: Cognition and acquisition.
Philosophical Review, 117 (1).
Leslie, S.J. (in preparation). Characteristic properties and indefinite
singular generics.
Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. (2006). Principled and statistical
connections in common sense conception. Cognition, 99 (1).
Prasada, S., & Dillinghamn, E. (2009). Representation of
principled connections: A window onto the formal aspect of
common sense conception. Cognitive Science, 33.
Prasada, S. (in press). Conceptual representations and some forms
of genericity. In F. J. Pelletier (Ed.) Kinds, Things and Stuff.
New Directions in Cognitive Science, v. 12. New York: Oxford
University Press.

484

