UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conjunction and Disjunction Fallacies in Prediction Markets

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mx2b5j7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Grothe, Emily
Lee, MIchael
Steyvers, Mark

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conjunction and Disjunction Fallacies in Prediction Markets
Michael D. Lee (mdlee@uci.edu)
Emily Grothe (egrothe@uci.edu)
Mark Steyvers (msteyver@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 3151 Social Sciences Plaza A
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-5100 USA

specific time in the future, then summing those probabilities, often returns a value greater than one.
This paper asks whether these sorts of classic conjunction and disjunction fallacies are also seen in the behavior of groups of people, when they work together in the
unique context provided by prediction markets.

Abstract
Prediction markets provide a mechanism for using groups
of people to determine the probability of events. We ask
whether these probability estimates, for logically related
events, exhibit the irrationalities often found in individual
judgments. In particular, we explore combinations of
markets that provide tests of classic conjunction and
disjunction fallacies. Across a number of markets,
asking about a wide variety of events, we find a few
interesting violations of probability theory, but mostly
rational adherence. We discuss our exploratory analyses
in terms of the relationship between group and individual
probability estimation, and the effectiveness of prediction
markets.

Prediction Markets

Keywords:
Conjunction fallacy, disjunction fallacy, prediction markets, group estimation, heuristics and
biases

Introduction
Few lines of research in cognitive science are as well
known and influential in other fields and endevours as
the heuristic and biases program (Tversky & Kahneman,
1974). The idea that human decision-makers proceed on
shaky grounds—making choices that are often incorrect,
sometimes worryingly irrational, and occasionally close
to bizarre—is treated seriously in all areas of academia
and business that need to understand and use people’s
judgments.
One of the best-studied and most central parts of
heuristics and biases research explores how people with
probabilities for events that bear some logical relationship to each other. Most famously, the conjunction fallacy shows that people can judge a specific event to be
more probable than a more general class of events to
which it belongs (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman, 1983). After learning about a person called Linda, described in a
way consistent with being a feminist, she is often judged
to more likely be a feminist bank teller than simply a
bank teller.
In a similar violation of probability theory, disjunction
fallacies show people judging a general event to have a
different probability from the sum of the probabilities of
its separate components (e.g., Wright & Whalley, 1983).
Asking people the individual probability that they will
be doing different, and mutually exclusive, activities at a

In a prediction market, people trade contacts related to
events. These events can be about anything—politics,
sport, entertainment, climate, and so on—for which there
will be a clear true-or-false answer known in a reasonably short period of time. Events in a prediction market
could include “Brazil wins the 2010 FIFA World Cup”,
“Steve Jobs to depart as CEO of Apple on or before 31
Dec 2009”, and “Bernard Madoff to plead guilty or be
found guilty of Securities Fraud.”
In a standard framework, the value of a contact is
bounded between 0 and 100, and can be bought or sold.
Traders owning a contact can specify a price at which
they are willing to sell. Potential buyers can specifically
a price at which they are willing to buy. When the price
of a buyer and a seller meet, a transaction takes place,
and the value of the contract is updated to represent this
last traded price. When the event itself is decided, and
known to be either true or false, the value of the contracts are realized. Those contracts for true events pay
100, while those that are false pay 0.
Under this trading system, it is natural and reasonable
to view the value of a contract as corresponding to an
estimate of the probability of the event being true. The
Intrade1 prediction market we study in this paper explicitly encourages a probabilistic interpretation of market
values. It says “[s]ince our contracts trade between 0 and
100, you can think of the price at any time to be the percentage probability of that event occurring,” and gives
a tutorial on the logic of trading in terms of buying if
you think a contract is being offered at a value below the
true probability of the event, and selling if you can find a
buyer willing to pay more than what you judge to be the
true probability.
Not only is the idea that prediction market values represent probability estimates well-established, but the values themselves are widely trusted. There is empirical

1639

1 See

http://www.intrade.com

65
60
100
90
80

Market Value

70

55

Democrat
Clinton+Obama+Edwards
Clinton
Obama
Edwards

3 Weeks

50

60
50
40
30
20
10

0
20−Oct−2004

04−Nov−2008

Time
Figure 1: Prediction market values for three individual presidential candidates (Clinton, Obama and Edwards), their total (Clinton+Obama+Edwards) and for the Democratic nominee. A three week period in which the sum of the markets
for the individual Democratic candidates is greater than the general Democratic nominee market is highlighted.

evidence (see, for example Christiansen, 2007) that the
probabilities produced by prediction markets can be consistently excellent guides to the final outcome for a wide
variety of events, and important decision-makers and organizations endorse the predictive ability of these markets. Nevertheless, since these probabilities are, ultimately, produced by people, we wondered whether they
are subject to the same sorts of logical fallacies found in
heuristics and biases research.

Do Prediction Markets Show Fallacies?
One of the most heavily traded Intrade prediction markets asked whether or not Hillary Clinton would win the
2008 US Presidential Election. Another heavily traded
market asked the related, but more general question, of
whether the Democratic party nominee would win the
2008 US Presidential Election. The close relationship
between these markets invites the possibility of a conjunction fallacy. Just as Linda is more likely to be a bank
teller than a feminist bank teller, the Democratic nominee
is more likely to win than Clinton. If these two prediction markets are making rational probability judgments,
the value for Clinton should never exceed the value of
the general Democratic nominee.
Nevertheless, just as it might be easier to imagine
Linda as a feminist bank teller than a generic bank teller,
it might be easier to imagine the inauguration of Clinton than the more abstract idea of the inauguration of the

Democratic nominee. So, it seems worth checking how
the specific Clinton and the general Democratic nominee
markets are valued at the same points in time, over their
trading histories. The same analysis makes sense for
other individual Democrats—including Barack Obama
and John Edwards—who had their own heavily traded
markets for winning the 2008 US Presidential Election.
Figure 1 shows the change in market value for the individual Clinton, Obama and Edwards markets, as well
as the Democratic nominee market, over the period in
which they existed. It is clear that none of the individuals ever exceed the value of their party, and so there is no
conjunction fallacy.
Figure 1 shows another analysis, however, that does
point towards an irrationality in these prediction markets.
Since only one person can win the election, the probabilities of Clinton, Obama and Edwards combined should
not exceed the probability for the Democratic nominee.
But, as the gray line shows, by adding the market values of the three individuals, total probabilities are obtained that exceed the Democratic value at several points
in time. The most severe of the violation is highlighted
by the circle in Figure 1, and a zoomed-in look at the
curves in this region is shown. For about a 3 week period, the probability that Clinton or Obama or Edwards
would win the election was judged by the Intrade markets
as higher—by more than 5% for much of the time—than

1640

Market Value

100

50

0
Jan08

A.

100

B.

100

50

Senate
House
President
Conjunction
Nov08

C.

50

0
Jan08

Nov08

0
Jan08

Nov08

Time

Figure 2: Prediction market values for individual propositions about whether Democrats or Republicans win the
Presidential, House and Senate elections, and the value for the market whose event is the logical conjunction of these
three individual markets. The three different analyses correspond to three different scenarios, as described in the text.

the probability of the Democratic nominee winning. This
pattern is essentially a form of the disjunction fallacy,
since the sum of the probabilities of mutually exclusive
events add to more than the probability of their union.
To be fair, it is possible to imagine circumstances in
which the violation we just observed is not so irrational.
It would have been possible, for example, for Clinton to
have won the US Presidential election as an independent.
Under that improbable, but not impossible, scenario, the
sum of the three individuals could exceed the Democratic
nominee. We think that it is unlikely this sort of thinking
is responsible for the data in Figure 1, and we will present
a little evidence later to support our doubts. But it is
not logically impossible. So, to provide sounder tests of
whether prediction markets fall prey to conjunction and
disjunction fallacies, we need to consider different combinations of markets that do make various combinations
of probabilities logically impossible.

Overview
In this paper, we use some Intrade prediction markets
to look for possible conjunction or disjunction fallacies.
Our approach is exploratory, intended to provoke thinking about the rationality of markets, and the applicability of heuristics and biases to group decision-making.
We examined a large range of logically related markets,
most of which were heavily traded in the real-world highstakes setting provided by Intrade, and present the highlights of those explorations here.
The most basic question we ask is whether we can
find evidence of conjunction or disjunction fallacies in
prediction markets. We are especially interested in substantial violations, where market values show large violations for sustained periods of time. We are interested
in when and why such violations occur, and whether or
how quickly they are corrected. An important theoretical
question raised by our line of study involves the relationship between individual and group estimation of probabilities, especially as they are made for logically related
events. An important applied question asks about the rationality of prediction markets. We will discuss these
issues in the light of our exploratory findings.

Selected Analyses
Looking through the Intrade markets available at the end
of 2008, we found a rich set of possibilities to look for
logical fallacies in the values of related markets. We restricted our attention to those markets that were heavily enough traded on a day-by-day basis for the market
value to be a meaningful running probability estimate.
These markets were typically found in the realms of politics, especially in the context of the 2008 US elections,
and in markets requiring predictions of the values of various financial and economic measures. Some also involved more general world events, including militaryand climate-related markets. In this section, we report
on three lines of analysis in some detail, giving a set of
results that are indicative of what we found.

Political Conjunctions
Not surprisingly, Intrade had prediction markets for
events like ‘Democrats win Presidency’, ‘Republicans
win House’, and ‘Democrats win Senate’. Besides these
separate markets, Intrade had a number of markets dealing with combinations of results, like ‘Democrats win the
Presidency and House, but Republicans win the Senate’.
Comparing the market values for the individual events
with the market for the intersection of those events provides an obvious and direct test for conjunction fallacies.
We looked at all of the possible combinations, and
show three representative analyses in Figure 2. In Figure 2a, the individual markets for the Democrats winning
the presidency, the Democrats winning the house, and the
Democrats winning the senate are shown, together with
the single market for the event “The Democrats win the
presidency, house and senate”. This final market, representing the conjunction of the first three, cannot logically
be more likely than the individual markets. This requirement seems to be met by the prediction markets values.
There are certainly no large and significant violations.
Similarly, Figure 2b corresponds to the markets for
a Democratic president, but Republican control of the
house and senate, and their logical conjunction. Figure 2c corresponds to Democratic presidency and con-

1641

Market Value

120
110
100

President

50

0
Oct04

House

120
110
100

120
110
100

50

Nov08

50

0
Dec06

Nov08

0
Dec06

Senate

Total
Democrat
Republican
Neither
Nov08

Time

Figure 3: Prediction market values for the ‘Democrat’, ‘Republican’ and ‘Neither’ choices, and the sum total of values
for these three markets, for the presidential, house and senate races.

trol of the house, but Republican control of the senate,
and their conjunction market. Looking at all three analysis together gives the basic conclusion we drew from
looking at all possibilities. This is that we could find no
evidence of a conjunction fallacy, even though the actual
pattern and level of the probabilities vary significantly
under different scenarios.

Political Disjunctions
Figure 3 shows three analyses dealing with political markets that directly test for disjunction fallacies. All three
relate to the 2008 US Elections, and the probabilities of
the Democratic party, the Republican party, or neither
party, achieved electoral success. The three analyses relate to the presidential, house and senate races. In each
case, of course, the ‘Democrat’, ‘Republican’ and ‘Neither’ choices partition the total possibilities, and so the
sum of their individual markets should be 100.
The left panel of Figure 3 suggests that this additive
relationship is approximately satisfied in the presidential
markets. The line showing the sum of the three market
values hovers consistently close to 100 throughout, even
though in the last year or two there are large and sometimes sudden shifts in how the Democratic and Republican components contribute to the sum. The house and
senate races tell a different story, with quite large violations evident in short bursts in both totals. These violations seem to be more often over- than under-estimations
of the total probability (i.e., they tend to show the supraadditivity usually found in individuals), although some
instances of both are evident.
Taken together, the house and senate totals show that
disjunctive fallacies are observed in prediction markets.
It is interesting to note that, while the violations are often significant in magnitude—exceeding 10% in several
cases—they are not sustained. We cannot know whether
this quick correction comes from traders observing the
mis-calibration of the relevant markets, or is a natural
rapid adjustment of the individual markets themselves to
match expectations. Indeed, we do not know whether the
same traders are actively engaged, or even aware, of all
of the relevant markets displayed in Figure 3. What we
do know is that, to the extent the market value represents

the belief a group of people have about the probability
of a series of related events, those probabilities are often very well calibrated, but do sometimes briefly take
irrational values.
There are two other observations to make about the
analyses in Figure 3. The first is that the partitioning into
Democratic, Republican, and a catch-all ‘Neither’ choice
provides a logically sound test of disjunction. Unlike our
introductory example with Clinton, Obama and Edwards,
the current analyses do not have alternative scenarios under which the deviation of the total market value from
100 can be justified. The second point is the presidential analysis in the left panel of Figure 3 argues against
the possible explanation we considered earlier, in which
Clinton could win the presidency as an independent. If
this were the thinking, we would expect the ‘Neither’
market would sharply increase at the time the sum of
the Clinton, Obama and Edwards curves in Figure 1 exceeded the Democrat market, but it does not.

Conjunctions in Snow, War, Jobs and Tax
A general class of markets that allows for additional testing for the conjunction fallacy involves the estimation
of whether a quantities is greater or less than a specified
value. Perhaps the most intuitive example in Intrade rests
on event like “Central Park to get MORE than 10 inches
of snowfall in Dec 2008”. Intrade has identically-worded
markets for this snowfall, ranging from 10 inches, to 15
inches, 20 inches, and so on, all the way up to 40 inches.
This means that, for example, if Central Park recorded 23
inches of snowfall in Dec 2008, the 10, 15 and 20 inches
markets would all pay out.
Logically, if more than 15 inches of snow is recorded,
more than 10 inches is also recorded. And so the market
value, estimating the probability of each specific level of
snowfall, should decrease as the numbers themselves increase. This is a form of logical conjunction, in which
more than 15 inches is both itself, and more than 10
inches. The more general events, which are the lower
levels of snowfall for this “more than” question, should
be the most probable.
The markets dealing with snowfall in Central Park
were only lightly traded, and so we did not analyze them.

1642

60

A. Iran

50
40

Market Value

60

Dec09
Sep09
Jun09
Mar09
Dec08

40
30

20

20

10

10

100

0
Mar07

Dec08

C. Unemployment

100

80

80

60

60

40
20
0
Jan08

Dec10
Dec09
Dec08

50

30

0
Jul08

B. Taiwan

6.00%
5.75%
5.50%
5.25%
5.00%

40

Dec08

D. Tax
34%
36%
38%
40%
42%

20
0
Feb08

Dec08

Dec08

Time

Figure 4: Prediction market values for (A) “USA and/or Israel to execute an overt Air Strike against Iran by [month]”,
(B) “China to conduct overt military action against Taiwan on/before [month]”, (C) “US Unemployment Rate in Dec
2008 to be greater than [rate]”, (D) “Highest Marginal Single-Filer Fed Income Tax Rate to be Equal or Greater than
[rate] in 2009 Tax Year”.

Instead, Figure 4 shows the results for four sets of heavily traded markets testing the conjunction fallacy in the
same way.
Figure 4a deals with a possible US or Israeli air strike
against Iran, with different markets specifying different
months before which the strike must take place. The
value of all of these markets generally declines over the
time period shown, but the conjunctive orderings are almost always preserved. Other than a brief period around
about October 2008 where the Sep09 value exceeded the
Dec09 value—and this could possibly be the result of
too little trading to keep the Sep09 estimate current—the
market values maintain their logically required ordering.
Figure 4b involves a similar event, asking whether
China will conduct overt military action again Taiwan
before a specified month. The three markets show a clear
step-change, in which the probability of action increases
suddenly. Despite this rapid readjustment, however, the
logically required ordering is preserved throughout.
Figure 4c considers markets for the US unemployment rate in December 2008, specifying different percentage rates that need to be exceeded. All of the specified values—ranging from 5.00 to 6.00%—define propositions that become progressively more likely in the economic situation leading up to December 2008, and so the
markets increase in value towards 100. They do this al-

most always adhering to the logical ordering. There is
only a brief and small violation for 5.25% and 5.50%.
Finally, Figure 4d looks at the US tax rate for filing
individuals, with specific markets corresponding to rates
between 34% and 42%. There is an interesting clumped
structure to these markets, with 34% always being assessed as probably low enough to be true, 36% and 38%
assessed very similarly, originally at about a value of 40,
but then rising and falling dramatically and in unison,
and 40% and 42% being similarly coupled, but with a
steady and low probability of being true. But again, there
are no significant conjunction fallacies.
Taken together, these analyses are representative of
our broader explorations. We did not find any large and
sustained conjunction fallacies by looking for violations
of required orderings in multiple markets with different
levels of the same quantity.

Discussion
The existence of conjunction and disjunction fallacies is
one of the most robust findings in experimental psychology. Looking at the probabilities produced by prediction
markets, we found some evidence for disjunction fallacies, but only the merest hint for conjunction fallacies.
Of course, our explorations were limited. But, we did

1643

not find the large and sustained effects that might be expected from experimental psychology. We now discuss
some ideas that might help understand this discrepancy.
One important consideration is that prediction markets produce probability estimates from groups of people, not the individuals tested in experimental psychology. But there is nothing inherent about using groups of
people, rather than individuals, that guarantees the prevention of irrational decision-making. Rioting crowds
and stock market bubbles are common events. Indeed, a
stock bubble in a prediction market—so that, for example, Hillary Clinton becomes significantly over-valued—
is exactly the sort of phenomenon that could potentially
produce fallacies. And some empirical psychology studies have demonstrated fallacies in group settings (e.g.,
Tindale, 1993)
Surowiecki (2004) distinguishes between three types
of group decision-making. The first are cognitive problems, such as deciding who will win a major sporting
event. The second are coordination decisions, and include buyers and sellers working out how to traded at a
fair price. The third are cooperation decisions, and include selfless feats like paying taxes. Traditional demonstrations of fallacies in heuristic and biases research have
largely focused on cognitive problems. In contrast, prediction markets are more like coordination problems.
Thus, it is possible one of the key differences is not
that the probability estimates we examined came from
groups, but that they were made through a trading process. On the other hand, experimental psychology has
used betting paradigms to replicate logical fallacies in
individual decision-making (e.g., Bar-Hillel & Neter,
1993). This raises the question as whether coordinated
group trading is somehow different from or better than
individual betting. It would be interesting to know, for
example, whether short selling (i.e., betting on a decrease in a stock, and so realizing a loss), which is notoriously psychologically difficult in financial markets
(e.g., Odean, 1998), is psychologically easier in prediction markets.
A more general question is whether trading markets
are the best way to solve group coordination problems.
A number of different mechanisms exist, including stock
pricing and futures contracts in economics, voting systems in politics, and points spreads in sports betting. It
would be interesting to compare these approaches, and
to relate them back to the constituent cognitive decision
and estimates on which they must ultimately rest. This
could tell us something about how individual and group
decision-making are related, and how to extract good decisions from groups in different circumstances.
A key claim made Surowiecki (2004) is that good
group decision-making requires four elements. The first
two are a set of rules, and a mechanism for aggregating
individual opinions. These are clearly provided by prediction markets like Intrade. The third element is that
there is diversity, independence or decentralization in the
individual decision-makers. While we do not have details on the traders in our markets, it seems likely they

had a variety of political dispositions, levels of expertise
in finance and world affairs, and brought different information and opinions to bear on their individual decisions.
The final element advocated by Surowiecki (2004) is
that individuals need to be able to communicate to some
extent, but not too much. This is an interesting issue.
Prediction markets in general, and possibly Intrade in
particular, seem to strike this difficult balance in a natural way. The decisions made by individual traders to
offer a buying or selling price are made in the context
of current lists of offers. This gives individuals a calibrating perspective on the opinions of others. But to
make successful trades, individuals must identify deviations from reality in existing offers. Contacts should
be bought when undervalued, and sold when overvalued.
Thus, individual traders must use their own expertise,
opinion and data to provide fresh information to make
trades, and so are encouraged to bring new information to
the market. Perhaps the dynamics of trading allow group
opinions to calibrate (rather than anchor) individual opinions, while encouraging improvement (rather than conformity) in decision-making.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a UROP grant from
the University of California to EG and MDL. We thank
members of the Memory and Decision Lab, and Danny
Openheimer and Ben Newell for helpful discussions.

References
Bar-Hillel, M., & Neter, E. (1993). How alike it is versus
how likely it is: A disjunction fallacy in probability judgments. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 1119–1131.
Christiansen, J. D. (2007). Prediction markets: Practical experiments in small markets and behaviours
observed. The Journal of Prediction Markets, 1,
17–41.
Odean, T. (1998). Are investors reluctant to realize their
losses? Journal of Finance, LIII(5), 1775-1798.
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The wisdom of crowds. New York:
Random House.
Tindale, S. (1993). Decision errors made by individuals
and groups. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science,
185(4157), 1124–1131.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extension versus intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy
in probability judgment. Psychological Review,
90(4), 293–315.
Wright, G., & Whalley, P. (1983). The supra-additivityof
subjective probability. In B. P. Stigum & F. Wenstop (Eds.), Foundations of utility and risk theory
with applications (pp. 233–244). Dordrecht: Reidel.

1644

