UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Contextual Diversity and the Associative Structure of Adult Language in Early Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6wm6v7f5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hills, Thomas
Maouene, Josita
Riordan, Brian
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Contextual Diversity and the Associative Structure of Adult Language
in Early Word Learning
Thomas T. Hills (thomas.hills@unibas.ch)
University of Basel, Cognitive and Decision Sciences, Basel, Switzerland

Josita Maouene (jcmaoune@indiana.edu), Brian Riordan (briordan@indiana.edu),
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN, 47405 USA
Abstract
Previous studies have demonstrated that the statistical
properties of adult generated free associates can predict the
order of early word learning in children. In this paper, we
investigate the cause of this phenomenon. We propose that
early word learning may be driven by the contextual diversity
of words in child directed speech, which is in turn correlated
with an underlying associative structure in adult language.
We present evidence for this hypothesis by analysing the cooccurrence of words in the CHILDES corpus of child directed
speech. We find that a word’s contextual diversity—its
number of unique neighbors—predicts the order of early word
learning and is highly correlated with a word’s associative
diversity. Using longitudinal network analysis on developing
early semantic networks from 15 to 30 months, we also find
evidence for a specific growth process called preferential
acquisition, in which words with more diversity in the
learning environment are learned earlier than less diverse
words. Only adjectives support preferential attachment—a
process based on the structure of known words—and this is
consistent with the evidence that adjective learning is a
strongly facilitatory process, in which the learning of an
adjective is enhanced by comparison with other similar
adjectives.
Keywords: network analysis, age of acquisition, child
directed speech, free association, contextual diversity, corpus
analysis, nouns, adjectives

Introduction
Adult free-associations predict the order of early noun
acquisition (Hills et al., in press; Hills et al., 2008; Steyvers
& Tenenbaum, 2005). In a standard free association task,
researchers provide cues and subjects provide the first word
that comes to mind (the target). Words that are recalled as
targets for a larger set of cues are acquired earlier in
development than words that are the recalled target for a
smaller set of cues. A clear question is why do adult
associations predict age of acquisition (AoA)?
Children do not have direct access to information about
adult free associates, therefore the predictive power of
associates must be due to their correlation with some other
property of the learning environment. One explanation for
the success of associates is that they represent a proxy for
structural information contained in adult language. The
words children acquire earlier are the ones elicited by many
different contexts in adult free association tasks; perhaps
then, the key factor relevant to acquisition is contextual

diversity. The words adults produce in many different
contexts in the free association task may be the ones that
they also produce in many different contexts in their
language to children. In part, early-learned words may have
more associative relations because they occur in more
contextually diverse contexts in adult language. If this idea
is correct, then we should see a similar associative structure
in child directed speech to that observed in standard freeassociation tasks and, moreover, we should also find
contextual diversity—measured by number of unique
contexts—is a predictor of age of acquisition.
Contextual diversity has not been directly studied in early
vocabulary development, but a number of studies suggest its
importance. Work by Hayes and Clark (1970) found that
adults, when listening to an artificial speech stream without
clear word boundaries, detected word boundaries in
proportion to the transitional probabilities between
phonemes—with words in more diverse phonemic
backgrounds being more easily differentiated. Saffran et al.
(1996a, 1996b) also demonstrated this result for adults, and
went on to show that eight-month-olds could make similar
word non-word distinctions based on transition probabilities
when presented with unparsed speech stream, e.g.,
identifying “bidaku” after listening to speech of the form
“bidakupadotigolabubidaku.”
This suggests that early lexical learning may be
particularly sensitive to a lexical item’s contextual diversity,
because diversity provides critical information for
differentiating word boundaries and potential word-object
mappings. That is, items that appear in many varied
contexts are more easily disambiguated, both with regards to
the primary speech data and also with regards to separating
object from background. If contextual diversity actually
drives language acquisition, then this leads to the prediction
that the age at which a word is acquired should be a
consequence of its contextual diversity in child directed
speech.
In this paper, we use the CHILDES corpus of child
directed speech (MacWhinney, 2000) to investigate the
contextual diversity in the structure of adult language. In
particular, we ask, how does the contextual diversity in child
directed speech correlate with the statistical properites of
free associates. Secondly, we ask if contextual diversty
might be a better predictor of age of acquisition than
associates—with the implication that the predictive power

2118

of associates is explained by their relationship to contextual
diversity in child directed speech.
A second question we address here is whether the
predictive power of associates and contextual diversity also
apply to non-noun word classes. There is reason to believe
that they might not. Different word classes are learned at
different times (e.g., Dale & Fenson, 1996), and possibly by
different mechanisms. For example, Waxman & Klibanoff
(2000) demonstrated that adjective learning was strongly
facilitated by comparison either across adjectives or across
basic level nouns—whereas children tend to default to basic
level noun mapping when hearing novel words with novel
objects (e.g., Waxman & Kosowski, 1990).
Also,
Tomasello’s (2000) Verb Island hypothesis might be taken
to suggest that verbs are learned differently from other
words, taking on more independent representations in their
earliest learning. We examine the predictive power of
associations and contextual diversity for each word class.
Our main focus is therefore to examine the relationship
between contextual diversity and the associative structure of
child directed speech as a possible source of information
relevant to learning those words, and secondly to examine
how these structural cues may differ for different word
classes.

Methods
The words. The words were taken from the MacArthurBatesCommunicative Developmental Inventory or MCDI
(Dale & Fenson, 1996), Toddler version. This inventory is
a checklist of 574 words typically acquired by children
learning English and normatively included in the productive
vocabularies of 50% of children at 30 months of age. For
our analyses, we excluded 42 words that were never recalled
as target words in the free association norms, or were words
about time. This left 532 words, of which 330 were nouns,
96 were action words, 58 were descriptive words, 21 were
pronouns, and 48 were function words consisting of
quantifiers, articles, helping verbs, and connecting words.
We let the age of acquisition for a word equal the first
month at which the word was produced by more than 50%
of the children in the normative tables of the MCDI.
Associates. We used the adult-generated University of
Southern Florida Free Association Norms (Nelson, et al.,
1999). These were collected by providing subjects with a
word (the cue) and asking them to provide the first word
that came to mind (the target). This establishes a cue-target
relationship, e.g., when provided with the cue word CAT
many subjects provide the target word DOG. The norms
consist of approximately 5000 cue words and their related
targets.
CHILDES. In order to train our model of contextual
diversity (see below), we used a 2 million word corpus of
caregiver speech derived from the CHILDES database
(Riordan & Jones, 2007). In this corpus, a large number of
word forms were standardized to reduce orthographic
variation introduced by varying transcription conventions.
Words were also converted to stemmed forms (e.g. cats 

cat) under the assumption that word meaning in childdirected speech varies little across inflectional variants.
Words were aligned with their appropriate matching word in
the MCDI data.
Co-occurrence.
To generate a lexical semantic
representation based on the co-occurence of words in
CHILDES, we built matrix representations of word cooccurrences using a process similar to the Hyperspace
Analogue to Language (HAL) (Lund & Burgess, 1996) and
the word co-occurrence detector (Li et al, 2004). For a
corpus of N unique words, we formed an NxN network,
where each cell, ij, is filled according to the following rule:
a moving window of size k moves word-wise through the
corpus, with each word, i, adding to cell ij, a value
equivalent to the window size minus the number of
intervening words to the subsequent word j, for all words in
the window. We also used three different window sizes of
5, 10, and 15. The results were not qualitatively different
across window sizes, thus we only report results for a
window size of 15. After converting all cell entries greater
than one to one, the sum of columns and rows provides a
straightforward indication of a word’s contextual diversity.
Frequency counts were taken as the number of occurrences
of a given word. Our analysis only uses the 5000 most
frequent words in the corpus.
The networks. To construct the developing networks used
for the following analyses, we let words represent nodes.
Links between words were formed depending on whether or
not two words contained an associative or co-occurrence
relation. For the association network, each word pair was
connected by a directed link from the cue word to the target
word if that cue-target relationship was reported in the
association norms. For the co-occurrence networks, each
word pair was connected if the two words co-occurred in
child directed speech. We then created 15 networks, for
each month between 15 and 30 months, by including only
words acquired by that month. This generated a
developmentally ordered set of 15 association and 15 cooccurrence networks. For the 30 month networks used for
preferential acquisition, we only use the words in the given
word class. For the adult network, we use the combined
532 words from all word classes.

Results
As reported in the introduction, previous research
established the relationship between age of acquisition for
nouns and its associative relationships in the adult free
association norms. The number of associative relationships
was taken as the count of the number of distinct cue words
for which the target word was recalled. For clarity, we will
call this value the associative indegree. To investigate the
relationship between associative indegree and age of
acquisition for different word classes, we investigate the
predictive power of associative indegree (in the 30 month
network) on age of acquisition in Table 1. These results
also present the R2 contribution of associative indegree and
word frequency, each after controlling for the other.

2119

Table 1: Effects of log-transformed associative indegree
(Log-AI) and log-transformed word frequency (Log-WF) on
age of acquisition.

The results from Table 1 indicate that associative indegree
does make a significant contribution to age of acquisition,
and that for nouns, verbs, and function words, this
contribution is above and beyond that contributed by word
frequency alone. This confirms and extends our previous
findings (Hills et al., in press), demonstrating that
associative indegree is effective for a broader class of
nouns, as well as other word classes. In all cases, the sign
of the coefficient for log-AI was negative, indicating that
words that are the target for a larger set of cues (have more
associates) are more likely to be learned earlier than words
associated with a smaller set of cues.
These results are potentially a consequence of a statistical
learning strategy based on contextual diversity. One way to
approach this hypothesis is to ask what aspects of the
structure of child directed language are similar to adult
generated free associates, and are these aspects also
predictive of age of acquisition. If free associates are
simply dependent variables that are themselves the products
of cognitive semantic knowledge representations, then the
structure of child-directed speech should actually be more
informative with respect to age of acquisition than
associates. To investigate this possibility, we took the
CHILDES degree (CHd)—using the sum of both column
and row for a given word—as an independent variable, and
controlling for frequency of the word in the CHILDES
corpus, we regressed these on the AoA from the MCDI for
each word in a given word class (see Table 2). Thus, in
part, Table 2 parallels Table 1, with CHd replacing AI.
First, note that CHd is a predictor of AoA, and that this is
true even after controlling for word frequency. Second, the
overall fit of a word’s diversity in CHILDES and its
frequency is as good or better than associative indegree as a
predictor of age of acquistion. This is true of all word
classes except function words. Log-transformed nouns are
possibly another case where this may not be true, but nouns
are also the least frequent (and the least diverse) word class,
and may therefore lose information in the log
transformation. The sign of the coefficients are always
negative, with more contextually diverse nouns being
learned at younger ages. Finally, note that the correlation
between a word’s diversity in CHILDES is also highly
correlated with its associative indegree. These results
strongly suggest that the performance of adult associates is
due to their correlation with the structure of child directed

speech—in particular, their correlation with a word’s
contextual diversity.
Table 2: Results of log-transformed CHILDES degree
(Log-CHd) on age of acquisition. Items in parenthesis are
not log-transformed for CHd.

We also examined how much of the variance is explained
by CHd after controlling for associates. If our initial
hypothesis is true, and contextual diversity in CHILDES is
the force driving the age of acquisition effect found for
associates, then most of the variance explained by
associative indegree should disappear if we first take out the
contribution made by CHILDES degree. Table 3 shows
that, for any given word class, CHILDES degree explains
significant variance after taking out that explained by
associative indegree.
Associative indegree is still
predictive, but to a lesser extent, explaining less of the
variance for both nouns and function words. Associative
indegree does retain a high overall explanatory power when
all words are combined.
Table 3: Results of log-transformed CHILDES degree (logCHd) and Log-transformed associative indegree in
explaining age of acquisition, after controlling for other
factors. Items in parenthesis are not log-transformed for
CHd.

In summary, the above analyses suggest that contextual
diversity, as measured by the count of a words cooccurrence with unique words in child directed speech, is a
significant predictor of age of acquisition for all word
classes. The results also indicate a significant relationship
with associative indegree, but do not completely remove the
possibility of an independent effect of associates—one that
is not related to contextual diversity.
In prior work, beyond establishing the efficacy of
associates to predict AoA, we also hypothesized and found
support for a specific growth process called preferential
acquisition. This growth process is consistent with the
contextual diversity hypothesis because it proposes that
words are learned in relation to their contextual diversity in
the learning environment. In prior work, we only examined

2120

diversity as measured by a nouns associative indegree. Here
we extend this analysis to CHILDES indegree, examing the
three growth hypotheses we investigated in Hills et al. (In
press).
The three growth rules are as follows (Figure 1):
preferential attachment – based on the connectivity of
known words; preferential acquisition – based on the
connectivity of new words to all words in the learning
environment; and a third intermediate possibility, lure of
associates, based on the connectivity of new words to
known words. For preferential attachment, a word is more
likely to be learned if it attaches to an existing already
known word in the network that is itself well attached. In
this way, richly connected words become more richly
connected. In contrast, with preferential acquisition, a word
is more likely to be learned if it is attached to many other
words in the learning environment. The lure of associates
lies between the above two; at the time-of-acquisition, the
child learns next the word that attaches to the most already
known words.
We asked which model for growth best fits the CHILDES
degree using a maximum likelihood test. Our basic growth
model determines how strongly the growing network
weighs the value of new words at each month in the growth
of the network, with value determined by the model. We do
this using a parameter, β , which we fit to an exponential
ratio of strengths rule. We calculate the probability that a
word, w i , is added to the network at a given month based
on its value, di , using the following:

P(w i ) =

€

€e βd

∑e

i

βd j

j

Figure 1.The three growth models for a simplified
network. Each of the networks is the same, but the
growth models differently value each unknown word
(possible new words are shown in white, existing
nodes are represented in grey; links relevant to the
growth model are shown in black, unimportant links in
grey). “Add” indicates which node is favored for
learning by the growth model. With Preferential
Attachment, the value of the new node is the average
degree of the known nodes it would attach to. With
Preferential Acquisition, the value of the new node is
its degree in the full network. With the Lure of the
Associates, the value of new node is its degree with
respect to known words. This figure is taken from
Hills et al. (In press).

€Here, β represents the sensitivity of the acquisition
process to di . In particular, positive values of β mean that
words with higher values of di are more likely to be
€
acquired early, whereas negative values of β mean that
€ words with low values of d are more likely to be acquired
i
€early. A β value of exactly zero would
€ indicate that order
€
of acquisition is not sensitive to di . We let di represent the
€ 1) for each word
degree values (“Value” in Figure
calculated with€respect to each model. For example, with
€ the lure of associates model, di is equivalent to the indegree of the word€ i at the€time of acquisition. The
denominator is calculated for all words that are not yet
learned at the start of the month for which the word in the
numerator is acquired.
€ The log of the P(w i ) values, for
each acquired word, is then added to produce the log
likelihood.

−log(L(β )) = −∑ log(P(w
€ i ))
i

*

We then find the β that minimizes the above log
likelihood function using a standard optimization procedure.

Table 4 presents the results for the model comparison,
using CHILDES degree. The results indicate that for most
word classes, preferential acquisition or lure of the
associates are the best fitting models. As shown in Figure 1,
these models only differ by the inclusion of unknown words
when moving from lure of the associates to preferential
acquisition. That the best fit for function words is
preferential acquisition based on the adult network is most
likely due to the fact that function words gain most of their

€

€

2121

co-occurrence information from non-function words,
which—for this word class—are only present in the adult
network. Finally, adjectives are the only word class that
supports preferential attachment.
Table 4: Results of the log likelihood fits for the three
growth models. Model fits are ranked by their log likelihood
value, with 1 representing the best fit. Models that were not
different from random by AIC are represented with an ‘r’.
We take a conservative estimate of 6 G2 units as our
measure of significance, and do not rank models that are
more distant than 6 units from the best model. P. Attach. =
preferential attachment. P.Acq = Preferential acquisition
using the designated network (30 months or Adult).
______________________________________________
All
Noun Verb
Adj
Fun
P. Attach.
r
r
r
1
r
Lure of Assoc. 1
1
2
r
P. Acq-30mts
2
2
1
r
2
P. Acq-Adult
r
3
r
1

Discussion
This paper provides a first look at how the statistical
structure of child directed speech may facilitate a specific
pattern of early word learning. Our results provide a
possible explanation for the success of associates in
predicting the order of early word learning. We do this by
demonstrating that the associative indegree of a word is
strongly correlated with the contextual diversity of a word in
child directed speech.
We further show that both
associative indegree and the number of co-occurring
neighbors of a word in child directed speech are predictors
of the order of acquisition for words in the first 30 months.
The role of contextual diversity in learning is gaining
momentum and we feel this explanation for the success of
associates in prior work is consistent with literature on early
language learning. It is also consistent with a growing
literature on contextual diversity in lexical decision times
(Adelman et al., 2006; Steyvers & Malmberg, 2003; Hicks
et al., 2005; Recchia et al., 2008). A high level explanation
for the effect of contextual diversity is provided by the
rational analysis of memory (Anderson & Milson, 1989;
Anderson & Schooler, 1991), which is based on the
principle of likely need. This principle suggests that words
in more contexts are more likely to be needed in any new
context, and thus should be learned earlier. In the
introduction, we provide instead an argument based on
mechanism—high diversity words are more easily
disambiguated; they are more readily isolated from the
background and mapped to their corresponding referents.
Our results show that the predictive power of contextual
diversity is effective for all word classes, but differentially
so.
Nouns show the strongest predictive effect for
contextual diversity in child directed speech, but much of
this effect disappears after controlling for word frequency.
The necessary precedence of frequency, however, is far
from established. In Table 1, frequency across all words is

much less predictive than associative indegree. Frequency
and contextual diversity are related, but word repitition is
clearly not sufficient to drive early word learning—
otherwise, function words would be learned earliest.
The final result is that preferential acquisition, and its
close neighbor, lure of the associates, are still supported as
the most favorable growth models for development in early
semantic networks. However, this effect does not hold for
all word classes. For descriptive words (adjectives),
preferential attachment is the dominant model, significantly
outperforming all other models. This result is consistent
with the known differences between noun and adjective
learning (Gasser & Smith, 1998; Sandhofer & Smith, 2007).
In adjective learning, the role of comparison appears to play
a much stronger role than in learning with other word
classes. For example, the process of helping children to
extend adjectives appropriately is strongly facilitated by
presenting a comparison object that differs along the
adjectival dimension, or that differs in everything but the
adjectival dimension (Waxman & Klibanoff, 2000).
Further, learning new adjectives appears to be strongly
predicted by how many other adjectives one knows for the
class of properties (e.g., Sandhofer & Smith, 1999;
Backscheider & Shatz, 1993) In this way, strong knowledge
of one adjective facilitates the learning of other related
adjectives, creating a preferential attachment growth
process.
We note that the age of acquisition effect—in which
lexical decision times are related to the age of a word’s
acquisition—might be interpreted as a situation where early
word learning is driving adult retrieval times (Ellis and
Morrison, 1998). In this paper we explore an alternative
possibility, in which the age of acquisition effect is a
consequence of the associative structure of language, which
in turn drives age of acquisition via preferential acquisition.
In the final analysis, the direction of causation may well go
in both directions—there is evidence in support of both
(e.g., Recchia et al., 2008; Stewart & Ellis, 2008). We
propose that this evidence is best explained by seeing word
learning as a self-reinforcing dynamical system, in which
the earliest learned words become more easily retrieved
during speech, and thus reinforce the learning of these
words earliest in future generations through a process
involving contextual diversity.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institute of
Health, T32 Grant # HD 07475.

References
Adelman, J.S., Brown, G.D.A., Queseda, J. F. (2006).
Contextual Diversity, Not Word Frequency, Determines
Word-Naming and Lexical Decision Times.
Psychological Science 17(9), 814-823.
Anderson, J. R. & Milson, R. (1989). Human memory: An
adaptive perspective. Psychological Review, 96(4), 703719.

2122

Anderson, J. R. & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the
environment in memory. Psychological Science 2(6),
396-408.
Backscheider, A. G. & Shatz, M. (1993). Children’s
acquisition of the lexical domain of color. In K. Beals et
al. (Eds), What we think, what we mean, and how we say
it, Vol. 2 (pp. 11–21). Chicago: The Chicago Linguistic
Society.
Dale, P.S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28, 125-127.
Ellis, A. W., & Morrison, C. M. (1998). Real age-ofacquisition effects in lexical retrieval. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 24, 515-523.
Gasser, M., & Smith, L. B. (1998). Learning nouns and
adjectives: A connectionist account. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 13, 269-306.
Hayes, J.R., & Clark, H.H. (1970). Experiments in the
segmentation of an artificial speech analog. In J. R.
Hayes (Ed.), Cognition and the Development of
Language. New York: Wiley.
Hicks, J. L., Marsh, R. L., & Cook, G. I. (2005). An
observation on the role of contextual variability in free
recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 31, 1160-1164.
Hills, T., Maouene, M., Maouene, J., Sheya, A. & Smith L.
B. (2008). Categorical Structure in Early Semantic
Networks of Nouns. Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Washington,
DC, USA, July 23-26.
Hills, T., Maouene, M., Maouene, J., Sheya, A. & Smith, L.
(In press). Longitudinal analysis of early semantic
networks: preferential attachment or preferential
acquisition? Psychological Science.
Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2007). Representing
word meaning and order information in a composite
holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 114(1), 1–37
Lund, K., & Burgess, C. (1996). Producing highdimensional semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence.
Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 28(2), 203-208.
Li, P., Farkas, I., MacWhinney, B. (2004). Early lexical
development in a self-organizing neural network. Neural
Networks 17, 1345-1362.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1999).
The University of Southern Florida word association
norms. Retrieved from http://w3.usf.edu/FreeAssociation
Recchia, G., Johns, B. T., & Jones, M. N. (2008). Context
repetition benefits are dependent on context redundancy.
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Cognitive Science
Society, Washington, DC, USA, July 23-26.
Riordan, B., and Michael N. J.. (2007). Comparing semantic
space models using child-directed speech. In D. S.

MacNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the
29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Pgs. 599-604.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., and Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996b).
Word segmentation: the role of distributional cues.
Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Sandhoffer, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Learning adjectives
in the real world: how learning nouns impedes learning
adjectives. Language Learning and Development, 3(3),
233-267.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2007). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition 106, 1558-1568.
Stewart, N., & Ellis, A. W. (2008). Order of acquisition in
learning perceptual categories: a laboratory analogue of
the age of acquisition effect? Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 15, 70-74.
Steyvers, M., & Malmberg, K. (2003). The effect of
normative context variability on recognition memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 29(5), 760-766.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29, 41-78.
Tomasello, M. (2000). The item-based nature of children’s
early syntactic development. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 4(4), 156-163.
Waxman, S. R., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2000). The role of
comparison in the extension of novel adjectives.
Developmental Psychology, 36, 571-581.
Waxman, S. R., & Kosowksi, T. D. (1990). Nouns mark
category relations: Toddlers’ and preschoolers’ wordlearning biases. Child Development, 61, 1461-1473.

2123

