UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-situational language learning: The effects of grammatical categories as constraints on
referential labeling

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1z6231ns

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Mattock, Karen
Monaghan, Padraic

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross-situational language learning:
The effects of grammatical categories as constraints on referential labeling
Padraic Monaghan (p.monaghan@lancaster.ac.uk)
Karen Mattock (k.mattock@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster LA1 4YF, UK
Abstract
Infants learn to map words onto situations, even though there
is a bewildering array of potential referents for each word in
their environment. Previous studies of cross-situational
learning have shown that learning correspondences between
words and referents is possible, when all words refer to
objects. However, in child-directed speech, the infants’
primary input is more complex as it comprises multi-word
utterances from different grammatical categories, some of
which do not form word-object pairings. In study 1, we
confirmed in corpus analyses of child-directed speech that
utterances typically contain words from several different
grammatical categories. In study 2 we confirmed that
participants could still learn from cross-situational statistics
when (1) the language also incorporated words that did not
refer to objects, and (2) when the language additionally
contained function words that marked the referring and nonreferring words. Cross-situational learning is robust to
grammatical categories in acquiring word-object pairings.

Learning to map words onto objects
How do infants acquiring their first language learn to map
words onto referents in their environment? In 1960, Quine
illustrated the complexity of this task by describing the
situation of a field linguist trying to determine the meaning
of the word “gavagai” spoken by a native speaker as he
points to a rabbit running past. The referent for the word
could be the rabbit, but it could also be the action of
running, a patch of fur, the general beauty of the scene, or
infinite other interpretations. Additional constraints must be
available to the learner in order to correctly ascertain the
intended referent. The developmental literature reports
several candidate constraints that reduce the space of
possibilities, such as the whole-object constraint (Markman,
1990), whereby infants seem to assume that the referent for
a word is a whole object and not a part of it. However, such
perceptual constraints are still not sufficient to confine the
interpretation to a single referent as there are often situations
where the child’s environment contains several separate but
whole objects. In the same paper, Markman (1990) reports
other possible constraints that arise from the child’s
computation of statistical co-occurrences between words
and objects in the environment that can assist in solving the
“gavagai” problem.
Smith and Yu (2008) illustrated one such statistical
constraint in action by indicating that 12-month old infants
could learn the relationship between particular names and
objects across multiple learning situations, known as “crosssituational learning” (Siskind, 1996). In their study, six

nonsense words and six unfamiliar shapes were paired. For
each learning trial, participants heard two words and viewed
the two objects to which they referred, and had to learn
which of the words referred to which of the objects. The
probability of hearing a word and seeing the target object
was therefore 1, but the probability of hearing a word and
seeing another of the objects was .2. After training, infants
were presented with two objects and heard the word paired
with one of those objects, and were found to preferentially
look toward the target object. The infants were shown to
rapidly determine across multiple learning trials the cooccurrence between names and objects.
Yu and Smith (2007) conducted a similar study for adults,
but examined the effect of the number of words and objects
presented at any one time. When the number of words and
objects presented at any one time was either two, three, or
four, the participants learned better than by chance the
relationship between the target name and the target object.
As with the infant study, adults could learn the link between
particular words and objects from co-occurrences across
several learning situations even when there were several –
up to four – possible referents for each word.
However, in both these previous studies the association
between a particular word and object in each learning
situation was perfectly represented, in that for every word
spoken there was an object to which it referred. This has the
consequence that means that in the learning situation
multiple factors may have been contributing to learning.
First, the cross-situational association between each word
and each object across multiple instances was a contributor,
as highlighted by Smith and Yu (2008). Second, learning of
one of the word-object pairs could assist in learning the
relationships between the other word and object (as in
Akhtar, 2002). Hence, another influence on learning in these
studies could be the mutual exclusivity constraint of names
for objects (Houston-Price, Plunkett, & Harris, 2005;
Markman, Wasow, & Hansen, 2003), whereby learning of a
name for one object precludes the child from using the same
name for another object. So, learning the cross-situational
statistics could be boosted in that knowing the connection
for one of the word-object pairs provides information about
the referent for the other word(s) that the participant hears.
The cross-situational learning studies are useful
abstractions from the real-life learning situations present
when infants acquire knowledge of referents for words, yet
they do not represent the natural situation in two potentially
important respects. First, all the words in these situations
have referents, whereas this is not the case in child-directed

2226

speech where only some of the words spoken to the child in
each utterance are nouns referring to objects (see Yu &
Ballard, 2007). Second, and relatedly, all the words in these
situations refer to one of the objects in view, and so there
are no cases where a word is spoken and a referent for the
word is absent. If we incorporate these realistic features of
child-directed speech into the cross-situational learning task
then the mutual exclusivity constraint, and the assumption
that every word has a referent, is not available to the
language learner. In these cases, the role of cross-situational
statistics as the sole driver of learning can be investigated.
This, too, enables a stronger test of cross-situational
learning under conditions that more closely resemble the
natural-language situation.
In the first study, we investigated a large corpus of childdirected speech to determine the extent to which utterances
consisted of words from more than one grammatical
category. In the following corpus analysis, we were
particularly interested in the co-occurrence of nouns and
verbs in speech – in cross-situational learning only the
nouns should be taken to identify with the object, though
there are possibilities that a particular verb could also
reliably co-occur with the object. In addition, we were also
interested in the use of other content words alongside a noun
for similar reasons – an adjective may reliably co-occur with
a particular noun, which indirectly then may effectively cooccur with an object. We were also interested in the use of
nouns with function words, such as “the” or “a” which occur
frequently with nouns, and consequently could occur
frequently with the object target for the noun. In these cases
the probability of the object given the function word is high,
but presumably the child would have to learn the nonspecificity of the function word and disregard it as a
potential label for an object.

Study 1: Corpus Analyses of Child-Directed
Speech
Method
Corpus preparation
The corpus was taken from the English corpora submitted to
the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000). We selected
all the adult speech spoken in the presence of infants, which
comprised 5.7 million words in 1.3 million utterances. The
corpus was automatically tagged by a parser with 95%
accuracy (Sagae, MacWhinney, & Lavie, 2004).
Corpus analysis
We grouped the words in each utterance into different sets
of grammatical categories. As we were particularly
interested in the co-occurrence of words with referring
nouns, we selected only those utterances that contained at
least one noun. There were 608,008 such utterances. We
then analysed these utterances in terms of the number of
distinct nouns they contained – this addresses the question
of the relative proportions of utterances that children are
exposed to with either one or several nouns. Pronouns were

not considered in the analyses, as once the child had
acquired the pronouns then they could not be interpreted as
referring to objects in the child’s environment, and they
have a different distribution in that they tend not to be
marked by a function word as with common nouns, which
becomes relevant for the following analyses on the role of
function words.
For each of these utterances containing at least one noun,
we also counted the number of verbs they contained. Verbs
are a frequent word category and we hypothesized that
nearly all utterances would contain at least one verb. Certain
verb tokens may be used in specific situations, and so could
provide misleading variable information to the child about
the identity of the referring word in speech, such as the verb
“watch” that occurs in the same utterance as more than 20%
of occurrences of “television” in the CHILDES corpus.
We also measured the other words that would not function
as referents in the speech in each utterance, divided into two
general categories. First, content words such as adjectives
and adverbs which, as with the verbs, are varied in their
usage and so could be misleading in terms of their link to
particular objects in the environment. Second, we measured
occurrence of function words, comprising articles, numerals,
conjunctions, and prepositions, that are likely to occur with
a referring noun, but, unlike specific verbs, adjectives, and
adverbs, they occur frequently in speech and so the child has
to learn that the lack of variation in these words’ usage
indicates they are poor candidates for mapping words to
objects.
Not all nouns in child-directed speech are used to refer to
an object in the child’s environment (for instance,
“parliament” and “senate” occur once each in the CHILDES
corpus, yet it is unlikely this is used to refer to an object in
the child’s immediate environment). However, the results do
provide an indication of the potential co-occurrence of
nouns with non-referring words in child-directed speech.
Aslin, Woodward, LaMendola, and Bever (1996) instructed
parents to teach 12-month old infants a novel word, and they
tended to use the word in multi-word utterances including
verbs and function words, suggesting that the general
pattern of utterances for learning word-object pairings is not
qualitatively distinct from general patterns of parent-child
discourse in terms of the range of grammatical items used.
Yu and Bannard (2007) provided some highly-detailed
analyses of two small corpora of child-directed speech (281
and 321 utterances, respectively) when parents were
speaking to their children in the presence of various toys in
the child’s immediate environment. They found that the
utterances were generally grammatically complex, and that
children would have to learn to disregard certain misleading
associations between words and objects, and that a
computational model maximizing the likelihood of
descriptions to match environmental objects could
effectively learn the associations between referring words
and objects from these corpora. Our corpus analyses extend
these results by providing a perspective from a substantially
larger corpus as to the extent of the complexity of words of

2227

different grammatical categories present in child-directed
speech.
Table 1. Proportion of utterances containing at least one
noun in child-directed speech corpus.
NUMBER OF
NUMBER OF
PROPORTION
NOUNS
UTTERANCES OF UTTERANCES
1
419469
0.69
2
135044
0.22
3
35456
0.06
4
10611
0.02
5
3796
0.01
6+
3632
0.01
Table 2. Proportion of the utterances containing one noun
and zero or one or more other words of each grammatical
grouping.
VERBS ADJ/ADV FUNCTION PROPORTION
0
0
0
0
1+
1+
1+
1+

0
0
1+
1+
0
0
1+
1+

0
1+
0
1+
0
1+
0
1+

0.10
0.21
0.01
0.06
0.02
0.13
0.07
0.40

Results and Discussion
Table 1 shows the number of utterances containing
different numbers of nouns. The results indicate that the
majority of utterances contain only one potential referring
noun, however 31% of utterances contained more than one
noun, and 10% contained three or more. Whereas the
learning situation of several nouns occurring in an utterance
is frequent (the learning situation of Smith & Yu, 2008, for
instance is reflected in 22% of utterances that contain two
nouns, and 2% of utterances reflect the learning situation of
Yu & Smith, 2007, where four nouns are present), the
typical exposure the child experiences is of utterances
containing just one word as a referent.
Table 2 indicates the utterances that contain just one noun
and the number of other words of each of the other
groupings of grammatical categories in the corpus – verbs,
adjective and adverbs, and function words. 10% of the
utterances containing one noun contained no other words –
these were potentially referring nouns that were spoken in
isolation and may have provided ideal information about the
pairing of the word with an object in the child’s
environment. However, the most common occurrence was
when a single noun is also accompanied by at least one
other word that could not operate as a potential referring
word. 62% of utterances containing one noun also contained
at least one verb, 54% contained at least one adjective or
adverb, and 80% contained at least one function word. 40%
of the utterances containing just one noun also comprised at

least one verb, at least one adjective or adverb, as well as at
least one function word, indicating that most child-directed
speech utterances were grammatically complex.
These proportions were maintained when all the
utterances containing one or more nouns (and not only those
containing a single noun) were considered. 8% of these
utterances contained only nouns, so 92% consisted of at
least one noun and at least one other grammatical category
word. 45% of utterances containing at least one noun
contained at least one of all three of the other categories –
one or more verbs, adjectives/adverbs, and function words.
The corpus analyses confirmed that children are often
exposed to situations where several nouns, potentially
referring to objects in the environment, occur in the same
utterance. However, far more frequently, children hear an
utterance that contains several words other than the noun.
So, the task of cross-situational learning requires learning
which of the words in a multi-word utterance may relate to
an object in the environment and which do not. The words
to be rejected are either those that co-occur with a particular
object, such as verbs, adverbs, or adjectives, but are not
paired with a particular object in the environment, or those
that co-occur reliably with an object but also co-occur with
many other objects, such as the function words).
Our results therefore confirmed the small corpus analyses
of Yu and Bannard (2007) and showed that the complexity
of child-directed speech extended to a larger corpus more
representative of the variety of input to which the child is
exposed. Our second study tested whether cross-situational
learning is possible when learners hear object labels
alongside a range of other words that did not relate to
objects. The study was performed on an adult population to
determine whether the referring and non-referring words
could be isolated in a language learning task. Additional
studies on infants would enable the results to be generalized
to the language acquisition process, but previous studies of
artificial language learning have indicated similar
qualitative patterns of results in adult and infant studies
(e.g., Smith & Yu, 2008; Yu & Smith, 2007).

Study 2: Cross-situational learning task
Method
Participants
The participants were 48 undergraduate students from
Lancaster University. There were 13 male and 35 female
participants, with mean age 19.5 years (range 18-24 years),
and 24 participants were randomly assigned to each of the
two conditions.
Materials
From the corpus analyses, it was clear that the majority of
utterances to which children are exposed contain both a
noun and a verb. The “noun-verb” condition incorporated
this fact into the language learning task. For this condition,
we selected six geometric shapes printed in black on a grey
background, taken from Fiser and Aslin’s (2002) study.

2228

There were 12 nonsense two-syllable words spoken by a
female voice in a neutral tone: jeelow, pakrid, rakken,
makkot, fooglow, shellbye, vinnoy, bimdah, zawyer, trepier,
haagle, and wiertat. For each participant, six of the words –
the referring words – were randomly paired with one of the
shapes, and the other words formed the non-referring word
set. The randomization was performed to avoid any possible
effects of preference for certain words describing certain
shapes (see, e.g., Westbury, 2004).
In the “function word” condition, two additional nonsense
words were used, tha and noo. The function words were
initially randomly paired with either the category of
referring words or the non-referring words. Figure 1 shows
an example of a learning situation from the “function word”
condition. The participant hears four words and sees two
pictures, and has to learn that one of the words (“makkot”)
refers to the picture on the left. Another word not heard in
this learning situation refers to the picture on the right. The
word “tha” is the function word indicating the referring
word. “Pakrid” is the non-referring word, and “noo” is the
function word indicating the non-referring word.

Procedure
In each trial, participants heard a sentence and viewed two
pictures. In the “noun-verb” condition, one of the words was
selected from the referring word set and the other was taken
from the non-referring word set. The picture that was paired
with the referring word appeared on the screen along with
one of the other five pictures. The “function word”
condition was identical except that the sentence comprised
four words, the referring function word, the referring word,
the non-referring function word, and the non-referring word.
The function words always occurred immediately before the
referring or non-referring word, but the order of the
referring and non-referring word was counterbalanced.
Each trial began with the two pictures appearing on a
computer screen, 500ms later, the sentence began. The
referring/non-referring words lasted 500ms each, and the
function words lasted 250ms. The participant was instructed
to press the “1” key if they thought the sentence described
the left picture, and the “2” key if the sentence described the
right picture. 1000ms after the participant’s response the
next trial began. The order of the pictures (left/right) was
counterbalanced. No feedback was given as to the
participant’s accuracy.
Accuracy of judgments was measured for every 30
blocks, in which each referring word appeared with its
target picture 5 times. We also recorded reaction times of
the responses, timed from the offset of the final word in the
sentence.

Figure 1. An example of a learning situation for one trial
in the “function word” condition.

Figure 3. Response times for the “noun-verb” and the
“function word” conditions of the cross-situational learning
task.

Results and discussion

Figure 2. Accuracy for “noun-verb” and “function word”
conditions of cross-situational learning across the six
training blocks. 15 is chance level.

For the accuracy of responses, Figure 2 shows the results
for the “noun-verb” and the “function word” conditions. A
repeated measures ANOVA with block (1 to 6) as within
subjects factor and condition (“noun-verb” or “function
word”) as between subjects factor was performed. There
was a main effect of time, F(5, 230) = 28.74, p < .001,
indicating that responses became more accurate with time.

2229

There was no significant main effect of condition and no
significant interaction between time and condition, both F <
1, indicating that accuracy was at a similar level in both
conditions and improved at a similar rate.
When compared to chance level of 15 from 30 in each
block, both conditions resulted in performance significantly
better than chance from the first block, all t(23) > 4.37, all p
< .001. In both conditions, participants were able to learn
the mapping between the referring word and the target
picture quickly, despite the presence of words that did not
refer to any pictures, as well as the presence of a foil picture
that was not referred to in the learning trial.
Reaction times are shown in Figure 3. A repeated
measures ANOVA with time as within subjects factor and
condition as between subjects factor resulted in a similar
pattern of effects as for the accuracy measures. There was a
main effect of time, F(5, 2151) = 27.76, p < .001, indicating
that responses became quicker with time, and there was no
significant main effect of condition and no interaction
between time and condition, both F < 1. As with the
accuracy measures, the additional complexity of the speech
containing two additional words for the “function word”
condition did not impede responses compared to the “nounverb” condition.

General Discussion
There is substantial complexity in the situation facing the
child in learning the link between words and their referents
in the environment. This complexity is certainly present in
the world, in terms of the variety of possible objects, object
parts, actions, and emotions that surround the child. Yet, the
complexity is also present in the language itself, in that only
some of the words that the child hears in each utterance
have potential referents in that environment. Our corpus
analyses provide a snapshot of the proportion of utterances
containing words that the child must learn are not candidates
for word-object pairings. Yet, as Yu and Bannard (2007)
point out, the low likelihood of certain words occurring only
with certain objects can cause many of these words to be
disregarded, such as the frequent and diverse usage of
function words.
Yet, other categories of words, such as certain pairs of
nouns, or certain noun-verb or adjective-noun pairings, may
be strongly co-occurrent in the corpus causing difficulties in
forming the object-word pair. By chance, for instance, in Yu
and Bannard’s (2007) corpora, “eye” and “bird” were both
highly associated with the appearance of a bird in the child’s
environment. Previous studies of learning from crosssituational statistics have indicated that, when all the words
present are paired with one object each then learning can
occur (Smith & Yu, 2008; Yu & Smith, 2007), yet learning
that certain words may not have referents is a more realistic
reflection of the situation that the child faces in language
acquisition.
1

Four participants’ data was not available for the response time
analysis due to problems in recording.

As in the experiments conducted by Smith and Yu (2008)
and Yu and Smith (2007), learning in our study could only
take place as a consequence of determining the associations
between particular words and pictures. However, we have
additionally indicated that the learning of these associations
is robust against the presence of additional information that
may have obscured the linking between the referring word
and the picture in the form of words that did not have a
referent in the “noun-verb” condition, and in the presence of
additional words that co-occurred with all pictures in the
“function word” task. We have shown that cross-situational
learning is therefore sensitive to the mutual dependence of
one word with a picture and does not occur only under
circumstances where every word has a referent. The
“function word” condition illustrated that the function words
which were always present with each picture but did not
provide information about the referent did not interfere with
learning – there was no detriment in learning compared to
the noun-verb condition where only two words were
present.
We have also demonstrated that cross-situational learning
is not dependent upon learning based on mutual exclusivity.
In previous studies of cross-situational language learning,
determining the mapping between one of the words and its
referent provides additional information about the referent
for the other words in the learning situation. In our design,
participants had to learn that (at least) one of the words and
one of the pictures provided no useful information for
forming the mapping between the referring word and its
referent.
Though the natural language situation is more complex
than the small-scale tasks employed in these laboratory tests
of cross-situational learning, this complexity may feasibly
facilitate learning the word-object mappings. If the child can
learn not only that an article such as “the” or “a” not only
does not independently pair with a referent but also that it
generally precedes a noun that can be paired with a referent,
then the language internal structure may assist in
constraining the possible mappings available between words
and objects (see Yu, 2006, for preliminary work on
grammatical category information constraining the
mappings). In our “function word” experiment, the function
words provided additional information about which of the
other words was the referring word. This confluence of
word-word and word-object associations may have boosted
learning. The extra complexity of four words, only one of
which was a referring word, in the “function word”
condition did not produce a detrimental effect on learning
compared to the “noun-verb” condition. This absence of
impact may have been because the language internal
information provided additional constraints on the locus of
the word-object mapping.

Conclusion
Learning to pair words to objects in language acquisition
is a difficult task due to the enormous number of
possibilities for forming links between words and objects in

2230

the environment. We have confirmed that the majority of
utterances in child-directed speech contain words that have
no referents. Incorporating these natural language
characteristics into a study on cross-situational statistical
learning indicated that participants could still form wordobject associations even when there were several words in
each utterance that related to no objects in the learner’s
environment. These natural language properties preclude the
effective use of strategies such as mutual exclusivity to learn
the associations. We contend that these language properties
that introduce extra complexity also generate additional
constraints on the language that may indeed promote the
child’s language learning.

the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 924-929). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Yu, C. & Ballard, D.H. (2007). A unified model of early
word learning: Integrating statistical and social cues.
Neurocomputing, 70, 2149-2165.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.

Author Note
Thanks to Jenny Ball of Lancaster University for lending
her voice for recording the stimuli.

References
Akhtar, N. (2002). Relevance and early word learning.
Journal of Child Language, 29, 677-686.
Aslin, R.N., Woodward, J., LaMendola, N., & Bever, T.G.
(1996). Models of word segmentation in fluent maternal
speech to infants. In J.L. Morgan & K. Demuth (Eds.),
Signal to Syntax: Bootstrapping from speech to grammar
in early acquisition (pp.117-134). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erbaum Associates.
Fiser, J. & Aslin, R.N. (2002). Statistical learning of higherorder temporal structure from visual shape-sequences.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28, 458-467.
Houston-Price, C., Plunkett, K., & Harris, P. (2005). ‘Wordlearning wizardry’ at 1;6. Journal of Child Language, 32,
175-189.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Volume 2: The database, 3rd edition.
Markman, E.M. (1990). Constraints children place on word
learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
Markman, E.M., Wasow, J.L., & Hansen, M.B. (2003). Use
of the mutual exclusivity assumption by young word
learners. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 241-275.
Quine, W.V.O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Sagae, K., MacWhinney, B., & Lavie, A. (2004). Automatic
parsing of parental verbal input. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments and computers, 36, 113-126.
Siskind, J.M. (1996). A computational study of crosssituational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings. Cognition, 61, 39-61.
Smith, L. & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Westbury, C. (2004). Implicit sound symbolism in lexical
access: Evidence from an interference task. Brain and
Language, 93, 10-19.
Yu, C. (2006). Learning syntax-semantics mappings to
bootstrap word learning. In R. Sun (Eds.) Proceedings of

2231

