UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Decision Making in Mate Choice: Prospecting for Potential Mates

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4pg6c76h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Place, Skyler
Todd, Peter

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Decision Making in Mate Choice: Prospecting for Potential Mates
Peter M. Todd (pmtodd@indiana.edu)
Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Skyler S. Place (ssplace@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Keywords: psychology, decision making, evolutionary
psychology, cross-cultural analysis, human experimentation

The choice of a life-partner is an important
decision for any individual. This choice begins with a search
for potential mates (Miller & Todd, 1998; Todd, Billari, &
Simão, 2005). As it is impossible to interact with every
possible prospective suitor, it is adaptively important to
target your courtship efforts efficiently, by knowing who is
interested in you, and who is interested in others. Correctly
perceiving interest is useful not only for choosing a mate but
also for determining one’s own mate value (Simão & Todd,
2002), which is important for future mating decisions
(Todd, Penke, Fasolo, & Lenton, 2007). Additionally,
knowing about interest among your peers allows you to
discover who the popular individuals are, and can lead to
mate choice copying, where an individual purposely
chooses a mate they have seen others choosing (Place,
Todd, Penke, & Asendorpf, submitted).
We have tested this ability to judge romantic
interest by having naïve observers watch videos of
individuals on speed-dates (Place, Todd, Penke, &
Asendorpf, 2009) and predict the outcomes of the dates.
Speed-dating is a way for people to meet a large number of
prospective partners in a short period of time, by going on
sequential short dates with members of the opposite sex, in
a manner that mirrors the extended mate search humans and
other animals perform (Lenton, Fasolo, & Todd, 2009). We
found that observers can accurately predict when men are
interested in their dates, but have more trouble predicting
when the women are interested. Surprisingly, the observers
are able to perform this task without any knowledge of what
is being said – videos are of speed-daters from Berlin
speaking in German, and observers are English-speaking
American college students.
Here we present new findings that extend this
research. Cross-cultural data replicating our 2009 study with
both German and Chinese participants allows us to see if
language comprehension increases performance, and if less
exposure to Western culture decreases performance.
Additionally, new eye-tracking data demonstrates patterns
of differential attentional deployment during this
observational task. Our unique stimuli set of videos of
actual mate choice interactions allows us to ask questions
and design experiments that have previously been
unavailable to researchers, such as whether highly accurate
observers attend more to the non-verbal cues presented by

the men in the videos, or focus on the harder-to-read coy
responses of the females.

Acknowledgements
Skyler Place’s research is supported by Indiana University’s
Cognitive Science Program, Center for the Integrative Study
of Animal Behavior, and Department of Psychological and
Brain Sciences.

References
Lenton, A. P., Fasolo, B., & Todd, P. M. (2009). The
relationship between number of potential mates and
mating skew in humans. Animal Behaviour, 77(1), 55-60.
Miller, G. F., & Todd, P. M. (1998). Mate choice turns
cognitive. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2(5), 190-198.
Place, S. S., Todd, P. M., Penke, L., & Asendorpf, J. B.
(2009). The ability to judge the romantic interest of
others. Psychological Science, 20(1), 22-26.
Place, S. S., Todd, P. M., Penke, L., & Asendorpf, J. B.
(submitted). Humans show mate copying after observing
real mate choices.
Simão, J., & Todd, P. M. (2002). Modeling mate choice in
monogamous mating systems with courtship. Adaptive
Behavior, 10(2), 113-136.
Todd, P. M., Billari, F., & Simão, J. (2005). Aggregate ageat-marriage patterns from individual mate-search
heuristics. Demography, 42(3), 559-574.
Todd, P. M., Penke, L., Fasolo, B., & Lenton, A. P. (2007).
Different cognitive processes underlie human mate
choices and mate preferences. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104(38), 15011-15016.

2377

