UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Designing for Productive Failure in Mathematical Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7bj6f9rz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kapur, Manu
Lee, June

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Designing for Productive Failure in Mathematical Problem Solving
Manu Kapur & June Lee

National Institute of Education, Singapore
solving problems without the provision of support
structures. While this belief may well be grounded in
empirical evidence, it is also possible that by engaging
novices to persist and even fail at tasks that are beyond their
skills and abilities can be a productive exercise in failure.
Research reported in this paper explores this very possibility
of designing for productive failure (Kapur, 2008).

Abstract

This paper describes two quasi-experimental studies of
productive failure (Kapur, 2008) in Singapore public schools
for the curricular unit on average speed. In the first study,
seventh-grade mathematics students from intact classes
experienced one of two conditions: a) productive failure,
where students solved complex, ill-structured problems on
average speed without any instructional support or scaffolds
up until a teacher-led consolidation, or b) traditional lecture
and practice. Despite seemingly failing in their collective and
individual problem-solving efforts, students from the
productive failure condition significantly outperformed their
counterparts from the other two conditions on both the wellstructured and higher-order application problems on the posttest. The second study, conducted in another school with
significantly lower academic ability students, replicated the
findings of the first study. Findings and implications of
productive failure for theory, design of learning, and future
research are discussed.

Failure and Structure

Introduction
When and how to design structure in learning and problemsolving activities is a fundamental theoretical and design
issue in education and the learning sciences. Structure can
be operationalized in a variety of forms such as structuring
the problem itself, scaffolding, instructional facilitation,
provision of tools, content support, expert help, and so on
(Puntambekar & Hübscher, 2005). Thus conceived,
structure is designed to constrain or reduce the degrees of
freedom in learning and problem solving activities; the
lower the degree of freedom, the greater the structure
(Woods, Bruner, & Ross, 1976). By doing so, structure
increases the likelihood of novices achieving performance
success during problem solving, which they might not
otherwise be able to in the absence of support structures.
Indeed, a vast body of research supports the efficacy of such
an approach. This has led some to argue that instruction
should be heavily guided especially at the start, for without
it, little if any learning will take place (e.g., Kirschner,
Sweller, & Clark, 2006). Further support for starting with
greater structure in learning and problem solving activities
with a gradual reduction (or fading) over time as learners
gain expertise comes from several quarters (e.g.,
Puntambekar & Hübscher, 2005; Vygotsky, 1978; Woods et
al., 1976).
More often than not therefore, researchers have tended to
focus on ways of structuring learning and problem-solving
activities so as to achieve performance success, whereas the
role of failure in learning and problem solving remains
largely underdetermined and under-researched by
comparison (Clifford, 1984; Schmidt & Bjork, 1992). What
is perhaps more problematic is that an emphasis on
achieving performance success has in turn led to a
commonly-held belief that there is little efficacy in novices

The role of failure in learning and problem solving is no
doubt intuitively compelling. For example, research on
impasse-driven learning (VanLehn et al., 2003) with college
students in coached problem-solving situations provides
strong evidence for the role of failure in learning. Successful
learning of a principle (e.g., a concept, a Physical law) was
associated with events when students reached an impasse
during problem solving. Conversely, when students did not
reach an impasse, learning was rare despite explicit tutorexplanations of the target principle. Instead of providing
immediate structure, e.g., in the form of feedback,
questions, or explanations, when the learner demonstrably
makes an error or is “stuck,” VanLehn et al’s (2003)
findings suggest that it may well be more productive to
delay that structure up until the student reaches an
impasse—a form of failure—and is subsequently unable to
generate an adequate way forward. Echoing this delaying of
structure in the context of text comprehension (also with
college students), McNamara (2001) found that whereas
low-knowledge undergraduate learners tended to benefit
from high-coherence texts, high-knowledge undergraduate
learners benefited from low-coherence texts, and especially
more so when a low-coherence text preceded a highcoherence one. This, McNamara argues, suggests that
reading low-coherence texts may force learners to engage in
compensatory processing by using their prior knowledge to
fill in the conceptual gaps in the target text, in turn,
preparing them better to leverage a high-coherence text
subsequently. Further evidence for such preparation for
future learning (Schwartz & Bransford, 1998) can be found
in the inventing to prepare for learning research by Schwartz
and Martin (2004). In a sequence of design experiments on
the teaching of descriptive statistics with intellectually
gifted students, Schwartz and Martin (2004) demonstrated
an existence proof for the hidden efficacy of invention
activities when such activities preceded direct instruction,
despite such activities failing to produce canonical
conceptions and solutions during the invention phase.
Clearly, the relationship between failure and structure
forms a common thread through the abovementioned
studies. It is reasonable to reinterpret their central findings
collectively as an argument for a delay of structure in
learning and problem-solving situations, be it in the form of

2632

feedback and explanations, coherence in texts, or direct
instruction. Indeed, all of them point to the efficacy of
learner-generated processing, conceptions, representations,
and understandings, even though such conceptions and
understandings may not be correct initially and the process
of arriving at them not as efficient. However, the
abovementioned studies deal with students solving wellstructured problems as is typically the case in schools (Spiro
et al., 1992).
While there exists a substantive amount of research
examining students solving ill-structured problems with the
provision of various support structures and scaffolds,
Kapur’s (2008) work on productive failure examined
students solving complex, ill-structured problems without
the provision on any external support structures or scaffolds.
Kapur (2008) asked 11th-grade student triads from seven
high schools India to solve either ill- or well-structured
physics problems in an online, chat environment. After
group problem solving, all students individually solved
well-structured problems followed by ill-structured
problems. Ill-structured group discussions were found to
more complex and divergent than those of their wellstructured counterparts, leading to poor group performance.
However, findings suggested a hidden efficacy in the
complex, divergent interactional process even though it
seemingly led to failure. Kapur argued that delaying the
structure received by students from the ill-structured groups
(who solved ill-structured problems collaboratively
followed by well-structured problems individually) helped
them discern (Marton, 2007) how to structure an illstructured problem, thereby facilitating a spontaneous
transfer of problem-solving skills (Kapur & Kinzer, 2009).
The above findings, while preliminary, underscore the
implication that by delaying structure in the learning and
problem-solving activities so as to allow learners to persist
in and possibly even fail while solving complex, illstructured problems can be a productive exercise in failure.
The purpose of this paper is to report findings from an ongoing, classroom-based research program with grade seven
students on productive failure in mathematical problem
solving at two mainstream public schools in Singapore. The
two schools, hereinafter referred to as School A and School
B, were selected based on the academic ability profile of
their student intake as evidenced by the Primary School
Leaving Examination (PSLE 1 : the 6th-grade national
standardized tests used to gain entry into secondary schools,
i.e., grades 7 through 10). A MANCOVA, F(2, 191) =
660.52, p < .001, revealed that students from School A
achieved a significantly higher PSLE score, M = 235.6, SD
= 2.45, than those from School B, M = 209.3, SD = 5.95.
Likewise, students from School A achieved significantly
better PSLE Math grade 2 , M = 1.60, SD = .55, than those
from School B, M = 2.50, SD = .62. Details of the two
studies follow next; School A followed by School B.
1
More information on the PSLE can be found at
www.moe.edu.sg.
2
The lower the mean, the better the grade; grade A* is
equivalent to 1 point, A to 2 points, B to 3, and so on.

Study 1: School A
Participants
Participants were 75, Secondary 1 (7th-grade) students (43
male, 33 female) at a co-educational, secondary school in
Singapore. Students were from two math classes (37 and 38
students respectively) taught by the same teacher. Students
had limited or no experience with the targeted curricular
unit—average speed—prior to the study.

Research Design
A pre-post, quasi-experimental design was used with one
class (n = 37) assigned to the ‘Productive Failure’ (PF)
condition and other class (n = 38) assigned to the ‘Lecture
and Practice’ (LP) condition. Both classes participated in the
seven lessons totaling six hours of instructional time over
two weeks. Before the unit, all students wrote a 30-minute,
9-item pre-test ( α = .72) as a measure of prior knowledge
of the targeted concepts. There was no significant difference
between the two conditions on the pre-test, F(1,73) = .177, p
= .675. After the unit, all students took a post-test.
Productive Failure (PF) The 37 students in the PF class
were assigned to groups by the teacher, resulting in 13
groups (11 triads, 2 dyads). In the PF instructional design
cycle, student groups took two periods to work face-to-face
on the first ill-structured problem. Following this, students
took one period to solve two extension problems
individually. The extension problems required students to
consider the impact of changing one or more parameters in
the group ill-structured problem. No extra support or
scaffolds were provided during the group or individual
problem-solving nor was any homework assigned at any
stage. The PF cycle—group followed by individual problem
solving—was then repeated for the next three periods using
another ill-structured problem scenario and its
corresponding what-if extension problems. Only during the
seventh (and last) period was a consolidation lecture held
where the teacher led a discussion of the targeted concepts.
Two ill-structured problem scenarios were developed for
the unit on average speed. The design of the ill-structured
problem scenarios was closely aligned to the design
typology for problems espoused by several scholars (e.g.,
Voss, 1988). An additional design element was that of
persistence, i.e., the focus was more on students being able
to persist in problem solving than on actually being able to
solve the problem successfully. A focus on ensuring that
students solve a problem which they may not otherwise be
able to in the absence of support structures necessitates the
provision of relevant support structures and scaffolds during
problem solving. However, a focus on persistence does not
necessitate such a provision as long as the design of the
problem allows students to make some inroads into
exploring the problem and solution space without
necessarily solving the problem successfully. Validation of
the problem scenarios was carried out through multiple
iterations of design and pilot-testing with a small group of
students from the previous cohort of students from the
school. The validation exercise informed the time allocation

2633

for group and individual tasks as well as the design element
of persistence.
Lecture & Practice (LP) The 38 students in the LP class
were involved in teacher-led lectures guided by the course
workbook. The teacher introduced a concept (e.g., average
speed) to the class, worked out some examples, encouraged
students to ask questions, following which students solved
problems for practice. The teacher then discussed the
solutions with the class. For homework, students were asked
to continue with the workbook problems. This cycle of
lecture, practice/homework, and feedback then repeated
itself over the course of seven periods. Note that the
worked-out examples and practice problems were typically
well-structured problems with fully-specified parameters,
prescriptive representations, predictive sets of solution
strategies and solution paths, often leading to a single
correct answer. Students worked independently most of the
time although some problems were solved collaboratively.
In short, the LP condition represented a design that was
highly structured from the very beginning with the teacher
leading the students through a set of well-structured
problems with proximal feedback and regular practice. The
PF condition represented a design that delayed structure (in
the form of the consolidation lecture) up until students had
completed two ill-structured problem scenarios and the
corresponding what-if extension problems without any
instructional facilitation, support structures, or scaffolds.
It is important to note that the research design allows for
a comparison between instructional designs as wholes, not
their constituent elements. Unlike laboratory experiments,
the reality of classroom-based research is that one is rarely
able to isolate individual elements of an instructional design
in a single study because it is the complexity of how the
individual elements combine that gives rise to the efficacy
of a particular design (Brown, 1992). Thus, we put greater
emphasis on an ecological comparison of designs vis-à-vis
causal attribution of effects to design elements.
Hypothesis Based on past research on productive failure,
we hypothesized that compared to the LP condition,
designing for persistence and delaying structure in the PF
condition may result in students attempting to assemble key
ideas and concepts underlying average speed, as well as
exploring various representations and methods for solving
the ill-structured problems (Schwartz & Martin, 2004; Spiro
et al., 1992). We did not expect students who were novices
to the targeted concept of average speed to use the most
effective representations and domain-specific methods for
solving the problems, nor did we expect them to be
successful in their problem-solving efforts (Chi et al., 1981;
Kirschner et al., 2006). However, such a process may be
integral to engendering the necessary knowledge
differentiation which may help students better discern and
understand those very concepts, representations, and
methods when presented in a well-assembled, structured
form during the consolidation lecture (Marton, 2007;
Schwartz & Bransford, 1998).

Process Results
Problem representation Group-work artifacts provided a
rich source of data about the nature of problem
representations produced by the groups in the process of
solving the problem. A qualitative analysis revealed that
groups produced a diversity of linked representations. We
illustrate this using a paradigmatic example (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Example of Linked, Representational Diversity.
First, we describe the essence of the ill-structured
problem scenario that Figure 1 refers to (the actual problem
scenario was two pages long). The problem presented a
scenario where two friends, Jasmine (J) and Hady (H), were
on their way to an audition on their bikes, when Jasmine’s
bike broke down. Given their different walking and biking
speeds, groups had to determine the change over point, i.e.,
the optimal distance that Jasmine and Hady should bike and
walk, in order to reach the audition at the same time.
Figure 1 reveals that the group used a diverse but linked
set of iconic (e.g., house, bicycle), graphical (e.g., straight
lines for J and H), proportional (e.g., ratios between J’s and
H’s speeds and distances for walking and riding), and lettersymbolic algebraic representations (e.g., using numbers and
unknowns such as X, Y, A, B to link with other
representations). Additionally, the group set up systems of
algebraic equations. The use of letter-symbolic algebraic
representations is significant because the introduction of
algebra in the formal curriculum does not happen until after
the unit on rate and speed. As hypothesized, however,
despite producing various inter-connected representations,
the group was not able to solve the problem successfully.
For example, neither the proportions nor the algebraic
equations were manipulated further to solve the problem 3 .
To confirm if this inability to develop a solution held true
more generally, we analyzed group solutions as well as
individual solutions to the extension problems.
3
See Kapur (2009) for a fuller qualitative analysis of the nature
of group representations, methods and strategies used by the
groups as evidenced in their discussions and solutions.

2634

Confidence ratings PF students rated their confidence their
extension problem solutions on a 5-point Likert scale from 0
(0% confidence) to 4 (100% confidence). The average
confidence was low, M = 1.22, SD = .82.
Student Performance in the LP condition Students in the
LP condition, by design, repeatedly experienced
performance success in solving well-structured problems
under the close monitoring, scaffolding, and feedback
provided by the teacher. Data from homework assignments
provided a proxy measure for student performance in the LP
condition. Based on the teacher’s report, the average
percentage score on the homework assignments ranged
between 88% and 100%.
Summary Our analysis revealed that in spite of attempting
various representations and methods for solving the
problem, PF students seemed unsuccessful in their problemsolving efforts, be it in groups or individually. Their selfreported confidence in their own solutions was also
reportedly low. These process findings also double up as a
manipulation check demonstrating that students in the PF
condition experienced failure at least in the conventional
sense. Thus, on conventional measures of efficiency,
accuracy, and performance success, students in the PF
condition seemed to have failed relative to their counterparts
in the LP condition.

Outcome Results
Post-test All students took a 40-minute, 6-item post-test
( α = .86) comprising five well-structured problem items
similar to those on the pre-test, and one complex problem
item (for the items, see Kapur, 2009). Score on the wellstructured items and the complex item formed the two
dependent variables in our analysis. Controlling for the
effect of prior knowledge as measured by the pretest, a
MANCOVA revealed a statistically significant effect of

condition (PF vs. LP) on posttest scores, F(2, 71) = 5.64, p
= .005, partial eta-squared, η2 = .14 4 .
School A: Mean % Score on Post-test Items
PF

120
100
% Score

Group & Individual Solutions All groups were able to
identify relevant parameters such as the various distances,
speeds, and time, and perform basic calculations involving
these parameters (e.g., calculating time, given speed and
distance). However, they were unable to build on their
representations to devise either domain-general and/or
domain-specific strategies, develop at least one solution, and
support it with quantitative and qualitative arguments (Chi
et al., 1981; Spiro et al., 1992). For the first and second illstructured problems, only 11% and 21% of the groups
respectively managed to solve the problem; an average
success rate was evidently low at only 16%. This was not
surprising because the problem scenarios were carefully
designed and validated for students to persist in problem
solving without necessarily doing it successfully.
Likewise for the first and second individual extension
problems, 3% and 20% of the students respectively
managed to solve the problem; an average success rate of
only 11.5%.

96

90

80

LP

64

60
41
40
20
0
well-structured items

complex item

Figure 1. School A’s breakdown of post-test performance as a
percentage of the maximum score for the four types of items.

Univariate analysis further suggested that (see Figure 1):
i. On the five well-structured items (maximum score = 32),
students from the PF class scored higher, M = 30.61, SD =
4.09, than those from the LP class, M = 28.89, SD = 4.26.
This effect was statistically significant, F(1,72) = 4.78, p
= .032, partial η2 = .06. Notwithstanding the moderate
effect size, it was remarkable that PF students who were
not given any homework or practice assignments still
managed to outperform LP students who did receive such
practice and feedback on well-structured type of items.
ii. On the complex item (maximum score = 7), students from
the PF class scored higher, M = 4.35, SD = 2.13, than
those from the LP class, M = 2.77, SD = 2.12. This effect
was statistically significant, F(1,72) = 10.11, p = .002,
partial η2 = .12.
Thus, students from the PF class outperformed those from
the LP class on both the well-structured and complex items
on the posttest thereby suggesting that the productive failure
hypothesis held up to empirical evidence.

Study 2: School B
Participants
Participants were 114, Secondary 1 (grade 7) students (63
male, 51 female; 12-13 years old) from a secondary school
in Singapore. Students were from three intact math classes
(36, 38, and 40 students). Students had limited or no
experience with the targeted curricular unit—average
speed—prior to the study. Recall that these students were of
significantly lower academic ability, in both general and
math ability compared to students from School A.

Research Design
The research design and procedures were same as in School
A with the following variations:
i. Two of the three classes were taught by the same
teacher, teacher A. Of the two classes taught by teacher
A, one class (n = 38) was assigned to the PF condition
(referred to as PF-A) and the other (n = 40) to the LP
condition. The third class (n = 36), taught by the second
teacher, teacher B, was assigned to the PF condition (PFB). There was no significant difference between the
three classes on the pretest, F(2,114) = .536, p = .586.
4

As a rule of thumb, partial η2 = .01 is considered a small, .06
medium, and .14 a large effect size (Cohen, 1977).

2635

Process Results
Representations and Group Solutions Our analysis
(similar to that for School A but not reported here due to
space constraints) suggested that despite producing various
inter-connected representations and methods for solving the
problems, groups were ultimately unable to solve the
problems successfully. None of the PF groups from the PFA class and only 4 of the 13 groups in PF-B class were
successful at solving one of the problems. Therefore, the
average success rate was 7%.
Individual Extension Problems & Confidence Ratings As
described above, individual extension problems and the
associated confidence ratings were not part of the PF design
for School B.
Student Performance in the LP condition As in School A,
based on the teacher’s report, the average percentage score
on the homework assignments ranged between 84% and
100%.
Summary In sum, the analysis revealed that in spite of
attempting various representations and methods for solving
the problem, PF students seemed unsuccessful in their
problem-solving efforts. Once again, on conventional
measures of efficiency, accuracy, and performance success,
students in the PF conditions seemed to have failed relative
to their counterparts in the LP condition.

Outcome Results
Post-test Score on the well-structured items and the
complex item formed the two dependent variables in our
analysis. Controlling for the effect of prior knowledge, a

MANCOVA revealed a statistically significant multivariate
effect of class (PF-A, PF-B, or LP) on posttest scores, F(8,
212) = 6.48, p < .001, partial η2 = .20.
School B: Mean % Score on Post-test Items
100.00
80.00
% Score

The same teacher for the LP and PF-A condition allowed
us to test for replication of findings from School A. At
the same time, the PF-B class under a different teacher
allowed us to investigate variation between teachers A
and B in their enactment of the same PF design.
ii. A pilot study with a small group of students prior to the
actual study revealed that School B students’ thresholds
for persistence were lower than that in School A.
Therefore, the individual extension problems (which
immediately follow group problem solving) were
removed from the design. The time saved was spent on
an extended consolidation lecture, as proposed by the
teachers, given the significantly lower math ability of
their students compared to those from School A.
iii. Two well-structured problem items from the posttest
were dropped because of low reliability. Based on the
findings from School A wherein PF students generated
and explored a variety of representations, we conjectured
that they might also demonstrate better representational
flexibility in problem solving (Goldin, 1998). Thus, two
additional items were added to the posttest to measure
representational flexibility, that is, the extent to which
students are able to flexibly adapt their understanding of
the concepts of average speed to solve problems that
involve tabular and graphical representations.

86

81

PF-B

75

PF-A
55

60.00

66
55

LP

65
57

47
39

37

40.00

14

20.00
0.00
well-structured items

complex item

tabular representation
item

graphical
representation item

Figure 2. School B’s breakdown of post-test performance as a
percentage of the maximum score for the four types of items.

Univariate analysis further suggested that (see Figure 2):
i. On the three well-structured items (maximum score =
19), students from the PF-B class scored the highest, M =
16.30, SD = 2.29, followed by those from the PF-A
class, M = 15.30, SD = 2.45, and then by the LP class, M
= 14.30, SD = 3.11. This effect was statistically
significant, F(2, 110) = 5.26, p = .007, partial η2 = .09.
ii. On the complex item (maximum score= 7), students
from the PF-B class scored the highest, M = 3.86, SD =
2.44, followed by those from the PF-A class, M = 2.58,
SD = 2.65, and then by the LP class, M = 1.01, SD =
2.32. This effect was significant, F(2, 110) = 17.98, p <
.001, partial η2 = .25.
iii. On the tabular representation item (maximum score = 6),
students from the LP class scored the highest, M = 3.30,
SD = 2.23, followed by those from the PF-B class, M =
2.80, SD = 1.73, and then by the PF-A class, M = 2.34,
SD = 1.87. However, this effect was statistically not
significant, F(2, 110) = 1.09, p = .339, partial η2 = .02.
iv. On the graphical representation item (maximum score =
3), students from the PF-B class scored the highest, M =
1.97, SD = 1.05, followed by those from the PF-A class,
M = 1.95, SD = 1.01, and then by the LP class, M = 1.70,
SD = .97. However, this effect was not significant, F(2,
110) = 2.06, p = .133, partial η2 = .04.

Discussion
This study was designed to explore the hidden efficacies, if
any, in delaying structure in the learning and performance
space of students by having them engage in unscaffolded
problem-solving of complex, ill-structured problems prior to
direct instruction. In both studies, students from the PF
conditions outperformed those from the LP conditions on
both the well-structured and complex problem items on the
posttest, thereby suggesting that the productive failure
hypothesis held up to empirical evidence. Furthermore, in
the second study (in School B), there were no significant
differences between the conditions on the tabular
representation item. This could be because of the relative
concreteness of a tabular representation, which might have
been easier for students to work with than a more abstract
representation. On the graphical representation item,
students from the PF conditions performed better than their
counterparts from the LP condition. However, this effect did

2636

not reach significance. Future studies with larger samples
should help unpack this effect. Finally, the second study
also suggested some variance within teachers’ enactments of
the PF design. This was expected, and we are currently
analyzing this variance using classroom observation notes
and video data that we collected in School B.
As hypothesized, explanation for the above findings
comes from the notions that perhaps what was happening in
the productive failure condition was that students were
seeking to assemble or structure key ideas and concepts
while attempting to represent and solve the ill-structured
problems. Indeed, qualitative analyses revealed that students
tried different concepts, representations, and methods for
solving the problems. They were evidently not successful,
but the process of exploring the problem and solution spaces
for representations and methods for solving the problem
may have engendered sufficient knowledge differentiation
that prepared them to better discern and understand those
very concepts, representation, and methods when presented
in a well-assembled, structured form during the
consolidation lecture (Marton, 2007; Schwartz & Bransford,
1998). Furthermore, it is plausible that having explored
various representations and methods for solving the
complex ill-structured problems, they perhaps better
understood the affordances of the representations and
methods when delivered by the teacher during the
consolidation lecture. In other words, when the teacher
explained the “canonical” representations and methods for
solving the problem, they perhaps better understood not
only why the canonical representations and methods work
but also the reasons why the non-canonical ones—the ones
they tried—did not work.
It is of course much too early to attempt any
generalization of the claims from two studies; the scope of
inference technically holds only under the conditions and
settings of the two studies and is thus circumscribed by the
content domain, communication modality, age-group, and
various socio-cultural factors. The work reported herein
represents a preliminary but important step towards
developing a theory of conditions under which failure can
be productive. Going forward, therefore, future research
would do well to extend this study to larger samples across
schools and subjects. At the same time, further analyses of
group discussions should unpack learning mechanisms
underpinning the productive failure effect. Examining
learner characteristics (e.g., motivation, goal orientation,
ability, etc.) as well as the nature and content of
interactional behaviors (e.g., explanations, critiquing,
elaborating, up-taking, etc.) and relating them to eventual
gains in group and individual performance would be most
insightful in developing an explanatory base for productive
failure.

Acknowledgements

The research reported in this paper was funded by grants to
the first author from the Learning Sciences Lab of the
National Institute of Education of Singapore.

References
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated
cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Clifford, M. M. (1984). Thoughts on a theory of
constructive failure. Educational Psychologist, 19(2),
108-120.
Goldin, G. A. (1998). Representational systems, learning,
and problem solving in mathematics. Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 17(2), 137-165.
Kapur, M. (2009). Productive failure in mathematical
problem
solving.
Instructional
Science.
doi:
10.1007/s11251-009-9093-x.

Kapur, M. (2008). Productive failure. Cognition and
Instruction, 26(3), 379-424.
Kapur, M., & Kinzer, C. (2009). Productive failure in CSCL
groups. International Journal of Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning (ijCSCL), 4(1), 21-46.
Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why
minimal guidance during instruction does not work.
Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86.
Marton, F. (2007). Sameness and difference in transfer. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 15(4), 499-535.
McNamara, D. S. (2001). Reading both high-coherence and
low-coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and prior
knowledge. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 55(1), 51-62.
Puntambekar, S., & Hübscher, R. (2005). Tools for
scaffolding students in a complex learning environment:
What have we gained and what have we missed?
Educational Psychologist, 40(1), 1-12.
Schmidt, R. A., & Bjork, R. A. (1992). New
conceptualizations of practice: Common principles in
three paradigms suggest new concepts for training.
Psychological Science, 3(4), 207-217.
Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for
telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475-522.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare
for future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouraging
original student production in statistics instruction.
Cognition and Instruction, 22(2), 129-184.
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, R. P., Jacobson, M. J., & Coulson, R.
L. (1992). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and
hypertext. In T. M. Duffy, & D. H. Jonassen (Eds.),
Constructivism and the technology of instruction: A
conversation. NJ : Erlbaum.
VanLehn, K., Siler, S., Murray, C., Yamauchi, T., &
Baggett, W. B. (2003). Why do only some events cause
learning during human tutoring? Cognition and
Instruction, 21(3), 209-249.
Voss, J. F. (1988). Problem solving and reasoning in illstructured domains. In C. Antaki (Ed.), Analyzing
everyday explanation: A casebook of methods. London:
Sage Publications.
Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of
tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 17, 89-100.

2637

