UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Developmental Evidence for a Canonical Syntax-Semantics Mapping for Verbs of
Psychological States
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3fx0w9d2
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Hartshorne, Joshua K.
Pogue, Amanda
Snedeker, Jesse
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

  Developmental Evidence for a Canonical Syntax-Semantics Mapping
                               for Verbs of Psychological States
                                               Amanda Pogue
                                               University of Toronto
                                           Joshua K. Hartshorne
                                                Harvard University
                                                Jesse Snedeker
                                                Harvard University
Abstract: Psychological state verbs pose problems for theories of the syntax-semantics interface as they can appear
with either the stimulus as the subject and the experiencer as the object (SS verbs, e.g. frighten), or vice versa
(SO verbs, e.g. fear). In semantic bootstrapping proposals, one of these mapping is treated as an innate default.
However theorists disagree about which is the canonical mapping (compare Pinker, 1984 with Grimshaw, 1990) and
diary studies suggest the two emerge simultaneously in development (Bowerman, 1990). In Experiment 1, adults, 4-
and 5-year-olds showed a trend towards better comprehension of SS-verbs (p=.06), with 4-year-olds performing at
chance on SO-verbs. In a less taxing Experiment 2, 4-year-olds again exhibited superior comprehension of SS-verbs
(p¡.01), misanalyzing two SO-verbs as SS-verbs. Curiously, SO-verbs are more common in child-directed speech. We
conclude that the SS mapping is acquired more easily and discuss implications for theories of argument realization.
                                                        972

