UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dissociation of Category-Learning Mechanisms via Brain Potentials

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7245v603

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Morrison, Robert
Paller, Ken
Reber, Paul

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dissociation of Category-Learning Mechanisms via Brain Potentials
Robert G. Morrison (rmorrison@luc.edu)
Loyola University Chicago, Psychology Department,
6525 North Sheridan Road Chicago, IL 60626 USA

Paul J. Reber (preber@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University, Psychology Department,
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston IL 60208 USA

Ken A. Paller (kap@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University, Psychology Department,
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston IL 60208 USA
Abstract
Behavioral, neuropsychological, and neuroimaging
evidence indicate categories can be learned either via an
explicit rule-based mechanism dependent on medial
temporal and prefrontal brain regions, or via an implicit
information integration mechanism relying on the basal
ganglia and occipital cortex. In this study, participants
viewed Gabor patches that varied on two dimensions,
and learned categories via feedback. Different stimulus
distributions can encourage participants to favor explicit
rule-based or implicit information integration
mechanisms. We monitored brain activity with scalp
encephalography while participants (1) passively
observed Gabor patches, (2) categorized patches from
one distribution, and, one week later, (3) categorized
patches from another distribution. Categorization
accuracy was matched across the two learning
conditions, which nevertheless elicited several distinct
event-related potentials. These results demonstrate the
efficacy of real-time neural monitoring during category
learning and provide additional evidence implicating
different neurocognitive mechanisms in explicit rulebased versus implicit information integration category
learning.
Keywords: category learning; memory; event-related
potentials; ERP; EEG.

Introduction
Behavioral, neuropsychological, and neuroimaging
evidence suggests that categories can be learned via
explicit and/or implicit mechanisms (Ashby & Maddox,
2005; Kéri, 2003; Nomura & Reber, 2008). Ashby and
Maddox (2005) described a feedback category-learning
paradigm with different category distributions to
selectively encourage one of the two types of learning:
Explicit or Rule-Based learning (RB) versus Implicit or
Information Integration learning (II). These strategies
have been dissociated behaviorally using working
memory dual-task procedures (e.g., Zeithamova &
Maddox, 2006), feedback delay (e.g., Maddox, Ashby,
& Bohil, 2003), and procedural interference (e.g.,
Ashby, Ell, & Waldron, 2003). In our previous work,

we (Nomura et al., 2007; Nomura, Reber, & Maddox,
2007) used functional neuroimaging to demonstrate that
RB category learning depends on contributions from
prefrontal cortex (PFC) and medial temporal lobe
(MTL), whereas II category learning depends on basal
ganglia and occipital cortex.
One possible explanation for RB learning specifies a
mechanism for hypothesis testing (Ashby et al., 1998).
By this account, a participant develops a candidate rule
(category A has bars that are thinner than x; category B
has bars thicker than x) that is tested based on the
feedback on each trial. This RB mechanism would
presumably require both updating and maintaining the
rule in working memory (dependent on PFC) and
updating and maintaining information about the
boundary condition in long-term memory (dependent
on MTL).
In contrast, II learning appears to occur implicitly,
such that the rule for the category structure is difficult
or impossible to describe verbally or experience
subjectively. II learning may occur via procedural
learning under the control of the caudate nucleus in
conjunction with visual processing areas in occipital
cortex. Dopaminergic reward circuits of the caudate
may be responsible for associating specific stimuli with
groups of neurons coding for their visual features in
occipital cortex (Ashby et al., 1998).
Building on the success of previous neuroimaging

3076

Figure 1. Category distributions used in this study.

efforts to dissociate RB and II category learning, we
utilized electrophysiological methods to obtain
additional evidence about this neural dissociation with
greater temporal precision and to learn more about how
the two mechanisms may differ.

Methods
Task Description
We used a visual category-learning paradigm (Maddox,
Ashby, & Bohil, 2003) in which subjects learn, via
feedback, to categorize Gabor patches that vary in
spatial frequency and orientation and that are selected
from distributions (Figure 1) designed to encourage
either explicit rule-based or implicit informationintegration mechanisms.

Participants
Twenty-eight Northwestern University students served
as participants in this experiment. Participants received
US$15 per hour for two 2- to 3-hour testing sessions.
Participants gave informed consent according to the
oversight of the Northwestern University Institutional
Review Board.

Procedure
Prelearning At the beginning of the first testing
session, participants passively viewed 80 RB and 80 II
stimuli from the two stimulus distributions to ensure
that there were no systematic differences in ERPs based
entirely on the two types of distributions. The timing
was identical as in the learning trials, but participants
made no response and no feedback was given.
Learning In separate sessions, each participant learned
an RB category defined by the spatial frequency of
Gabor patches and an II category defined by a diagonal
threshold based on both spatial frequency and spatial
orientation. Sessions were 1 week apart and
administered in counterbalanced order. Participants
received no instructions about the nature of the
categories, but rather discovered the categories with the
aid of auditory feedback given 2.5 s after stimulus
onset. Figure 2 provides a schematic of the trial
timeline. Participants categorized 320 Gabor patches,
presented in four blocks, during each learning session.
They were debriefed about their categorization
strategies after the second testing session.

Figure 2. Trial timeline.

EEG Continuous electroencephalographic (EEG)
recordings were made during prelearning and learning
blocks from 59 evenly distributed scalp sites using tin
electrodes embedded in an elastic cap. Four additional
channels were used for monitoring horizontal and
vertical eye movements. Electrode impedance was ≤ 5
kΩ. EEG signals were amplified with a band pass of
0.05–200 Hz, sampled at a rate of 1000 Hz, and rereferenced offline to average mastoids. Participants
were instructed to attempt to refrain from blinking or
moving their eye position from fixation during the
categorization portion of each trial.
For categorization event-related potentials (ERPs),
trials exhibiting eye movements were rejected (< 15%
of trials). Averaging epochs lasted 1100 ms, including
100 ms prior to stimulus onset. Participants showed a
high of blinking during auditory feedback, so we
employed a blink-correction algorithm based on
independent component analysis instead of rejecting
trials (Source Signal Imaging, 2008). Averaging epochs
for feedback processing lasted 850 ms, including 100
ms prior to stimulus onset.

Results
Based on prior behavioral and neuroimaging results, we
anticipated that RB and II category learning
mechanisms would produce different ERPs particularly
when comparing successful (correct) and unsuccessful
(incorrect) trials. Specifically, we predicted that ERPs
associated with explicit memory (Late Positive
Complex/P3) and ERPs associated with selective
attention (N1) would show correct-incorrect differences
only during RB learning. Given that RB learning is
more explicit than II learning, we also anticipated a
differential P300 to feedback for incorrect trials in RB
versus II learning.

Decision-Bound Theory Modeling
We used mathematical models derived from DecisionBound Theory (DBT; Ashby, & Maddox, 1993;
Nomura et al., 2007) to fit each participant's responses
and obtain a detailed picture of how they were likely
categorizing the stimuli. The RB model assumed a
vertical decision boundary (in stimulus space) reflecting
the use of a rule dependent on a single stimulus
dimension (spatial frequency). The II model assumed a
decision boundary with slope equal to 0.5 (i.e., a
diagonal line reflecting integration of both dimensions).
In each case, the model identified the placement of this
boundary and the perceptual noise parameter that best
accounted for the observed data. Thus the models both
had exactly two free parameters to allow for direct
comparison of fit.
Of the 28 participants in the study, 15 exhibited an
II distribution response profile best fit by an II DBT
model, while 13 exhibited an II distribution response
profile best fit by an RB DBT model (see Figure 3 for

3077

RB

II
+5µV

+5µV

Figure 3. Model fits for two participants in the II
condition showing how DBT models can be used to
select participants based on likely strategies.
distribution profiles from representative participants).
Thus, for analyses reported here we excluded data from
participants who were probably using a unidimensional
RB strategy to categorize the II category distributions.

-5µV

Accuracy
100

Percent Correct

90

B

RB

E

II

80
70
60
50

100

200 ms
Correct

-5µV

0

100

Incorrect

of the difference in correct/incorrect RTs we carefully
evaluated the ERPs described in the following sections
for onset and offset latencies; however, there was no
evidence this differed across accuracy or categorization
conditions.

Event Related Potentials
Learning Visual inspection of waveforms and
topographies for correct/incorrect subtractions for each
categorization condition confirmed three areas of
spatiotemporal interest.
First, an early (115-155 ms) negative frontocentral
ERP was predictive of correct categorization (Figure 5)
in the RB condition [F(1,12) = 8.1, p = .015], but not
the II condition [F(1,12) = .07, ns]. Second, a slightly
later (170-200 ms) negative occipito-temporal ERP was
modulated by categorization condition (Figure 6) with
less negativity on correct than incorrect RB trials
[F(1,12) = 8.2, p = .014], but more negativity on correct
than incorrect II trials [F(1,12) = 7.9, p = .016]. Third, a
RB

II

+3µV

B

E

B

200 ms

Figure 5. Early negative frontocentral ERPs
at 105-155 ms, larger for correct than for
incorrect trials during RB learning.

Task Performance
Of the 15 participants whose DBT fits were consistent
with II strategy use in categorizing the II distributions,
2 did not have an adequate number of incorrect trials to
allow for the correct/incorrect ERP analysis (< 30), so
their results were also excluded from analysis.
For the remaining 13 participants, accuracy in RB
and II conditions (Figure 4) did not reliably differ
[F(1,12) = 1.5, ns]. There was a main effect of block
[F(3,36) = 29, p < .001] and no interaction [F(3,36) < 1,
ns]. Thus, observed differences in correct/incorrect ERP
subtractions (described below) cannot easily be
attributed to simple differences in accuracy between RB
and II learning.
Response time in RB and II conditions did not
reliably differ [F(1,12) = 1.7, ns]. Correct trials were
reliably faster than incorrect trials [F (1,12) = 23, p <
.001]. There was no effect of block [F (1,12) = 1, ns];
however, there was a condition by block interaction [F
(3,36) = 3.8, p = .02] whereby II RTs slightly increased
over blocks while RB RTs slightly decreased. Because

0

+3µV

B
E

E

B

E
-3µV

Block 1

Block 2

Block 3

0

100

200 ms
Correct

Block 4

Figure 4. Accuracy results for 13 participants
included in ERP analyses.

-3µV

0

100

200 ms

Incorrect

Figure 6. Early negative occipital ERPs differed
at 170-200 ms as a function of accuracy and RB/II.

3078

a)

RB

Correct

II

+ 5µV

+10µV

0

0

+ 5µV

0

- 4µV

- 5µV

Incorrect

+10µV

0

400

700 ms
Correct

- 5µV

0

400

200

400

600 ms

- 4µV
RB

700 ms

Incorrect

200

400

600 ms

II

Figure 8. ERPs recorded during feedback show
differential RB vs. II P300 responses for incorrect,
but not correct trials. Waveform shown is from a
right occipital electrode location.

b)

Figure 7. a) Late positive parietal ERPs for RB
and II conditions; b) correlations between accuracy
and the magnitude of the correct/incorrect
subtraction at the peak.
late (400-700 ms) positive parietal ERP was predictive
of correct categorization (Figure 7a) in the RB
condition [F(1,12) = 9.0, p = .011], but not in the II
condition [F(1,12) = .077, ns]. The magnitude of the
correct/incorrect subtraction, measured for a 60-ms
interval at its maximum, was reliably correlated
(Figure 7b) with RB performance [r(11) = .62, p = .02],
but not with II performance [r(11) = .11, ns].
Prelearning Although our comparisons of interest
during learning were correct/incorrect subtractions
performed within a categorization condition (i.e., RB or
II), not across conditions, we wanted to ensure that any
differences were not due to the nature of the RB or II
stimuli distributions. Inspection of prelearning and
learning waveforms suggested that early peaks were
timed similarly between prelearning and learning, and
prelearning peaks were smaller in amplitude than
learning peaks. In contrast the prominent late positivity
seen in learning was absent in prelearning. We directly
compared all three temporal regions of interest during
prelearning and found no significant differences
between RB and II waveforms at the electrodes that
were tested at during learning. This suggests that
differences in stimuli per se did not contribute to
observed ERP findings during learning.
Feedback In order to assess predictions about the
explicit nature of the RB condition relative to the II
condition, we examined ERPs recorded during
feedback for the presence of a differential P300
response, an ERP sometimes associated with subjective

expectations (Polich, 2007). Both correct and incorrect
trials showed P300s with broad topographies centered
around 350 ms (Figure 8). Whereas ERPs for RB and II
conditions did not differ in the 310 to 410 ms range for
correct trials [F(1,12) = .01, ns], they did differ for
incorrect trials [F(1,12) = 5.7, p = .03], suggesting that
participants were more surprised when they learned that
they had made an error in the RB condition than in the
II condition.

Discussion
Our ERP results provide additional evidence for distinct
RB and II category-learning mechanisms. We observed
both early and late ERP differences when comparing
correct to incorrect trials for RB and II category
learning. These ERP differences reflected the
distinctive cognitive processing engaged rather than
perceptual differences between stimuli or learning
conditions.
RB processing is usually thought to depend on
hypothesis testing, whereby a candidate rule is
evaluated by comparing the representation of the
stimulus in the current trial to that of a stimulus
representative of the relevant boundary condition (or to
some abstract representation of that boundary
condition). This evaluation requires selective attention
and working memory, likely implemented in prefrontal
cortex, as well as the ability to form enduring
representations of the rule and boundary condition
dependent on hippocampus and medial temporal cortex.
In contrast, II learning may be likened to gaining
expertise in specialized or holistic processing, as
applied for individuating faces or categorizing complex
multi-featured objects like Greebles (Rossion, Curran,
& Gauthier, 2002).
ERP results were consistent with both of these
descriptions. Specifically a differential correct/
incorrect frontocentral N1 ERP (Figure 5) may reflect

3079

early top-down allocation of attentional resources,
which is most important in RB learning because one
stimulus dimension must be used and the other ignored.
In RB learning, the extent to which resources are
allocated to the correct feature (i.e., spatial frequency)
will tend to result in correct categorization; selectively
attending to just one feature in the II condition would
often result in errors. Similar frontal N1 potentials have
been reported in other visual paradigms (Luck & Vogel,
2000; Hillyard & Anllo-Vento, 1998), and some
evidence suggests that the various N1 signals are under
frontal control (Deouell & Knight, 2009).
We also observed a differential correct/incorrect
response in positive parietal potentials only during RB
learning (Figure 7). This effect is thus analogous to the
earlier N1 effect. However, this ERP was correlated
with performance in the RB condition; subjects with
larger correct/incorrect differences performed the task
more accurately. Similar positive potentials have been
found in many different tasks and variously referred to
as the P3, P300, P600 or Late Positive Complex (LPC).
These positive potentials have also been associated with
working memory (Kok, 2001; Polich, 2007) and
episodic memory retrieval (Paller, Voss, & Westerberg,
2009). Thus, LPC potentials found during category
learning here may reflect discriminative processing to
compare the current Gabor patch with the boundary
condition. Differential LPC responses for correct/
incorrect responding in the RB condition are likely to
reflect the engagement of the neural system responsible
for making the decision based on RB learning.
LPC potentials were also apparent in the II
condition with amplitudes for both correct and incorrect
trials similar to those for correct RB trials. Importantly,
these LPC amplitudes in the II condition were not
predictive of accuracy, as they were in the RB
condition. This suggests that the neural systems
responsible for the LPC may also be engaged during II
learning, but are not responsible for the final behavioral
decisions. Normura, Reber, and Maddox (2007) argued
that RB and II systems compete during categorization
and that prefrontal cortex appraises confidence in both
systems, making the final decision based on the one
with higher confidence for a particular stimuli. Foerde,
Knowlton, and Poldrack (2006) likewise demonstrated
competition between systems in a categorization task
that can also be performed explicitly and implicitly, and
were able to experimentally manipulate competition,
resulting in changes in the neural systems engaged.
We observed a differential correct/incorrect
response in a negative occipitotemporal N1 ERP
(Figure 6) in both RB and II conditions. A prior
category learning study also revealed differential effects
in similarly distributed N1 potentials (Curran, Tanaka,
& Weiskopf, 2002). The authors speculated that this
ERP could be related to the N170 ERP frequently seen

in studies of face processing (e.g., Bentin et al., 1996)
and expert categorization (e.g., Rossion et al., 2002;
Tanaka & Curran, 2001). This type of processing
frequently engages extrastriate visual cortex (e.g.,
Kanwisher, McDermott, & Chun, 1997; Gauthier et al.,
1999), an area found to be more active in the II
condition of this task (Normura, Reber, & Maddox,
2007) and previously seen in several other category
learning tasks (Reber et al., 1998ab).
One hypothesis is that this N170-like ERP may be
sensitive to the type of holistic processing engaged
when categorizing complex objects, which could thus
overlap with II processing. We found a differential
correct/incorrect effect in both II and RB conditions,
but importantly, the direction of the effect was inverted;
correct II trials showed greater negativity than incorrect
trials whereas correct RB trials showed greater
negativity than incorrect trials. This pattern of results is
consistent with competition between the two systems,
such that correct II trials specifically employ holistic
processing. We further propose that correct RB trials
likely rely on single-feature processing, and incorrect
trials may rely more on holistic processing.
Lastly, we observed a differential P300 response
comparing RB and II incorrect trials during feedback
(Figure 8), with no difference in correct trials. Some
researchers have argued that the P300 is an index of
cognitive “surprise” (see Polich, 2007).
This is
consistent with an explicit RB and implicit II
mechanism.
Specifically, participants in the RB
condition are developing firm hypotheses about the rule
to use for categorization and the identity of the
boundary condition. When those expectations are
violated by negative feedback, participants are
surprised. In contrast, they are much less certain about
what they are doing in the II condition (in spite of
equivalent learning as measured by accuracy). This
result is also consistent with participants’ self reports,
which indicate great confidence in rule description after
RB learning and little confidence after II learning.
These results thus provide further evidence for an
explicit/implicit distinction between RB and II learning.
An alternative perspective is that the feedback P300
represents memory updating (see also Polich, 2007).
From this perspective, the representation for the
boundary condition or the rule must be changed in
memory as a result of negative feedback. Again,
updating is more important for the system employing
explicit memory for categorization, the RB mechanism.
In summary, the present ERP findings illustrate that
neurocognitive processes engaged during category
learning differ for RB and II learning. These differences
occur at multiple time-points in the course of stimulus
processing. Real-time neural monitoring via EEG
analyses can thereby provide a window into
categorization processing yielding information that

3080

goes significantly beyond analyses limited to behavioral
responses. Further analyses of these measures may thus
constitute an fruitful avenue for gaining new insights
into higher cognition generally.

Acknowledgments
We thank Emi Nomura for programming DBT Models,
Joel Voss and John Rudoy for technical assistance,
Richard Greenblatt and Demetrios Voreades from
Source Signal Imaging, and Courtney Clark and Ilya
Bendich for assistance in data collection. We are
grateful for support from the Northwestern University
Mechanisms of Aging and Dementia Training Grant
(T32 AG020506, RGM), and the National Science
Foundation (0518800 and 0818912, KAP).

References
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, U, &
Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory
of multiple systems in category learning.
Psychological Review, 105, 442-481.
Ashby, F. G., Ell, S. W., & Waldron, E. M. (2003).
Procedural learning in perceptual categorization.
Memory & Cognition, 31, 1114-1125.
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (1993). Relations
between prototype, exemplar, and decision bound
models of categorization. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 37, 372-400.
Ashby, F.G., Maddox, W.T. (2005) Human category
learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 149-78.
Bentin, S., Allison, T., Puce, A., Perez, E., &
McCarthy, G. (1996). Electrophysiological studies of
face perception in humans. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 8, 551-565.
Curran, T., Tanaka, J.W., & Weiskopf, D.M. (2002).
An electrophysiological comparison of visual
categorization and recognition memory. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 2, 1- 18.
Deouell, L.Y., & Knight, R.T. (2009). Executive
function and higher-order cognition: EEG studies.
Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, 4, 105-109.
Foerde, K., Knowlton, B. J., & Poldrack, R. A. (2006).
Modulation of competing memory systems by
distraction. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA, 103, 11778-11783.
Gauthier I, Tarr MJ, Anderson AW, Skudlarski P, Gore
JC. (1999) Activation of the middle fusiform 'face
area' increases with expertise in recognizing novel
objects. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 568-73.
Hillyard, S. A., & Anllo-Vento, L. (1998). Eventrelated brain potentials in the study of visual selective
attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA, 95, 781-787.
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., & Chun, M. M. (1997).
The fusiform face area: A module in human
extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception.
Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 4302-4311.

Kéri, S. (2003). The cognitive neuroscience of category
learning. Brain Research Reviews, 43, 85-109
Kok A. 2001. On the utility of P3 amplitude as a
measure of processing capacity. Psychophysiology
38, 557–77.
Maddox, W. T., Ashby, F. G., & Bohil, C. J. (2003).
Delayed feedback effects on rule-based and
information-integration category learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 650-662.
Nomura, E. M., Maddox, W. T., Filoteo, J. V., Ing, A.
D., Gitelman, D. R., Parrish, T. B, Mesulam, M.-M.
& Reber, P. J. (2007). Neural correlates of rule-based
and information-integration visual category learning.
Cerebral Cortex, 17, 37-43.
Nomura, E. M., & Reber, P. J. (2008). A review of
medial temporal lobe and caudate contributions to
visual
category
learning.
Neuroscience
&
Biobehavioral Reviews, 32, 279-291.
Nomura, E. M., Reber, P. J., & Maddox, W. T. (2007).
Mathematical models of visual category learning
enhance fMRI data analysis. Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Austin TX.
Paller, K.A., Voss, J.L., & Westerberg, C.E. (2009).
Investigating the awareness of remembering.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 185-199.
Polich, J. (2007). Updating P300: an integrative theory
of P3a and P3b. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118,
2128-2148.
Reber, P. J., Stark, C. E., & Squire, L. R. (1998a).
Contrasting cortical activity associated with category
memory and recognition memory. Learning &
Memory, 5, 420-428.
Reber, P. J. , Stark, C. E., & Squire, L. R. (1998b).
Cortical areas supporting category learning
identified using functional MRI. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA, 95, 747-750.
Rossion, B., Gauthier, I., Goffaux, V., Tarr, M. J., &
Crommelinck, M. (2002). Expertise training with
novel objects leads to left lateralized face-like
electrophysiological
responses.
Psychological
Science, 13, 250–257.
Source Signal Imaging. (2008). EMSE (Version 5.3)
[Computer Software] San Diego, CA. Available from
http://www.sourcesignal.com
Tanaka, J. W., and Curran, T. (2001). A neural basis for
expert object recognition. Psychological Science, 12,
43–47.
Zeithamova,, D., & Maddox, W. T. (2006). Dual-task
interference in perceptual category learning. Memory
& Cognition, 34, 387-398.

3081

