UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dissociating Ideomotor and Spatial Compatibility: Empirical Evidence and Connectionist
Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/42g51743

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bertenthal, Bennett I.
Boyer, Ty W.
Sceutz, Matthias

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dissociating Ideomotor and Spatial Compatibility:
Empirical Evidence and Connectionist Models
Ty W. Boyer (tywboyer@indiana.edu)
Matthias Scheutz (mscheutz@indiana.edu)
Bennett I. Bertenthal (bbertent@indiana.edu)
Cognitive Science Program and Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
The tendency to imitate others is a fundamental social skill
which could develop via associative learning or some more
specialized mechanism, such as observation-execution
matching. In this paper, we employ a stimulus-response
compatibility paradigm to evaluate whether ideomotor
compatibility conforms to the same processes as other S-R
responses. The findings reveal a dissociation between spatial
and ideomotor compatibility. A set of connectionist models
are developed, which show that the differences between
spatial and ideomotor compatibility are attributable to
structural differences and in part to the relative strengths of an
inhibitory node mediating the involuntary S-R response.
Keywords: action perception; ideomotor compatibility;
spatial compatibility; connectionist modeling

Introduction
The tendency of people to spontaneously imitate observed
actions has long been noted. This automatic tendency
contributes to the ‘social glue’ by which humans coordinate
behaviors, cooperate, and develop affiliative tendencies
toward each other (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999; Lakin,
Jefferis, Cheng, & Chartrand, 2003). In spite of its
importance for such social interactions, there is little
consensus on how this mimicry occurs.
One prominent approach suggests that the perception of
actions activates motor programs in an observer because
each shares a common representational code (e.g., Prinz,
1990). This common coding framework descends from the
ideomotor theory of James (1890) and Greenwald (1970),
and has received considerable attention following the
discovery of mirror neurons in the monkey brain (Rizzolatti,
Fadiga, Gallese, & Fogassi, 1996). A straightforward
prediction from this theory is that the ease with which a
stimulus might be transformed into an action depends on the
similarity or ideomotor compatibility between the observed
and executed action (Brass, Bekkering, Wohlschläger, &
Prinz, 2000). Imitated responses, which involve replication
of observed actions, are highly ideomotor compatible.
Given this formulation, it is conceivable that ideomotor
compatibility is simply a special case of stimulus-response
(S-R) compatibility, determined by the degree to which a
stimulus and a response are perceptually, structurally, or
conceptually similar (Kornblum, Hasbroucq, & Osman,
1990). Indeed, some theories explicitly propose that the
same associative learning and motor control processes that
underlie other S-R mapping processes also underlie

imitation (Brass & Heyes, 2005; Gewirtz & Stingle, 1968).
If, however, ideomotor compatibility is mediated by a
neural network specialized for the direct matching of
observed and executed actions (e.g., Iacoboni et al., 1999;
Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004), then it is more likely that
ideomotor compatibility is dissociable from other forms of
S-R compatibility.
The Simon effect (Simon, 1969), a processing advantage
for spatially compatible stimuli and responses, is a prime
example of S-R compatibility. If ideomotor and spatial
compatibility are both mediated by associative learning,
then the patterns of responses on tasks that test either form
of compatibility should be similar. Until recently, ideomotor
and spatial compatibility have been confounded in most
experiments. Bertenthal, Longo, and Kosobud (2006),
however, devised a paradigm for testing both types of
compatibility independently in the same experiment by
manipulating the instructions.
In this paradigm participants observe a tapping index or
middle finger of a stimulus hand presented as if belonging
to a person facing them. They respond to the tapping finger
by pressing a key with the index or middle finger of their
right hand. In one condition, they are instructed to imitate
the cue by pressing a key with their anatomically matching
finger (imitative cue). In the other condition, they are
instructed to press a key with their spatially corresponding
finger (spatial cue). As such, either the imitative or spatial
cue is the imperative stimulus, but the other stimulus cue,
although irrelevant, is also present. If the stimulus hand is
the left hand (i.e., a mirror image of the participant’s right
hand), then the irrelevant dimension of the response is both
spatially and ideomotor compatible (e.g., leftward index
finger stimulus corresponds to a leftward index finger
response). By contrast, if the stimulus is a right hand, then
the irrelevant dimension is incompatible. Reaction times
(RTs) are faster when the irrelevant dimension is compatible
(i.e., left stimulus hand) than when the irrelevant dimension
is incompatible (i.e., right stimulus hand).
Although these studies provide evidence for both spatial
and ideomotor compatibility, they also suggest that the
underlying processes responsible for these two forms of
compatibility are not identical. Bertenthal et al. (2006)
reported that the effects of ideomotor compatibility were
attenuated across a block of trials, but the effects of spatial
compatibility persisted. Longo et al. (2007) also reported a

2280

difference, the ideomotor compatibility effect disappeared
when biomechanically impossible actions were observed,
although spatial compatibility continued. These findings
suggest a dissociation in the processing of spatial and
ideomotor compatibility, but more definitive evidence is
needed. Thus, the first aim of this paper is to provide more
direct evidence that spatial and ideomotor compatibility are
dissociable; the second aim is to model these two processes
to gain greater insight into how they differ.

Experiment 1
The problem with testing for dissociation between spatial
and ideomotor compatibility using the Bertenthal et al.
(2006) paradigm is that similar results are predicted in both
conditions. A possible solution to this problem was
suggested by Sauser and Billard (2006), where ideomotor
compatibility for direct and reverse S-R mapping were
modeled. The logic for this manipulation is that Hedge and
Marsh (1975) reported that with a reverse S-R mapping
paradigm, the effect of spatial compatibility reverses (i.e.,
RTs are faster to stimuli that are spatially incompatible with
the response). In contrast to this finding, Sauser and Billard
(2006) reported model simulation results that ideomotor
compatibility does not follow a similar reversal. These
findings are suggestive, but they still need to be empirically
tested, especially since the paradigm modeled by Sauser and
Billard confounded spatial and ideomotor compatibility (cf.
Bertenthal et al., 2006).
In the following experiment we employ the Bertenthal et
al. (2006) paradigm to compare spatial and ideomotor
compatibility when participants are instructed to respond to
either a direct or reverse mapping of imitative or spatial
cues. If spatial and ideomotor compatibility are dissociable,
then we do not expect a reverse ideomotor compatibility
effect for the spatial cue condition, but do expect a reverse
spatial compatibility effect for the imitative cue condition.

Method
Participants Forty-eight undergraduates at the University
of Chicago and Indiana University (34 female; 14 male),
between the ages of 18- and 25-years, participated. They
were naive as to the purpose of the study, and were paid $10
or were awarded course credit for their participation.
Apparatus and Materials Five-frame video sequences of a
hand were displayed on a 43.2 cm computer monitor,
viewed from approximately 60 cm. The hand was
approximately 15° visual angle horizontally and 8°
vertically. Stimulus finger movements involved a 2.5°
displacement. The initial frame appeared for 533 ms and
showed the hand at rest above a surface. The next three
frames lasted 38 ms each and presented either the index or
middle finger moving downward. The final frame lasted 886
ms and showed the finger in its final position. The stimulus
was followed by a blank screen that lasted 1,467 ms.
Participants responded by pressing the ‘1’ or the ‘3’ key on
the computer keyboard number pad with their right hand

index finger and right hand middle finger, respectively. EPrime (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) was
used for presentation and data collection.
Design and Procedure Participants were evenly assigned to
one of four conditions, formed by crossing stimulus cue
(imitative vs. spatial) and S-R mapping (direct vs. reversed).
Direct Mapping Condition: Participants in the imitative cue
condition were instructed to respond to the tapping index or
middle finger with the anatomically matching finger on their
right response hand. Participants in the spatial cue condition
were instructed to respond to the tapping index or middle
finger with the spatially congruent (left vs. right) finger on
their right response hand. Reverse Mapping Condition:
Participants were instructed to respond with the finger
opposite that selected in the direct mapping condition. For
example, they would respond to a tapping index finger in
the imitative cue condition by selecting their middle finger.
Participants were presented with 20 blocks1 of 20 trials.
Stimulus hand was constant within blocks and alternated
between blocks (e.g., 20 trials with the left hand stimulus,
then 20 trials with the right hand stimulus, and so on). The
sequence was counterbalanced across subjects. With direct
mapping, the left stimulus hand was compatible with the
participants’ response hand and the right stimulus hand was
incompatible. With reverse mapping, the right stimulus
hand was compatible and the left hand was incompatible.
Index and middle finger stimuli were presented randomly
within blocks, with the constraint that each block consisted
of an equal number of index and middle finger trials.

Results
Error trials (5.8% of all trials) and RTs less than 200 ms and
greater than 1200 ms (1.9% of all trials) were excluded from
all analyses. A 2 x 2 x 2 mixed model ANOVA revealed
significant main effects for compatibility, F(1, 44) = 15.14,
p < .001, ηp2 = .26, mapping condition, F(1, 44) = 42.44, p
< .001, ηp2 = .49, and cue condition, F(1, 44) = 3.92, p =
.05, ηp2 = .08 (see Fig. 1), with faster responses to
compatible than incompatible trials, direct than reverse
mapping, and spatial cues than imitative cues. Importantly,
no interactions approached significance (all ps > .18).
Figure 1 illustrates the planned pairwise comparisons
between compatible and incompatible trials that were
statistically significant in each condition.

Discussion
These results replicate previous findings that have shown
spatial and ideomotor compatibility effects, but were
inconclusive regarding the effects of the reverse mapping.
The slower RTs in the reverse mapping condition suggest
that some cognitive recoding of the stimulus is necessary
prior to response selection which requires additional time. In
spite of this finding there was no evidence of a reversal of
1
Participants given direct S-R mapping were adopted from
Bertenthal et al., 2006, and were only given 10 blocks of 20 trials.

2281

Figure 1: Mean RTs for compatible and incompatible trials for direct and reverse S-R mapping, imitative and spatial cues,
and blocked and randomized trials. Error bars are standard errors. ** compatible-incompatible contrast at p <.05; * p < .10.
the compatibility effect for either spatial or ideomotor
compatibility. Our interpretation for this non-reversal is that
blocking the trials had an adaptation effect on the recoding
of the stimulus, and thus reduced the level of activation
necessary to recode it on each trial. As a consequence of this
reduced activation, the likelihood of the recoding spreading
to the irrelevant priming stimulus dimension decreased. In
order to address this possibility, we replicated the preceding
experiment but randomized the presentation of compatible
and incompatible trials within blocks.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Forty-eight undergraduates at Indiana
University (28 female; 20 male), between the ages of 18-and
28-years, who were not in the previous study, participated.
Apparatus and Materials The same apparatus and
materials of the previous experiment were used.

condition, F(1, 44) = 7.79, p = .008, ηp2 = .15, and
compatibility x mapping condition x cue condition, F(1, 44)
= 4.70, p = .036, ηp2 = .10. Planned comparisons revealed
faster RTs for compatible than incompatible trials in the
imitative cue, direct mapping condition, t(11) = 6.11, p <
.001. By contrast, RTs were faster in the incompatible than
compatible trials in the imitative cue, reverse mapping
condition, t(11) = -2.35, p = .038. Compatible RTs were
faster than incompatible RTs in the spatial cue, direct
mapping condition, t(11) = 3.32, p = .007, with no
difference in the spatial cue, reverse mapping condition (p =
.28). Comparisons also revealed slower RTs in the imitative
cue, reverse mapping condition than each of the other
conditions (all p < .006), with no differences between each
of the other conditions (all p > .54). Thus, these effects were
due to the compatibility reversal in the imitative cue, reverse
mapping condition, but, significantly, this same reversal did
not occur in the spatial cue, reverse mapping condition.

Discussion

Design and Procedure The design and procedure of the
previous experiment were used; however, the stimulus hand
varied randomly within each block, with the constraint that
there would be an equal number of trials per block depicting
a left or right hand and an index or middle finger action.

Results
Error trials (6.1% of all trials) and RTs less than 200 ms and
greater than 1200 ms (0.5% of all trials) were excluded from
the analyses. Figure 1 shows the mean RTs. A 2 x 2 x 2
mixed model ANOVA revealed significant main effects for
compatibility, F(1, 44) = 6.75, p = .013, ηp2 = .13, mapping
condition, F(1, 44) = 13.47, p = .001, ηp2 = .23, and cue
condition, F(1, 44) = 5.26, p = .027, ηp2 = .11, with faster
responses to compatible than incompatible trials, direct than
reverse mapping, and spatial cues than imitative cues.
Importantly, the analysis revealed significant interactions
between compatibility and mapping condition, F(1, 44) =
19.15, p < .001, ηp2 = .30, mapping condition and cue

The results of this experiment replicate previous findings of
spatial and ideomotor compatibility effects with direct S-R
mapping, and furthermore, show that the effects of spatial
compatibility, but not ideomotor compatibility, reverse with
reversed S-R mapping. This is in contrast with the results of
the previous experiment, which suggests that randomizing
the trials eliminated the adaptation effect caused by
blocking the trials. As a consequence, the level of activation
necessary to recode the imitative stimulus spread to the
spatial priming stimulus as well. The effect of ideomotor
compatibility, however, did not reverse, but rather
maintained a trend toward the standard compatibility effect.
This finding thus provides new and more direct evidence
that priming by spatial and imitative cues differ. These
results cannot tell us, however, whether this difference may
be due to differences in the underlying neural pathway (e.g.,
architectural difference), or to differences in processing
within the same pathway (e.g., parameterization difference).
As a first step toward addressing this question, we develop a
formal model for simulating our results.

2282

Computational Model and Simulations
Our goal was to begin by developing the simplest possible
model for simulating the results of the above experiments.
Such a model will need a component representing the
features of the input stimulus, which can be mapped onto a
response (output units) based on matching the anatomical
identity or spatial position of the input and output units. In
addition, the irrelevant stimulus dimension is represented by
additional S-R units.

Figure 2: The base model (upper left) and models for the
direct (upper right) and reverse (bottom) mapping
conditions (arrows indicate excitatory connections, circles
inhibitory connections, see text for explanations of labels
and weights).

Model Architecture and Parameters
We use interactive activation and competition connectionist
units whose change in activation over time is given by
∆act/∆t = netin - act (netin + decay), where act∈[0,1] is
the activation of the unit, netin∈[0,1] the sum of the
weighted inputs to the unit and decay∈[0,1] is a constant
decay factor (set to 0.05 for all nodes). The sum of all
incoming connection weights must be at most 1 (to
guarantee that netin∈[0,1]). The base model consists of six
units (upper left in Fig. 2): two input units, called finger
units, representing the perceived index (“I”) vs. middle
(“M”) input finger, two input units, called location units,
representing the left (“L”) vs. right (“R”) location of the
perceived input finger (depending on the stimulus hand) as
well as two output units, representing the index finger in the
left location (“IL”) vs. the middle finger in the right
location(“MR”), corresponding to the right hand of the
participant. Input units are connected to output units via
direct excitatory connections: left location and index finger
inputs to the left index finger output; right location and
middle finger inputs to the right middle finger output (the
strength of all connections is fixed at 0.001). Inputs are
applied to the model by adding a fixed external activation of
0.5 to the netinput of the respective input units on each
cycle. A response is selected whenever an output unit first
reaches the action threshold of 0.5 (i.e., the activation
needed to perform a motor action of the finger). The weights

in the base model reflect task-independent connections
present in participants before, and lasting beyond, the task,
and these connections are insufficient to create an output
action even if all input units are activated.

Parameter Fitting
We constructed eight models for the 2x2x2 design:
compatibility (spatial vs. ideomotor), condition (direct vs.
reverse mapping), and presentation (blocked vs.
randomized). Model parameters were obtained by fitting the
grand means of the human data from the first ten blocks of
the experiment (See Fig. 3). The models were then
incrementally constructed from the base model: first, we add
mutually inhibitory connections to the two output fingers
because the task requires subjects to move only one finger
(and not the other) at any given time (the weights are fixed
at -0.04 for all eight models).
For the direct mapping conditions (see upper right in Fig.
2), we added additional “S-R mapping” units (“SR”) to the
base model, with excitatory connections coming from either
the finger or the location input units, depending on the
stimulus condition, with connections going to the output
units: for the imitative cue (i.e., spatial compatibility), input
fingers (i.e., index and middle) are connected to the SR
units, which are then connected to matching output units;
for the spatial cue (i.e., ideomotor compatibility), input
locations (i.e., left and right) are connected to SR units,
which are then connected to matching output units. We then
fit the additional excitatory connections to the human data.
The best fitting connection values are 0.86 for the random
models and 0.1 for the blocked models. The difference
reflects the adaptation effect in the blocked conditions,
which emerged because the stimulus hand was the same for
the entire block, allowing a consistent input finger
type/location and response finger type/location mapping. In
the second experiment, the stimulus hand was randomized
from trial to trial, thus preventing the learning of a fixed
mapping within the block. Note, the SR units and their
excitatory connections and the inhibitory connections
between output units represent temporary connections, all
based on the task instructions (assumed to not exist in
participants before the experiments).
For the reversed mapping conditions (bottom in Fig. 2),
we extend the direct mapping models by adding two
“reversal units” (“Rv”) whose excitatory connections
parallel those of the SR units (i.e., connecting input finger
type or location unit to the corresponding output unit).
Moreover, we add inhibitory connections between the
reversal units and the corresponding SR units, because the
direct mapping established by the SR units has to be
explicitly suppressed. We can then fit both the added
excitatory and inhibitory connections to the human data.
The best fitting excitatory weights are 0.92 for all random
and 0.1 for all blocked models. The inhibitory weights
reveal an important difference between spatial and
ideomotor models: the best fitting inhibitory weights are
lower for the spatial than for the ideomotor models in both

2283

Figure 3: Parameters used for fitting the models and model results. Parameters represent the grand mean of the human data in
the first ten blocks of trials. LH = Left hand; RH = Right hand.
random and blocked conditions. In the random condition,
the inhibitory weights are -0.092 for the spatial and -0.12 for
the ideomotor condition. In the blocked condition, the
inhibitory weights are -0.1 for the spatial condition, and
again -0.12 for the ideomotor condition. The lower
magnitudes on the connections in the blocked condition are
again due to within-block adaptation.

Simulation Results and Discussion
The simulation results (Fig. 3) show a very good fit of the
model to all experimental conditions, except the
randomized, reverse mapping, imitative cue (spatial
compatibility) condition. This suggests that the models are
able to capture the essential results of the tasks other than
the reversed spatial compatibility effect. That the model was
unable to fit the human data in this particular condition
suggests that additional nodes, not present in our current
models, may be necessary to explain performance in this
condition. It is also interesting that the model fit the
complimentary spatial cue (ideomotor compatibility)
condition, suggesting that no additional components may be
necessary in this condition.
Another key result was the difference in inhibitory
connections across models, which hints at an important
difference between the way humans process ideomotor and
spatial compatibility. While our models are silent on many
processing details (i.e., stimulus encodings and operations),

they do capture important differences in processing time and
effort. For the reversed mapping conditions, the consistently
larger inhibitory connections in the ideomotor than in the
spatial compatibility models indicate greater suppression
underlying ideomotor compatibility. The reversed models
thus demonstrate that the locus for the processing difference
between spatial and ideomotor compatibility may involve
the inhibitory connections between the S-R and reversal
units, because no other connection in the random and
blocked reversed models differ.

General Discussion
Two experiments tested for dissociation of ideomotor and
spatial compatibility and a set of computational models
were developed to identify potential differences between
these two processes. The first experiment, where
compatibility varied only between blocks, showed that the
effects of neither spatial nor ideomotor compatibility
reversed with a reverse S-R mapping paradigm. The second
experiment, where compatibility varied randomly within
blocks, showed that the effect of spatial compatibility
reversed with reverse mapping, but the effect of ideomotor
compatibility did not. This dissociation is consistent with
the suggestion that ideomotor compatibility is mediated by a
neural network specialized for the direct matching of
observed and executed actions (e.g., Iacoboni et al., 1999;
Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004).

2284

Our connectionist models allow us to draw further
inferences about the processes that underlie ideomotor and
spatial compatibility. In the reverse mapping conditions,
both ideomotor and spatial compatibility are activated via
additional reversal units with inhibitory links to the SR
nodes, but the model was unable to fit the spatial
compatibility condition, suggesting additional nodes are
necessary to fully explain spatial compatibility reversal
effects. Importantly, a difference that did emerge between
spatial and ideomotor compatibility was in the inhibitory
weights of these nodes. The greater inhibition associated
with ideomotor compatibility may reflect the early origins
and encapsulated stability of the neural circuit responsible
for the direct matching of perceived actions by the
observer’s motor system (Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004).
The greater inhibition associated with ideomotor
compatibility also makes sense in terms of the processes
underlying social engagement. For example, social
cognitive research has shown that although spontaneous
mimicry can be socially advantageous (e.g., Lakin et al.,
2003), excessive mimicry of others can be socially
undesirable, and has long been known as a pathological
manifestation of frontal lobe brain injury (Stengel, 1947).

Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we provided new experimental evidence that
suggests ideomotor and spatial compatibility are
dissociable, and therefore are not likely attributable to the
same underlying associative system. We also presented a set
of computational models fit to the data for explaining the
dissociation of spatial and ideomotor processes. The models
suggest structural differences as well as different inhibitory
connections that may be required to suppress direct SR
mappings between observed and executed actions. This
difference in inhibitory connections could be related to a
more complex model where the cognitive reversal rule
(implemented in the “Rv” structure in the current model)
spreads more strongly to the priming stimulus in the spatial
compatibility models. This spreading of the cognitive rule
suggests that a slower semantic process replaces and
reverses the more direct S-R mapping mediated by spatial
compatibility. Developing this model further and extending
it to explain the differences between blocked and
randomized trial compatibility effects is left for future work.

References
Bertenthal, B. I., Longo, M. R., & Kosobud, A. (2006).
Imitative response tendencies following observation of
intransitive actions. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception & Performance, 32, 210-225.
Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Wohlschläger, A., & Prinz, W.
(2000). Compatibility between observed and executed
finger movements: Comparing symbolic, spatial, and
imitative cues. Brain & Cognition, 44, 124-143.
Brass, M. & Heyes, C. (2005). Imitation: Is cognitive
neuroscience solving the correspondence problem?
Trends in the Cognitive Sciences, 9, 489-495.

Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception–behavior link and social
interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
76, 893–910.
Gewirtz, J. L. & Stingle, K. G. (1968). Learning of
generalized imitation as the basis for identification.
Psychological Review, 75, 374-397.
Greenwald, A. G. (1970). Sensory feedback mechanisms in
performance control: With special reference to the ideomotor mechanism. Psychological Review, 77, 73-99.
Hedge, A., & Marsh, N. W. A. (1975). The effect of
irrelevant spatial correspondence on two-choice responsetime. Acta Psychologica, 39, 427-439.
Iacoboni, M., Woods, R.P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H.,
Mazziotta, J.C., & Rizzolatti, G. (1999). Cortical
mechanisms of human imitation. Science, 286, 25262528.
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychololgy, vol 2.
Henry Holt & Co: New York, NY, US.
Kornblum, S., Hasbroucq, T., & Osman, A. (1990).
Dimensional overlap: Cognitive basis for stimulusresponse compatibility – a model and taxonomy.
Psychological Review, 97, 253-270.
Lakin, J. L., Jefferis, V. E., Cheng, C. M., & Chartrand, T.
L. (2003). The chameleon effect as social glue: Evidence
for the evolutionary significance of nonconscious
mimicry. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 27,145–162.
Longo, M.R., Kosobud, A., & Bertenthal, B.I. (2007).
Automatic imitation of biomechanically possible and
impossible movements: Effects of priming movements vs.
goals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 34, 489-501.
Prinz, W. (1990). A common coding approach to perception
and action. In O. Neumann & W. Prinz (Eds.),
Relationships between perception and action (pp. 167–
201). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Rizzolatti, G. & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169-192.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Gallese, V., & Fogassi, L. (1996).
Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor actions.
Cognitive Brain Research, 3, 131-141.
Sauser, E. L., & Billard, A. G. (2006). Parallel and
distributed neural models of the ideomotor principle: An
investigation of imitative cortical pathways. Neural
Networks, 19, 285-298.
Simon, J. R. (1969). Reactions toward the source of
stimulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81,
174-176.
Stengel, E. (1947). A clinical and psychological study of
echo-reactions. Journal of Mental Science, 93, 598-612.

2285

