UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Executive Functions Predict Performance in All Switching Tasks?
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/57m590gx
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Blagrove, Elisabeth
Chater, Nick
Ellefson, Michelle
et al.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

  Do Executive Functions Predict Performance in All Switching Tasks?
                                               Andrea Molzhon
                                        Virginia Commonwealth University
                                               Michelle Ellefson
                                        Virginia Commonwealth University
                                              Elisabeth Blagrove
                                               University of Warwick
                                                  Nick Chater
                                             University College London
Abstract: Previous task switching studies have demonstrated improvements in switching abilities throughout child-
hood and adolescence. This pattern may reflect a development of executive functions, as efficient switching may
depend on two processes: inhibition and switching. The current study examined the relation between executive
functions and task switching with participants from 6 years to adulthood across different contexts: figure matching,
arithmetic, and reading. Executive functions were measured using an extended version of Shape School. Separate
path analyses indicated that executive skills account for switching in all contexts, but the fit of the reading model
did not meet acceptable standards. The results supported the importance of both age and executive functions on
task switching ability for figure matching and arithmetic, but not necessarily reading. Therefore, it could be the
case that the contribution of executive functions in task switching experiments may not be equivalent, potentially
depending on the strength of switch.
                                                        3210

