UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Voters Use Episodic Knowledge to Rely on Recognition?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6vp7r74m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gaissmaier, Wolfgang
Gigerenzer, Gerd
Goldstein, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do Voters Use Episodic Knowledge to Rely on Recognition?
Julian N. Marewski (marewski@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)

Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Wolfgang Gaissmaier (gaissmaier@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)

Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Lael J. Schooler (schooler@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)

Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Daniel G. Goldstein (dgoldstein@london.edu)

London Business School
Regent's Park, Sussex Place, London, NW1 4SA, United Kingdom

Gerd Gigerenzer (gigerenzer@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)

Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Abstract
The recognition heuristic is a simple mnemonic decision
strategy. In a comparison between two alternatives, one
recognized and the other not, it bets that the recognized
alternative is likely to score a higher value on a given
criterion of interest. Yet, this heuristic is not applicable when
both alternatives are recognized. We investigate a
recognition-based heuristic for tasks with two recognized
alternatives. What we call the source heuristic relies on
episodic knowledge about the recognition sources to treat
recognized alternatives as unrecognized. An experiment
provides evidence to suggest that voters rely on this source
heuristic when inferring the outcomes of real-world German
political elections.
Keywords: Simple heuristics; recognition heuristic; fluency
heuristic; episodic memory; political elections

Inferences with Recognition
A couple of months before this paper was written, eight
Democratic and nine Republican candidates in the U.S.
primaries had invested thousands of dollars to enter their
names into Americans’ recognition memory. It is likely that
higher name recognition considerably increased their
chances of being included in voters’ consideration sets of
candidates potentially worth a vote. At the same time, not
only in the United States but all over the globe, people were
wondering who would emerge from the primaries as a
winner, possibly becoming the next President.
A simple cognitive strategy that can be relied on to
forecast which candidates voters are most likely to favor in
an election is known as the recognition heuristic (Goldstein
& Gigerenzer, 2002). It helps people infer which of two

alternatives, one recognized and the other not, has the larger
value on a given criterion.1 The heuristic reads as follows:
If only one of two alternatives is recognized, infer the
recognized one to have a larger value on the criterion.
The recognition heuristic bets on certain structural
relations in a decision maker’s environment. Figure 1
illustrates what we call the ecological rationality of the
recognition heuristic in terms of three correlations. There is
a criterion, an environmental mediator, and a person who
infers the criterion. Using the recognition heuristic can help
a person to make accurate inferences when there is both a
substantial ecological correlation between the mediator and
the criterion and a substantial surrogate correlation between
the mediator and recognition. This combination can yield a
substantial recognition correlation; that is, recognized
alternatives tend to have higher criterion values than
unrecognized ones. If either or both the ecological and
surrogate correlations are zero, the use of the recognition
heuristic will not result in accurate inferences; that is,
applying this heuristic is not ecologically rational.
1

In the memory literature, the term recognition is often used to
refer to a person’s ability to distinguish between stimuli presented
in an experiment (e.g., as in a study list) and those that were not.
Usually, a person has heard of both examples of the stimuli before
participating in the experiment (e.g., stimuli could be the names
CLINTON and NIXON). In this article we adopt Goldstein and
Gigerenzer’s (2002; see also Pleskac, 2007; Schooler & Hertwig,
2005) usage of the term to refer to a person’s ability to
discriminate between novel stimuli that have not been heard of
before (e.g., the name SCHNAU) and those that have (e.g.,
NIXON).

2232

alternative as unrecognized and infer that the other has
the higher value on the criterion.

co
rre

ca
lc

te
la
ti o

ol
og
i

ga
n

Ec

rro

Criterion
Election
e.g., election
Outcomes
outcomes

Recognition in Political Elections: A Study

Su

or
re
la
t io
n

Mediator
Newspaper
e.g., mentions in the
Mentions
press

Recognition correlation Name Recognition
Name
e.g., of politicians'
names

Figure 1. An unknown criterion is reflected by a
mediator. The mediator makes it more likely for a person to
encounter alternatives with larger criterion values than those
with smaller ones (e.g., the press mentions more successful
politicians more frequently). As a result, the person will be
more likely to recognize alternatives with larger criterion
values than those with smaller ones, and, ultimately,
recognition judgments can be relied upon to infer the
criterion (e.g., the success of politicians in elections).
Marewski (2008) found that the recognition heuristic yields
accurate inferences about the outcomes of elections.

What Do People Do When Two Alternatives
Are Recognized?
The recognition heuristic is a model for the situation in
which one of two alternatives is recognized. Yet, as we
sample alternatives in our world, recognition memory
grows. Sometimes, people end up recognizing all
alternatives of one kind, say, all parties in an election. In
this case, recognition alone does not differentiate between
alternatives, and in principle, the recognition heuristic as
formulated by Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) cannot be
used.
However, the recognition memory literature suggests that
episodic memory could support the use of recognition
information even then. Specifically, here we hypothesize
that people treat recognized alternatives as unrecognized
when they believe the recognition source does not represent
an environmental mediator that reflects alternatives’
criterion values (Figure 1)—a situation in which one has
good reason to judge the predictive power of recognition to
be low. To illustrate, guess about whom more biographies
have been written, Mr. Kissinger or Mr. Marewski. Many of
you recognize the name of the graduate student who is the
first author of this article only from its first page. Although
both names are recognized, episodic knowledge tells us that
in one case, the source is an article that is not linked to the
criterion, whereas in the other case, the source is the media,
which may well reflect the criterion. Although recognition
alone does not differentiate between the two, you could treat
Mr. Marewski as unrecognized and then pick Mr. Kissinger.
Thus, in situations in which two alternatives in a pair are
recognized, a simple source heuristic might be relied upon:
If two alternatives are recognized, but the source of
one is unrelated to the criterion, then treat this

Do people follow this principle? And if so, when do they
follow it and when do they not? To answer these questions,
we ran a study during the 2005 German national election,
when 61,870,711 eligible voters could choose between 25
parties. In a first session prior to this election, we let a group
of eligible voters acquire recognition of parties by
repeatedly exposing them to the party names in an
experiment. In a second session, we could then test (a) if
they treated recognized parties as unrecognized when they
identified their study participation as the recognition source,
a source they should have little reason to expect to reflect
electoral success. We could also test (b) if they trusted
recognition when they acquired it before the experiment in
their natural environment, where recognition sources such
as the press do reflect electoral success (Figure 2).
14 days

2 days

T1
Recognized, that is,
heard or seen before T1?

Election

T2
Recognized, that is,
(a) heard or seen before T1?
(b)

…

during T1?

(c)

…

between T1 and T2?

Inference:

Inference:

Which party …?

Which party …?

Figure 2. Schematic presentation of the study design.

Method
Sixty-six residents of Berlin, Germany (52% female;
mean age 26 years, SD = 3.7) completed a computerized
experiment in the laboratories of the Max Plank Institute for
Human Development. These eligible voters (henceforth:
voters) were at least 18 years old. (Voting age is 18 in
Germany.) They were paid 25 ($37).2
The first session (T1) took place about 16 days before the
election and the second session (T2) 2 days before the
election. In a recognition task in both sessions, we presented
voters the name of one party at a time on a computer screen
and asked them to judge whether they recognized the party,
that is, whether they had seen or heard of the party prior to
participating in the study. Participants were instructed to
respond as quickly and accurately as possible. In the second
session, in a recognition source task, we again presented one
party name at a time and additionally asked the voters
whether they had seen or heard a party name (a) before the
first session, (b) during the first session, or (c) after the first
session and before the second session. In both sessions, in a
two-alternative forced-choice task, we presented two party
2

One participant did not return to the second session. Her data
were excluded.

2233

names on the computer screen (one on the left side and the
other on the right) and asked voters to infer which party
would win more votes in the election. There were a total of
300 comparisons of parties (complete pairings of 25
parties). In all tasks, the order of appearance of party names
was randomized and all trials were preceded by fixation
crosses for 1,000 ms. All responses were made on a
standard PC keyboard. Positive responses were made with
the index finger of the right hand. In each session,
completing the experiment took about 50 min.
To assess how well a heuristic predicts each voter’s
forecasts in the two-alternative task, for each voter we
selected the paired comparisons where the heuristic could be
applied. Across these comparisons, we counted how often
the voter had made an inference consistent with the heuristic
(A), and the number of times this did not happen (D). A
heuristic’s accordance rate, k, is the proportion of
inferences consistent with it:
k = A/(A + D).

(1)

The accuracy of a voter’s election forecast is the
proportion of correct election forecasts made. It is computed
separately for T1 and T2 across the comparisons of two
parties the voter worked on in the two-alternative task.

Results and Discussion
Do voters rely on episodic knowledge to treat parties
as unrecognized? At T1, voters could apply the recognition
heuristic on average on 144 pairs (SE = 2.6) consisting of
one recognized and one unrecognized party. Since they had
seen all parties in the study at T1, by T2 they could not
apply the recognition heuristic but could use the source
heuristic instead—if they treated the parties they did not
recognize at T1 as also unrecognized at T2. In this case,
they could continue to forecast more votes for the parties
they already recognized at T1; that is, it should be possible
to predict their forecasts at T2 based on their recognition of
a party name at T1.
To test this, we computed voters’ recognition heuristic
accordance rates at T1 and predicted their source heuristic
accordance rates at T2 based on recognition data from T1.
That is, we used voters’ recognition data from T1 to
calculate their recognition heuristic accordance rate at T1.
We also used their recognition data from T1 to compute
their source heuristic accordance rate at T2. If at T2 voters
continued to forecast more votes for the parties they already
recognized at T1, both accordance rates should be similar.
In fact, we observed only small declines in the recognition
heuristic accordance rate at T1 (M = .89) to the source
heuristic accordance rate at T2 (M = .87; both SE = .01), and
consistent with this result, only small drops in the accuracy
of voters’ election forecasts, (MT1 = .84, MT2 = .82, both SE
= .01), which should also be very similar if voters continued
to forecast more votes for the previously recognized party.
Yet, in forecast for the larger parties, voters may have had
an alternative to relying on episodic knowledge about
recognition sources at T2: They could also have used factual

(i.e., semantic) knowledge about parties as cues, say,
opinion poll data. To gain control over this possibility, we
excluded the six largest German parties and, in addition,
two well-known extreme right-wing parties from our
analyses. These eight parties receive news coverage even
when no election is taking place and/or are regularly
represented in German parliaments. Furthermore, opinion
polls tend to be published only for these eight parties and
not for those that are lesser known.3 If voters relied on cues
for these eight parties instead of on the source heuristic,
they could base their forecasts for the smaller parties on
random guesses. In this case, at T2 the source heuristic
accordance rate and accuracy of their forecast should drop
to the chance level of .50 when the eight parties are
excluded. However, the source heuristic accordance rate did
not decrease to .50. In comparison to the recognition
heuristic accordance rate of M = .78 at T1, the source
heuristic accordance rate only dropped to M = .75 (both SE
= .02) at T2; and the accuracy dropped from M = .64 (SE =
.01) at T1 to M = .61 (SE = .02) at T2, suggesting that voters
relied on episodic knowledge to treat some parties as
unrecognized in order to use the source heuristic.
Model comparison Instead of using the source heuristic,
voters could also rely on a fluency heuristic. This heuristic
has been defined in different ways (e.g., Jacoby & Brooks,
1984). Here we use the term to refer to Schooler and
Hertwig’s (2005) model, which builds on these earlier
definitions and on a long research tradition on fluency (e.g.,
Jacoby & Dallas, 1981) as well as related notions such as
familiarity (e.g., Hintzman, 1988; Mandler, 1980). Schooler
and Hertwig implemented their fluency heuristic side by
side with the recognition heuristic in the ACT-R (adaptive
control of thought–rational) cognitive architecture (e.g.,
Anderson et al., 2004). In ACT-R, the same memory
currency—a continuous activation trace—determines (a)
whether an alternative will be retrieved or not and (b) the
time it takes to retrieve it. Schooler and Hertwig adopted
Anderson, Bothell, Lebiere, and Matessa’s (1998)
assumption that retrieving an alternative implies recognizing
it, adding the assumption that the more quickly the
alternative is retrieved, the greater the sense of recognition.
A person using the recognition heuristic can base inferences
on the binary outcome of this memory process (retrieved or
not). A person using the fluency heuristic, in turn, can base
inferences on the more graded outcome of the same process,
namely, on the speed with which the alternatives come to
mind, that is, on their retrieval time or retrieval fluency. By
this token, the fluency heuristic is a computational
instantiation of the version of Tversky and Kahneman’s
(1973) availability heuristic that bases judgments on ease of
retrieval (for a discussion of the differences between the two
3

In fact, in another study in German elections, Marewski (2008)
found these eight parties to represent those about which, on
average, 95.5% (Mdn = 98.3%) of the participants indicated they
had knowledge. Only 13.4% of the participants, on average, had
knowledge about the remaining smaller parties (Mdn = 11.7%).

2234

Fluency heuristic

Accordance rate at T2

Recognition
heuristic
Source heuristic

Individual participants

Figure 3. Source heuristic versus fluency heuristic. Pairs of bars show individual participants’
Figure 3. Source heuristic versus fluency
heuristic.
of bars
individual
accordance rates
accordance
ratesPairs
for the
two show
models
at T2 (N participants’
= 65).
for the two models at T2 (second session; N = 65).
heuristics and the recognition heuristic, see Schooler &
Hertwig; Hertwig, Herzog, Schooler, & Reimer, 2008; see
Jacoby & Dallas, 1981, p. 333; Jacoby, Kelley, Brown, &
Jasechko, 1989, p. 328, for an articulation of the link
between their fluency/familiarity concept and availability.)
The fluency heuristic is defined as follows:
If two alternatives are recognized and one is more quickly
retrieved than the other, infer that this alternative has the
higher value with respect to the criterion.
Operationalizing retrieval time as recognition time, we
used each voter’s reaction times in the recognition task at T2
to compute the proportion of judgments consistent with the
fluency heuristic at T2 (see Equation 1). This procedure has
been successfully applied to model people’s inferences with
the fluency heuristic (Hertwig et al., 2008). As above, we
used the recognition data from T1 to compute the source
heuristic accordance rate on the same pairs at T2. To gain
control over voters’ access to cues, we excluded the eight
larger parties.
The fluency heuristic cannot be used when differences in
retrieval time between two alternatives are very small and
therefore not detectable. Guided by Fraisse’s (1984) review
of the timing literature, Schooler and Hertwig (2005)
assumed that people are able to detect differences in time
that exceed 100 ms. Hertwig et al. (2008) provided
empirical support for this assumption. Thus, we restricted
the comparison between the two heuristics to parties that
differed by more than 100 ms in recognition time at T2. On
the resulting pairs, each heuristic unambiguously decides for
one of the parties. Which heuristic predicts voters’ decisions
best?
For 49 voters, the source heuristic accounts for more
election forecasts than the fluency heuristic. For 12 voters,
the fluency heuristic predicts judgments best, and for 4
others, the two heuristics’ accordance rates are identical
(Figure 3). This suggests that a majority of voters relied on
episodic knowledge to treat recognized parties as
unrecognized and applied the source heuristic. This finding

is consistent with experimental results and computer
simulations with ACT-R’s memory model, suggesting that
people are most likely to rely on the fluency heuristic when
they cannot use knowledge instead (Marewski & Schooler,
2008). It is also consistent with studies indicating that
people are less likely to rely on a sense of fluency when this
sense has been manipulated experimentally (e.g., Jacoby, et
al., 1989).4 Note, however, that not all voters were better
modeled by the source heuristic than by the fluency
heuristic. We therefore next examine how people decide
when to rely on the source heuristic.
Do voters use episodic knowledge to decide when to
rely on recognition? The source heuristic is only applicable
when the recognition source of one alternative correlates
with the criterion but the other does not. At T2, voters
sometimes erred when identifying recognition sources. Such
source confusions constitute an interesting case. They allow
for comparing voters’ trust in recognition in two situations:
when they (a) correctly identified the study as the source,
and (b) when they falsely believed their recognition was
naturally acquired when in fact it was also only
experimentally induced. Mentions of party names in studies
are unlikely to reflect election outcomes; however, in the
natural environment, recognition sources such as
newspapers can reflect electoral success (Marewski, 2008).
Correspondingly, voters may have judged the predictive
power of recognition to be lower when they correctly
tracked the study as the source than when they falsely
believed that recognition was acquired in the natural
environment. Therefore, voters should be more likely to
treat parties as unrecognized when they have identified the
study rather than the natural environment as the source.
4
We use the fluency heuristic as formulated above as a
benchmark for the source heuristic. That is, to examine how well
the source heuristic predicts behavior, we compare it to a model
that does not take source knowledge into account. However, this is
not to say that source evaluation processes could not play a role in
people’s reliance on retrieval fluency.

2235

To test this, we selected for each voter all pairs that
consisted of a recognized and an unrecognized party at T1
(RU pairs) and that had become pairs of two recognized
parties at T2 (RR pairs). We divided these pairs into two
kinds. First, on correct-source RR pairs, at T2 voters
correctly indicated that they only recognized the second,
formerly unrecognized party from the study (at T1, this
party was unrecognized; at T2, it was believed to be
unrecognized before T1, recognized at T1, and
unrecognized between T1 and T2; Figure 2). We expected
that at T2 voters would continue to treat this second,
formerly unrecognized party as unrecognized. In doing so,
they would be able to use the source heuristic, and in this
case, at T1 and at T2, they should forecast more votes for
the party they already recognized at T1 than for the second
party. As a result, the recognition heuristic accordance rate
at T1 and the source heuristic accordance rate at T2 (both
based on recognition data from T1) should differ little.
Second, false-source RR pairs were identical to correctsource RR pairs except that at T2 voters falsely believed
they had recognized the second party before T1. On falsesource RR pairs, voters should thus not treat the second
party as unrecognized and, since the first party is also
recognized from the natural environment, they should not be
able to use the source heuristic. Instead they would have to
resort to other heuristics, or guess. Therefore, the source
heuristic accordance rate at T2 should decrease in
comparison to the recognition heuristic accordance rate at
T1 (both rates based on recognition data from T1).
For 27 voters we identified at least one false-source RR
pair (M = 22 pairs) and one correct-source RR pair (M =
81). To gain control over voters’ access to cues, we
excluded the eight larger parties. As predicted, on falsesource RR pairs, voters’ source heuristic accordance rate at
T2 was lower than the recognition heuristic accordance rate
at T1, whereas there was little difference on correct-source
RR pairs—a pattern we also found in the accuracy of voters’
election forecasts (Tables 2, 3).5

A long research tradition in cognitive psychology has
stressed the importance of source evaluation processes for
behavior (for an overview see, e.g., Johnson, Hashtroudi, &
Lindsay, 1993). The current findings help to explain earlier
work: In a study by Oppenheimer (2003) people were
unlikely to rely on recognition to infer the size of cities
when they knew that they recognized cities for reasons
dissociated with the criterion (see also Oppenheimer, 2004).
Our data are also consistent with Jacoby et al.’s (1989) wellknown “overnight fame” experiments in which people
seemed to rely on experimentally induced recognition to
infer other people’s fame when they were unable to recall
the source of recognition. At the same time, they tended to
ignore recognition when they could trace it exclusively to
the experiment—a mediator that is unlikely to reflect the
criterion fame.
Table 1: Mean (SE) accordance rates at T1 and T2 as
well as accuracy of voters’ election forecasts on
correct-source RR pairs and false-source RR pairs
computed across pairs of smaller parties

Accordance
Accuracy

5

When judging the magnitude of these effects, one has to keep
in mind that the strategies people may have resorted to on falsesource RR pairs may have mimicked some of the choices of the
source heuristic, meaning that one would not necessarily expect the
source heuristic accordance rate to reach the chance level of .50 on
false-source RR pairs at T2.

T1 false
.71 (.04)
.65 (.03)

T2 false
.64 (.05)
.57 (.03)

Note. n = 27. Correct: correct-source RR pairs. False:
false-source RR pairs. RR: two recognized parties.
(paired data; confidence intervals in Table 2)
Table 2: Confidence intervals (CI) on mean differences
in accordance rates between T1 and T2, as well as on
the mean differences in the accuracy of voters’ election
forecasts, computed for correct-source RR pairs and
false-source RR pairs consisting of smaller parties
Mean difference

Discussion
This study provides evidence for voters’ use of episodic
knowledge to assess the predictive power of recognition and
rely on the source heuristic in pairs of two recognized
alternatives: Episodic knowledge appears to have helped
voters to identify recognition sources. One source (the lab)
was unlikely to represent a mediator reflecting the criterion,
whereas another (the natural environment) was likely to
reflect it. Thus, when recognition was acquired in the
natural environment, voters were more likely to trust it than
when it was acquired in the lab.

T1 correct T2 correct
.80 (.03) .83 (.03)
.66 (.03) .62 (.03)

Accordance

T2 correct–T1 correct
T2 false–T1 false

Accuracy

T2 correct–T1 correct
T2 false–T1 false

95% CI on the
mean difference
(Lower, upper)
(−.03, .08)
(−.16, .009)
(−.08, −.002)
(−.13, −.02)

Note. n = 27. Correct: correct-source RR pairs.
False: false-source RR pairs. RR: two recognized parties.
Table depicts paired data.
Similarly, Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) induced false
recognition of city names and observed how after the
passing of several weeks, people would more often infer
cities with induced recognition to be larger than novel,
unrecognized ones. It is likely that as time passed, people
were unable to pinpoint the experiment as the recognition
source, and so they relied on induced recognition even
though it was not predictive of the criterion.
In this study, Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) also
showed that the accuracy of people’s inferences decreases

2236

when they are unable to use the recognition heuristic
because all alternatives from a set end up being recognized.
They hypothesized that in such situations, people have to
rely on cues or fluency or guess instead, which can be less
accurate than relying on recognition. Recently, much
empirical research has investigated whether and when such
less-is-more effects occur (e.g., Dougherty, Franco-Watkins,
& Thomas, 2008; Gigerenzer; Hoffrage, & Goldstein, 2008;
Pachur & Biele, 2007; Pohl, 2006; Snook & Cullen, 2006).
Our findings have important implications for this work:
When a person can correctly recall recognition sources and
treat some recognized alternatives as unrecognized, less-ismore effects may be diminished.

Conclusion
Voters’ rules of thumb for deciding for whom to vote are
often assumed to operate on voters' partiality to candidates,
their attitudes about political issues, or their perceptions of
political parties’ and candidates’ competence. At the same
time, empirical evidence suggests that voters take into
account not only the desirability of candidates or parties but
also their likelihood of being elected (Stone & Abramowitz,
1983), and, as our findings indicate, voters may rely on
episodic knowledge and recognition to infer which political
parties have the best chances of being elected.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Rona Unrau for editing this
manuscript.

References
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review, 111, 1036–1060.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Lebiere, C., & Matessa, M.
(1998). An integrated theory of list memory. Journal of
Memory and Language, 38, 341–380.
Dougherty, M. R. P., Franco-Watkins, A. N., & Thomas, R.
(2008). Psychological plausibility of the theory of
probabilistic mental models and the fast and frugal
heuristics. Psychological Review, 115, 199–213.
Fraisse, P. (1984). Perception and estimation of time.
Annual Review of Psychology, 35, 1–36.
Gigerenzer, G., Hoffrage, U., & Goldstein, D. G. (2008).
Fast and frugal heuristics are plausible models of
cognition: Reply to Dougherty, Franco-Watkins, &
Thomas (2008). Psychological Review, 115, 230–239.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (1999). The recognition
heuristic: How ignorance makes us smart. In G.
Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd, & the ABC Research Group,
Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp. 37–48). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Hertwig, R., Herzog, S. M., Schooler, L. J., & Reimer, T.
(2008). Fluency heuristic: A model of how the mind
exploits a by-product of information retrieval. Journal of

Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 34, 1191–1206.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgment of frequency and
recognition memory in a multiple trace memory model.
Psychological Review, 95, 528–551.
Jacoby, L. L., & Brooks, L. R. (1984). Nonanalytic
cognition: Memory, perception and concept learning. In
G. H. Bower (Ed.), Psychology of learning and
motivation (Vol. 18, pp. 1–47). New York: Academic
Press.
Jacoby, L. L., & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship
between autobiographical memory and perceptual
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
110, 306–340.
Jacoby, L. L., Kelley, C. M., Brown, J., & Jasechko, J.
(1989). Becoming famous overnight: Limits on the ability
to avoid unconscious influences of the past. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 326–338.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, S. D. (1993).
Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 3–28.
Mandler, G. (1980). Recognizing: The judgment of previous
occurrence. Psychological Review, 87, 252–271.
Marewski, J. N. (2008). Ecologically rational strategy
selection. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Freie
Universität Berlin, Germany.
Marewski, J. N., & Schooler, L. J. (2008). How memory
aids strategy selection. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2003). Not so fast! (and not so
frugal!): Rethinking the recognition heuristic. Cognition,
90, B1–B9.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2004). Spontaneous discounting of
availability in frequency judgment tasks. Psychological
Science, 15, 100-105.
Pachur, T., & Biele, G. (2007). Forecasting from ignorance:
The use and usefulness of recognition in lay predictions
of sports events. Acta Psychologica, 125, 99–116.
Pleskac, T. J. (2007). A signal detection analysis of the
recognition heuristic. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
14, 379–391.
Pohl, R. (2006). Empirical tests of the recognition heuristic.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19, 251–271.
Schooler, L. J., & Hertwig, R. (2005). How forgetting aids
heuristic inference. Psychological Review, 112, 610–628.
Snook, B., & Cullen, R. M. (2006). Recognizing national
hockey league greatness with an ignorance-based
heuristic. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology,
60, 33–43.
Stone, W. J., & Abramowitz, A. I. (1983). Winning may not
be everything, but it’s more than we thought: Presidential
party activists in 1980. American Political Science
Review, 77, 945–956.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
Psychology, 5, 207–232.

2237

