UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do we inhibit responses to stop them? Assessing the role of inhibition in motor stopping
tasks
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2n88n5r2
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Anderson, Michael
Weaver, Chelan
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

 Do we inhibit responses to stop them? Assessing the role of inhibition
                                        in motor stopping tasks
                                                 Chelan Weaver
                                              University of St. Andrews
                                               Michael Anderson
                                              University of St. Andrews
Abstract: Stop-signal and go/no-go paradigms are widely used to measure motor stopping ability. Although
both tasks quantify stopping performance, it is unclear to what degree they share common processes or substrates.
Further, it has not been shown that either necessitates inhibitory control as defined by cognitive psychologists, in
which stopping is accomplished by attenuating the response. To ascertain the involvement of inhibition, each task
was adapted to incorporate an independent probe, a technique developed to isolate the aftereffects of inhibition from
other sources of impairment. In both paradigms, novel stimuli cued recently stopped motor responses, enabling the
measurement of localized performance decrements. This revealed a dissociation between the two types of stopping.
Robust aftereffects of inhibition were found in the adapted stop-signal task, but no evidence of inhibition was found
in the go/no-go task, suggesting that inhibitory control is recruited for revoking actions, but might not be utilized
to prevent movements.
                                                         3189

