UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Conceptual Information Take Precedence Over Perceptual Information Early in
Development? Evidence From Perseveration Errors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8515z310

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Fisher, Anna

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Conceptual Information Take Precedence Over Perceptual Information Early
in Development? Evidence From Perseveration Errors
Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Baker Hall 345-I
5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract
Generalization is a fundamental cognitive process; however
mechanisms of generalization early in development remain
contested. According to one theoretical position, from very
early in development conceptual information takes
precedence over perceptual information. According to the
alternative position, effects of conceptual knowledge have a
protracted developmental course. The goal of the present
research was to examine directly whether 3- to 5-year-old
children privilege conceptual information over perceptual
information. Participants were presented with triads of objects
in which category membership conflicted with appearance
similarity. Half of the children were first asked to sort
pictures by category membership and then switch to sorting
by similarity; the order of tasks was reversed for the other
half of the children. A strong asymmetry in perseveration
errors was observed across all three age groups: there was a
marked decrease in accuracy when children were asked to
switch form sorting by similarity to sorting by category
membership, whereas the decrease was less pronounced when
children were asked to switch from sorting by category
membership to sorting by similarity (particularly for 4- and 5year-old children who exhibited virtually no decrease in
accuracy in the latter condition).
Keywords: Categorization, Cognitive
Cognitive Flexibility, Perseveration.

Development;

Introduction
Generalization is a fundamental cognitive process because
it allows us to acquire new knowledge by extending known
to the unknown. Humans exhibit remarkable generalization
abilities very early in development. For example, 3- and 4month-old infants can learn to categorize artificial dot
patterns (Bomba & Siqueland, 1983) as well as naturalistic
stimuli (Quinn, Eimas, & Rosenkrantz, 1993); by 10 months
of age infants are capable of performing simple
generalizations about object properties, such as pattern of
motion (Rakison, & Poulin-Dubois, 2002; Baldwin,
Markman, & Melartin, 1993); and by 24 months of age
children readily extend known labels to novel objects
(Booth & Waxman, 2002; Jones & Smith, 1998; Smith,
Jones, & Landau, 1996). However, mechanisms of
generalization early in development remain contested.
There is little disagreement in the literature that
perceptual factors influence both early and mature
generalization (for review see Murphy, 2002). For instance,
French, Mareschal, Mermillod, & Quinn (2004)
demonstrated that 3- and 4-month-old infants form a
representation of the category “cat” that excludes dogs, and

a representation of the category “dog” that includes cats.
The basis for this asymmetry was infants’ sensitivity to the
distribution information of perceptual features (such as leg
length, head width, ear separation, etc.) and the fact that
feature distribution of the category “cat” is subsumed within
the feature distribution of the category “dog”. Therefore,
the asymmetry was reversed when infants were presented
with a set of stimuli in which the inclusion relationship of
the feature distributions was reversed (French, et. al., 2004).
When children learn their first words, they extend new
words to refer to correct objects or overextend new words to
refer to items perceptually similar to correct objects
(Huttenlocher & Smiley, 1987). Importantly, perceptual
similarity effects are also well documented in mature
generalization (Malt, 1994; Sloman, 1993; Osherson, Smith,
Wilkie, Lopez, & Shafir, 1990; Nosofsky, 1984; Rips,
Shoben, & Smith, 1973).
There is also little disagreement that mature
generalization is often influenced by conceptual factors,
such as knowledge of the taxonomic hierarchies, expertise
in a particular domain, or knowledge of an object’s function
(Heit & Rubinstein, 1994; Proffitt, Coley, & Medin, 2000;
Wisniewski, 1995). However, while conceptual effects in
mature generalization are well documented, the
developmental course of these effects remains unclear. One
possibility is that early in development generalization
processes are driven primarily by the low-level mechanisms
of perception, attention, and memory, with conceptual
factors emerging as an important influence on generalization
later in development (McClelland, & Rogers, 2003;
Rakison, 2003; Sloutsky, & Fisher, 2004; Sloutsky, 2003;
Samuelson, & Smith, 2000; Smith, 2000). However, it has
been argued that perceptual factors alone are insufficient to
explain early generalization, and conceptual factors (e.g.,
knowledge of the ontological status of the object) permeate
learning from early infancy (Booth & Waxman, 2002;
Gelman, 2003). Furthermore, it has been suggested that
when perceptual and conceptual information are in conflict,
conceptual information “takes precedence” over perceptual
information (Booth & Waxman, 2002; Gelman & Markman,
1986; Gelman, 2003).
The goal of the present research was to address the
question whether young children privilege conceptual
information over perceptual information using a task
traditionally used to examine cognitive flexibility - a
Dimension Change Card Sorting (DCCS) task, which is a
simplified version of the Wisconsin Card Sort Test (Berg,
1948). In the DCCS task children are presented with a set

1330

of cards depicting familiar objects that differ on two
dimensions, such as color and shape (e.g., the cards may
depict red and blue flowers, and red and blue boats).
Children are first asked to sort cards according to one
dimension, for example shape (in this case they need to
group blue flowers with red flowers, and blue boats with red
boats). Upon completing this task, children are asked to sort
cards according to a different dimension, for example color
(in this case they need to group red boats with red flowers,
and blue boats with blue flowers).
Considerable amount of evidence suggests that despite
understanding and remembering the instructions, children
younger than four years of age often fail to shift attention
away from a previously relevant dimension, perseverating in
sorting by the original dimension (Zelazo, Frye, & Rapus,
1996; Jacques, Zelazo, Kirkham, & Semcesen, 1999). It is
important to note that children are equally likely to
perseverate if they start sorting by shape and switch to
sorting by color, and if they start sorting by color and switch
to sorting by shape.
However, it has been demonstrated that experimentally
manipulating saliency of chosen dimensions can
dramatically improve children’s cognitive flexibility
(Fisher, 2008). Dimension saliency may play a crucial role
in flexible shifts of attention among object dimensions
because salient information has been demonstrated to
automatically capture attention in children as well as adults
(Koch & Ullman, 1985; Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1996;
Treisman & Gelade, 1980; Trick & Enns, 1998;
Underwood, Foulsham, van Loon, Humphreys, & Bloyce,
2006). Therefore, shifting attention from a less salient object
dimension to a more salient dimension should require less
cognitive control (and therefore lead to more successful
performance) than shifting attention from a more salient to a
less salient dimension (or shifting attention between two
equally salient dimensions).
These predictions have received empirical support
(Fisher, 2008). Differential saliency of dimensions was
achieved by representing the dimension of color by two
similar values (e.g., red and pink) and the dimension of
shape by dissimilar values (e.g., stars and flowers; see
Figure 1). Increasing similarity of values representing the
dimension of color was expected to reduce the saliency of
this dimension relative to the dimension of shape, which
was represented by two dissimilar values. Effectiveness of
this manipulation was confirmed in a separate calibration
experiment: children were accurate in sorting objects based
on either dimension, however they were over 1000 ms faster
in sorting pictures by shape than by color. When presented
with these stimuli in the DCCS paradigm, 3-year-old
children were more successful in switching to sorting by a
more salient dimension (i.e., shape) than to sorting by a less
salient dimension (i.e., color); in fact, when switching to
sorting by the more salient dimension, children’s accuracy
in the post-switch phase was equivalent to their accuracy in
the pre-switch phase. At the same time, children were
equally successful in sorting by both shape and color during

the pre-switch phase, suggesting that poor post-switch
performance when switching to sorting by color cannot be
attributed to poor discrimination of the specific values of the
color dimension values (i.e., red and pink).

Figure 1: Example of stimuli used in Fisher (2008).
Findings describe above suggest that young children are
largely successful in switching to sorting by a more salient
dimension and make perseveration errors when switching to
sorting but not by a less salient dimension. These findings
can be used to directly examine whether conceptual
information is more salient that perceptual information early
in development: If conceptual information is more salient
than perceptual information, then children should be more
successful in switching to sorting by conceptual
information; however if perceptual information is more
salient than conceptual information, an opposite pattern of
performance should be observed. To test these possibilities,
in the present research participants were presented with
triads of pictures in which conceptual information (i.e.,
category membership) was in conflict with perceptual
information (appearance similarity).

Method
Participants
Participants were 49 3-year-old children (M = 3.51 years of
age, SD = .25 years; 27 females and 22 males), 39 4-yearold children (M = 4.40 years of age, SD = .27 years; 24
females and 15 males), and 28 5-year-old children (M =
5.26 years of age, SD = .30 years; 9 females and 19 males).
All participants were recruited from child care centers in the
Pittsburgh area.

Materials
Materials consisted of eight experimental triads in which a
target object (e.g., an open umbrella) shared category
membership with one test item (e.g., a folded umbrella) but
looked similar to the other test item (e.g., a mushroom). The
location of the category matches and appearance matches
(i.e., to the left or to the right of the target) was
counterbalanced across the eight triads. All triads used in
this research are presented in Table 1. In addition to the
experimental triads, there was an instruction triad depicting
a lemon (target), a lemon slice (category match) and a tennis
ball (appearance match). This triad was used to explain the
task to participants and responses on this triad were
excluded from all analyses reported below.

1331

Table 1: The list of experimental triads.
Target: Umbrella
Appearance match:
Umbrella
Category Match:
Mushroom
Target: Light bulb
Appearance Match:
Pear
Category Match:
Christmas lights
Target: Chocolate
Cake
Appearance Match:
Hat

Design and Procedure
There were two between-subject conditions: a Perceptualto-Conceptual Switch condition and a Conceptual-toPerceptual Switch condition. In the Perceptual-toConceptual Switch condition children were first asked to
group together objects that “look similar” and then switch to
grouping together objects that are “the same kind of thing”.
The order of tasks was reversed in the Conceptual-toPerceptual Switch condition.
The experiment was administered on a laptop computer
using SuperLab Pro software, and the order of trials was
randomized for each participant. Participants were randomly
assigned to the Conceptual-to-Perceptual and Perceptual-toConceptual Switch conditions, and interviewed individually
by hypothesis-blind experimenters. After completing the
task, all children were presented with a familiarity check:
they were shown all pictures used in the experiment proper,
one by one, and asked to identify the depicted objects. The
goal of the familiarity check was to ensure that all of the
objects used in this study were familiar to children.

Category Match:
Birthday Cake

Results

Target: Red Flower
Appearance Match:
Star
Category Match:
White Flower
Target: Oak Tree
Appearance Match:
Broccoli
Category Match:
Christmas Tree
Target: Red Balloon
Appearance Match:
Lollipop
Category Match:
Group of 3 Balloons
Target: Closed Book
Appearance Match:
Present Box
Category Match:
Open book
Target: Round Clock
Appearance Match:
Plate
Category Match:
Grandfather Clock

Familiarity Check
In addition to the labels provided in Table 1, the following
types of responses were scored as correct: (1) semantically
similar labels (e.g., “pie” instead of “cake, “bowl” instead of
“plate”, “watch” instead of “clock); (2) super-ordinate labels
substituted for basic-level labels (e.g., “fruit” instead of
“pear”, “candy” instead of “lollipop”); and (3) substitutions
from the same basic-level category (e.g., “apple” instead of
“pear”, “celery” or “cauliflower” instead of “broccoli”,
“popsicle” instead of “lollipop”). Substitutions from the
basic-level category comprised less than 5% of responses
and were scored as correct only if the child correctly
identified the other two pictures in the corresponding triad:
this was done because confusing “broccoli” for “celery”,
given that the child knows that the other objects in the triad
are trees, should lead to the same pattern of sorting (both by
appearance and category membership) as correct
identification of the object as “broccoli”. Additionally, over
80% of children in all age groups identified the “star” as
“sun”; because these children clearly exhibited knowledge
that this object belonged to a different category than the
other two objects in the triad (i.e., a white flower and a red
flower), these responses were scored as correct.
Children in all age groups exhibited near-ceiling accuracy
during familiarity check, averaging 91%, 93%, and 96% of
correct responses in the 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old group
respectively. Therefore, any observed differences in sorting
accuracy can not stem from children being unfamiliar with
the objects used in this research.

1332

Figure 2: Decrease in accuracy in the post-switch phase
compared to the pre-switch phase.

Sorting accuracy
Proportions of correct responses by age group and condition
are presented in Table 2. To analyze sorting accuracy
proportion of correct responses in the post-switch phase was
subtracted from the proportion of correct responses in the
pre-switch phase for each participant. Analyses reported
below were based on these difference scores averaged
across participants (Figure 2).
Three-year-old Children The majority of three-year-old
children exhibited poor pre-switch accuracy in both
experimental conditions. Overall, 15 out of 23 participants
in the Conceptual-to-Perceptual Switch condition, and 17
out of 26 participants in the Perceptual-to-Conceptual
Switch condition failed to provide at least 6 out of 8 (or
75%) correct responses during the pre-switch phase.
As shown in Figure 2, three-year-old children who passed
the pre-switch phase (providing at least 75% of correct
responses) exhibited a somewhat larger decrease in accuracy
in the Perceptual-to-Conceptual condition than in the
Conceptual-to-Perceptual condition (averaging a 42% and a
23% decrease in accuracy respectively, independentsamples t (15) = 1.5, one-tailed p = .08; this difference
reached only marginal significance likely due to very small
number of children who passed the pre-switch phase).
Four-year-old Children The majority of four-year-old
children passed the pre-switch phase in both experimental
conditions. Overall, 8 out of 18 participants in the
Conceptual-to-Perceptual Switch condition, and 8 out of 21
participants in the Perceptual-to-Conceptual Switch
condition failed to provide at lest 75% (or 6 out of 8) of
correct responses during the pre-switch phase.
Table 2: Proportions of correct responses by age group and
condition.
Perceptual-toConceptual-toConceptual condition Perceptual condition
Participants who did not pass the pre-switch phase
3-yearolds
4-yearolds
5-yearolds

Pre-switch
phase

Post-switch
phase

Pre-switch
phase

Post-switch
phase

.41

.55

.35*

.60

.48

.53

.38

.42

.54

.60*

.42

.58

Participants who passed the pre-switch phase
3-year.88*
.39
.80*
.56
olds
4-year.85*
.41
.82*
.75*
olds
5-year.91*
.63*
.93*
.85*
olds
* Means that are different from chance (chance = 50%; p <
.05) are marked with an asterisk (*).

Four-year-old children who passed the pre-switch phase
(providing at least 75% of correct responses) exhibited a
pronounced decrease in accuracy in the post-switch phase
compared to the pre-switch phase in the Perceptual-toConceptual condition (41%, below zero, one-sample t (12) =
3.48, p < .005). At the same time, the decrease in accuracy
in the post-switch phase compared to the pre-switch phase
in the Conceptual-to-Perceptual condition was not
significant (7%, not different from zero, one-sample t (9) <
1.3, p > .26). Furthermore, the decrease in accuracy in the
Perceptual-to-Conceptual condition was greater than
decrease in accuracy in the Conceptual-to-Perceptual
condition (independent-samples t (21) = 2.29, p < .05; see
Figure 2).
Five-year-old Children The majority of five-year-old
children passed the pre-switch phase in both experimental
conditions. Overall, only 3 out of 12 participants in the
Conceptual-to-Perceptual Switch condition and 6 out of 16
participants in the Perceptual-to-Conceptual Switch
condition failed to provide at lest 75% (or 6 out of 8) of
correct responses during the pre-switch phase.
Five-year-old children who passed the pre-switch phase
(providing at least 75% of correct responses) exhibited a
pronounced decrease in accuracy in the post-switch phase
compared to the pre-switch phase in the Perceptual-toConceptual condition (28%, below zero, one-sample t (9) =
2.7, p < .05). At the same time, the decrease in accuracy in
the post-switch phase compared to the pre-switch phase in
the Conceptual-to-Perceptual condition was not significant
(8%, not different from zero, one-sample t (8) < 1.3, p > .12;
see Figure 2).

1333

Difference scores were submitted to a two-way ANOVA
with Age (3-, 4-, and 5-year-old children) and Condition
(Conceptual-to-Perceptual Switch and Perceptual-toConceptual Switch) as between-subject factors. This
analysis revealed a main effect of condition (F (1, 53) =
9.51, p < .05), with the effect of age and age-by-condition
interaction being not significant (both Fs < 1.5, ps > .24).
Findings presented above suggest that across all three age
groups many children found it challenging to sort pictures
by a single dimension when there was a strong conflict
between the dimensions. Specifically, 65% of 3-year-olds,
41% of 4-year-olds, and 32% of 5-year-olds did not pass the
pre-switch phase of the task (the proportion of 3-year-old
children failing the pre-switch phase was different from the
proportion of 4- and 5-year-old children failing the preswitch phase, both χ²s > 5.16, ps < .01). As is shown in
Table 2, with few exceptions these children performed at
chance level during both phases of the task.
However, those children who successfully resolved
conflict between conceptual and perceptual information and
passed the pre-switch phase, exhibited an asymmetric
pattern of perseveration during the post-switch phase. In
particular, when children switched from sorting by category
membership to sorting by appearance similarity, across all
age groups perseveration was lower (in the case of 4- and 5year-old children the decrease in accuracy in the post-switch
was not different form zero) than when children switched
from sorting by appearance similarity to sorting by category
membership (in the case of 3- and 4-year-old children the
decrease in accuracy in the post-switch phase was greater
than 40%).

Discussion
Results presented above point to two important findings.
First, when presented with triads of familiar objects in
which there was a strong conflict between appearance
similarity and category membership, across all age groups
many children experienced difficulty when resolving this
conflict. More importantly, those children who successfully
resolved the conflict between appearance similarity and
category membership during the pre-switch phase, were
markedly more successful in switching to sorting pictures
by appearance similarity than to sorting by category
membership.
The first finding goes against the notion that children can
categorize objects or generalize object properties based on
conceptual information when it conflicts with perceptual
information (Booth & Waxman, 2002; Gelman & Markman,
1986; Gelman, 2003). At the same time, this finding adds to
the growing body of evidence that when there is a strong
conflict between multiple sources of information (e.g.,
linguistic labels and appearance similarity) 4- and 5-yearold children’s performance on generalization tasks is not
different from chance (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; Sloutsky,
Lo, & Fisher, 2001).

The second finding provides direct evidence that children
do not privilege conceptual information over perceptual
information; rather the pattern of perseveration errors
described above suggests that for young children, at least up
to five years of age, perceptual information is more salient
than conceptual information.
Another important aspect of the findings presented above
is the fact that strong perseveration tendencies were
observed in children older than three years of age. In
previous research that used the switch paradigm, children
older than three years of age rarely make perseveration
errors in the DCCS task, unless the task is modified to
increase working memory demands. For example, children
may be asked to remember a pair of rules, such as “if there's
a border, play the color game; if there's no border, play the
shape game” (Zelazo, 2006, p. 300). Findings presented
above suggest that task demands can be increased not only
by making the rules more complex, but also by requiring
children to switch from sorting by appearance similarity to
sorting by category membership.
Overall, the present findings challenge the theoretical
view suggesting that conceptual information takes
precedence over perceptual information for children as
young as two years of age (Booth & Waxman, 2008;
Gelman, 2003). At the same time, these findings contribute
to the mounting evidence suggesting that processing early in
development is driven primarily by the low-level
mechanisms of perception, attention, and memory, with
conceptual knowledge emerging as a strong influence on
cognition in the course of development and learning
(McClelland, & Rogers, 2003; Rakison, 2003; Sloutsky, &
Fisher, 2004; Sloutsky, 2003; Samuelson, & Smith, 2000;
Smith, 2000).

Acknowledgments
We thank the parents, teachers, staff, and children at the
Carnegie Mellon Children’s School, ABCs for Children,
Brightside Academy, Three Rivers Rochelle Street, Three
Rivers Hazelwood, and Three Rivers Overbrook for their
participation in this research.

References
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M., & Melartin, R. L. (1993).
Infants' ability to draw inferences about nonobvious
object properties: Evidence from exploratory play. Child
Development, 64, 711-728.
Berg, E.A. (1948). A simple objective technique for
measuring flexibility in thinking. Journal of General
Psychology, 39, 15-22.
Bomba, P. C. & Siqueland, E. R. (1983). The nature and
structure of infant form categories. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 35, 294-328.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. R. (2002). Word learning is
‘smart’: evidence that conceptual information affects
preschoolers’ extension of novel words. Cognition, 84,
B11-B22.

1334

Fisher, A. V. (2008). Automatic and voluntary shifts of
attention in the Dimensional Change Card Sorting task.
In. V. Sloutsky, B. Love, & K. McRae (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXX Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 469-474.
French, R. M., Mareschal, D., Mermillod, M., & Quinn, P.
C. (2004).
The role of bottom-up processing in
perceptual categorization by 3- to 4-month-old infants:
Simulations and data.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 133, 382-397.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child. Oxford:
University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Heit, E., & Rubinstein, J. (1994). Similarity and property
effects in inductive reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 411422.
Huttenlocher, J., & Smiley, P.
(1987). Early word
meanings:
The case of object names.
Cognitive
Psychology, 19, 63-89.
Jacques, S., Zelazo, P. D., Kirkham, N. Z., & Semcesen, T.
K. (1999). Rule selection and rule execution in
preschoolers:
An
error-detection
approach.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 770-780.
Jones, S. S. & Smith, L. B. (1998) How children name
objects with shoes. Cognitive Development, 13, 323-334.
Koch, C. & Ullman, S. (1985). Shifts in selective visual
attention: Towards the underlying neural circuitry.
Human Neurobiology, 4, 219-227.
Malt, B.C. (1994).
Water is not H2O.
Cognitive
Psychology, 27, 41-70.
McClelland, J. L., & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel
distributed processing approach to semantic cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310-322.
Murphy G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the context
theory of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, memory, & Cognition, 10, 104–
114.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O, Lopez, A, &
Shafir,
E.
(1990).
Category-based
induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Quinn, P. C., Eimas, P. D., & Rosenkratz, S. L. (1993).
Evidence for representations of perceptually similar
natural categories by 3-month-old and 4-month-old
infants. Perception, 22, 463-475.
Proffitt, J. B., Coley, J. D., & Medin, D. L. (2000).
Expertise and category-based induction. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 811-828.
Rakison, D. H. (2003). Parts, motion, and the development
of the animate–inanimate distinction ininfancy. In D. H.
Rakison & L. M. Oakes (Eds.), Early category and
concept development: Making sense of the blooming,

buzzing confusion, pp. 159–192. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Rakison, D. H., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2002). You go this
way and I’ll go that way: Developmental changes
ininfants’ attention to correlations among dynamic
features in motion events. Child Development, 73, 682–
699.
Rips, L. J., Shoben, E. J., & Smith, E. E. (1973). Semantic
distance and the verification of semantic relations.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12, 1
20.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (2000-a). Grounding
development in cognitive processes. Child Development,
71, 98-106.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y.-F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar: Linguistic
labels and the development of inductive inference. Child
Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Smith, L. B. (2000). Learning how to learn words: An
associative crane. In Becoming a Word Learner. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism?
Cognition, 60, 143-171.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A Featureintegration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12,
97-136.
Trick, L. M. & Enns, J. T. (1998) Lifispan changes in
attention: The visual search task. Cognitive Development,
13, 369-386.
Underwood, G., Foulsham, T., van Loon, E., Humphreys,
L., & Bloyce, J. (2006). Eye movements during scene
inspection: A test of the saliency map hypothesis.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 18, 321-343.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1995). Prior knowledge and functionally
relevant features in concept learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 21, 449-468.
Zelazo, P. D. (2006). The Dimensional Change Card Sort
(DCCS): a method of assessing executive function in
children. Nature Protocols, 1, 297-301.
Zelazo, P. D., Frye, D. & Rapus, T. (1996). An age-related
dissociation between knowing rules and using them.
Cognitive Development , 11, 37-63.

1335

