UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Adaptation to Task Complexity Guarantee Success in Learning? Processes and
Conditions of Beneficial Adaptation in Self-Regulated Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40z280k0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bromme, Rainer
Pieschl, Stephanie
Porsch, Torsten
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Adaptation to Task Complexity Guarantee Success in Learning? Processes and
Conditions of Beneficial Adaptation in Self-Regulated Learning
Stephanie Pieschl (pieschl@uni-muenster.de),
Rainer Bromme (bromme@uni-muenster.de),
Torsten Porsch (t.porsch@uni-muenster.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Muenster,
Fliednerstr. 21, 48149 Muenster, Germany

Elmar Stahl (elmar.stahl@ph-freiburg.de)
University of Education,
Kunzenweg 21, 79117 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
Most theories of self-regulated learning (Winne & Hadwin,
1998) assume that adaptability is one key competency of selfregulation that should be associated with success in learning.
Within previous studies, learners indeed demonstrated
significant adaptation to task complexity; however, empirical
results so far do not indicate a straightforward positive
relationship with learning success (Pieschl, Bromme, & Stahl,
submitted). In this study, students (n = 129) solved three
differently complex tasks within a hypertext. Their learning
process was captured in detail and showed significant
adaptation to task complexity on all variables. For example,
students spent most time on the most complex task.
Additionally, we analyzed two important but independent
indicators of learning success: quantity and quality. In both
cases, successful students strongly adapted their learning to
task complexity. Additionally, quantitatively successful
students followed a high-speed strategy whereas qualitatively
successful students followed a deep-elaboration strategy,
especially for the most complex task.
Keywords: Adaptation, Self-Regulated Learning, Task
Complexity.

Theoretical Introduction
Most theories of self-regulated learning assume that
adaptation to external characteristics is a key competency of
good self-regulation and thus should be beneficial for
learning (Pintrich, 2004; Zimmerman, 2002).
More specifically, we refer to the COPES model of
studying (Winne & Hadwin, 1998) as guiding heuristic.
This model emphasizes the pivotal influence of given
learning tasks, learners’ (metacognitive) monitoring of task
features, and corresponding task interpretations on learning
(also see Butler & Cartier, 2004): In the first stage of
studying, good learners are assumed to form a thorough task
definition. This task definition should be influenced by the
task itself, for example by the complexity of the task. In
addition, learners’ should generate hypotheses about
missing or ambiguous information, for example they may
assume suitable learning strategies based on their
metacognitive knowledge. All subsequent stages are
impacted by these task definitions: Good learners are
assumed to generate idiosyncratic goals and construct an

elaborate plan for addressing the tasks during goal setting
and planning. In the enactment stage they are assumed to
execute this plan and within the adaptation stage they may
revise it. To summarize: Learning is influenced by external
conditions (task complexity) as well as by internal
conditions (learners’ metacognitive knowledge).
In accordance with this model, empirical studies show
that learners adapt their learning process substantially to
task complexity: For example, they plan more deep
processing learning strategies (Bromme, Pieschl, & Stahl,
submitted) and access more hypertext pages (Pieschl,
Bromme, & Stahl, submitted) for more complex tasks.
However, opposed to the idealized COPES model,
empirical results also show that learners demonstrate less
adequate self-regulation, use of fewer learning strategies,
and imprecise information search for complex tasks (Rouet,
2003; Veenman & Elshout, 1999; Winne & Jamieson-Noel,
2003). Furthermore, so far no consistent positive
relationship between adaptation to task complexity and
learning success could be demonstrated (Pieschl, Bromme,
& Stahl, submitted).
Based on these conflicting findings, we will address the
following research questions in this study: (1) Do learners
adapt their learning to task complexity? (2) Is adaptation to
task complexity beneficial for learning success? For the
second question, we will analyze two independent but
equally important aspects of learning success: quantity
(large number of correctly solved tasks) and quality (best
written argumentative essays). In order to answer these
questions, our participants had to solve differently complex
tasks within a hypertext about genetic fingerprinting.

Method
Participants
Participants of this study were students (n = 129, 35 males,
94 females) with a mean age of 24 years (SD = 4.48). On
average they studied in the fifth semester (SD = 3.26)
psychology (n = 51), other humanities (n = 40), sciences
(n = 17), or miscellaneous other majors (n = 21).

2638

Materials
Questionnaires about Learner Characteristics We
measured students’ prior domain knowledge about genetics.
We captured their epistemological beliefs with a domaingeneral questionnaire (Wood & Kardash, 2002) and a
domain-dependent questionnaire (Stahl & Bromme, 2007).
Furthermore, we measured their motivational orientation
(Balke & Stiensmeier-Pelster, 1995) and their need for
cognition (Bless, Wänke, Bohner, Fellhauer, & Schwarz
1994). None of these variables elicited any effects;
therefore, we will report no further information.
Tasks of Different Complexity Task complexity varied
according to Bloom’s revised taxonomy, which is based on
a hierarchy of cognitive operations as underlying rationale
(Anderson et al., 2001). Students worked on between 3 and
10 tasks. In our analyses we focus on three consecutive
tasks that were solved by more than 90 % of students: Task
A is a simple factual “remember” task with a multiplechoice format (“Which steps are not part of the mtDNA
analysis?” correct answer out of five alternatives:
“Determining a band pattern with gel electrophoresis.”),
task B is a complex “evaluate” task in an open-answer
format (“Imagine that you study biology. As part of a term
paper you have to discuss the suitability of Y-STR analysis
and STR analysis for paternity testing.” (excerpt)), and task
C is a factual “remember” task in an open-answer format
(“Your family is into genealogy and had mtDNA profiles of
all family members made. The experts speak of ‘matches’.
What does this term mean?” (excerpt)). Note that task
complexity in this sense is not necessarily related to task
difficulty as determined by the percentage of correct
solutions in a population: A task could be very simple in the
sense of Bloom (require a “remember” operation) but still
be very difficult because only few people know the answer
(example: What is the capital of Mongolia? Ulanbaataar).
We used task complexity as exemplified by tasks A
through C as within-subject repeated-measure variable in
our analyses. These three tasks enabled us to investigate all
aspects of students’ adaptation to task complexity (research
question 1): Do students enhance their processing if
confronted with a more complex task after a simple task (A
vs. B)? Do students decrease their processing if a simple
task requires less elaboration after a complex task (B vs. C)?
Learning Success We distinguish two desirable properties
of learning success: high quantity and quality.
More specifically, on the one hand, we consider students’
number of correctly solved tasks (NCT) as an indicator of
solution quantity. The best student was able to solve 10
tasks correctly and the worst students solved zero tasks
correctly (M = 4.34; SD = 1.84). Note that we analyzed all
tasks to compute NCT, not only tasks A through C. In our
analyses regarding research question 2, we compare extreme

groups of quantitatively successful students who solved five
or more tasks correctly (NCT+; n = 47) with students who
were quantitatively unsuccessful and solved three or fewer
tasks correctly (NCT-; n = 44).
On the other hand, we consider students’ score on the
most complex evaluate essay task B (CET) as an indicator
of solution quality (sample sub-scores: number of discussed
methods and quality of argumentation). The best students
received 14 points for the essay and the worst students three
points (M = 8.54; SD = 2.52). In our analyses regarding
research question 2, we compare extreme groups of
qualitatively successful students who received eleven points
or more (CET+, n = 30) with qualitatively unsuccessful
students who received six points or less (CET-, n = 29).
Hypertext Logfiles The hypertext about genetic
fingerprinting was created with MetaLinks (Murray, 2003)
and contains 106 pages. The hierarchical structure of the
hypertext
offers
introductory
material
that
is
comprehensible for laypersons as well as further details on
multiple levels which require expert understanding – at least
on the deepest hierarchical level. All technical terms are
explained in a hyperlinked glossary.
During task solution, logfiles of students’ navigation were
automatically generated. We computed multiple scores for
each of the three tasks: We analyzed students’ number of
accessed pages or nodes (NAN) and their time for task
completion (TTC) as rough indices of their elaboration.
Furthermore, we analyzed their use of hierarchical
commands (HC; example: go to the next deeper hierarchical
level for further details) as an indicator of how much
students follow the given structure of the hypertext and their
use “jump” commands (JC; example: use the table of
content to access any page) as an indicator of how much
students purposefully select content. We assumed that
students would demonstrate adaptation with regard to task
complexity on these variables (research question 1).
Task-Specific Questionnaire Students answered a taskspecific questionnaire for each of the three tasks; to remind
students of each specific task these tasks were always
visible on the page opposite the questions: We extracted
three scales: judged task complexity (9 items, α = .91;
sample item “This task was simple – complex.”), selfreported task satisfaction (5 items, α = .82; sample item:
“My strategies were inefficient – efficient.”), and selfreported depth of processing (10 items, α = .85; “The
strategy of critically evaluating hypertext pages is
unimportant – important.”). We assumed that students
would demonstrate adaptation with regard to task
complexity on these variables (research question 1).

2639

Procedure
Students were recruited by a posting at the University and
received 18 € as reimbursement for participation. They were
invited via e-mail and filled in an internet questionnaire
about their learner characteristics. It took approximately 15
minutes and measured their epistemological beliefs,
motivational orientation, and need for cognition. The main
part of the study was conducted with groups of 2 – 10
students and lasted approximately 2 hours: First, students’
prior domain knowledge was tested. Second, they received a
short training about hypertext navigation and read a printed
introduction to molecular biology on high school level (for
example about the structure of DNA). Third, students had
one hour time to solve tasks with the hypertext about
genetic fingerprinting. They were told that they should
concentrate on high-quality solutions rather than on speed.
At the beginning they were given a booklet with the first
five tasks. Upon request, they could get further booklets
with further tasks. Fourth, students had to fill in the taskspecific questionnaire for tasks A through C.

Results

significant (t (58) = 6.65, p < .001). For this analysis
students who were part of both successful groups, NCT+ as
well as CET+ (n = 8), were excluded; however, the same
results were obtained if these students were included in
either the NCT+ or the CET+ group. To conclude, our two
measures of learning success turned out to be independent
and students who solved many tasks correctly (NCT+)
worked on significantly more tasks than less successful
NCT- students and qualitatively successful CET+ students.
To answer our research questions, we computed repeatedmeasure ANOVAs for all questionnaire and logfile variables
separately; task complexity was used as repeated-measure
factor (tasks A, B, and C); groups with different learning
success were included as factor in each analysis (NCT or
CET). Significant adaptation (research question 1) was
diagnosed if the simple tasks A and C differed significantly
from the complex task B (effects of the repeated-measure
factor). A significant relation between adaptation and
learning success (research question 2) was diagnosed if
groups with either different quantitative (NCT) or
qualitative (CET) learning success differed significantly.

NCT: Quantitative Learning Success

We report only significant effects with p < .05. At first, we
analyzed our measures of learning success: Solution
quantity (NCT) proved to be independent of solution quality
(CET) (r = .01, n.s., n = 129). This is underlined by the
differential effects of these variables with regard to the
number of worked tasks (not necessarily solved correctly):
While NCT+ students worked on significantly more tasks
(M = 7.45, SD = 1.73) than NCT- students (M = 4.07,
SD = .97; t (89) = -11.38, p < .001), CET+ students’ number
of worked tasks (M = 5.40, SD = 1.59) did not differ
significantly from CET- students’ (M = 5.93, SD = 2.23). If
we compared quantitatively successful NCT+ students’
number of worked tasks (M = 7.55, SD = 1.78) with
qualitatively successful CET+ students’ number of worked
tasks (M = 4.77, SD = 1.07), this difference was also

Task-Specific Questionnaire For the scale judged task
complexity we found an effect of the repeated-measure
factor task complexity (F (2,78) = 118.72, p < .001,
ηp2 = .75) and a main effect of NCT groups (F (1,79) = 5.86,
p = .018, ηp2 = .07): The corresponding graph (Figure 1, left)
indicates that students judged task B to be more complex
than tasks A or C and that NCT+ students considered all
tasks less complex than NCT- students.
For the scale task satisfaction we found an effect of the
repeated-measure factor task complexity (F (2,78) = 22.06,
p < .001, ηp2 = .36) and a main effect of NCT groups
(F (1,79) = 6.81, p = .011, ηp2 = .08): The corresponding
graph (without Figure) indicates that students reported less
task satisfaction for task B than for tasks A or C and that

Figure 1: Students judged task complexity (left), their number of accessed nodes (middle), and their use of hierarchical
commands (right) as a function of task complexity (x-axis) and quantitative learning success (NCT groups).

2640

NCT+ students indicated higher task satisfaction for all
tasks than NCT- students.
For the scale depth of processing we found an effect of
the repeated-measure factor task complexity (F (2,78) =
87.73, p < .001, , ηp2 = .69): Students indicated deeper
processing for task B than for tasks A or C.

between NCT groups and task complexity (F (2,77) = 3.47,
p = .036, ηp2 = .08): The corresponding graph (without
Figure) indicates that students used more “jump” commands
for task B than for tasks A or C and that NCT+ students
used more “jump” commands for the complex task B than
NCT- students.

Hypertext Logfiles For students’ number of accessed nodes
(NAN) we found an effect of the repeated-measure factor
task complexity (F (2,77) = 70.95, p < .001, ηp2 = .65) and a
main effect of NCT groups (F (1,78) = 7.56, p = .007,
ηp2 = .09): The corresponding graph (Figure 1, middle)
indicates that students accessed more nodes for task B than
for tasks A or C and that NCT+ students accessed less nodes
across all tasks than NCT- students.
For students’ time for task completion (TTC) we found an
effect of the repeated-measure factor task complexity
(F (2,77) = 201.08, p < .001, ηp2 = .84), a main effect of
NCT groups (F (1,78) = 30.18, p < .001, ηp2 = .28), and an
interaction between task complexity and NCT groups
(F (2,77) = 3.95, p = .023, ηp2 = .10): The corresponding
graph (without Figure) indicates that students needed more
time for task B than for tasks A or C, that NCT+ students
needed less time across all tasks than NCT- students, and
that this effect was most pronounced for task B.
For students’ use of hierarchical commands (HC) we
found an effect of the repeated-measure factor task
complexity (F (2,77) = 64.55, p < .001, ηp2 = .63) and a
main effect of NCT groups (F (1,78) = 7.53, p = .008,
ηp2 = .09): The corresponding graph (Figure 1, right)
indicates that students used more hierarchical commands for
task B than for tasks A or C and that NCT+ students used
less hierarchical commands than NCT- students.
For students’ use of “jump” commands (JC) we found an
effect of the repeated-measure factor task complexity
(F (2,77) = 15.55, p < .001, ηp2 = .29) and an interaction

CET: Qualitative Learning Success
Task-Specific Questionnaire For the scale judged task
complexity we found an effect of the repeated-measure
factor task complexity (F (2,51) = 57.95, p < .001, ηp2 = .69)
and an interaction between CET groups and task complexity
(F (2,51) = 4.76, p = .013, ηp2 = .16): The corresponding
graph (Figure 2, left) indicates that students judged task B to
be more complex than tasks A or C and that CET+ students
considered tasks A and C less complex and task B more
complex than CET- students.
For the scale task satisfaction we found an effect of the
repeated-measure factor task complexity (F (2,51) = 14.47,
p < .001, ηp2 = .36): The corresponding graph (without
Figure) indicates that students reported less task satisfaction
for task B than for tasks A or C.
For the scale depth of processing we found an effect of
the repeated-measure factor task complexity (F (2,51) =
65.99, p < .001, ηp2 = .72) and an interaction between CET
groups and task complexity (F (2,51) = 7.97, p = .001,
ηp2 = .24): The corresponding graph (without Figure)
indicates that students reported deeper processing for task B
than for tasks A or C and that CET+ students indicated more
deep processing for task B than CET- students.
Hypertext Logfiles For students’ number of accessed nodes
(NAN) we found an effect of the repeated-measure factor
task complexity (F (2,51) = 54.76, p < .001, ηp2 = .68) and
an interaction between CET groups and task complexity

Figure 2: Students judged task complexity (left), their number of accessed nodes (middle), and their use of hierarchical
commands (right) as a function of task complexity (x-axis) and qualitative learning success (CET groups).

2641

(F (2,51) = 5.99, p = .005, ηp2 = .19): The corresponding
graph (Figure 2, middle) indicates that students accessed
more nodes for task B than for tasks A or C and that CET+
students accessed more nodes for task B than NCTstudents.
For students’ time for task completion (TTC) we found an
effect of the repeated-measure factor task complexity
(F (2,51) = 127.26, p < .001, ηp2 = .83), a main effect of
CET groups (F (1,52) = 13.52, p = .001, ηp2 = .21), and an
interaction between CET groups and task complexity
(F (2,51) = 11.59, p < .001, ηp2 = .31): The corresponding
graph (without Figure) indicates that students spent more
time on task B than on tasks A or C and that CET+ students
spent more time on task B than NCT- students.
For students’ use of hierarchical commands (HC) we
found an effect of the repeated-measure factor task
complexity (F (2,51) = 41.65, p < .001, ηp2 = .62) and an
interaction between CET groups and task complexity
(F (2,51) = 5.25, p = .008, ηp2 = .17): The corresponding
graph (Figure 2, right) indicates that students used more
hierarchical commands for task B than for tasks A or C and
that CET+ students used more hierarchical commands for
task B than NCT- students.
For students’ use of “jump” commands (JC) we found an
effect of the repeated-measure factor task complexity
(F (2,51) = 9.53, p < .001, ηp2 = .27): The corresponding
graph (without Figure) indicates that students used more
“jump” commands for task B than for tasks A or C.

Discussion
Do Learners Adapt to Task Complexity?
Students adapted their whole learning process significantly
to task complexity: We found significant effects of the
repeated-measure factor task complexity in all our analyses.
More detailed analyses comparing the different levels of this
repeated-measure factor (not reported) as well as the Figures
show that the simple remember tasks A and C differ
significantly from the complex evaluate task B on all
variables: Students considered task B more complex, they
reported less task satisfaction but more deep processing for
task B, and they used more pages (NAN), more time (TTC),
more hierarchical (HC) and jump commands (JC) for the
solution of task B. Thus, they significantly enhanced their
processing from a simple to a complex task (A vs. B) and
they significantly decreased their processing from a
complex to a simple task (B vs. C). Therefore, we can
answer our first research question affirmative.
Furthermore, these results build on results from other
studies: They replicate results from strictly controlled
experimental research (Luwel, Verschaffel, Onghena, & De
Corte, 2003) within a more ecologically valid learning
scenario. And they expand results from the preparatory
planning stages of self-regulated learning (Bromme, Pieschl,
& Stahl, submitted) to the whole process of learning (Winne

& Hadwin, 1998). Additionally, these results go beyond a
mere diagnosis of time-dependent “fluctuation” (Moos &
Azevedo, 2006) by systematically relating students’
judgments and actions to an external criterion such as task
complexity (Pieschl, in press).

Is Adaptation to Task Complexity Beneficial?
NCT: Quantitative Learning Success Quantitative success
indicated by the number of correctly solved tasks was
significantly related to the learning process; the NCT factor
elicited six main effects and three interaction effect: More
successful students (NCT+) considered tasks simpler,
indicated higher task satisfaction, accessed less pages
(NAN), spent less time on the complex task B (TTC), used
less hierarchical commands (HC), and used more jump
commands for the complex task B (JC) than their less
successful counterparts (NCT-).
As can be seen in Figure 1, the quantitatively successful
(NCT+) as well as the unsuccessful (NCT-) students
strongly adapted their learning process to task complexity.
Successful students (NCT+) were just more selective and
faster on all tasks (see main effects above); they seem to
follow a “less is more” and a “faster is better” heuristic. We
assume that these students initially set quantitative learning
goals in the preparatory stages of learning (for example: “I
want to solve as many tasks as possible.”) and selected
corresponding strategies to reach these goals in the
enactment stage (for example: “I only look at the most
essential information for each task.”). Consequently,
quantitatively successful students seem to be well-adapted
to their goals as well as with regard to task complexity.
CET: Qualitative Learning Success Qualitative success
indicated by the score of the essay for the complex evaluate
task was significantly related to the learning process; the
CET factor elicited six interaction effects and two main
effects: More successful students (CET+) considered task B
more complex, indicated more deep processing for task B,
accessed more pages for task B (NAN), spent more time on
task B (TTC), and used more hierarchical commands for
task B (HC) than their less successful counterparts (CET-).
As can be seen in Figure 2, the qualitatively successful
(CET+) as well as the unsuccessful (CET-) students adapted
their learning process to task complexity. However, this
adaptation was much stronger for successful students: Their
judgments and actions differed much more between the
simple remember tasks A and C and the complex evaluate
task B (interaction effects). They seem to follow a “put
special effort in complex tasks” heuristic. We assume that
these students initially set qualitative learning goals in the
preparatory stages of learning (for example: “I want to give
elaborate answers on complex questions.”) and selected
corresponding strategies to reach these goals in the
enactment stage (for example: “I exhaustively collect all
relevant information before answering a complex task.”).

2642

Consequently, qualitatively successful students seem to be
well-adapted to their goals as well as with regard to task
complexity.

Conclusion and Implications
All successful students adapted their learning strongly to
task complexity and tailored their whole learning process in
a meaningful way to their specific goals. Furthermore,
quantitatively unsuccessful students also adapted their
learning to task complexity but were slower and less precise
in their search for information. Qualitatively unsuccessful
students failed to adequately perceive differences in task
complexity and therefore did not adapt their learning
processes sufficiently. Thus, research question two can be
answered in the following way: For quantitative success no
relation between adaptation and success could be found,
differences were rather due to different speeds of task
solutions. For qualitative success on the other hand
adaptation to task complexity was clearly beneficial.
These results have implications for educational practice:
First, quantitative and qualitative success proved to be
independent and seemed to require different tactics.
Educators therefore should be aware of this distinction and
explicitly communicate task demands to students. Second,
quantitatively and qualitatively less successful students
might need different kinds of support: While quantitatively
unsuccessful students might profit best from repeated
practice to speed up their learning process, qualitatively
unsuccessful students additionally need scaffolding with
regard to adequate task interpretations.

Acknowledgments
This study was funded by the German Research Foundation
(DFG). We thank our student research assistants of this
project: Leoni Pytlik and Janina Wolters.

References
Anderson, L. W., Krathwohl, D. R., Airasian, P. W.,
Cruikshank, K. A., Mayer, R. E., Pintrich, P. R., et al.
(2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing.
A revision of Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives.
New York: Longman.
Balke, S., & Stiensmeier-Pelster, J. (1995). Die Erfassung
der motivationalen Orientierung - eine deutsche Form der
Motivational Orientation Scales (MOS-D). Diagnostica,
41(1), 80-94.
Bless, H., Wänke, M., Bohner, G., Fellhauer, R. F., &
Schwarz, N. (1994). Need for cognition: Eine Skala zur
Erfassung von Engagement und Freude bei
Denkaufgaben. Zeitschrift für Sozialpsychologie, 147154.
Bromme, R., Pieschl, S. & Stahl, E. (submitted).
Epistemological beliefs and the perception of task
complexity.

Butler, D. L., & Cartier, S. C. (2004). Promoting effective
task interpretation as an important work habit: A key to
successful teaching and learning. Teachers College
Record, 106(9), 1729-1758.
Luwel, K., Verschaffel, L., Onghena, P., & De Corte, E.
(2003). Analysing the adaptiveness of strategy choices
using the choice / no-choice method: The case of
numerosity judgments. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 15(4), 511-537.
Moos, D., & Azevedo, R. (2006). Examining the fluctuation
of strategy use during learning with hypermedia. In S. A.
Barab, K. E. Hay & D. T. Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 7th International Conference of the Learning Sciences
(pp. 481-487). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Murray, T. (2003). MetaLinks: Authoring and affordances
for conceptual and narrative flow in adaptive hyperbooks.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence and
Education, 13, 2-4.
Pieschl, S. (in press). Metacognitive calibration – an
extended conceptualization and potential applications.
Metacognition and Learning.
Pieschl, S., Bromme, R., & Stahl, E. (submitted). Does an
epistemological sensitization cause better adaptation to
task complexity?
Pintrich, P. R. (2004). A conceptual framework for
assessing motivation and self-regulated learning in
college students. Educational Psychology Review, 16(4),
385-407.
Rouet, J.-F. (2003). What was I looking for? The influence
of task specificity and prior knowledge on students'
search strategies in hypertext. Interacting with
Computers, 15, 409-428.
Stahl, E., & Bromme, R. (2007). CAEB. An instrument to
measure connotative aspects of epistemological beliefs.
Learning and Instruction, 17(6), 773-785.
Veenman, M., & Elshout, J. J. (1999). Changes in the
relationship between cognitive and metacognitive skills
during the acquisition of expertise. European Journal of
Psychology of Education, XIV(4), 509-523.
Winne, P. H., & Hadwin, A. F. (1998). Studying as selfregulated learning. In D. J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky & A. C.
Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and
practice (pp. 277-304). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Winne, P. H., & Jamieson-Noel, D. (2003). Self-regulating
studying by objectives for learning: Students' reports
compared to a model. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 28, 259-276.
Wood, P., & Kardash, C. M. (2002). Critical elements in the
design and analysis of studies of epistemology. In B. K.
Hofer & P. R. Pintrich (Eds.), Personal epistemology. The
psychology of beliefs about knowledge and knowing (pp.
231-260). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zimmerman, B. J. (2002). Becoming a self-regulated
learner: an overview. Theory into Practice, 41(2), 64-70.

2643

