UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Language Comprehension Affect Visual Motion Perception?
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3tf8w8w3
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Boroditsky, Lera
Dils, Alexia Toskos
Winawer, Jonathan
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

     Does Language Comprehension Affect Visual Motion Perception?
                                                Alexia Toskos Dils
                                                  Stanford University
                                               Jonathan Winawer
                                                  Stanford University
                                                 Lera Boroditsky
                                                  Stanford University
Abstract: What kinds of representations do people generate in the course of normal language processing? One
possibility is that people invoke imagery in service of language comprehension. If so, might there be overlap between
representations brought about by language and those brought about by perception itself? To examine this possibility,
we compare the effects of viewing real visual motion to the effects of listening to stories depicting visual motion on
the same subsequent perceptual task. Participants either view an upward or downward moving grating or listen to
a story describing upward or downward visual motion. Following each motion stimulus, participants are asked to
judge the direction of a field of moving dots. Viewing actual visual motion produces adaptation, making subjects
more likely to see an ambiguously moving dot display as moving in the direction opposite the adapting motion. We
investigated whether processing linguistic motion descriptions also affects subsequent perceptual motion judgments.
                                                           2062

