UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does the K-12 practice of mixing pictures and graphs contribute to students' 'graph-as-
picture' misconceptions?
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jq125tt
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Cox, Richard
Garcia, Grecia Garcia
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

   Does the K-12 practice of mixing pictures and graphs contribute to
                       students’ ’graph-as-picture’ misconceptions?
                                              Grecia Garcia Garcia
                                                 University of Sussex
                                                   Richard Cox
                                                 University of Sussex
Abstract: Graphs are often introduced to young students in a form (e.g. pictograms) that conflates them with
pictures. Numerous examples from the UK National Curriculum illustrate this practice (Garcia-Garcia & Cox, 2008).
We criticize this approach and suggest that it may negatively impact students’ acquisition of diagram comprehension
skills. The graph-as-picture (GAP) misconception (interpreting a diagrammatic representation as a picture) might be
an inadvertent consequence. We developed a method for detecting and remediating the GAP misconceptions in the
form of an interactive diagram system. Students use a large touch screen to perform a representation decision task
and to play an interactive ’racing car’ game. The student’s finger interactions with the on-screen ’car’ are dynamically
coupled to an adjacent speed/distance graph. Students are encouraged to experiment (e.g. by varying their ’driving’
speed on straight track sections and corners) and to observe the concomitant changes on the speed-distance graph.
                                                         3217

