UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Drawing on Experience: Use of Sketching to Evaluate Knowledge of Spatial Scientific
Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/41c0z359

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Forbus, Kenneth
Gentner, Dedre
Jee, Benjamin
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Drawing on Experience: Use of Sketching to Evaluate Knowledge
of Spatial Scientific Concepts
Benjamin D. Jee (b-jee@northwestern.edu)1
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)1
Kenneth Forbus (forbus@northwestern.edu)2
Bradley Sageman (brad@earth.northwestern.edu)3
David H. Uttal (duttal@northwestern.edu)1
1

Department of Psychology
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
3
Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60607 USA

2

causal knowledge about the formation of the structure. For
the fault depicted in Figure 1, the geoscientist would notice
that the block of rock above the fault plane has moved
downward relative to the block of rock below the plane.
This indicates that extensional forces deformed the rock
until it fractured along the fault plane.

Abstract
How does learning affect the structure of domain knowledge?
This question is difficult to address in domains such as
geoscience, where spatial knowledge is paramount. We
explore a new platform, called CogSketch, for collecting and
analyzing participants’ sketches as a means of discerning their
spatial knowledge. Participants with differing levels of
experience in the geosciences produced sketches of geologic
structures and processes on a tablet computer running
CogSketch software. This allowed for the analysis of not only
the spatial-relational structure of the sketches, but also the
process through which the sketches were constructed.

Introduction
The development of expertise is a central issue in cognitive
science and education. Understanding the paths by which
people acquire mastery in a domain is important both in
guiding the design of training in the domain and in shaping
theories of learning high-level knowledge (Bransford,
Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Chi, Glaser, & Farr, 1988). To
support student learning, cognitive scientists and educators
need to assess the mental models that students develop at
different points along the continuum of knowledge
acquisition. This is a challenge in domains that are intensely
spatial, such as geoscience, architecture and engineering,
because evaluating students’ spatial mental models requires
that students produce a spatial depiction; assessing such
sketches and designs is extremely laborious. In this paper
we describe a new method for eliciting students’ spatial
knowledge through sketching.

Spatial knowledge in Geoscience
Geoscience requires learning about complex, large-scale
processes that occur over large ranges of space and time.
These include the structure of the Earth’s interior, the
deformation processes that occur within its crust (e.g., folds,
faults, and fissures) and unifying both, the model of plate
tectonics. All these topics are deeply spatial.
Consider the simple concept of a fault (see Figure 1).
Faults are defined by the spatial relationship between the
blocks of rock along a fracture. For the experienced
geoscientist, this perceptual information is connected to

Figure 1. Example of a fault
Thus, simply to identify a basic geoscience concept,
students must understand relevant spatial structures, which
are intimately connected to causal knowledge. To take a
more complex example, consider subduction, depicted in
Figure 2. Understanding this process involves identifying
spatial structures – e.g., that one plate is moving underneath
another. Yet, noticing that structure is just the beginning.
The student must also understand the driving forces: that
the subduction process is causally related to both the process
of seafloor spreading, which creates new ocean crust at
divergent spreading zones, and differences in crustal density
between converging plates, which determines which plate
sinks below the other. In addition, subduction drives other
relevant geologic processes, such as volcanic activity.

2499

Figure 2. Diagram of Subduction

Because understanding the spatial structure of geological
phenomena is crucial, students are constantly exposed to
sketches of geoscience phenomena in their classes, in their
texts (e.g., Marshak, 2005), and in the field, where their
instructor is likely to ask them to sketch an outcrop and then
explain their sketch to deepen their understanding. Thus, as
part of their coursework, geoscience students are asked to
produce sketches showing key spatial configurations.
What are the effects of the highly spatial tasks that
geoscience students regularly engage in? Generally, as
people gain expertise in a domain, their mental models
emphasize key relational and goal-relevant structure, and
deemphasize object-level appearances (e.g., Chi, et al.,
1988; Gentner & Ratterman, 1991; Jee & Wiley, 2007).
Thus, geoscience students may interpret geoscience
diagrams, photographs, and outcrops in terms of their
relational structure, especially key spatial relations that
reflect geologic activity. Novices, however, may focus on
objects and their attributes.

Sketching as an assessment of spatial knowledge
How can students’ mental models of spatial phenomena be
assessed – from relatively simple models for concepts such
as fault, to complex models of phenomena such as plate
tectonics? Clearly, verbal assessments will fall short
because of the difficulty of conveying complex spatial
relations through speech. The ideal solution would be to ask
learners to draw the relevant structures. Sketches can reflect
spatial and causal knowledge of the domain (Goel, 1995;
Suwa & Tversky, 1997). Vosniadou & Brewer (1992), for
example, used children’s sketches to help discern their
model of the Earth and solar system. With respect to
geoscience expertise, people with more experience would be
expected to draw geoscience-related images in terms of the
spatial relations that reflect geologic activity. Moreover, if
they engage a spatial model while interpreting such images,
people with geoscience experience may be more likely to
begin their sketches with relational information.
In addition to probing spatial and causal knowledge,
another advantage of using student’s own constructions is
that sketching and handwriting can reveal implicit aspects of
people’s representations that are lost in speech. For
example, Landy and Goldstone (2007) found that when
people copy equations, the distance between elements of
their handwritten expressions reflect their conceptual
understanding. Specifically, students who understand the
calculations tend to group pairs of operations that must be
done earlier in the equation more closely in space than pairs
that are done later in the calculation. Similarly, Cheng and
Rojas-Anaya (2007) asked people at different levels of
expertise to copy a set of equations using a computer stylus
and tablet. The number of long pauses that participants took
while writing each equation was used as an index of the size
of the chunks in memory (the fewer long pauses, the larger
the presumed size of the chunks). As predicted, participants

with greater expertise took fewer long pauses, suggesting
that they analyzed the equations into larger chunks.
These findings offer new possibilities for the assessment
of learning and knowledge in spatial domains. However, the
temporal and spatial qualities of students’ drawings have
been difficult to study because of technological limitations.
One method is to score videotapes of participants sketching,
but this of course is highly time-intensive. Alternatively,
one can manipulate the sketching task so that the ordering of
the parts of the sketch to be later analyzed. This method is
used with the Rey-Osterreith Complex Figure test (a widely
used assessment of neurological disorder), in which the
participant uses a different colored pencil for different parts
of their sketch. Yet, this would clearly be prohibitive in a
classroom, and does not record finer-grained ordering.
This paper describes a new program for collecting and
scoring sketches called CogSketch, and show how it can be
used to assess student’s knowledge. CogSketch accepts and
spatially analyzes people’s drawings. It takes advantage of
recent advances in computer technology that make it
possible to record ink strokes on a computer screen, and to
record their spatial and temporal properties with far less
effort than previous methods.
Our goal in this initial study was to determine whether
participants’ sketches would provide information diagnostic
of expertise, and, if so, to characterize this information. A
further goal was to determine whether CogSketch could
help automate the process of obtaining and scoring student
sketches. To do this, we asked geoscience students and
novices (psychology students) to sketch using a Tablet PC
running CogSketch software. The materials were of two
kinds: geological formations and causal diagrams. The
specific task was also varied, from tracing to copying to
copying from memory.

CogSketch as a research tool
CogSketch (Forbus et al., 2008) is a program that
constructs representations from human-drawn sketches and
other line drawings. CogSketch is an open-domain, generalpurpose sketch understanding system. Most sketch
understanding systems focus on recognizing the entity that
the user is sketching. CogSketch is based on the insight that
when humans communicate through sketches, they describe
what they are sketching verbally, rather than relying on
visual recognition. Similarly, CogSketch allows users to tell
it what they are sketching via a specialized interface. Thus
it focuses on capturing and interpreting the spatial relations
among (and within) entities, including perceptual and spatial
organization.
Every sketch drawn in CogSketch is made up of glyphs.
A glyph is a shape or object that has been drawn by the user.
Each glyph is represented internally as ink—essentially the
lines drawn by the user when creating the glyph—and
content—a conceptual entity representing what the glyph
depicts. The user presses a button to indicate that they are
about to start drawing a glyph, then they draw as many ink

2500

strokes as they want, and end the glyph by pressing the
button again. As a separate step, users can describe what
they intend a glyph to mean by labeling it with either a
concept from its knowledge base or with a word or phrase.
Importantly, CogSketch records a time stamp along with
every ink point, and exports it in a format easily digested by
analysis tools. This allows experimenters to examine the
time sequence of events in sketching in great detail, without
having to rely on video data capture and scoring. Because
the user has manually segmented their ink into glyphs, there
is no ambiguity about which parts belong to which depicted
entity. Because users have used the interface to label their
glyphs, there is no need to analyze video and audio
transcripts after the fact to ascertain what labels should be
used for the parts of a sketch. Thus the interface design
greatly facilitates data gathering.

Examining geoscience knowledge through sketches
In this research, we explored differences in the structure
of people’s geoscience knowledge by analyzing their
sketching. Participants with differing levels of experience in
geoscience produced sketches of geologic structures and
processes on a tablet computer running CogSketch software.
Because CogSketch requires people to label their sketches,
the finished sketches provide a rich source of data about
their spatial and causal models. Further, because CogSketch
records the order in which elements are drawn, the data also
speak to the process through which the sketches were
constructed.
The specific aims of this study were (a) to determine
whether automatic scoring of sketches could be used to
detect differences in geoscience knowledge; (b) to explore
differences in the structure of geoscience knowledge
between geoscience students and novices by analyzing their
sketches; (c) to explore differences in the kind of task –
tracing, copying, and reproducing from memory; and, most
speculatively, (d) to determine whether differences in
dynamic temporal construction of sketches are diagnostic of
expertise in geoscience.
There were two kinds of images: causal diagrams and
photographs of geological formations. These involved
different specific questions and predictions. With the causal
diagrams, the questions were whether geoscience students
(relative to novices) include more causal information,
whether they focus more on depicting relational information
and less on depicting the objects present, and whether they
begin their sketches with this causal/relational information1.
For the geologic formations, the questions were whether
geoscience students included more geoscience-relevant
structures, and if they represent these structures differently.
Participants were asked to sketch geoscience-related
images under various task conditions: tracing, copying, and
1

A pilot study by Louis Gomez (personal communication) found
that biology students copying a diagram would start sketching at
the beginning of a process, while novices would start with visually
salient parts of the diagram.

drawing from memory. In addition, to distinguish whether
the observed differences were related to differences in
spatial reasoning vs. drawing ability, participants also
sketched control images. If geoscience students use spatial
and causal models to sketch geoscience images, they should
differ from novices in their geoscience sketches but not on
the control sketches.

Method
Participants
20 participants from Northwestern University took part: 10
geoscience students (6 graduate students and 4 undergrads)
and 10 undergraduates with no prior course experience in
geoscience. All were run individually.

Materials
A set of 12 images were used (Table 1). Nine of these were
related to basic geoscience content; three depicted a causal
process, and six were photos of geological formations. The
remaining three images were controls unrelated to
geoscience, but comparable to the geoscience images in that
they contained parts arranged in intricate patterns. One was
a causal diagram (pressure cooker), and the others were
photos of moderately complex, layered objects (fruit crosssection and lasagna slice).
Table 1. Images used in the present study.
Image
Description
1) Carbon cycle

The cycling of carbon through the
atmosphere, hydrosphere, and geosphere

2) Subduction

A slab of ocean crust subducts beneath a
slab of continental crust

3) Mountain
formation

Volcanism associated with subduction
builds a mountain belt

4) Fault

A fracture showing evidence of movement

5) Faulted fold

A stack of rock layers that has been
deformed plastically and later faulted
(brittle failure)

6) Rock strata

Distinct layers of rock stacked vertically

7) Multiple folds

Folds in several locations

8) Syncline

A concave downward fold

9) Unconformity

A surface separating strata of different ages,

10) Pressure cooker

A sealed vessel creating high pressure

11) Fruit section

Cross-section of glade mallow fruit

12) Lasagna

Italian dish with alternating layers

Note. Images 1-9 are geoscience-related, and images 10-12 are
control; bold font = diagram; regular font = photo.

Tasks
Each participant completed three sketching tasks. In each
task, the participant was given up to 3 minutes to complete
their sketch. In the tracing task, an image was displayed on
the computer screen, and the participant traced it. In the
copying task, a printout of an image was presented next to
the computer screen, and the participant drew the image on

2501

the screen. In the memory task, a printout of an image was
presented for 30 seconds and then removed. The participant
then drew the image from memory on the computer screen.

Procedure
All sketches were made on a tablet laptop computer running
CogSketch software. The participant used a stylus to draw
on the screen. The participant was first given a brief tutorial
and practice with using the software. The participant was
then given an overview of the tasks and procedure. For each
of these tasks—tracing, copying, and drawing from
memory—they were asked to try to draw the image to the
best of their ability, to use the glyph function to divide the
sketch into the parts that seem natural to them, and to label
the parts as they saw fit. They were given up to 3 minutes
per sketch, with a warning 1 minute before the time limit.
All participants completed the tasks and sketched the
images in the same order: tracing task, copying task, and
then memory task. The images were assigned such that each
task included 1 causal diagram, 2 geoscience-related photos,
and 1 control image. The images for the tracing task were
1, 4, 5, and 10; for the copying task, 2, 6, 11, and 7; and for
the memory task, 8, 3, 12, and 9.

Results
Sketches of causal diagrams
For the causal diagrams (Images 1, 2, 3, and 10)
participants’ sketches were analyzed in terms of the number
of relations and objects represented: specifically, the overall
proportion of relations in the sketches, and the number of
relations in the first two parts sketched (an indication of
whether the initial focus was relational). Figure 3 displays a
representative sample of geoscience-related sketches from
experienced and inexperienced participants. Each part/glyph
in each sketch was coded as either an object –a part that
depicted some tangible entity – or a relation – a part that
1. Carbon Cycle

depicted the behavior or connectivity of either a tangible or
intangible entity, e.g., a force. The information in both the
glyphs and their labels was used for this classification. A
part was scored as a relation if either the glyph itself
contained relational information, such as an arrow
indicating movement, or its label described the part in terms
of its relation to other entities. Thus, even if the participant
did not label a glyph in a relational way, it would still be
coded as a relation if the glyph contained at least one
symbol that related it to other parts of the sketch. Here and
throughout the study, scoring was done with all identifying
information removed from each sketch.
The results for the causal diagrams are shown in Table 2.
As predicted, the geoscience students’ sketches had a higher
proportion of relations (M = .42, SD = .32) than the novices’
(M = .08, SD = .11), F(1, 69) = 48.25, MSE = 0.04, p <.01.
This difference was specific to the geoscience images; no
such difference appeared for the control image, as
confirmed by an Experience Level x Image interaction, F(3,
69) = 5.19, MSE = 0.04, p <.01.
Table 2. Relational Content of Sketches of Causal Diagrams
Image
Mean proportion
Mean relations in
of relations
1st two parts
Geo
Novice
Geo
Novice
Geoscience-related
1) Carbon

a

.03 (.06)

a

.11 (.17)

.63 (.41)

2) Subduction

.53 (.30)

3) Mountain

.27 (.19)

b

.09 (.10)

10) Cooker

.21 (.13)

.08 (.08)

a

.10 (.21)

a

.44 (.46)

.00 (.00)

.30 (.42)

.13 (.23)

.60 (.46)

Control
.00 (.00)

.00 (.00)

Note. Geo = Geoscience students; SDs in parentheses; a = p <.01; b
= p <.05.

2. Subduction

3. Mountain formation

A

B

Figure 3. Sample of causal diagram sketches by geoscience students (row A) and novices (row B)

2502

A second set of analyses examined the mean number of
relations in the first two parts that participants sketched.
Again, the geoscience students drew a higher proportion of
relations (M = .22, SD = .06) than the novices (M = .04, SD
= .06), F(1, 71) = 5.23, MSE = 0.09, p <.05. This difference
was specific to the geoscience images, as confirmed by an
Experience Level x Image interaction, F(3, 71) = 5.23, MSE
= 0.09, p <.05. For two of the three geoscience images, the
geoscience students drew a significantly higher proportion
of relations, Fs > 10.17, ps <.01, but for the third (image 3)
and the control image, there was no significant difference Fs
< 1.47, ns.
Overall, participants with geoscience experience had a
higher proportion of relations in their sketches of
geoscience-related images. This is clear from the sample
sketches in Figure 3. It is worth noting that these effects
were most striking for the two images (Carbon cycle and
Subduction) for which the diagram was present during
sketching. For the Carbon cycle, the diagram was actually
traced. Thus, these effects are not due to differences in
memory for the images.

shown in Table 3. Geoscience students drew a higher
proportion of key structures (M = .83, SD = .26) than the
novices (M = .53, SD = .33), F(1, 147) = 63.68, MSE = 0.06,
p <.01. This difference was specific to the geoscience
images; no such difference appeared for the control images,
as confirmed by an Experience Level x Image interaction,
F(7, 147) = 2.55, MSE = 0.06, p <.05.
Table 3. Key Structures in Participants’ Sketches
Image
Geo
Novice
Geoscience-related
4) Fault

.73 (.39)

.21 (.22)

5) Faulted fold

.56 (.12)

.30 (.20)

6) Rock strata

.90 (.21)

.68 (.34)

7) Multiple folds

.67 (.38)

.30 (.23)

8) Syncline

1.0 (.00)

.59 (.20)

9) Unconformity

.92 (.15)

.45 (.27)

Total

.80 (.29)

.43 (.29)

Sketches of geological formations

11) Fruit

.86 (.17)

For the photographs of geologic formations (Images 4-9),
and control photos (11 and 12), we analyzed the sketches in
terms of the number of key structures depicted. Figure 4
displays a representative sample of sketches from
experienced and inexperienced participants. A key geologic
structure was defined as a visible feature that reflected a
geologic event (e.g., the folding of rock). These key
structures were identified a priori by one of the authors of
the present paper (B. Sageman), who listed 2-4 key
structures for each geoscience photo. Key structures for the
control images were assessed by an independent rater.
The results for the photos of geologic formations are

12) Lasagna

.97 (.13)

.91 (.08)

Total

.92 (.15)

.84 (.23)

Original Image (key structures indicated)

Control
.77 (.24)

Note. Geo = Geoscience students; SDs in parentheses.

Overall, the analyses suggest that geoscience experience
affected whether participants’ sketches of photos included
key geological structures. Geoscience students were more
likely to draw these structures. This is clearly seen in Figure
4. No such difference was found for the control images,
which were sketched similarly by geoscience students and
novices (arguing against drawing ability as a factor in the
results).

Geoscience student sketch

Novice sketch

Figure 4. Sample of geological formation sketches by geoscience students and novices participants

2503

Discussion
Our main goals were to see if sketches would reveal
expertise-related differences in spatial knowledge within
geoscience, and if automatic recording of online sketching
by CogSketch could be used to detect differences in
geoscience knowledge. The answer to both questions is yes.
When sketching causal diagrams, geoscience students
showed greater focus on causal relations and processes in
their sketches, both overall and in their initial steps. For
geological formations, geoscience students included a
higher proportion of key geologic structures. No such
differences appeared with non-geoscience images. Overall,
this application of CogSketch was successful in
distinguishing participants with different levels of domain
knowledge.
In addition to validating CogSketch as a research
instrument, and a potentially useful diagnostic instrument
for expertise, the present study revealed interesting
differences in the structure of geoscience knowledge.
Experienced participants tended to include more relational
information, such as arrows and relational labels, in their
sketches of causal diagrams. This difference probably
reflects participants’ mental models of the systems (Gentner
& Stevens, 1983). Heiser and Tversky (2002) found that
people were more likely to produce sketches with arrows
when they were provided with a functional description of a
system compared to when they were presented with an
object-level description. The present findings suggest that
geoscience students represented the pictured systems
functionally, based on their spatial/causal mental models,
whereas novices, lacking such knowledge, represent them
pictorially. Indeed, the sample sketches in Figure 3 support
such an explanation.
We also found, as predicted, that geoscience students
included more key structures in their sketches of geological
formations. Surprisingly, this difference showed up strongly
even in the tracing task, where we might have expected no
difference. Again, this result suggests that domain-specific
differences in spatial knowledge influenced how
participants analyzed and represented the photos that they
sketched. However, because in this study the specific
images were confounded with the tasks, further research
will be necessary to decouple the image and task variables.
Future research will also explore using CogSketch to
automatically score for the key structures, by carrying out
an analogy between an expert’s sketch and a participant’s or
student’s sketch.
In conclusion, using the CogSketch platform and a set of
varied sketching tasks appears to be a rich source of
evidence for diagnosing differing levels of domain
knowledge. The approach of the current work could be
applied broadly to other domains that involve spatial
learning, to educational settings, and to tests that use
sketching as a diagnostic of knowledge or mental
impairment. The analysis of people’s sketching behavior

promises to reveal much about the course of learning in
spatial domains.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF grant SBE-0541957,
the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC). The
authors thank Thomas Shipley, Cathy Manduca, Basil
Tikoff, and Carol Ormand for their contributions to this
project, Nathaniel Goldin-Meadow for assistance with data
collection, and Jeffrey Usher for technical assistance with
CogSketch.

References
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (Eds.). (2000).
How people learn: Mind, brain, experience and school.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Cheng, P. C.-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2008). Measuring
mathematic formula writing competence: An application
of graphical protocol analysis. Proceedings of the
Thirtieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 869-874). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Chi, M. T. H., Glaser, R., & Farr, M. (Eds.). (1988). The
nature of expertise. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Forbus, K., Usher, J., Lovett, A., Lockwood, K., & Wetzel,
J. (2008). CogSketch: Open-domain sketch understanding
for cognitive science research and for education.
Proceedings of the Fifth Eurographics Workshop on
Sketch-Based Interfaces and Modeling. Annecy, France.
Gentner, D., & Ratterman, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on thought and language:
Interrelations in development (pp. 257-277). London:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Stevens, A. L. (Eds.). (1983). Mental
models. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goel, V. (1995). Sketches of thought. MIT Press,
Cambridge: MA.
Heiser, J., & Tversky, B. (2006). Arrows in comprehending
and producing mechanical diagrams. Cognitive Science,
30, 581-592.
Jee, B. D., & Wiley, J. (2007). How goals affect the
organization and use of domain knowledge. Memory &
Cognition, 35, 837-851.
Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. L. (2007). Formal notations are
diagrams: Evidence from a production task. Memory &
Cognition, 35, 2033-2040.
Marshak, S. (2005). Earth: portrait of a planet. W. W.
Norton & Company, New York: NY.
Suwa, M., & Tversky, B. (1997). What architects and
students perceive in their sketches: A protocol analysis,
Design Studies, 18, 385-403.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of
the earth: A study of conceptual change in childhood.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 535-585.

2504

