UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dynamic Integration of Pragmatic Expectations and Real-World Event Knowledge in
Syntactic Ambiguity Resolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/31w0n7pn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bicknell, Klinton
Rohde, Hannah

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dynamic Integration of Pragmatic Expectations and
Real-World Event Knowledge in Syntactic Ambiguity Resolution
Klinton Bicknell (kbicknell@ling.ucsd.edu)
Department of Linguistics, UC San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #108, La Jolla, CA 92093-0108 USA

Hannah Rohde (hannah@northwestern.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Northwestern University
2016 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract
This paper presents the results of a sentence completion study
and a self-paced reading experiment involving a relative clause
attachment ambiguity. Our results provide evidence that comprehenders resolve local structural ambiguity during incremental sentence processing by combining expectations about upcoming discourse continuations with their knowledge of typical relationships between event participants. We interpret these
results as supporting an account in which comprehenders dynamically integrate cues from an in-principle unbounded range
of sources during language comprehension.
Keywords: Syntactic ambiguity resolution; discourse processing; event knowledge.

Introduction
Psycholinguistic research shows that comprehenders rely on
cues of many different types during language processing.
We distinguish between two general explanations of the way
that comprehenders store and use these cues. One possibility is that comprehenders appeal to a broad set of knowledge
sources including discourse pragmatics and real-world event
knowledge, integrating cues from this arbitrarily large set of
sources as they incrementally process a sentence (an ‘arbitrary integration’ account). As Willits, Sussman, and Amato
(2008) point out, however, another possibility is that comprehenders merely appear to be integrating cues from many
sources, but instead are making use of simpler and easier to
calculate statistical contingencies (correlated with knowledge
sources such as event knowledge and discourse pragmatics)
such as cooccurrence patterns (a ‘simple statistics’ account).
There is evidence from a variety of domains that comprehenders make use of both simple and more complex statistical models of linguistic events. For example, eye movements
during reading can be significantly predicted using very simple probabilities such as the transitional probability from one
word to the next (McDonald & Shillcock, 2003) as well as
more complex probabilities such as the likelihood of a word
given the preceding syntactic structure (Demberg & Keller,
2008). Also, the omission of optional material in language
production (e.g., the rate of omission of optional that) has
been found to vary with the predictability of the next word
given the preceding syntactic context within the sentence
(Levy & Jaeger, 2007).
There is also evidence that online processing is sensitive to
a broader set of knowledge sources including discourse pragmatics and real-world event knowledge. For example, Simner

and Pickering (2005) show that expectations about upcoming discourse continuations are sensitive to the discourse’s
causal structure. Comprehenders also appear to readily integrate their real-world knowledge of typical events during
processing. Priming studies have shown facilitation between
verbs and their typical agents, patients, instruments, and locations (e.g., arresting∼criminal or spoon∼stirred) within
250 ms (McRae, Hare, Elman, & Ferretti, 2005; Ferretti, Kutas, & McRae, 2007). Experiments using self-paced reading
and event-related potentials have also shown that comprehenders’ use of event knowledge extends beyond single verb-toparticipant dependencies and includes more complex knowledge about specific combinations of verbs, agents, patients,
and instruments (Bicknell, Elman, Hare, & McRae, 2008;
Matsuki, McRae, Tabaczynski, Elman, & Hare, 2008). Together, these studies suggest that comprehenders store a large
body of knowledge about typical events and the relationships
between event participants, and can deploy that knowledge
rapidly during language comprehension.
In a recent paper, however, Willits et al. (2008) present evidence that some of the results mentioned above as support for
the use of real-world event knowledge can also be modeled
using simple word co-occurrence patterns. Specifically, they
show that in Ferretti et al.’s (2007) priming study, the probability of the target occurring within 10 words of the prime in
Wikipedia is higher in precisely those conditions that showed
significant facilitation. Willits et al. argue that much of the
evidence standardly taken to support the integration of a wide
variety of knowledge sources can likewise be explained by
simpler statistical models over linguistic events.
To test whether the simple statistics account is sufficient,
we will present data that seem to demand an account in which
comprehenders dynamically combine cues from real-world
knowledge and discourse pragmatics during incremental sentence comprehension. In order to distinguish these two accounts, we refine the design of one of the existing studies that
could perhaps be reinterpreted in terms of simple statistics
(Rohde, Levy, & Kehler, 2008).

Rohde, Levy, & Kehler (2008)
Rohde et al. (2008) used contexts in which the syntactic attachment site of a relative clause is temporarily ambiguous.

1216

(1) John detests/babysits the children of the musician who...
IC
NonIC
high
low
a. ...are generally arrogant and rude
[high attach.]
b. ...is generally arrogant and rude
[low attach.]
In these materials, a relative clause (RC) starting with who
can be used to modify either of the noun phrases (NPs) in the
preceding complex NP. The RC in (1a) is said to attach high
to the children, the NP in the higher position in the syntactic
structure; the RC in (1b) is said to attach low to the musician, the possessor NP within the the complex NP. Rohde et
al. manipulated whether the matrix clause contained an implicit causality (IC) verb or not. IC verbs are a set of verbs
that have been shown to pattern together in that they describe
events in which one individual is implicated as central to the
event’s cause (e.g., detest, adore, criticize, congratulate; first
discussed in Garvey & Caramazza, 1974). The IC verbs in
their study were crucially all object-biased IC verbs – verbs
like detest which describe an event whose cause is attributed
primarily to the second NP, the direct object.
The results from Rohde et al.’s studies with sentencecompletion and self-paced reading methodology show that
low-attaching RCs are more frequent and easier to process
following non-IC matrix clauses, but that the reverse holds in
IC contexts: high-attaching RCs are more frequent and easier
to process in contexts with IC matrix clause verbs.
Rohde et al. interpret this result as follows: for non-IC
verbs, comprehenders make use of the default low-attachment
preference that has been reported for English RCs (see review
in Mitchell & Brysbaert, 1998, though cf. Gilboy, Sopena,
Clifton, & Frazier, 1995 for discussion of variation in attachment preferences based on NP animacy and definiteness).
For IC verbs, however, Rohde et al. argue that comprehenders use a combination of three discourse-level pragmatic factors: (i) an expectation given an IC verb that the next clause
will provide an explanation (Kehler, Kertz, Rohde, & Elman,
2008), (ii) a bias in a subsequent explanation to re-mention
the causally-implicated object NP of object-biased IC verbs
(Garvey & Caramazza, 1974; McKoon, Greene, & Ratcliff,
1993; inter alia), and (iii) the knowledge that an RC can be
used to provide an explanation. The use of the term ‘pragmatic factors’ here is intended to include those cues that guide
the establishment of discourse coherence and coreference.
Applied to example (1), Rohde et al.’s account maintains
that encountering the verb detest increases comprehenders’
expectations for an upcoming explanation (one that will explain why John detests the children of the musician), whereas
encountering the verb babysit creates no such expectation. At
that point, if comprehenders are implicitly aware that explanations following a verb like detest are likely to be about the
object NP (the children) and they are implicitly aware that
the upcoming RC can be used to provide such an explanation,
then they will prefer RCs that attach to the children more so
than they will following a non-IC verb like babysit. Crucially,
the object NP the children occupies the high-attachment position, so that the bias to provide an explanation centered

around the children following detest but not babysit yields
attachment preferences that differ by verb type.
From this result, it appears that comprehenders are combining several discourse-level biases and expectations as they
make their attachment decision mid-sentence. This study,
however, could also be explained by a simpler statistical
model. Just as comprehenders appear to track the subcategorization probabilities of different specific verbs (Trueswell,
Tanenhaus, & Kello, 1993), they may keep track of the probabilities of high- versus low-attaching RCs following individual verbs, the verb-specific attachment height model. It is
certainly possible that, given the inferencing described above,
there is a statistical pattern present in language data in which
more high attaching RCs follow IC verbs than non-IC verbs,
so it is plausible that language users could make use of that.
The next section describes how we refine the design of Rohde
et al. (2008) to tease apart these two accounts.

Comparing the Two Accounts
The intuition behind our refinement is that since the verbspecific attachment height model predicts object-biased IC
verbs to have a consistent bias for high-attaching RCs, then
these attachment preferences should not interact with other
cues drawn from knowledge beyond the immediate sentence,
including, for example, cues related to the specific individuals
mentioned in the complex NP and the real-world relationship
that holds between those individuals. On the other hand, if,
as in the arbitrary integration account, comprehenders are integrating several pragmatic and real-world knowledge cues
together for disambiguation, then the bias for high-attaching
RCs following IC verbs should interact with other information sources.
In our materials, we use the basic design from Rohde et al.
(2008) with IC and non-IC verbs followed by temporarily ambiguous RCs, but we add one more factor: the ‘responsibility
relationship’ that stereotypically holds between the individuals referenced by the two NPs:
(2) John criticizesIC /resemblesnon−IC . . .
a. the orthodontist of the kids who. . . [non-responsible]
b. the father of the kids who. . .
[responsible]
At an intuitive level, a father is responsible for his kids’ behavior in a way that an orthodontist is not. In Rohde et al.’s
materials, the responsibility relation between the individuals
in the complex NP was not tightly controlled, but most items
exhibited a non-responsible relation like the one in (2a). If,
as under the arbitrary integration account, comprehenders are
combining pragmatic and real-world knowledge during incremental processing, we predict this sort of responsibility relation to modulate the effect of IC verbs.
The crucial intuition is that the reason that someone criticizes an orthodontist of some kids is likely to center around
the orthodontist’s behavior, whereas the reason that someone
criticizes the father of some kids may instead center around
the kids’ behavior precisely because the father is, to some

1217

extent, responsible for kids’ behavior. More specifically, according to Rohde et al.’s interpretation of their results (as in
the description given above), encountering the IC verb criticize increases expectations for an upcoming explanation (one
that will explain why John criticizes the orthodontist/father),
whereas encountering the verb resemble creates no such expectation. Furthermore, just as under Rohde et al. (2008)’s
account, comprehenders must be implicitly aware that an RC
can be used to provide an explanation.
The responsibility relationship gives rise to the difference
in predictions in the final part of the reasoning. When no responsibility relationship exists (2a), the predictions replicate
Rohde et al.: An RC providing an explanation about why the
orthodontist is criticized is likely to attach high to orthodontist. On the other hand, when a responsibility relationship
does exist (2b), an RC providing an explanation for why the
father is criticized could still attach high to father, but additionally, it could attach low to kids, since a father is somewhat
responsible for his kids’ behavior (e.g., John criticizes the father of the kids who are often seen playing in traffic). Thus,
our predictions are that, for non-responsible cases, IC verbs
should increase the proportion of high attachments relative to
non-IC verbs, but for responsible cases, IC verbs will not increase the proportion of high attachments by as much – and in
fact may even decrease them. Verification of these predictions
would represent evidence that comprehenders can combine
knowledge from a range of sources together during incremental comprehension, and are unlikely to be relying solely on
linguistic cooccurrence generalizations.
The remainder of this paper describes two experiments that
test these predictions. We present the results of a norming
study to evaluate the responsibility relations between pairs of
individuals. We then present the results of an offline sentencecompletion experiment that demonstrates that RC attachment
biases differ, as per the above predictions, in contexts with
responsible and non-responsible pairs. Finally, we show that
the attachment biases revealed in the offline study influence
comprehenders’ online processing in a self-paced reading experiment.

Norming Study: Responsibility Relations
The norming study was conducted to probe comprehenders’
intuitions about the strength of the responsibility relation between individuals in a set of NP pairs.

Methods
Participants 22 students from UC San Diego participated
for course credit. All were monolingual English speakers.
Materials We selected 44 NPs (e.g., the kids) and 2 related
NPs for each, one predicted to be responsible for first NP (the
father) and one not (the orthodontist). These were combined
with object-biased IC verbs into plausibility questions, shown
for one item in (3a-b).
(3) a. [Non-Responsible]

Imagine an orthodontist of

some kids. How plausible would it be for someone to
criticize the orthodontist for something the kids did?
b. [Responsible] Imagine a father of some kids. How
plausible would it be for someone to criticize the father for something the kids did?
We selected two IC verbs for each item, and half the participants saw the item with a negative polarity IC verb (criticize)
and half with a positive polarity IC verb (congratulate).
Procedure We administered a web-based questionnaire
that contained questions like those in (3a-b). Participants
rated the plausibility of the scenarios on a scale from 1 to
7 with 1 being least plausible and 7 being most plausible.
Participants responded to all 44 items in both the responsible
condition and the non-responsible condition, all in a separately randomized order, for a total of 88 responses.

Results and Discussion
For each item, we calculated the mean rating for each combination of IC verb (positive/negative polarity) and responsibility relation (responsible/non-responsible), yielding 4 scores
per item. We then computed the mean effect size of responsibility for each item with each verb by subtracting the rating
for the non-responsible condition from that for the responsible. We used these scores to select the 40 strongest items (and
best polarity for each item) for use in the sentence-completion
experiment. For the 40 best items, the mean plausibility rating
for the non-responsible condition was 2.1 (SE 0.1), and for the
responsible condition it was 5.3 (SE 0.1), demonstrating that
comprehenders are aware of and sensitive to the responsibility differences in these materials.

Sentence Completion Experiment
We conducted a sentence-completion experiment varying
verb type (IC/non-IC) and NP-pair responsibility (responsible/non-responsible) in order to test the effects of discourselevel biases and real-world event knowledge on RC attachment preferences. The verb-specific attachment height model
predicts no interaction of NP-pair responsibility and verb
type in attachment preferences, and the only anticipated effect is an effect of verb type, replicating Rohde et al.. (Neither account makes any predictions as to whether or not there
will be a main effect of responsibility.) The arbitrary integration account, however, predicts an interaction whereby nonresponsible NP pairs yield more high-attaching RCs following IC verbs than non-IC verbs (replicating Rohde et al.), but
this difference is reduced for responsible NP pairs.

Methods
Participants 44 students from UC San Diego participated
for course credit. All were monolingual English speakers.
Materials We combined the noun-noun-verb triplets obtained from the norming study with a proper name and a nonIC verb to create sentence-completion prompts like (4).

1218

Proportion of High Attachments

Non−IC

●

●

●

given as a Wald Z-score and associated p-value. The results
showed a significant main effect of verb type [F1 (1, 43) =
14.4, p < .001; F2 (1, 39) = 6.1, p < .05; Z = 5.2, p < .001],
driven by the non-responsible condition which replicates
Rohde et al.. Crucially, there was also a significant interaction
between responsibility and verb type [F1 (1, 43) = 11.5, p <
.01; F2 (1, 39) = 5.6, p < .05; Z = −4.1, p < .001], showing
that as predicted the difference in attachment preferences for
IC and non-IC verbs is reduced in contexts with responsible
NP pairs. This result thus supports the arbitrary integration
account, demonstrating that comprehenders combine pragmatic information with real-world knowledge to make syntactic attachment decisions.

IC

0.55
0.50
0.45

●

0.40
0.35
●

0.30

Non−resp

Resp

Responsibility

Figure 1: Proportion of high attachments by verb type and
responsibility. Error bars show standard error of the mean.

Self-Paced Reading Experiment

(4) John criticizesIC /resemblesNonIC the orthodontistNonResp /
fatherResp of the kids who
These 40 items were combined with 60 fillers, which contained a mix of embedded clauses, subordinate clauses, RC
prompts, unambiguously attached RCs following complex
NPs, and other wh- words as prompts.
Procedure The sentence-completion experiment was conducted using a web-based interface. Each participant saw
each item only once. Participants were asked to imagine a
natural completion to the sentence and write the first completion that came to mind.

Results and Discussion
Two judges, the authors of this paper, assessed the elicited
RCs for their attachment height. Attachment heights were
annotated as either high, low, or ambiguous, and were only
assigned the high/low labels when the intent of the writer
was clear, either through number agreement on the verb or
through event plausibility.
After excluding 18 ungrammatical/nonsensical completions as well as the 35.5% of completions which were not
disambiguated through syntactic number or event plausibility, we analyzed the remaining completions for effects of verb
type and the responsibility relation on RC attachment. The
data are shown in Figure 1. As predicted, the non-responsible
condition replicated Rohde et al.’s results, showing the default low-attachment preference for non-IC verbs (31.8%
high attachments) and an increase in high attachments for IC
verbs (52.2% high attachments). In the responsible condition,
however, the proportion of high attachments was similar for
IC verbs and non-IC verbs (IC: 45.3%; non-IC: 43.5%).
We performed two statistical analyses on this data, conducting a 2×2 ANOVA (responsibility × verb type) on the
arcsine-transformed percentages as well as fitting a generalized linear mixed-effects regression with a logit link function (Agresti, 2002; Bates & Sarkar, 2008) to the raw attachment data, allowing for the use of random intercepts by
participant and by item. Results for the latter model will be

In order to test whether the biases observed in the offline
sentence-completion experiment influence comprehenders’
online sentence processing, we conducted a 2×2×2 selfpaced reading experiment varying verb type, responsibility,
and attachment height. We adapted the sentence completion
materials to create sentences with a disambiguating verb that
signaled the RC attachment height. We measured reading
times at the critical disambiguating region and one region
after, testing for a three-way interaction between attachment
height, verb type, and responsibility. A two-way interaction
alone between attachment height and verb type would support the verb-specific attachment height model whereby highattaching RCs are easier to process in contexts with objectbiased IC verbs than non-IC verbs, regardless of the responsibility relation. A three-way interaction, on the other hand,
would support the arbitrary integration account whereby responsible NP pairs reduce the facilitation provided for highattaching RCs by IC verbs.

Methods
Participants 40 students from UC San Diego participated
for course credit. All were monolingual English speakers.
Materials We used all 40 prompts from the sentencecompletion experiment and added RC endings that signaled
attachment height through number agreement on the embedded RC verb:
(5) John criticizesIC /resemblesNonIC the orthodontistNonResp /
fatherResp of the kids who ishigh /arelow often heard
yelling loudly.
High-attaching RCs were signaled with a singular verb
(is/was/has) and low-attaching RCs were signaled with a plural verb (are/were/have). The next word after the RC verb was
a neutral adverb and was the same in all conditions. The 40
target sentences were mixed with 60 filler sentences, created
by adding completions to the 60 sentence-completion fillers.
Procedure Participants read the sentences on a computer
screen using a word-by-word, non-cumulative, self-paced
moving-window reading paradigm (Just, Carpenter, & Wool-

1219

ley, 1982). Each trial began by displaying the entire target
sentence on screen with dashes replacing all the letters. Participants pressed a button on a game controller to reveal the
next word, which simultaneously caused the previous word
to change back to dashes. During this procedure, the time between the presentation of a word and the button press was
recorded. After each sentence, a comprehension question was
displayed. Participants used two other buttons on the controller to indicate their answer. They were instructed to read
as naturally as possible, and to slow down if they found themselves unsure of an answer to a comprehension question.

Table 1: Residual reading times (and SE) for the Verb and
Adverb regions by verb type, attachment, and responsibility.
Non-IC
IC
High
Low
High
Low
Verb/Non-resp.
28 (13)
-13 (13) 24 (14)
-11 (11)
Verb/Resp.
-2 (11)
-1 (14)
-13 (13) -19 (9)
Adverb/Non-resp. -29 (19) -73 (15) -58 (20) -54 (15)
Adverb/Resp.
-75 (12) -72 (15) -44 (15) -72 (16)
High attachment

●

●

●

Non−IC

Residual reading time (ms)

Results and Discussion
Any reading time for which a participant spent longer than 3.5
seconds reading a single word was excluded from the analysis (102 reading times total across fillers and experimental
items). Next, in order to minimize the effects of word length
differences across conditions and of participant reading rates,
a regression was performed on the data for each participant,
predicting reading time from word length in characters. This
process used all words from both filler and experimental trials. The values predicted by the regressions were subtracted
from the actual reading times to produce residual reading
times. Residual reading times that were more than 2.5 standard deviations from the mean for each combination of position and condition were excluded from further analysis. This
process affected less than 1% of the data.

Responsible

−20
●

−40

●
●

−60

●

−80
Non−IC

IC

Figure 2: Residual reading times for the Adverb region by responsibility, verb type, and attachment. Error bars show standard error of the mean.

Reading times We performed two analyses on the residual
reading times for the critical verb and the immediately following adverb: a three-way ANOVA and a linear mixed-effect
regression (Pinheiro & Bates, 2000), which allowed for the
inclusion of random intercepts for participants and items. For
the latter model, we report a t value and a p-value produced
by Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling (Baayen, In Press).
The residual reading times for the critical verb and following adverb are given in Table 1.1 On the verb, there
was a main effect of responsibility [F1 (1, 39) = 5.1, p <
.05; F2 (1, 39) = 5.8, p < .05;t = −1.9, p < .05] such that the
responsible condition was faster than the non-responsible.
This suggests that comprehenders had an easier time with
the responsible nouns, perhaps indicating that, e.g., there are
closer semantic connections between father and kids than orthodontist and kids. The ANOVA also showed a significant
effect of attachment [F1 (1, 39) = 5.4, p < .05; F2 (1, 39) =
7.2, p < .05], indicating that low attachment was preferred
patterns reported look qualitatively similar with raw RTs.

Non−responsible

IC

Verb type

Comprehension question accuracy Overall, comprehension question accuracy on fillers and target items was 89%
(SE 0.7%), and no single participant was below 78%. We
performed two analyses on the experimental items: A threeway ANOVA (responsibility × verb type × attachment) on
the arcsine-transformed accuracy data, and a generalized linear mixed-effect regression on the raw accuracy data. Neither
analysis showed any main effect or interaction.

1 All

Low attachment

overall. Finally, there was a significant interaction between responsibility and attachment [F1 (1, 39) = 4.1, p <
.05; F2 (1, 39) = 6.0, p < .05;t = 2.4, p < .05] such that while
low attachments were about 40 ms faster than high attachments in the non-responsible condition, the two attachment
heights were quantitatively similar for responsible contexts.
While we did not specifically predict this effect, one explanation may be that the probability of seeing a verb in this position varies across the conditions. Such a suggestion would,
however, require further testing.
Residual reading times for the adverb region are plotted in Figure 2. On the adverb, there were no significant
main effects or two-way interactions. There was, however,
the predicted three-way interaction [F1 (1, 39) = 5.1, p <
.05; F2 (1, 39) = 4.4, p < .05;t = 2.0, p < .05]. Looking at Figure 2, this three-way interaction can be interpreted as follows:
for non-responsible noun pairs, IC verbs make high attachments easier, as found by Rohde et al. (2008); for responsible
noun pairs, however, IC verbs actually serve to make high attachments harder. That is, whereas hearing about criticism of
an orthodontist creates expectations to hear more information
about the orthodontist (relative to kids), hearing about criticism of a father actually creates expectations to hear more
information about his kids. This online result thus mirrors the
offline sentence completions in supporting the arbitrary integration hypothesis; that is, it shows that comprehenders dynamically combine pragmatic and real-world knowledge to

1220

References

resolve syntactic ambiguity incrementally.

Conclusion
This paper presents a set of experiments testing the predictions of two general explanations for results in language
processing research: simple statistics and arbitrary integration. Together the experiments provide evidence for a case
in which comprehenders appear to track arbitrary real-world
event information such as the responsibility relationship between two individuals (norming study), that they integrate
this information along with verb-driven pragmatic cues to
help resolve syntactic ambiguity (sentence-completion experiment), and lastly that they perform this integration of realworld and pragmatic knowledge in their incremental sentence processing (self-paced reading experiment). The results support the view that syntactic processing reflects a dynamic combination of discourse-driven biases with real-word
knowledge as idiosyncratic as the responsibility relationship
between two individuals.
Of course, one could build a more complex statistical
model of this phenomenon than the verb-specific attachment
height model in order to predict the interactions we found.
The model would need to track the probability of high- vs.
low-attachment after each combination of a particular matrix
verb with two particular NPs. At this point, however, it is not
clear that this model would represent a simpler account of the
data. Thus, we maintain that our results are best interpreted
as supporting the arbitrary integration account.
This claim fits within a growing body of literature suggesting that language comprehension requires the integration of
multiple cues from the linguistic context and from comprehenders’ real-world event knowledge. To take one example,
work by Desmet, de Baecke, and Brysbaert (2002) establishes
that RC attachment ambiguity is sensitive to discourse-level
linguistic properties of the relevant NPs (in their case, the
NPs’ definiteness in contexts in which the referent is or is
not uniquely identifiable); our work can be seen as extending
this result by showing that RC attachment ambiguity is sensitive to a combination of linguistic cues (in our case, cues that
are driven by the verb) and non-linguistic real-world knowledge cues (here, the responsibility relationship between individuals). Experimental work is consistently finding that incremental sentence processing is sensitive to more and more
complex interactions between cues. This implies that comprehenders are quite skilled at combining multiple cues and
that our models must accommodate these complex interactions between many different domains of knowledge.

Acknowledgments
This paper benefitted greatly from feedback and discussion
from Roger Levy. The research was supported by NIH Training Grant T32-DC000041 from the Center for Research in
Language at UC San Diego to the first author and by an Andrew W. Mellon Postdoctoral Fellowship to the second author.

Agresti, A. (2002). Categorical data analysis (Second ed.). New
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Baayen, R. (In Press). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical introduction to statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bates, D. M., & Sarkar, D. (2008). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4 classes. R package version 0.999375-23.
Bicknell, K., Elman, J. L., Hare, M., & McRae, K. (2008). Online
expectations for verbal arguments conditional on event knowledge. In B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2220–2225). Washington, D.C.: Cognitive Science
Society.
Demberg, V., & Keller, F. (2008). Data from eye-tracking corpora
as evidence for theories of syntactic processing complexity. Cognition, 109(2), 193–210.
Desmet, T., de Baecke, C., & Brysbaert, M. (2002). The influence
of referential discourse context on modifier attachment in Dutch.
Memory and Cognition, 30, 150-157.
Ferretti, T. R., Kutas, M., & McRae, K. (2007). Verb aspect and the
activation of event knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33(1), 182–196.
Garvey, C., & Caramazza, A. (1974). Implicit causality in verbs.
Linguistic Inquiry, 5(3), 459–464.
Gilboy, E., Sopena, J., Clifton, C., & Frazier, L. (1995). Argument structure and association preferences in Spanish and English
complex NPs. Cognition, 54, 131-167.
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Woolley, J. D. (1982). Paradigms
and processes in reading comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 111(2), 228–238.
Kehler, A., Kertz, L., Rohde, H., & Elman, J. L. (2008). Coherence
and coreference revisited. Journal of Semantics, 25, 1–44.
Levy, R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize information
density through syntactic reduction. In B. Schölkopf, J. Platt, &
T. Hoffman (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 19 (pp. 849–856). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Matsuki, K., McRae, K., Tabaczynski, T., Elman, J. L., & Hare, M.
(2008). Conceptual and structural event-based expectancy generation in language comprehension. Poster presentation at the 2008
CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing, Chapel Hill,
NC, 13–15 March 2008.
McDonald, S. A., & Shillcock, R. C. (2003). Low-level predictive
inference in reading: The influence of transitional probabilities on
eye movements. Vision Research, 43, 1735–1751.
McKoon, G., Greene, S., & Ratcliff, R. (1993). Discourse models,
pronoun resolution, and the implicit causality of verbs. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 19, 1040-1052.
McRae, K., Hare, M., Elman, J. L., & Ferretti, T. (2005). A basis
for generating expectancies for verbs from nouns. Memory &
Cognition, 33(7), 1174–1184.
Mitchell, D., & Brysbaert, M. (1998). Challenges to recent theories of crosslinguistic variation in parsing: evidence from Dutch.
Syntax and Semantics, 31, 313-335.
Pinheiro, J. C., & Bates, D. M. (2000). Mixed effects models in S
and S-Plus. New York: Springer Verlag.
Rohde, H., Levy, R., & Kehler, A. (2008). Implicit causality biases
influence relative clause attachment. Presented at the 21st Annual
CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing. Chapel Hill,
NC, March 13–15, 2008.
Simner, J., & Pickering, M. (2005). Planning causes and consequences in discourse. Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 226239.
Trueswell, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Kello, C. (1993). Verbspecific constraints in sentence processing: Separating effects of
lexical preference from garden-paths. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 528–553.
Willits, J. A., Sussman, R. S., & Amato, M. S. (2008). Event
knowledge vs. verb knowledge. In B. C. Love, K. McRae, &
V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2227–2232). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.

1221

