UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dynamical cognitive models and the study of individual differences.
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4sn2v2j0
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Kan, Kees Jan
Van Der Maas, Han L.J.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                              Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                 University of California

Dynamical cognitive models and the study of individual differences
Han van der Maas & Kees Jan Kan
A large part of psychology concerns the study of individual differences. Why do
people differ in personality? What is the structure of individual differences in
intelligence? What are the roles of nurture and nature? Researchers in these fields
collect data of many subjects and apply statistical methods, most notably latent
structure modeling, to uncover the structure and to infer the underlying sources of the
individual differences. Cognitive science usually does not concern individual
differences. In cognitive models we focus on the general mechanisms of cognitive
processes and not the individual properties.
We believe that these two traditions of modeling cannot remain separated. Models of
mechanisms necessarily precede models of individual differences. We argue against
the use of latent structure models of individual differences in psychological processes
that do not explicate the underlying mechanisms.
Our main example is general intelligence, a concept based on the analysis of group
data. Scores on cognitive tasks used in intelligence tests correlate positively with each
other, i.e., they display a positive manifold of correlations. The positive manifold is
arguably both the best established, and the most striking phenomenon in the
psychological study of intelligence. Over the past 100 years differential psychologists
have sought to explain this phenomenon by invoking an underlying general
intelligence factor, associated with a single quantitative cognitive or biological process
or capacity. At present, the factor analytic (statistical) support for a general factor is
considered strong. However, the nature of the g-factor remains unclear.
Here we discuss a new explanation of the positive manifold based on a dynamical
model, in which reciprocal causation or mutualism plays a central role.
We developed an abstract mathematical model for mutualistic development. It is
shown analytically and by simulations that the positive manifold emerges purely by
positive beneficial interactions between cognitive processes during development. A
single underlying g-factor plays no role in the model.
The model offers explanations of important findings in intelligence research, such as
the hierarchical factor structure of intelligence, the low predictability of intelligence
from early childhood performance, the integration/differentiation effect, the increase in
heritability of g, and the Jensen effect, and is consistent with current explanations of
the Flynn effect.
We believe and will argue that similar models can be developed for other typical latent
variable explanations in psychology, such as clinical disorders and personality traits.
Such models do not only increase our understanding of these phenomena but also
imply new types of interventions. In more complex dynamical systems interventions
can have counterintuitive effects.
Relevant recent references first author
van der Maas, H. L. J., Dolan, C. V., Grasman, R. P. P. P. , Wicherts, J. M. , Huizenga,
     H. M. & Raijmakers, M. E. J. (2006). A dynamical model of general intelligence:
     the positive manifold of intelligence by mutualism. Psychological Review, 113(4),
     842-861.
 Witkiewitz, K., van der Maas, H. L. J., Hufford, M. R, & Marlatt, G.A. (2007). Non-
     normality and Divergence in Post-Treatment Alcohol Use: Re-examining the
                                                321

    Project MATCH Data “Another Way”. Journal of Abnormal Psychology. 116 (2),
    378-394.
Ploeger, A., van der Maas, H.L.J., & Raijmakers, M.E.J. (2008). Is evolutionary
    psychology a metatheory for psychology? A discussion of four major issues in
    psychology from an evolutionary developmental perspective. Psychological
    Inquiry, 19(1), 1-18.
Van der Maas, H. L. J., & Raijmakers, M. E. J. (2009). Transitions in cognitive
    development: prospects and limitations of a neural dynamic approach. In J.P.
    Spencer, M. Thomas, & J. McClelland (Eds). Toward a New Grand Theory of
    Development: Connectionism and Dynamic Systems Theory Re-Considered. To
    be published by Oxford University Press.
Quinlan, P. T., van der Maas, H. L. J., Jansen, B. R. J., Booij, O., and Rendell, M.
    (2007). Re-thinking stages of cognitive development: An appraisal of
    connectionist models of the balance scale task. Cognition, 103(3), 413-459.
Kan, K. J., Ploeger, A., Raijmakers, M. E. J., Dolan, C. V., & van der Maas, H. L. J.
    (in press). Nonlinear Epigenetic Variance: Review and Simulations.
    Developmental Science.
van der Maas, H.L.J., & Molenaar, P.C.M. (1992). Stagewise cognitive
    development: an application of catastrophe theory. Psychological Review,
    99(3), 395-417.
.
                                             322

