UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dysexecutive syndrome model using ACT-R
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/64k8j40g
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Dion, Alexandre
Pigot, Helene
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                       Dysexecutive syndrome model using ACT-R
                                                 Hélène Pigot
                                             University of Sherbrooke
                                               Alexandre Dion
                                             University of Sherbrooke
Abstract: People with Action Disorder Syndrome (ADS) are prone to executive errors while performing activities.
This project proposes to model the four most frequent types of errors: omission, perseveration, anticipation and
substitution, modeled with the cognitive architecture ACT-R. The model is based on psychological theories aimed
to explain the executive errors. The coffee preparation selected from the Multi Level Action Test (MLAT) is first
simulated in ACT-R [1,2]. Two MLAT conditions are simulated with and without distractors. The four executive
errors are then introduced to simulate how people with ADS encounter difficulties while performing the activity. The
results of the simulation show the same tendency than the literature. Applying the model to another MLAT activity
the sandwich preparation has proved the model robustness.
  [1] Schwartz, M. F., Montgomery, M. W., Buxbaum, L. J., Lee, S. S., Carew, T. G., Coslett, H. B., et al. (1998).
Naturalistic action impairment in closed head injury. Neuropsychology, 12(1), 13-28. [2] Anderson, J. R., Bothell,
D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S., Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of the mind. Psychological
Review, 111, 136-1060.
                                                        2058

