UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Eaters In The Dark: The Primacy of Cognitive Factors For Food Consumption And Satiety

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/20b4g5vr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Scheibehenne, Benjamin
Todd, Peter M.
Wansink, Brian

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Eaters In The Dark:
The Primacy of Cognitive Factors For Food Consumption And Satiety
Benjamin Scheibehenne (bscheibe@indiana.edu)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94
14195 Berlin, Germany
&
Indiana University, Cognitive Science Program, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Peter M. Todd (pmtodd@indiana.edu)
Indiana University, Cognitive Science Program, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Brian Wansink (wansink@cornell.edu)
Cornell University, 110 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

problem in a world where large amounts of high-calorie
foods are ubiquitous, as in our modern affluent societies;
and it might even be a reason for the growing rate of
overweight in numerous countries, a development
sometimes referred to as the ‘obesity epidemic’ (Bolles,
1965; Jeffery et al. 2007; Blundell et al, 2005).

Abstract
To compare the importance of cognitive factors relative to
physiological factors for estimating food consumption and
satiety, we served 64 participants lunch in a “dark” restaurant
where they ate a regular two-course meal in complete
darkness. Half the participants unknowingly received
considerably larger portion sizes which subsequently led to
higher food intake. Despite this difference, participants’
appetite for dessert and their subjective hunger after the meal
was largely unaffected by the amount of food they had
consumed in the dark. In comparison, 32 participants in a
control group who ate the same meal in the light consumed
comparatively less food from the large portion and still
compensated for the larger portion size by eating less dessert
afterwards. Together, these results indicate that internal
physiological cues do not provide accurate feedback and that
visual cues are the main source of information for estimating
food intake and satiety.

Nikola Tesla, the eccentric inventor, worried about eating
anything which he could not visually judge the size of
before he consumed it (Hunt & Draper, 1964). As Tesla was
also concerned about his weight, his peculiar behavior could
have been connected to a fear of overeating when lacking
appropriate visual input. How important are visual cues for
controlling our food consumption and when to stop eating
once we start?
Physiological research has identified a number of postingestive satiety processes involving the integration of
numerous internal signals that trigger the inhibition of our
appetite (Schwartz et al., 2000; Barsh, Farooqui, & Rahilly,
2000). But this need to inhibit appetitive behavior internally
would rarely come up in an environment where food
resources are scarce, as the possible amount of food
available to consume is externally constrained. Thus our
proprioceptive signaling systems that evolved for meal
termination in challenging Pleistocene environments might
be less sophisticated than the signals that arose to first
motivate us to eat. As perhaps felt by Tesla, this poses a

To determine how much food they have consumed and
when to stop eating, people often rely instead on external
cues in their environment (Fedoroff, Polivy, & Herman,
1997; Schachter, 1968). The simplest case is that people
typically stop eating once they empty their plate, which can
lead to increased consumption with larger dish and portion
sizes (Wansink, Painter, & North, 2006; Diliberti, Bordi,
Conklin, Roe, & Rolls, 2004; Levitsky & Youn, 2004;
Fisher, Rolls, Birch, 2003; Rolls, Roe, Kral, Meengs, Wall,
2004). When eating in a group, people also adjust their
consumption to how others at the table eat, presumably
because this sets an implicit consumption norm (Herman,
Roth, & Polivy, 2003).
To the extent that food intake is controlled by cognitive
processes that rely on external cues, subjective feelings of
satiety may depend little on the actual amount of food in the
stomachs. In line with this, Rolls, Morris, and Roe (2002)
found that larger portion sizes led to more consumption
among participants but did not affect their subsequent
ratings of hunger and fullness. Likewise, Wansink, Painter,
and North (2006) showed that manipulating visual cues of
how much is eaten influences further intake, suggesting that
“people use their eyes to count calories and not their
stomachs” (p.98). They served participants soup in a bowl
that secretly re-filled through a hidden tube in the bottom.
Participants who ate from these “bottomless” bowls on
average consumed 73% more calories than a control group
eating from regular bowls, yet they did not report having
consumed more, nor were they more sated. Longitudinal
studies show that such overconsumption of food is often not

2095

fully compensated by subsequent reduction of food intake,
resulting in a net gain of body weight (Jeffery et al., 2007).
However, it could be that internal satiety cues do work
well, but are just most often being overridden or superseded
by external visual cues, and take over to guide behavior only
in extreme situations. If so, people could be advised to
listen to their stomachs rather than looking at their
environment in order to determine when to stop eating. But
would this work? How sensitive and reliable are the cues
transmitted through the brain-gut axis (Herman, 2005) about
how satiated we really are?
To find out, we need to experimentally control the
competing external visual cues of how much oneself and
others are eating. One way to do this is by serving food in
complete darkness. While the amount of food provided on
the plate can still be estimated by touch or by counting bites,
normal-sighted people should be unaccustomed to these
methods. As a consequence, the external cues become less
useable and internal satiety cues can gain in importance.
The reliability of these internal cues will then influence how
well people eating in the dark can estimate the amount of
food they consume as compared to people eating under
normal light conditions. Stated differently, contrasting the
behavior of people eating in the dark versus the light allows
us to estimate the importance of internal versus external
cues for judging satiety and consumption quantity.

Method
Overview
We experimentally tested the relative importance and
reliability of internal and external satiety and consumption
cues by inviting participants for lunch in a so-called “dark”
restaurant in downtown Berlin, Germany. This restaurant
consisted of two parts, an entrance and bar area in the light
and a dining area in the back where no light was visible and
patrons were served in complete darkness by blind waiters
and waitresses. In the experimental condition, 64
participants were given two main courses in the dark,
prepared by the restaurant kitchen, and a subsequent dessert
in the light where participants could serve themselves. The
amount of food served in the dark was manipulated such
that participants received portions that considerably varied
in size. The main dependent variables were participants’
satiety after the meal and how accurately they estimated the
amount of food they had consumed. Our behavioral measure
of satiety was the amount of dessert that participants served
themselves, assuming higher satiation corresponded to less
consumption. We also gave participants a questionnaire at
the end of the experiment asking them to estimate the
amount of food they had consumed and how satiated they
felt. In the control condition, a separate group of 32 people
ate the same meal at the same restaurant but in the light.

Procedure
The experimental condition was run on two consecutive
days with groups of 32 participants per day. The control

condition took place several weeks later, on one day.
Participants in both conditions were welcomed in the
entrance area of the restaurant at around noon. Only vague
information was given about the content of the food and
nothing was mentioned about the size of the portions.
Participants were asked to talk about anything over lunch
except the food itself, and then were guided to their tables
by the restaurant staff. In the dark condition, the tables were
in the lightless dining room. In the light control condition,
the tables were set up in the entrance area of the restaurant.
Tables were shared by 8 participants. The first main course
was vegetable risotto, followed by the second main course
of goulash with noodles. Together with these two courses
participants were served a plate with 5 pieces of white bread
and a glass of plain water (refilled upon request). To
measure the exact amount of food that was served to and
consumed by each participant, we weighed each plate before
it left the kitchen and after it was cleared from the table.
Eating in the dark took about 45-60 minutes, while in the
light it lasted about 30-40 minutes.
In both conditions, the dessert was served in the entrance
area of the restaurant in the light. Dessert consisted of large
plates with fruit pieces (tangerine, apple, and grape with
cheese) impaled on colored toothpicks, from which
participants could serve themselves. Each participant had a
plate to drop their empty toothpicks on, so that we could
assess the individual amount of dessert consumption by
counting the number of toothpicks on each plate. Following
this dessert, participants received a questionnaire and were
then debriefed, compensated with a 10 EUR show-up fee,
and dismissed.

Experimental manipulation
In the experimental condition, half of the participants on
each table received small portion sizes with an average
amount of 172 grams of risotto (SD = 18 grams) and 309
grams of goulash (SD = 38g) – the small-portion group. The
large-portion group on the first day received approximately
twice as much risotto (M = 338g, SD = 17g) while the
second main course dish was kept the same size (M = 305g,
SD = 31g). To test if the distribution of portion sizes
between the first and the second dish makes a difference, on
the second day the large-portion group instead received on
average 270g risotto (SD = 27g) and 494g goulash (SD =
56g). Yet subsequent analyses revealed no consistent
differences between the two days. Also, the plates were
filled by the kitchen chef who eyeballed the portions,
inducing some variance in the portion size. Therefore, our
subsequent analyses are based on the total amount of food
served and consumed, summing across both main courses
on both days separately for the small-portion and largeportion groups. On average, participants in the large-portion
group in the dark received 706g (SD = 77g), 225g (47%)
more food than those in the small group (M=481g, SD =
42g). In the control condition in the light, the average
serving sizes were 451g (SD = 69g) in the small group and
636g (SD = 75g) in the large condition. The resulting

2096

difference of 186 g (29%) is smaller than in the dark—see
Figure 1.

large portions on average ate 626g (SD = 106g), or 89%. In
the control condition in the light, participants with small
portions ate 432g (96%; SD = 72g), compared to
participants with large portions who eat 525g (83%, SD =
109g) —see Figure 2.

Figure 1: Total amount of food served for the two main
courses. Error bars indicate 95% boostrapped confidence
intervals.
Figure 2: Total amount of food consumed during the two
main courses. Error bars indicate 95% boostrapped
confidence intervals.

Dependent and control variables
As a behavioral measure of satiety, we counted the number
of fruit sticks that participants took and ate for dessert. In
the questionnaire, we asked participants to estimate the total
weight and calories that they had consumed in total for both
main dishes. They were also asked to rate their hunger and
the degree to which they thought they had overeaten on a
scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much). A number of
control variables regarding hunger, food preferences,
enjoyment, and general attitudes towards eating were also
assessed, but none of these variables showed a strong
relationship with the amount of food received, consumed, or
estimated, so we will not discuss them further.

Participants
The average age of the participants in the experimental
condition was 24 years (SD=2.8), and they had a mean
body-mass index (BMI) of 22.9 kg/m² (SD = 3.2). Thirty of
these 64 participants were female, and 52 were students at
local universities. None of them were vegetarian or dieting.
Participants in the small portion group and in the large
portion group were matched by gender, age, student status,
and BMI. The participants in the control condition were
similar to those in the experimental condition in terms of
age, BMI, and gender distribution.

Estimation of food consumed
Participants with small portions in the dark experimental
condition slightly overestimated the amount of food they
had eaten (M = 496g, SD = 147g) while those with large
portions underestimated it (M = 556g, SD = 196g). Thus,
even though participants in the large condition actually
consumed 39% more food as compared to the small
condition, their estimate is only 12% higher. Comparable
results were obtained for the estimation of calories. In the
light control condition, participants with small portions
estimated they had eaten on average 416g (SD = 143g)
versus 504g (SD = 121g) for the large portions. Thus, for
large portions participants estimated 21% more
consumption while they actually ate 18% more.

Measures of satiety
In the dark experimental condition, those with small
portions took 8 fruit sticks for dessert (SD = 4.0) while
those with large portions took 7 (SD = 3.5), F[59]1 = .82,
prep = .74. In the light control condition, this difference was
more pronounced: Those with small portions took 12 fruit
sticks (SD = 5.4) while those with large portions took only 8
(SD = 3.8), F[24] = 4.3, prep = .092—see Figure 3.

Results
1

Actual amount of consumption
The amount of consumption was contingent on the portion
size received. In the experimental condition in the dark,
participants with small portions on average ate 452g (SD =
62g), which was 94% of the amount served. Those with

For one participant the exact amount of food served could not be
measured, there were a few missing values in the questionnaire, 3
participants vastly overestimated the amount of food they had
consumed, and 11 participants did not drop their toothpicks on
their own plates, which reduced the number of valid cases in some
of the analyses.

2097

Figure 3: Number of fruit sticks participants served
themselves for dessert. Error bars indicate 95% boostrapped
confidence intervals
After having eaten the main course dishes and dessert,
everyone ended up feeling as though they had eaten roughly
the same amount: Self-reported hunger was largely
independent of the served portion size and the experimental
condition. In the experimental condition, the mean hunger
rating for small portions was 1.7 (SD = 1.01), and for large
portions 1.5 (SD = 1.02). In the control condition, the
ratings were M = 1.6 (SD = 1.22) and M = 1.2 (SD = 0.75)
respectively. Feelings of having overeaten followed a
similar pattern. Given that participants with small portions
in the light had to eat 50% more dessert than those with
small portions in the dark to get to the same satiation level,
this further supports the idea that visual cues of
consumption of the main dishes influenced the amount of
satiety felt from eating them: When people ate small
portions that they could see, they ate more dessert to make
up for it.

Discussion
Large differences between the amount of food served in the
dark or in the light led to large differences in the amount of
food eaten, confirming past research showing that
consumption is contingent on portion size. However, when
eating in the dark, where visual cues were not available and
only internal cues could be used, participants had difficulties
estimating the amount of food they had actually consumed.
This difficulty was also reflected on a behavioral level: The
amount of dessert (fruit sticks) participants served
themselves was largely independent of the food they had
previously consumed in the dark (Figure 1). Likewise,
participants eating small or large portions in the dark did not
end up feeling different amounts of satiety at the end of the
experiment.
This is in contrast to the control condition in the light
where participants made much more accurate estimations of
their consumption, presumably because visual cues were
readily available. Furthermore, with the availability of

visual cues came greater differences in the amount of food
consumed: Even though the actual differences between the
large and small portions were reduced compared to the dark
condition, participants in the light condition who received
large portions still compensated for them to a greater extent
by leaving more food on their plates and eating less dessert
than those with small portions.
Together, these results indicate that internal physiological
signals do not provide particularly accurate feedback
regarding food consumption and satiety, and that food
consumption and satiety are mainly controlled by cognitive
factors that rely on visual cues.
These results support the powerful effects of manipulating
visual food cues reported in previous research. Our findings
further indicate that the pronounced insensitivity to visceral
feedback found for obese people (Schachter, 1968; Stice,
Spoor, Bohon, & Small, 2008) may not be the only driver of
overeating. The (visual) environment also exerts an
important influence that should not be underestimated: Tesla
was right to avoid eating portions that cannot be visually
estimated.

References
Barsh, G. S., Farooqui, I. S., & O’Rahilly, S. (2000).
Genetics of body weight regulation. Nature, 404, 644651.
Blundell, J. E., Stubbs R. J., Golding, C., Croden, F., Alam,
R., Whybrow, S., Le Noury, J., & Lawton, C.L. (2005).
Resistance and susceptibility to weight gain: Individual
variability in response to a high-fat diet. Physiology &
Behavior, 86, 614-622.
Bolles, R. C. (1965). Consummatory behavior in rats
maintained aperiodically. Journal of Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 60, 457-471.
Diliberti, N., Bordi, P., Conklin, M. T., Roe, L. S., & Rolls,
B. J. (2004). Increased portion size leads to increased
energy intake in a restaurant meal. Obesity Research, 12,
562-568.
Fedoroff, I. C., Polivy, J., & Herman, C. P. (1997). The
effect of pre-exposure to food cues on the eating behavior
of restrained and unrestrained eaters. Appetite, 28, 33-47.
Fisher, J. O., Rolls, B. J., & Birch, L. L. (2003). Children's
bite size and intake of an entrée are greater with large
portions than with age-appropriate or self-selected
portions. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 77,
1164-1170.
Herman, C. P. (2005). Lessons from the bottomless bowl.
Obesity Research, 13, 2.
Herman, C. P., Roth, D. A., & Polivy, J. (2003). Effects of
the presence of others on food intake: a normative
interpretation. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 873-886.
Hunt, I. & Draper, W. W. (1964). Lightning in His Hand.
The Life Story of Nikola Tesla. Omni Publications,
Hawthorne, California.
Jeffery, R. W., Rydell, S., Dunn, C. L., Harnack, L. J.,
Levine, A. S., Pentel, P. R., Baxter, J. E., & Walsh, E. M.
(2007). Effect of portion size on chronic energy intake.

2098

International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity, 4, 27.
Levitsky, D. A. & Youn, T. (2004). The more food young
adults are served, the more they overeat. Journal of
Nutrition, 134, 2546-2549.
Rolls, B. J., Morris, E. L., & Roe, L. S. (2002). Portion size
of food affects energy intake in normal-weight and
overweight men and women. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 76, 1207-1213.
Rolls, B. J., Roe, L. S., Meengs, J. S., & Wall, D. (2006).
Increasing the portion size of a sandwich increases energy
intake. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 104,
367-372.
Schachter, S. (1968). Obesity and eating. Science, 161, 751756.

Schwartz, M. W., Woods, S. C., Porte, D., Seeley, R. J., &
Baskin, D. G. (2000). Central nervous system control of
food intake. Nature, 404, 661-671.
Stice, E., Spoor, S., Bohon, C., & Small, D. M. (2008).
Relation Between Obesity and Blunted Striatal Response
to Food Is Moderated by TaqIA A1 Allele. Science, 322,
449 – 452.
Wansink, B. (2004). Environmental Factors That Increase
the Food Intake and Consumption Volume of Unknowing
Consumers. Annual Review of Nutrition, 24, 455-479.
Wansink, B., Painter, J. E., & North, J. (2006). Bottomless
Bowls: Why Visual Cues of Portion Size May Influence
Intake. Obesity Research, 13, 93-100.

2099

