UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Caffeine on Cognitive Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/62c3w8vc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bedford, Anthony
Cosic, Irena
Valladares, Lorraine

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Caffeine on Cognitive Tasks
Lorraine Valladares (Lorraine.Valladares@RMIT.edu.au)
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, RMIT University
GPO Box 2476V, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 3001

Irena Cosic (Irena.Cosic@RMIT.edu.au)
College of Science, Engineering, and Technology, RMIT University
GPO Box 2476V, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 3001

Anthony Bedford (Anthony.Bedord@RMIT.edu.au)
Sport Statistics Group, RMIT University
PO Box 71, Bundoora, Victoria, Australia 3083

Abstract
The effects of caffeine (250 mg) and placebo on healthy
controls were studied in a double-blind, cross over study on
24 healthy subjects who performed a working memory n-back
task. Reaction time and accuracy levels were tested using the
n-back working memory measure in cognitive neuroscience.
An experimental study tested on the 1, 2 and 3-back tasks
under the placebo/coffee condition. Based on the empirical
results obtained in this study it can be concluded that changes
produced by caffeine ingestion support the hypothesis that
caffeine acts as a stimulant. However, it cannot be proven that
the stimulant translates into enhanced motor processes with
an improvement in performance.
Keywords:. Caffeine, placebo, mean response time (MRT),
accuracy (ACC) n-back, cognition, cognitive tasks, working
memory (WM).

Introduction
The aim of this research was to determine whether caffeine
enhances cognition in healthy subjects. Prior to this research
work healthy subjects have not been assessed in sufficient
detail. To this end it assesses (i) the effect of 250 mg of
caffeine on mean response time (MRT) and (ii) accuracy in
normal healthy human controls.
Numerous
studies
have
examined
the
psychopharmacological and electrophysiological effects of
caffeine on the human brain and heart (Bruce et al., 1986).
Caffeine has been tested to assess effects on sleep patterns,
arousal, and its enhancement effectiveness in enhancing the
effects of analgesics (Richardson et al., 1995).
Drinking a cup of coffee is a daily pleasure for millions of
people around the world with an average individual
consumption estimated at around three cups per day.
Caffeine has been found to enhance mental performance,
mood, and vigilance (Barry et al., 2005). Research findings
also present a great body of evidence on the medical aspects
of caffeine enhancement on patients suffering from bi-polar
disorder, schizophrenia, and depression (Coffey et al., 1990;
Callicott and Ramsey, 1998; and Callicott et al., 2003).
However, there is comparatively little literature available
on the effects of caffeine on healthy subjects with no

medical impediments. Hence, this research proposed to
answer the following question: Can a certain dosage of
caffeine ingestion measurably enhance cognitive functions?
Few studies have examined the effects of caffeine on
cognition on healthy individuals.
Caffeine is widely consumed throughout the world for a
variety of reasons, including its stimulant-like effects on
mood and cognitive performance (Fredholm et al., 1999 and
Liberman et al., 1987). The purpose of this study was to
investigate the possible effect of caffeine on cognitive
neural function in healthy human volunteers.
Caffeine absorption from the gastrointestinal tract is rapid
and reaches 99% in humans in about 45 minutes after
ingestion (Marks and Kelly, 1973). Peak plasma caffeine
concentration is reached between 15 and 120 minutes (mins)
after oral dosage, and therefore, it can be estimated that
peak concentration is reached after 30 mins of ingestion.
One effect of caffeine is the ability to manifests itself in
lengthening the post firing duration in the hippocampus; this
effect lasts longer than the changes induced by caffeing on
the EEG (Kenemans and Lorist, 1995).

Working Memory
Working memory (WM) refers to a system which enables
temporary storage and manipulations of information within
the context of cognitive activity (Baddeley and Hitch,
1974). Baddeley and Hitch characterised WM as a type of
mental workspace composed of 3 sub-systems:
(a) Central executive involved in control and selection
process
(b) A buffer responsible for maintaining acousticallycoded information
(c) A buffer responsible for maintaining visual and
spatial information.
The present study attempted to clarify whether WM is
improved or enhanced in any way with ingestion of a
controlled amount of caffeine. The fundamental
characteristic of WM, are well known. Working memory
capacity to handle information is limited; the physiological

1563

basis of this limitation has not been explained and is still
being explored extensively.

N-back

Z-B). Letter case was treated as irrelevant, e.g., “g” and “G”
were defined as matching. The rationale for alternating
letter-case is to force participants to remember letters by
their meaning rather than their shape (Levin et al., 2002).
The 1, 2 and 3-back tasks were also administered in a
counterbalanced order, so that the effects of memory load
were not confounded by caffeine/placebo condition.

Results

Figure 1: An example of a trial illustrating the schematic
representation of the 3WM (n-back task). Each subject
performed 20 practice trials, before performing 90 trials in
the test, re-test sessions.

The n-back was used to test WM. The task involved a
number of stimuli that must be held in the mind at any one
time, to be varied parametrically (Owen et al., 2005). Figure
1 outlines a series of stimuli, in the present case letters, and
participant had to match and identify the stimuli 1, 2, or 3
previously seen.

Mean reaction time and accuracy data were collected and
analysed by a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
testing the effects of ‘groups’ (A and B). Group A consisted
of participants consuming placebo first and coffee in the
second session. Group B involved participants who
consumed coffee first in session one and placebo in session
two. The term ‘drug’ will refer to coffee or placebo.
ANOVA testing was conducted to determine any
significant differences between MRTs for the groups, nbacks, treatments, and their interactions. The data was split
into the four groups (placebo first, coffee first, placebo
second, coffee second), with all passing the KolmogorovSmirnov normality tests (p > 0.05), meeting one of the
underlying assumptions of the ANOVA test. Posthoc
analysis was conducted utilising Tukey’s Honestly
Significant Difference (HSD) test. Significant differences
were found amongst all 3 n-back task comparisons (1 versus
2: p<.012, 1 versus 3: p<.001, 2 versus 3: p<.01).

Methodology
Twenty four healthy (non smoking) volunteers aged
between (19-38 years) participated in this experiment with a
mean age of (26.5), with no history of psychiatric disease.
All subjects gave written informed consent to take part in
the study, which was approved by the Human Research
Ethics Committee, Swinburne University of Technology.

Study Design
A double blind, counter-balanced, placebo controlled, crossover was used. Each participant was tested under two
different drug conditions [placebo and caffeine (250mg)]
separated by a seven-day ‘wash-out’ period. The doses
selected were based on previous research that found
significant behavioral effects at this dose (Barry et al.,
2005), but being low enough to minimize the possibility of
side-effects, such as nausea, which could confound the
results. Upon arrival, participants were provided with a
standard lunch to reduce the possible nausea caused by
caffeine administration.
N-back task was a stimuli, which in this study was a
single white consonant presented for 500 ms each every 3s
in the middle of a black computer screen (Koivisto, Krause
et al., 2000). The letter case was alternated at each
appearance of each particular letter of the alphabet (e.g. z-b-

Figure 2: Behavioural data presented for visual comparison:
95 % Confidence Interval for the mean response time MRT
for placebo and coffee ingestion, estimated by n-back: (1-,
2-, and 3- back). Data was collapsed across the different
treatment conditions (coffee or placebo for all 24
participants over 2 sessions = 48 experiments). The error bar
range suggests that reaction time increased with working
memory load.

1564

Figure 3: Percentage increase in response time. MRTs for
all 3 trials: 95% confidence interval for the MRT for coffee
first vs. placebo first by n-back: 1-back, 2-back, and 3-back,
across task conditions. Participants taking coffee first (green
bar) had a significantly lower MRT for all n-back
experiments. This does not account for whether or not the
group ingested coffee or placebo, Group A or B, rather
provides the MRT of all their experiments. This indicates
that being in the coffee first group significantly impacts
MRT, irrespective of treatment.

Figure 5: Behavioural data presented for visual comparison:
95% confidence interval of the mean response time for all
subjects (grouped) by n-back: 1-back, 2-back, and 3-back.
Data displayed across task conditions and collapsed across
working memory task.

Figure 6: Average mean percentage accuracy levels of
Group A and B (4 sessions) by n-back task. Accuracy Data
for the 3 levels of task difficulty. This provides a pictorial
image where the coffee second group performed better than
coffee first.
Figure 4: Activity data for n-back – MRT of performance
across the levels of the n-back task for all 4 sessions.
These results depict the trend irrespective of coffee
ingestion, first or second. However, the placebo plot shows
that the placebo first group exhibited a markedly higher
MRT compared to the coffee first group. Placebo first and
Placebo second, exhibits an inverse result with placebo
being quicker than coffee, (a lower MRT). This weakness
was identified in the previous figure (Fig. 2).

MRT gradually increased with WM load and 3-back
proving the most difficult task, with the longest MRT.
Retrieval decreased as n increased in all variants of the nback task.
As previously plotted n-back 1, has the highest level of
accuracy. Figure 6 illustrates the mean percentage accuracy
for each of the four sessions by n-back. The coffee second
group had the highest mean accuracy for n-back 1, whereas
the placebo second had the highest accuracy for n-back 2
and 3.

1565

An ANOVA was conducted on mean accuracy levels to
determine if there was any significant difference between
the groups. A full interaction model was utilised. The only
significant difference occurred in relation to the 3-back F(2,
143) = 64.241, p= .001 indicating, as shown in the Fig. 7.
Treatment (coffee or placebo) and Group (1 or 2) showed no
significant differences in mean accuracy level F(1,143) =
2.834, p =.095; F(1,143) = 2.437, p = .121.

Figure 7: Plots the n-back by groups. Visual complexity of
accuracy levels within the groups. Average accuracy for
each of the groupings presented and the proportion of drop
in accuracy levels whilst performing 3-back which had the
greatest difficulty.

Discussion
Caffeine was associated with a significant increase in
alertness. However, there was no significant enhancement
on cognition. There was no significant relationship between
the intake of caffeine and cognitive task. Analyses between
caffeine/placebo conditions, found significant results in 1back and 2-back. On the other hand, results were not
significant with n-back 3. This performance decrement
could be due to familiarity of content, and counteracted by
caffeine (Deslandes et al., 2005). Briefly summarising,
across subjects, accuracy was higher, and RT faster, in the
low-load WM task compared with the high-load WM tasks.
Optimal level of performance was achieved with caffeine,
when comparing the two groups in Fig. 2, providing support
for the hypothesis, that caffeine improved response time.
Whereas MRT was slightly higher for the coffee group in
the 3-back task, this could be attributed to memory load or
other variables. It can be clearly observed that MRT
increases with memory load of n-back 3 in both group
conditions. As the task difficulty and memory load
increased, reaction time also increased. The 3-back task
required judging whether an item matched any item up to
and including 3-back. Reduced MRT suggests that three
items could not be effectively maintained in focal attention.

These results indicate that focal attention has a much
smaller capacity than has typically been assumed (Cowan,
2008).
The ANOVA results supports earlier findings which
indicated that taking coffee first, then a placebo had some
effect in the second test. Although the task was
counterbalanced across subjects so as to control for task
practice effects, it still seemed that group B fully or partially
were alert in session one to enable familiarity in Session 2.
This however did not occur when the group ingested
Placebo first. There was no speed-accuracy trade off and
accuracy since all subjects found the 3-back task difficult in
all 4 sessions and RTs were slower. Data shows that the nback judgements are in part mediated by a search process,
and that the complexity of the search depends on ‘n’. Intersubject variability poses a different problem, in that no
standard method has emerged for reliably comparing
activity across subjects (Braver et al., 1997).
A possible explanation of these results could be due to
testing bias, that is, exposure to the n-back test originally
leads to better results the second time. This could be due to
the nature of the test, rather than any treatment effects.
Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that having practised
the n-back task over 90 trails, thrice, familiarity of content,
enables participants to improve MRT in group having
placebo second, rather than the effects of treatment? Perhaps
the measures are not reflective of arousal rather indicators of
task related difficulty.
As expected, increasing WM load was associated with
declining accuracy and performance tended to decrease as
memory load increased. Performance declines continuously
with increased task load. The behavioural findings also
indicate that both accuracy and speed declined
monotonically with increases in task load. Note that the 3back task differs considerably. The statistical analysis of
Smith and Jonides stated that there are 22 significant sites of
activation in both 2-back and 3-back tasks, but only 2
significant areas in 0, and 1-back (Smith and Jonides, 1997).
These results support previous studies that as memory load
increases, more areas in the brain are recruited to perform
the task.
As was mentioned above, the primary purpose of this
study was to determine whether caffeine improved
cognition. The empirical results obtained did not support a
strong correlation. The second aim was to test whether
caffeine improved accuracy and this objective was
accomplished by comparing the behavioural data obtained
during the WM task performance (Gevins et al., 1996 and
Gevins et al., 2000). With respect to the performance data,
significantly shorter response times were recorded for the
caffeine rather than the placebo condition.
Koppelstaetter et al. (2008) concluded that the
modulations seen in specific cortical regions suggest an
effect on brain areas engaged in specific cognitive processes
rather than a general effect due to the influence of caffeine
on the vasculature. The Koppelstaetter study used functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) with a focus on

1566

caffeine users. The most relevant aspect of Koppelstaetters’
study was the confirmation that “caffeine had no significant
effect on cognitive performance,” which matched our
experimental results. Our study differs from the
Koppelstaetter study in that it used healthy subjects and an
increased dosage of 250 mg (as against 100 mg).

Conclusions
Based on the empirical results obtained in this study it can
be concluded that changes produced by caffeine ingestion
support the hypothesis that caffeine acts as a stimulant.
However, it cannot be proven that the stimulant translates
into enhanced motor processes with an improvement in
performance. Improved performance through ingestion of
caffeine may be evident in a fatigue situation. However, to
verify this assumption additional studies are needed to better
understand the mechanisms of how caffeine influences WM,
as the underlying fundamental processes are still unclear. In
the present work, caffeine showed little effect on
performance and it can be suggested that caffeine had no
large effects on cognitive tasks.

Future Work
Coffee as a beverage and its popularity in society definitely
warrants additional investigation. Consequently, large scale
studies need to be undertaken to affirm caffeine’s possible
effectiveness on specific cognitive functions and working
memory. Testing would require replication, and inclusion of
a third session that would result in a broader range of scores.
Investigators would have to be mindful that the dual-task
nature of the n-back, such as encoding, matching,
responding, updating, storing and rehearsing demands, vary
greatly between individuals due to (demographics,
education and social status). This perhaps may pose as a
potential problem. To date, little is known about the
sequence of events or neural pathways whilst performing
the WM task. Although calculation of response times and
accuracy levels assist to a degree, further studies are
required to account for subtleties. This thesis offered one
more account to add to its underlying processes.

References
Baddeley, A.D., & Hitch, G.J. (1974). Working Memory.
In G. A. Bower (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation (pp. 47-89). New York: Academic Press.
Barry, R.J., Rushby, J.A., Wallace, M.J., Clarke, A.R.,
Johnstone, S.J., & Zlojutro, I. (2005). Caffeine effects on
resting-arousal. Clinical Neuropsychology, 116, 26932700.
Benowitz, N.L. (1990). Clinical Pharmacology of Caffeine.
Annual Reviews, 41, 277-288.
Braver, T.S., Cohen, J.D., Nystrom, L.E., Jonides, J., Smith,
E.E., & Noll, D. (1997). A Parametric Study of Prefrontal
Cortex Involvement Inhuman Working Memory,
NeuroImage, 5, 49-62.

Bruce, M., Scott, N., Lader, M., & Marks, V. (1986). The
Psychopharmacological and Electrophysiological Effects
of Single Doses of Caffeine in Healthy Human Subjects.
Pharmacology, 22, 81-87.
Callicott, J.H., & Ramsey, N.F. (1998). Functional magnetic
resonance imaging brain mapping in psychiatry:
methodological issues illustrated in a study of working
memory in schizophrenia. Neuropschopharmacology, 18,
186-196.
Coffey, C.E., & Figiel, G.S. (1990). Caffeine Augmentation
of ECT. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 579-585.
Cowan, N. (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term
memory, A reconsideration of mental storage capacity.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 87-185.
Deslandes, A.C., Veiga, H., Cagy, M., Piedade, R., Pompeu
F., & Ribeiro, P. (2005). Effects of Caffeine on The
Electrophysiological, Cognitive and Motor Responses of
the Central Nervous System. Brazilian Journal of
Medical and Biological Research, 38, 1077- 1086.
Gevins, A., Smith, M.E., Leong, L.E., Bennett, H., Martin,
J., McEvoy, N., Du, L.R, & Whitfeild, S. (1996). High
resolution evoked potential imaging of the cortical
dynamics
of
human
working
memory.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
98, 327-348.
Gevins, A., & Smith, M.E. (2000). Neurphysiological
Measures Of Working Memory And Individual
Differences in Cognitive Ability and Cognitive Style.
Cerebral Cortex, 10, 829–839.
Jonides, J., Schumacher, E.H., Smith, E.E., Lauber, E.J.,
Awh, E., & Minoshima, S. (1997). Verbal working
memory load affects regional brain activation as
measured by PET. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 6,
462-475.
Kenemans, J.L., & Lorist, M.M. (1995). Caffeine and
selective visual processing. Pharmacology Biochemestry
Behaviour, 52, 461-471.
Koivisto, M., Krause, C.M., Revonsuo, A., Lane, M., &
Hamalainen, H. (2000). The effects of electromagnetic
field emitted by GSM phones on working memory.
Neuroreport, 11, 1641-1643.
Koppelstaetter, F., Poeppel, T.D., Sidentopf, C.M.,
Ischebeck, A., Verius, M., Haala, I., Mottaghy, F.M.,
Rhomberg, P., Golaszewski, S., Gotwald, T., Lorenz,
I.H., Kolbitsch, C., Felber, S., & Krause, B.J. (2008).
Does caffeine modulate verbal working memory
processes? An fMRI study. Neuroimage, 39, 492-499.
Levin, H.S., Hanten, G., Chang, C.C., Zhang, L., Schachar,
R., Ewing-Cobbs, L., & Max, J. (2002). Working
memory after traumatic brain injury in children. Annals of
Neurology, 52, 82-88.
Marks, V., & Kelly, J.F. (1973). Absorption of caffeine
from tea, coffee, and coca cola. Lancet, 1, 827.
Owen, A.M., McMillan, K.M., Laird, A.R., & Bullmore, E.
(2005). N-Back working memory paradigm: a metaanalysis of normative functional neuroimaging studies.
Human Brain Mapping, 25, 46-59.

1567

Richardson, N.J., Rogers, P.J., Elliman, N.A., & O’Dell,
R.J. (1995). Mood and performance effects of caffeine in
relation to acute and chronic caffeine deprivation,
Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behaviour, 52, 313-320.

1568

