UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Empiricist Solutions to Nativist Puzzles

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/62m6b84h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bod, Rens
Borensztajn, Gideon
Morgan, Emily

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Empiricist Solutions to Nativist Puzzles
Rens Bod (rens.bod@gmail.com) Gideon Borensztajn (gideonbor@gmail.com)
Emily Morgan (eipmorgan@gmail.com)
Cognitive Science Center Amsterdam, Institute for Logic, Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands

Introduction
How much knowledge of language is innate and how much
is learned through experience? The nativist view endorses
that human language acquisition is guided by innate rules
(“Universal Grammar”), while the empiricist view assumes
that language acquisition is the product of abstractions from
stored exemplars. Despite the apparent opposition between
these views, the essence of the debate lies in the relative
contribution of prior knowledge and linguistic experience.
The main goal is then to establish the minimal prior
knowledge needed for language acquisition to take place.
In this paper we will focus on a couple of hard linguistic
phenomena that have for a long time been considered
“parade cases of an innate constraint”: auxiliary fronting
and binding. We show that these linguistic facets can be
learned without assuming specific constraints or principles
and without presuming that they have been literally seen in
the data. Instead, we will demonstrate that these phenomena
can be learned either from simpler sentences in a corpus of
child-directed speech (Bod 2009) or emerge from a specific
parsing strategy.

same referent. Crain and Thornton (2006) motivate a
discussion of binding with the following sentences:
(3) While the Ninja Turtlei danced, hei ate pizza.
(4) While hei ate pizza the Ninja Turtlei danced.
(5) The Ninja Turtlei danced while hei ate pizza.
(6) *Hei ate pizza while the Ninja Turtlei danced.
In examples (3-5), he can be coreferential with the Ninja
Turtle, but in (6) it cannot. This fact is traditionally
explained in terms of a constraint known as Binding
Principle C, which in turn relies on one of the most
fundamental notions in generative grammar, known as ccommand. It turns out that Principle C is violated in (6)
while not in examples (3-5). However, we will show that the
binding constraint can also emerge as a result of incremental
parsing. There is no need for separate principles. Rather
than viewing c-command as an explicit rule that can either
be learned or innately granted, we show that it becomes a
natural relation when using an incremental left-corner
parser. This suggests that other ‘hard’ phenomena, which
also rely on c-command, can be explained in an empiricist
way as well.

Auxiliary Fronting (AF)
Based on Chomsky (1968), who argued that AF was a case
for the Poverty of the Stimulus argument, Crain &
Nakayama (1987) gave evidence that children never
produce sentences of type (2). Moreover, they maintained
that sentences of type (1) are so rare that children must have
innately specified knowledge that allows them to learn AF
without ever having heard it.
(1) Is the man who is eating hungry?
(2) *Is the man who eating is hungry?
However, Reali & Christiansen (2005) showed that AF can
also be learned by linear models such as SRNs and n-grams.
Yet, some of their success depends on “accidental” English
facts (Kam et al. 2008). Clark and Eyraud (2007) showed
that AF can be learned by inferring a CFG from
distributional statistics, but Berwick & Chomsky (2008)
opposed that their result is limited to an artificial example.
In Bod (2009), we replicated the induction of AF, and
additionally showed that AF can be learned from realistic
child-directed speech in the Eve (Childes) corpus. Although
complex auxiliary fronting is not literally recorded in the
Eve corpus, it can be ‘elicited’ by combining chunks from
previous utterances by means of simple substitution in the
shortest possible way. It turns out that this model can also
simulate various AF-errors made by children.

Binding and C-command
Another widely studied linguistic phenomenon is binding,
wherein multiple noun phrases are understood to have the

References
Berwick, R. & Chomsky, N. ‘Poverty of the Stimulus’ revisited:
recent challenges reconsidered. In Proceedings CogSci 2008,
383.
Bod, R. (1998). Beyond Grammar. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Bod, R. (2002). A Unified Model of Structural Organization in
Language and Music. JAIR, 17, 289-308.
Bod, R., Hay, J. & Jannedy, S. (eds.) (2003). Probabilistic
Linguistics. The MIT Press.
Bod, R. (2006). Exemplar-Based Syntax: How to Get Productivity
from Examples. The Linguistic Review 23, 291-320.
Bod, R. (2007). Is the End of Supervised Parsing in Sight? In
Proceedings ACL 2007, 400-407.
Bod, R. (2009). From exemplar to grammar: a probabilistic
analogy-based model of language learning. Cognitive Science
33, In press. <http://staff.science.uva.nl/~rens/analogy.pdf>.
Chomksy, N. (1968). Language and Mind. New York: Harcourt.
Clark, A. & Eyraud, R. (2007). Polynomial Identification in the
Limit of Substitutable Context-free Languages, Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 8, 1725-1745.
Crain, S., & Nakayama, M. (1987). Structure Dependence in
Grammar Formation. Language, 63, 522-543.
Crain, S., & Thornton, R. (2006). Acquisition of syntax and
semantics. In M. Thraxler & M. Gernsbacher (eds.), Handbook
of Pscyholinguistics, Elsevier, 1073-1110.
Kam, X.-N, Stoyneshka, I., Tornyova, L., Fodor, J., & Sakas, W.
(2008). Bigrams and the Richness of the Stimulus. Cognitive
Science, 32, 771-787.
Reali, F., & Christiansen, M. (2005). Uncovering the richness of
the stimulus: structure dependence and indirect statistical
evidence. Cognitive Science, 29, 1007-1028.

2328

