UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Endogenous orienting attention without consciousness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/735290zp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Casagrande, Maria
Marino, Barbara
Marotta, Andrea
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

ENDOGENOUS ORIENTING OF ATTENTION WITHOUT AWARENESS
Maria Casagrande (maria.casagrande@uniroma1.it)
Dipartimento di Psicologia, via dei Marsi 78
Roma, 00185 Italy

Stefania Mereu (smereu@uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 East Daniel St,
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Diana Martella (diana.martella@uniroma1.it)
Dipartimento di Psicologia, via dei Marsi 78
Roma, 00185 Italy

Andrea Marotta (andrea.marotta@uniroma1.it)
Dipartimento di Psicologia, via dei Marsi 78
Roma, 00185 Italy

Barbara Marino (babi0203@yahoo.it)
Dipartimento di Psicologia, via dei Marsi 78
Roma, 00185 Italy

Abstract
This study investigated the role of awareness in
endogenous orienting of visual attention. Twenty-five
subjects performed a Covert Attention Task, in which
target stimuli were preceded by masked and unmasked
symbolic central cues (i.e., digits). Results showed a
facilitation effect in both the aware and unaware
condition, suggesting that a symbolic cue was able to
induce an endogenous orienting in the absence of
subjective awareness

Keywords: Attention, Spatial Cueing; Endogenous
orienting; Awareness, Consciousness, Masking

Introduction
Orienting visual attention serves to enhance perceptual
processing at the attended location and it has been
extensively studied by the spatial cueing paradigm,
introduced by Posner (1980). Visual attention can be
oriented to a visual field location by a cue that accurately
indicates the spatial position at which a target stimulus will
appear. Two types of orienting have been described. One is
driven by a symbolic cue (as an arrow or any other symbol
to which a meaning is assigned by instructions), presented
in a central position of the screen; the other is triggered by
an abrupt onset of a peripheral change in the visual field, as
a brief brightening of the borders of a lateral placeholder
box, that may automatically capture attention (e.g., Folk,
Remington, & Johnston, 1992; Jonides, 1981; Müller, &
Rabbitt, 1989; Posner, & Cohen, 1984; Posner, Cohen, &

Rafal, 1982; Theeuwes, 1991; Yantis, & Jonides, 1990). A
shift of attention to the spatial location indicated by the cue
is inferred when reaction times (RT) are faster to targets
presented at the cued location than to targets at an uncued
location (Posner, 1980). These two types of cue allow to
distinguish two qualitatively different cognitive processes in
the shifting of attention. The first one, driven by a symbolic
predictive central cue, engages an endogenous orienting of
attention, reflecting an internal control. On the contrary, the
attentional shifting triggered by a peripheral cue (e.g., an
abrupt onset) elicits an exogenous orienting of attention.
The distinction between exogenous and endogenous
allocation of attention has been extensively explored (e.g.,
Folk, Remington, & Johnston, 1992; Jonides, 1981; Müller,
& Rabbitt, 1989; Posner, & Cohen, 1984; Posner, Cohen, &
Rafal, 1982; Theeuwes, 1991; Yantis, & Jonides, 1990).
Endogenous shifts of attention can be interrupted, they are
slow and under volitional control, reflecting a top-down
control and a goal-directed process. Exogenous shifts of
attention are rapid, resistant to interruption, they occur
automatically, reflecting a bottom-up control and a
stimulus-driven process.
Another essential difference between exogenousautomatic and endogenous-voluntary cognitive processes
concerns the role of the consciousness. In fact, while a
voluntary shift of attention would happen only in presence
of awareness, the seconds could be also unconscious
(Posner, & Snyder, 1975).
This theoretical hypothesis has been confirmed by
studies, using spatial cues made invisible by a procedure of
perceptual masking (McCormick, 1997; Ivanoff, & Klein,
2003). However, Casagrande and co-workers (Casagrande,

1442

Mereu, & Martella, 2006) have shown an implicit spatial
orienting induced by a central symbolic cue (an arrow),
made invisible by an object substitution masking (Enns, &
Di Lollo, 1997). Assuming that a central symbolic cue can
induce only an attentional shifting controlled by a voluntary
process (McCormick, 1997; Ivanoff, & Klein, 2003; Posner,
& Snyder, 1975) – i.e. a cognitive action impossible to
obtain by means of unconscious cues - this finding appears
to be amazing. Besides, this result do not confirm those of
previous studies (McCormick, 1997; Ivanoff, & Klein,
2003), which did not observed an endogenous orienting
process when subjects were not aware of the cue presence.
A simple explanation of this finding can come from studies,
demonstrating that an arrow – used as a central spatial cue –
can reflexively trigger an attentional shift (e.g., Tipples,
2002). On the basis of these results, one could argue that the
attentional shifting found with unaware central arrows
could be due to an automatic orienting of attention.
However, the ability of an arrow to elicit an automatic
process was shown by studies using a spatial cueing
paradigm in which the cue was uninformative of the
following target position (e.g., Tipple, 2002), while in the
Casagrande’ study the spatial cue indicated the likely
location of the target (e.g. 80%). It is well known that
exogenous orienting is studied with non-informative
peripheral cues (e.g., the cue does not predict the
subsequent spatial location of the target, since only 50% of
valid trials are present), whereas an informative (validity
greater than 50%) peripheral cue engaged both exogenous
and endogenous orienting processes (e.g., Ivanoff, & Klein,
2003). These methodological differences do not allow us to
unambiguous conclusions about the relation between
consciousness and endogenous processes in spatial
orienting. In order to clarify this issue, in this study we used
a Spatial Cueing paradigm with an informative spatial cue.
The central cue was a digit, to which the symbolic meaning
was assigned by instructions (Martella, Casagrande, Mereu,
Marotta, Sebastiani, 2008). In the fifty per cent of the trials,
the central cue was made invisible by the same masking
paradigm used by Casagrande et al. (2006).
If it is not possible to induce an endogenous shift of
attention without awareness of the cue, we will have to
observe a single cueing effect when cue is consciously
perceived and no effect when subjects report not to have
seen the cue. On the contrary, if a conscious process is not
necessary to induce an endogenous orienting of attention,
cueing effects should be observed both in the trials in which
cue is clearly visible and in those in which cue is made
invisible by the masking procedure.

Method
Subjects
Twenty-five subjects (mean age: 24,2; ±3,65) signed an
informed consent before participating as volunteers to the
study. They were all naïve to the purpose of the experiment.

All of them reported normal or corrected to normal vision.
The study was approved by the local ethical committee.

Apparatus
Stimuli were presented on a 21-inch colour VGA
monitor. An IBM-compatible PC, running E-Prime
software, controlled the presentation of stimuli, timing
operations, and data collection. Responses were collected
through the keyboard of the computer.

Stimuli
The display consisted of five boxes (3° of the visual
angle), displayed on the center of the screen and on the left,
right, above and under the central box; the center of each
peripheral box subtended 5º of the visual angle. The cue
was centrally presented and consisted in a digit (1° of the
visual angle) from 1 to 2, indicating the most probable
location of the target. The stimulus target was a black patch
(1° of the visual angle), and it could be presented only in
the right or left box. All stimuli were presented on a grey
background. The masks were similar to those used by Enns
and Di Lollo (1997), composed of four white dots (0.2°)
arranged at the corners of an imaginary square (2.8°)
centred on the patch. In successive phases they disappeared
and then reappeared dislocated from the starting point
giving the illusion of motion; in fact, they seemed to
enlarge due to the well-known illusion of apparent motion.

Task
The task required subjects to maintain their gaze on the
fixation point during the entire sequence trial. As soon as
the target stimulus was presented, subjects had to press the
spacebar of the keyboard with the right hand as quickly as
possible. Participants were also informed that the cue
indicated the most likely location of the incoming target, so
that the best strategy for fast responses was to allocate their
attention at the cued location. After response to the
stimulus, two questions appeared on the screen. The first
required subject to point out whether they had seen the
stimulus and to answer pressing a key for the "yes" and
another one for the "no". The second question required him
to point out what number had appeared, if "1" or "2",
pressing the respective keys on the keyboard and to try to
guess in case of uncertainty.

Procedure
The display was placed in a silent and dimly illuminated
room, at a distance of 56 cm. from the subjects’ eyes. A
headrest was used to stabilize the observer’s head.
Participants were required to maintain their gaze on the
fixation box during the entire experimental block.
At the beginning of each sequence, a square (17° in
height and 18° in width) appeared in the centre of the
display on which the subject had to maintain his gaze while
trying to extend attention on all the surface of the square.
500 ms later, the square was replaced by 5 boxes, in which

1443

both the cue and the stimulus had to appear. The five boxes
were presented and they remained for the whole duration of
the trial. Two conditions were possible: in one (no-mask
condition), the target (100 ms) appeared in isolation; in the
other (mask condition), the target and four white dots
appeared together for 10 ms. The four dots remained on the
screen and then disappeared after 140 ms, to be replaced by
another four dots dislocated (0.2°) on the diagonal of the
square that remained on the screen for 150 ms.
Subsequently, the four dots disappeared again in order to
reappear dislocated once more and to remain on the screen
for 150 ms. This sequence gave the sensation that the
imaginary square (on which the four dots were set) was
increasing in size.
The cue was presented for 100 ms in the no-mask
condition and for 10 ms in the mask condition. In both
conditions, two types of cue–target stimulus onset
asynchrony (SOA) were selected: 150 ms and 850 ms. The
target was displayed in the left or in the right box for 150
ms. If no response was given within 1500 ms after the target
onset, the next trial began.
There were two cue conditions. During the valid
condition, the target appeared in the same position of the
cue (75% of trials); in the invalid condition, the target
appeared in a different position of the cue (25% of all
trials). The ratio between valid and invalid trials was 3:1.
Participants completed one practice block of 25 trials and
two experimental blocks of 360 trials, in which 240 valid
trials, 80 invalid trials, 10 no-cue trials, and 30 no-target
trials (catch trials) were randomly presented. A short break
was provided at the end of each block. In the figure 1 an
example of the procedure is reported.

Experimental design
Only trials where the cue was presented in the central
position were considered for the analysis. A repeated
measure analysis of variance (ANOVA): Masking (Masked,
Unmasked) by Cue (Valid, Invalid) was carried out on
mean reaction times (RT) of correct responses. For masked
condition, only the trials in which the subject reported not
to have seen the cue were considered. For unmasked
condition, only the trials in which the subject reported to
have seen the cue were considered. Trials with correct
responses faster than 100 ms or slower than 1000 ms as
well as incorrect responses were excluded from RT analysis
The Duncan test was used for the post-hoc analysis of the
means.

RESULTS
All RT less than 100 ms represented the 13.8% of the
trials in the unmasked condition and the 3.2% of the trials in
the masked condition. RT longer than 1000 ms were 0,9%
of the trials. For each condition, means (±SD) of RT are
reported in the table 1.

Cue
Masking

Valid

Invalid

Masked

443
(98)
371
(89)

450
(92)
381
(104)

Unmasked

Table 1. Mean (±DS) RT for each experimental condition.
The ANOVA showed a significant effect for the Masking
(F1,24=84.4; p<.0001), which revealed faster RT when the
cue was unmasked (Mean RT: 376 ms) than when it was
masked (Mean RT: 446 ms). A significant effect of the Cue
(F1,24=4.5; p=.05) showed faster RT in the valid trials
(Mean RT: 407 ms) as compared to the invalid trials (Mean
RT: 416 ms). The interaction was not significant (F<1).

420

ms

415
410
405
400
Valid

Invalid

Figure 1. Sequence of the events in the procedure.

Figure 2. Mean RT for both valid and invalid trials.

1444

DISCUSSION
The masking procedure used in the experiment has been
effective in decreasing the subjective awareness of the cue;
in fact, when the cue was presented for very short time (10
ms) and the cue was masked by an object substitution
procedure, subjects reported to have not seen the cue in the
80% of the trials. The lack of cue awareness in the masked
condition was confirmed by slower RT in this condition as
respect to the unmasked condition. RT were faster in the
valid trials, compared to the invalid trials, and this cueing
effect was independently observed in the presence or
absence of the masking procedure, in other words a cueing
effect was present both when subjects clearly perceived the
spatial cue and when subjects were not aware of the
presence of the cue. In fact, the interaction was not
significant (F< 1). Such result is remarkable since shows
that an unconscious symbolic cue can become an attentional
trigger for an endogenous orienting process.
Results do not confirm those found by other authors
(McCormick, 1997; Ivanoff, & Klein, 2003), however they
replicate a previous finding of Casagrande et al. (2006).
The symbolic nature of the cue seems to unambiguously
induce an endogenous shifting of attention. Thus, results of
this study furnish further evidence that points out as a
purely endogenous cue is able to elicit an endogenous
shifting of attention also in absence of the cue awareness.
The relevance of this result is in the fact that in this
experiment, at variance with the study of Casagrande et al.
(2006), the symbolic nature of the spatial cue was
unambiguous (Martella et al., 2008).
Two hypotheses can be advanced for explaining the
present result. The first suggests that awareness is not
needed for inducing an endogenous shifting of attention.
The second hypothesis is more hazard, compared to the
first. In fact, if findings of the present study as due to an
exogenous shifting of attention, then they allow us to mine
the theoretical foundations of about thirty years of studies
on the attention, which have always pointed out that a
central symbolic cue is able to induce a voluntary shift of
attention. In other words, we should be concluded that, not
only an arrow, but also any symbolic cue could elicit only
an automatic orienting of attention. These conclusions
appear intriguing, however they have the advantage to
easily allow to verifiable hypotheses.

References

Enns, J. T., & Di Lollo, V. (1997). Object substitution: A
new form of masking in unattended visual locations.
Psychological Science, 8, 135–139.
Folk, C. L., Remington, R. W., & Johnston, J. C. (1992).
Involuntary covert orienting is contingent on attentional
control settings. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 18(4), 1030-1044.
Ivanoff J., & Klein R. M. (2003). Orienting of attention
without awareness is affected by measurement-induced
attentional control settings. Journal of Vision, 3, 32-40.
Jonides, J. (1981). Voluntary vs. automatic control over the
mind’s eye’s movement. In: M. I. Posner, & O. Marin
(Eds.). Attention and performance. Hillsdale, NJ,
Erlbaum.
Martella, D., Casagrande, M., Mereu, S., Marotta A.,
Sebastiani, M. (2008). Alerting and Orienting:
Interaction or independence? XXIX International
Congress of Psychology. Berlin. July, 20-25, 2008.
McCormick, P. A. (1997). Orienting attention without
awareness. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance. 23(1), 168–180.
Müller, H. J., & Rabbitt P. M. A. (1989). Reflexive and
voluntary orienting of visual attention: time course of
activation and resistance to interruption. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance. 15, 315–330.
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology. 32, 3–25.
Posner, M. I., & Cohen, Y. (1984). Components of visual
orienting. In H. Bouma & D. G. Bowhui (Eds.).
Attention and performance (pp. 531–556), Vol. X.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Posner, M. I., Cohen, Y., & Rafal, R. D. (1982). Neural
systems control of spatial orienting. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London. 298, 187–198.
Posner, M. I., & Snyder, C. R. R. (1975). Attention and
cognitive control. In: R. L. Solso (Ed.). Information
processing and cognition: The Loyola symposium (pp.
55-85). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Theeuwes, J. (1991). Exogenous and endogenous control of
attention: The effect of visual onsets and offsets.
Perception & Psychophysics. 49, 83-90.
Tipples, J. (2002). Eye gaze is not unique: automatic
orienting in response to uninformative arrows.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review. 9(2), 314–8.
Yantis, S., & Jonides, J. (1990). Abrupt visual onsets and
selective attention: Voluntary versus automatic
allocation. J. Exp. Psychol.Hum. Percept. Perform. 16,
121–134.

Casagrande, M., Mereu, S., & Martella, D. (2006).
Attenzione e coscienza: è possibile dissociare i due
processi? Congresso Nazionale AIP. Sezione di
Psicologia Sperimentale. Rovereto, 13–15 settembre
2006, p.28.

1445

