UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evaluating traffic scenes while performing motor tasks
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3f47849d
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Bueno, Mercedes
Castro, Candida
Moreno-Rios, Sergio
et al.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

               Evaluating traffic scenes while performing motor tasks
                                                Mercedes Bueno
                                               Universidad de Granada
                                                 Cándida Castro
                                               Universidad de Granada
                                                   Javier Roca
                                               Universidad de Granada
                                              Sergio Moreno-Rı́os
                                               Universidad de Granada
Abstract: Driving is a complex task that requires doing different subtasks simultaneously. The possible interference
between two of these subtasks is analysed: a) to judge manoeuvres regulated by traffic signs that can be made by
a vehicle at an intersection (in the shape of a T-junction) and b) to perform a motor task. In addition, we test the
possible effect of the spatial component of the motor task on the judgment task.
  Interpreting traffic signs requires comprehension and inference. In previous studies, the evaluation of these pro-
cesses allowed us to predict and prove differences in a judgment task with prohibitory and obligatory signs (Tornay,
Castro & Moreno-Rı́os, in press). When the task showed simple situations, obligatory and prohibitory signs were
easily judged for allowed and not allowed manoeuvres, respectively. The advantage of these conditions over the rest
was explained by the fact that these were the only conditions not requiring spatial inferences.
  In this study, this explanation is tested by adding two kinds of concurrent motor task: with a spatial component
and with a non-spatial one. More specifically, we predict an increase of interference in the judgement task when the
concurrent motor task has a spatial component than when it has not. Results from the proposed hypothesis are
discussed.
                                                          2039

