UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Event Segmentation Drives Memory Updating

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6wj4f5jq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Zacks, Jeffrey M.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Event Segmentation Drives Memory Updating
Jeffrey M. Zacks (jzacks@wustl.edu)

Washington University Department of Psychology, 1 Brookings Drive
Saint Louis, MO 63130 USA

Keywords: event perception;
cognitive neuroscience.

memory;

segmentation;

Acknowledgments

To the consternation of those of us in
experimental psychology, human experience is
not made up of “stimuli.” Rather, it is made of
events—meaningful chunks of activity that form
the units of perception, action planning, and
memory. In this talk I will describe a theory of
how event representations arise in perception,
how they are updated, and how this affects later
memory.
According to the theory, perception is oriented
in time such that perceivers constantly make
predictions about what will happen in the near
future. These predictions are guided by actively
maintained memory representations that keep
information about the current event available for
further processing throughout the duration of that
event. The quality of prediction is monitored.
When one experiences a sudden increase in
prediction error, one updates one’s memory
representations.
This theory makes several predictions about the
relations between perception and memory. First,
people will tend to perceive event boundaries at
moments in time when things are changing,
because changes tend to produce prediction errors.
Second, recently presented information should be
accessed differently depending on whether it is
part of a still-ongoing event. Third, how one
segments activity during perception should
determine how one remembers the activity later. I
will present data bearing on these predictions,
focusing on the second and third. Overall, the data
support the predictions of the theory. The data
suggest that the perception that one event has
ended and another has begun reflects the
operation of a fundamental cognitive operation
that drives attention and memory updating.

This talk will cover research completed with a supportive
and insightful group of collaborators, including Richard
Abrams, Chris Kurby, Larry Jacoby, Jeremy Reynolds,
Nicole Speer, and Khena Swallow. The research is
supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health
(RO1-MH70674 and RO1-AG0331150).

Relevant Publications
Zacks, J. M., Speer, N. K., Vettel, J. M., & Jacoby, L. L.
(2006). Event understanding and memory in healthy aging
and dementia of the Alzheimer type. Psychology & Aging,
21, 466-482.
Zacks, J. M., Speer, N. K., Swallow, K. M., Braver, T. S.,
& Reynolds, J. R. (2007). Event perception: A mind/brain
perspective. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 273-293
Speer, N. K., Reynolds, J. R., & Zacks, J. M. (2007).
Human brain activity time-locked to narrative event
boundaries. Psychological Science, 18, 449-455.
Zacks, J. M. & Swallow, K. M. (2007). Event segmentation.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 80-84.
Reynolds, J. R., Zacks, J. M., & Braver, T. S. (2007). A
computational model of event segmentation from
perceptual prediction, Cognitive Science, 31, 613-643.
Kurby, C. A. & Zacks, J. M. (2008). Segmentation in the
perception and memory of events. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 12, 72-79.
Yarkoni, T., Speer, N. K., & Zacks, J. M. (2008). Neural
substrates of narrative comprehension and memory.
Neuroimage, 41, 1408-1425.
Zacks, J. M., Speer, N. K., & Reynolds, J. R. (in press).
Situation changes predict the perception of event
boundaries, reading time, and perceived predictability in
narrative comprehension. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General.
Swallow, K. M., Zacks, J. M., & Abrams, R. A. (in press).
Event boundaries in perception affect memory encoding
and updating. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General.
Speer, N. K., Reynolds, J. R., Swallow, K. M., & Zacks, J.
M. (in press). Reading stories activates neural
representations of perceptual and motor experiences.
Psychological Science.

2656

