UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Expertise Effects on Immediate, Deliberate and Unconscious Thought in Complex
Decision Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9261v5h1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Boshuizen, Henny
Meeuwesen, Eva
Wiers, Reinout
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Expertise Effects on Immediate, Deliberate and Unconscious Thought
in Complex Decision Making
Margaretha W. J. van de Wiel (m.vandewiel@psychology.unimaas.nl)
Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD
Maastricht, The Netherlands

Henny P. A. Boshuizen (els.boshuizen@ou.nl)
CELSTEC, Open University, P.O. Box 2960, 6401 DL,
Heerlen, The Netherlands

Eva W. Meeuwesen (e.meeuwesen@alumni.unimaas.nl)
Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD
Maastricht, The Netherlands

Reinout W. Wiers (r.wiers@uva.nl)
Department of Psychology, Roeterstraat 15, 1018 WB
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract
In this study we examined the claim that unconscious thought
would lead to better choices in complex decision making than
immediate and deliberate thought. We doubted whether this
would also be true for experts in a domain. Participants were
students and experienced real-estate agents with expertise in
choosing between houses. In three problems, differing in
difficulty and/or task requirements, participants decided upon
the best house by rank-ordering and evaluation. No support
was found for beneficial effects of unconscious thought,
neither for experts, nor for students. In line with our
hypothesis we found that experts could take advantage of
deliberate thinking in complex decision making. They were
also better than students in immediate choices. These results
corroborate other studies that question the generalizability of
the deliberation-without-attention hypothesis, and provide
further evidence that it is helpful to deliberately think when
making complex decisions. The advice is to rely on experts or
to build expertise, instead of leaving thinking to the unconsciousness.
Keywords: expertise; task complexity; decision making;
unconscious thought; deliberation; intuition.

Introduction
Imagine you want to buy a house. Probably you have some
ideas what it should look like, what it may cost, and where
you would like to live. You start orienting yourself and find
out what is realistic in the price range you are looking for. If
you are lucky, you immediately find what you want and can
decide quickly. However, it is more likely that you will have
to make some compromises; otherwise you need to take the
time to wait for your dream. In case you need to reconsider
your wishes, you may set priorities, and evaluate the
characteristics of a house against your standards. When
comparing several houses you can make lists with pros and
cons to help you weigh and choose. In this process you can
also ask a real-estate agent for advice, who may integrate his
view on the technical details and the possible rearrange-

ments. Finally, you can let all information sink in, and take
the decision when you feel what to do.
This example shows the different types of decision
processes that might be involved when buying a house. An
immediate process of matching characteristics to criteria has
a satisfactory result when the problem is easy, a house
meets your wishes or it does not. A deliberate process of
listing and weighing pros and cons will be invoked when
you are not immediately convinced and the decision is
tougher. An unconscious process of information processing,
furthermore, might take place when you are indecisive and
put the problem at rest.
This last option of unconscious information processing
has recently received a lot of attention, since Dijksterhuis
(2004) found an advantage of this type of processing above
immediate decision making and deliberate thinking before
deciding. Based on his experiments, he gave the following
advice for making complex decisions: “..after a little initial
conscious information acquisition, avoid thinking about it
consciously. Take your time and let the unconscious deal
with it” (pp. 597). This advice has been taken quite
seriously in the public media, not the least in The
Netherlands. However, scientifically it raised considerable
debate. Several researchers failed to replicate the findings of
Dijksterhuis (Acker, 2008; Newell, Wong, Cheung, &
Rakow, 2009). Attempts to specify the conditions in which
the unconscious thought effect would arise (Newell et al.,
2009; Payne, Samper, Bettman, & Luce, 2008), as well as a
meta-analysis (Acker, 2008), indicated that there was no
clear evidence that unconscious thought contributed to
better decision making. On the contrary, conscious
deliberation about choice alternatives might have been
handicapped by the experimental tasks used, so it could not
help to make complex decisions.
Dijksterhuis and colleagues argued that conscious
processing capacity is too small to handle complex

733

problems (Dijksterhuis, 2004; Dijkstherhuis, Bos, Nordgren,
& van Baren, 2006), as it can only focus on a few attributes
simultaneously, so hindering the association and integration
of the other information. Theoretically it may only be
possible to take in and weigh all relevant information in
simple decisions. In the present study, we will focus on the
variable of complexity. This relates to the complexity of the
task and to the expertise of the decision maker: What is
complex for some might be simple for others.
Although the knowledge and skills of people underlie
their cognitive processing of information in all sorts of
tasks, expertise is underemphasized as a topic in the
decision making literature. Therefore, we tested the effects
of expertise on thinking in a within-subject experiment with
three problems using the Dijksterhuis (2004) paradigm. To
keep close to the original study, we asked both students and
experienced real-estate agents to rank order and evaluate
four houses in each problem. Two problems varied in
difficulty to investigate shifts in the beneficial effects of the
different modes of thought. Furthermore, in one problem we
slightly changed the task, so differences in and consequences of immediate judgments could be better assessed.
Before describing the method of study and the hypotheses
per problem, we will explain the Dijksterhuis paradigm
(2004) and his ideas about the working of unconscious
thought, as well as some basic findings from expertise
research.

Unconscious Thought and the Research Paradigm
Dijksterhuis and colleagues describe unconscious thought as
an active process of information integration that proceeds in
the background while attention is directed elsewhere
(Dijksterhuis, 2004; Dijksterhuis & Nordgren, 2006;
Dijksterhuis et al., 2006). They emphasize that it is not
constrained by processing capacity like conscious thought
but is the result of bottom-up or aschematic processing that
yields an unbiased holistic judgment. Therefore, it would be
particularly apt to process complex decision problems in
which many attributes and alternatives are involved. It was
also named ‘deliberation-without-attention’.
In a series of experiments, Dijksterhuis (2004) showed
that people made better decisions when they were diverted
for some time from the target task compared to both
immediate responses and decisions deliberated upon for the
same period. Participants were presented with a large
number of attributes for each of several alternatives
(apartments or roommates) asking them to form an
impression of the alternatives and to evaluate or choose
among them later. The assignment of attributes created
normatively better and worse options. In two of the three
experiments the attributes of all alternatives were randomly
presented. This resulted in a rather unrealistic and taxing
task. The final judgments were made in three different
conditions. In the immediate decision condition, participants
were not given time to consciously think as they had to
make a judgment immediately after information processing.
In the conscious thought condition, participants were

instructed to think carefully about the information for a few
minutes. Finally, in the unconscious thought condition,
participants performed a fully attention-demanding distractor task (n-back task or anagram task) preventing them to
consciously think about the task.
Interestingly, Dijksterhuis (2004) not only looked at
differences in judgments in the three conditions, but also at
the representations that underlie these judgments. The
positive effect of unconscious thought on decision making
was suggested to be the result of further organizing of the
information in mental representations and, thus, indeed of
thinking processes.

Expertise
Many experts learn to deal with complex problems and can
become very fast and accurate in representative problem
solving. The general explanation is that, through study and
experience, knowledge becomes organized in such a way
that it allows immediate recognition of a situation, and
subsequently, immediate appropriate action (Anderson,
1996; Chi, Feltovich & Glaser, 1981; Ericsson, 2005). The
crucial mediator here is the representation of the problem to
be solved. In interpreting the problem, situation-specific
information and knowledge interact forming a mental
representation. Other cognitive elements representing, for
example, possible actions and strategies, are associated with
this representation. The better developed this functional
system of integrated representations, the better the
performance. The acquisition of expertise, therefore, often
leads to dramatic increases in domain specific working
memory capacities, functionally expanding one’s ability to
encode and represent highly complex information.
In medicine, for example, experienced physicians come
up with accurate diagnostic hypotheses very early in the
patient encounter, which guide further questioning and
examination (Elstein & Schwarz, 2002). Students also
generate and test hypotheses in interacting with a patient but
their hypotheses are less accurate. They have to fall back on
analytical processing of case information in trying to understand the patient’s problem. Physicians only do that when
they are confronted with complex and difficult problems. In
routine problem solving, the appropriate actions come
immediately to their minds. (Schmidt, Norman, & Boshuizen, 1990; Norman, Eva, Brooks, & Hamstra, 2006).

Method
Participants
Participants were 60 undergraduate students (34 women and
26 men) of Maastricht University and 60 real-estate agents
(15 women and 45 men) working in the south of the
Netherlands. The average age of the students was 21.70 (SD
= 2.76). The real-estate agents were on average 36.73 years
(SD = 9.31), and their work experience after completing
relevant studies and internships varied from 1 to 49 years,
(M =7.74; SD = 7.81).

734

Students participated for course credits or a € 7,50 gift
certificate. Real-estate agents were approached by phone
(response rate of 62%) and unexpectedly received a bottle of
wine afterwards.

Material
The materials for each task consisted of information about
four hypothetical houses, labelled House 1-4. Depending on
the task 12 or 18 attributes per house were presented. The
attributes were positive, negative or neutral and assembled
in such a way that it led to normatively more and less
favourable options per task.
The stimulus material was developed in cooperation with
three independent experienced real-estate agents to assure
that the presented information would be congruent with
practices in their domain of expertise. A list of relevant
dimensions, such as date of building, number of bedrooms,
and garden, was formulated first to guide attribute selection.
To enhance representativeness of the materials attributes
were selected from existing houses. The order of attributes
for each house was determined in agreement with the realestate agents, so it resembled the order in which they
commonly process the information. Two important
constraints in searching for a house, price and location, were
preset and not included in the attribute lists. Pictures were
not included as they may dominate the decision making
process. In line with the experiments of Dijksterhuis (2004)
the materials were restricted to short verbal descriptions that
were not extremely positive or negative.

Procedure
In recruiting, the participants were told that they would have
to choose between several houses as we were interested how
decisions of real-estate agents would differ from those of
students. They were explained that characteristics of four
houses would appear on a computer screen and that their
task would be to rank-order the houses and to evaluate each
house for attractiveness.
The participants were individually tested with a laptop.
Students were tested at the university and real-estate agents
were tested in their offices. The experimenter explained that
they would be given 3 decision problems and a practice
problem. To increase representativeness of the task participants were asked to imagine a concrete real-life situation.
Real-estate agents were instructed to imagine that they had
spoken to a young couple in the process of buying their first
house. The couple had communicated their wishes and said
they wanted a house situated near the city of Maastricht.
They could afford a house in a price range of €170.000 to
€180.000 and asked the real-estate agent for advice which
house to buy. Students were instructed to imagine that their
parents had decided to buy a house in Maastricht as an
investment. They were told that they would be allowed to
live in the house with a friend during their years as a
student. The parents were able to afford a house in a price
range of €170.000 to €180.000. After some research on the
internet they found various houses in the proposed price

range, that the students might choose from. Their task was
to decide which house was the best for them to buy.
For each problem, the houses were sequentially presented
on a computer screen, each attribute appearing in the centre
of the screen for 2 seconds. The boundaries between houses
were marked by a 2 second pause (Problems 1 and 2) or an
extra evaluation task (Problem 3). The order in which the
houses were presented was randomized.
Participants were asked to form a good impression of the
houses and they were told that they would be asked to
choose one of them later. This was operationalized as rankordering and evaluation. They first had to rank-order the
houses by typing the house numbers in positions, putting the
most attractive house on top, and the least attractive house
at the bottom. Subsequently, they evaluated whether they
would like to buy, or would advise to buy, each house on a
VAS-scale (0-100 mm) ranging from definitely not to
definitely with a neutral point in the middle.
After the presentation of the four houses, following the
Dijksterhuis (2004) paradigm, specific instructions for the
three thought conditions were given. In the immediate
thought condition, participants were asked to provide a
rank-order of the houses and to do this as quickly as
possible. In the deliberate thought condition, participants
were asked to think carefully about what they thought about
the four houses for four minutes. A clock indicated the
remaining time. In the unconscious thought condition,
participants performed a distractor task for four minutes
aimed at occupying conscious thought before rank-ordering
the houses. The distractor task was a 2-back task (Jonides et
al., 1997) in which participants were presented with a
sequence of digits between 1 and 5 appearing one by one on
the computer screen. For each digit they had to decide
whether it matched the digit “2-back”in the sequence.
The order of the decision problems was balanced over the
participants, as well as the order of the thinking conditions
that were nested within the problems. The whole procedure
took about 35 minutes.

Analysis
Decision Quality
The rank-order data were analyzed to assess the quality of
the decision; when participants chose the attractive house as
the first-ranked alternative and the unattractive house as the
last-ranked alternative their decision was coded as correct.
To test the relationship between the different categorical
variables, a 3×2×2 loglinear analysis of mode of thought
(immediate vs deliberate vs unconscious), level of expertise
(student vs real-estate agent), and rank-order (correct vs
incorrect) was performed. Separate chi-square tests were
performed to further examine the obtained effects. Effect
sizes were specified by odds-ratios.
Difference Scores
Following Dijksterhuis (2004), difference scores were
calculated by subtracting the evaluation scores for the

735

unattractive house from the evaluation scores for the
attractive house. The difference scores were subjected to a
3×2 analysis of variance (ANOVA) of mode of thought
(immediate vs deliberate vs unconscious) and level of
expertise (student vs real-estate agent). Effect sizes were
computed for the focused comparisons by converting Fvalues to the Pearson’s correlation coefficient (Field, 2005).

Problem 1
The task in problem 1 was similar to the task used by
Dijksterhuis (2004) in Experiment 1 (apartments) and
experiment 3 (roommates). However, to make the task more
representative and less taxing we did not present the
attributes of all four houses in randomized order, but
presented the attributes per house in a sequence that is
common among real-estate agents. We hypothesized that
because of their task-relevant expertise real-estate agents
would perform better than the students. We expected this
effect especially in the immediate thought condition as the
experts may instantly recognize relevant patterns, but also in
the deliberate thought condition as the experts could use
their knowledge in organizing their thoughts about the
houses. If first impressions are already quite accurate, we do
not expect that unconscious thought would add anything.

Method Specification
The materials used in problem 1 were four houses, each
comprising 12 attributes. Normatively more and less
attractive houses were created by differential distribution of
positive and negative attributes over the houses. The
distribution was similar to that used by Dijksterhuis (2004)
in Experiment 1. The most attractive house was described
by 8 positive and 4 negative attributes, the least attractive
house by 4 positive and 8 negative attributes, and the two
filler houses were of medium attractiveness with 6 positive
and 6 negative attributes.

Results
Decision Quality
The percentage of correct rank-orders was 58% for experts,
and 38% for students. The three-way log-linear analysis of
the rank-order data produced a final model that retained all
effects. The likelihood ratio of this model was ² (0) = 0, p =
1. This indicated that the highest order interaction (mode of
thought × level of expertise × rank-order) was significant, ²
(2) = 6.93, p = .031.
To break down this effect, separate chi-square tests were
performed on level of expertise and rank-order for each
thought condition. Only in the deliberate thought condition,
a significant association was found between level of
expertise and rank-order, ² (1) = 10.42, p = .001. Odds
ratios indicated that, after a period of deliberation, realestate agents were 10.52 times more likely to provide a
correct rank-order of the houses than students.
To further investigate the differences in performance
between the three thought conditions, chi-square tests were

performed separately for real-estate agents and students.
Only for real-estate agents, there was a significant
association between mode of thought and rank-order, ² (2)
= 12.48, p = .002. Odds ratios indicated that real-estate
agents in the deliberate thought condition were 3.78 more
likely to make a correct judgment than in the immediate
thought condition, and 13.22 times more likely than in the
unconscious thought condition. Furthermore, real-estate
agents were 3.50 times more likely to make a better
judgment in the immediate thought condition than in the
unconscious thought condition. In contradiction with the
findings of Dijksterhuis (2004), the association between
mode of thought and rank-order was non-significant for the
students, ² (2) = .56, p = .75.
Difference Scores
Analysis of the difference scores revealed a significant
effect of expertise, F(1, 114) = 4.64, p = .033, r = .20, a
non-significant effect of condition, F(2, 114) = .669, p =
.51, and a non-significant interaction, F(2, 114) = .153, p =
.86, indicating that the real-estate agents in all three
conditions were better able to differentiate between the
attractive and the unattractive house (M = 57.25, SD =
34.73) than the students (M = 43.70, SD = 33.48). The data
suggest that this was due to a more negative evaluation of
the unattractive house by the real-estate agents than by the
students. This was confirmed in a separate ANOVA for the
unattractive house, F(1, 118) = 7.37, p = .008. r = .24.

Problem 2
The second problem was designed to compare the
achievements of novices and experts in a more difficult
decision problem. To enhance the level of difficulty the
number of positive and negative attributes describing each
of the four houses was increased. Furthermore, besides an
attractive house, an unattractive house and a filler, a
moderately attractive house was added. The differences
between the number of positive and negative attributes
describing the attractive and moderately attractive house
were decreased in order to create more complexity. We
hypothesized that when the problem was indeed difficult for
experts, they would perform less well in the immediate
condition, as it would be harder to recognize the best option
right away. They rather might benefit from deliberate
processing by ordering attributes and options. However,
according to the deliberation-without-attention hypothesis
(Dijksterhuis et al. 2006), unconscious thought would also
be best for experts in this complex problem.

Method Specification
Concerning the materials of problem 2, 18 attributes per
house were presented. The attractive house was described
by 11 positive and 7 negative attributes. The moderately
attractive house was described by 10 positive and 8 negative
attributes. The least attractive house was described by 7
positive and 11 negative attributes and the neutral house
was described by 9 positive and 9 negative attributes.

736

Results
Decision Quality
The evaluation data showed that the problem was indeed
difficult, as both the students and real-estate agents could
not differentiate between the two best houses. Therefore, the
rank-order criterion was set as the correct recognition of the
unattractive house as the worst alternative. This was
correctly done by 68% of experts and 48% of students. The
three-way log-linear analysis produced a final model that
retained the expertise level x rank-order interaction, ² (1) =
4.98, p = .026. The likelihood ratio of this model was ² (8)
= 2.01, p = .98. The odds ratio indicates that over all three
thought conditions the real-estate agents were 2.31 times
better in recognizing the least attractive house. The data
suggest that expertise effects were particularly strong for the
deliberate thought condition, the real-estate agents being
3.50 times more correct than the students. This was
confirmed by a significant association between expertise
and rank-order for this condition, ² (1) = 3.64, p = .029
(one-sided), and no significant associations for the other
conditions.
Difference Scores
Analysis of the difference scores revealed a significant
effect of expertise, F(1, 114) = 8.56, p = .004, r = .26, a
non-significant effect of condition, F(2, 114) = .940, p =
.39, and a non-significant interaction, F(2, 114) = 1.02, p =
.36. Thus, in all three conditions the real-estate agents were
better able to differentiate between the attractive and the
unattractive house (M = 40.02, SD = 33.20) than the
students (M = 19.72, SD = 42.26). Similar as in Problem 1
this was due to a more negative evaluation of the
unattractive house by the real-estate agents.

the instruction to form a good impression of the houses and
to choose one of them later, in this problem, they were also
told that they would be asked to evaluate each house
immediately after its attributes were presented. So after the
presentation of the 12 attributes of a house they indicated
their judgment on a VAS-scale. Condition instructions were
provided after the evaluation of the fourth house.
The evaluation and difference scores in the initial and
final evaluation conditions were compared by GLM
repeated measures.

Results
Decision Quality
The percentage of correct rank-orders was 57% for experts,
and 47% for students. The loglinear analysis of the rankorder data revealed a final model that retained the mode of
thought × rank-order interaction, ² (2) = 6.15, p = .046. The
likelihood ratio of this model was, ² (6) = 4.26, p = .64.
The data showed that participants performed worse in the
unconscious condition. Odds ratios indicated that participants made a correct rank-order 3.10 times more often in the
immediate than in the unconscious thought condition, 1.84
times more often in the deliberate than in the unconscious
thought condition, and 1.68 times more often in the
immediate than in the deliberate thought condition. The last
effect seemed to be mainly due to the experts who
performed best in the immediate thought condition, which
was confirmed by a significant association between expertise and rank-order for this condition, ² (2) = 4.00, p = .047.
Separate chi-square tests for the two expertise groups
showed that the association between mode of thought and
rank-order was only significant for the real-estate agents, ²
(2) = 7.06, p = .029, but not for the students, ² (2) = 1.74, p
= .42.

Problem 3
The paradigm used for Problem 3 deviated slightly from the
paradigm used in Problems 1 and 2. Besides rank-ordering
and evaluating after processing the four houses, participants
evaluated each house directly after its presentation. This
task was added as we thought participants would immediately have an impression of each house. Only measuring
them after all information of the four houses was processed
might distort these first impressions. As Newell et al. (2009)
outlined, the discrete and sequential presentation of
attributes makes it an on-line judgment task in which
impressions are continuously updated. Therefore, we
expected that the immediate judgments might better grasp
the advantage experts have in processing familiar
information. We hypothesized that experts would perform
better than students in these initial evaluations, and would
be able to make better choices through the strengthening of
their immediate impressions.

Method Specification

Difference Scores
Analysis of the difference scores derived from the initial
evaluations revealed an effect of level of expertise, F(1,
114) = 5.19, p = .025, r = .21, indicating better differentiation between the attractive and unattractive house by the
real-estate agents (M = 66.03, SD = 23.32) than by the
students (M = 56.78, SD = 21.10). Although evaluation
results suggest that the difference score in the final
evaluation was larger for the real-estate agents (M = 54.72,
SD = 36.41) than for the students (M = 44.29, SD = 31.73),
this effect was non-significant, F(1, 114) = 2.85, p = .094, r
= .16. This can be explained by less extreme judgments in
the final evaluation task compared to the initial judgments,
as described in the attitude order section.
For both the initial and final evaluations there was no
significant effect of thought condition, (F(2, 114) = 1.01, p
= .37, and F(2, 114) = 1.68, p = .19, respectively, and no
significant interaction effect, (F(2, 114) = 1.01, p = .37, F(2,
114) = 1.14, p = .24.

The distribution of positive and negative house attributes
over alternatives was similar as in Problem 1. In addition to

737

Discussion

References

This study was performed to examine expertise effects on
immediate, deliberate, and unconscious thought in a choice
and evaluation task. The results of all three problems in our
within-subject design experiment showed that expertise
positively affected the decisions made. However, we did not
find support for the deliberation-without-attention hypothesis (Dijksterhuis et al., 2006). We did not replicate the
findings that thinking which proceeds unconsciously while
performing another task leads to better decisions as
compared to either immediate or deliberate thought
conditions (Dijksterhuis, 2004). There was no difference in
either expert or student groups. This corroborates the results
of other studies on this phenomenon (Acker, 2008; Newell
et al., 2009; Payne et al., 2008) and questions the
generalizability of Dijksterhuis’findings.
Moreover, in problems 1 and 2 we found that experts
benefited from deliberate thought as compared to students.
In problems 1 and 3, we further found that experts made
better decisions in the immediate than in the unconscious
thought condition. These findings support our hypothesis on
the usefulness of immediate and deliberate thinking for
experts in complex problems.
One key theoretical implication of the present study is the
confirmation of the value of expertise and deliberative
thinking (Ericsson, 2005). Results converge with other
research and remind us that it is often better to ask for
advice of an expert rather than to leave decision making to
the unconscious. Deliberation might be valuable to explore
one’s own preferences and is needed to acquire expertise in
a field. Thinking might make a complex problem simpler.
With regard to the present study, we could check whether
the normative approach chosen led to the same best options
as would be indicated by weighing of attributes in a WADD
procedure (Newell et al., 2009). For each problem, however,
ranking of options based on evaluation scores was similar to
the normative order, which showed that the stimulus
materials were meaningful for participants. The experimental tasks could have been more realistic to fully grasp
expertise, but this would have hampered replication. The
within-subject design did not lead to carry-over effects
between problems, as similar results were found in
analyzing the problems that were presented first. The
extreme scores given by the experts in evaluating the
unattractive alternatives is an interesting phenomenon to be
followed up. The difference in results of rank-ordering and
evaluations suggests that rank-orders are stricter and
possibly better indicators of right choice behavior.
In further research on the cognitive processes underlying
decision making, manipulating expertise and task
complexity might be a fruitful approach. This may shed new
light on the interactive contributions of immediate, intuitive
and controlled, deliberate thinking (Kahneman, 2003). The
use of representative tasks that require the application of
relevant domain knowledge then is particularly important.

Acker, F. (2008). New findings on unconscious versus
conscious thought in decision making: additional
empirical data and meta-analysis. Judgment and Decision
Making, 3, 292-303.
Anderson, J. R. (1996). ACT: A simple theory of complex
cognition. American Psychologist, 51, 355-365.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J. & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Dijksterhuis, A. (2004). Think Different: The Merits of
Unconscious Thought in Preference Development and
Decision Making. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology., 87(5), 586-598.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M.W., Nordgren, L.F., & van Baaren,
R.B. (2006). On making the right choice: The
deliberation-without attention effect. Science, 311, 1005–
1007.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Nordgren, L.F. (2006). A theory of
unconscious thought. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 1, 95–109.
Elstein, A. S., & Schwarz, A. (2002). Clinical problem
solving and diagnostic decision making: Selective review
of the cognitive literature. British Medical Journal, 324,
729-732.
Ericsson, K. A. (2005). Superior decision making as an
integral quality of expert performance: Insights into the
mediating mechanisms and their acquisition through
deliberate practice. In H. Montgomery, R. Lipshitz, & B.
Brehmer, How Professionals Make Decisions (pp. 135171). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Jonides et al. (1997). Verbal working memory load affects
regional brain activation as measured by PET. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 462-475.
Field, A. (2005). Discovering statistics using SPSS (2 nd
edition). London: Sage.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and
choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American
Psychologist., 58(9), 697-720.
Newell, B. R., Wong, K. Y., Cheung, J. C. H., & Rakow, T.
(2009). Think, blink or sleep on it? The impact of modes
of thought on complex decision making. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62(4), 707-732.
Norman, G. R., Eva, K., Brooks, L., & Hamstra, S. (2006).
Expertise in medicine and surgery. In K. A. Ericsson, N.
Charness, P. J. Feltovich, & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.) The
Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert
Performance (pp. 339-354). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Payne, J. W., Samper, A., Bettman, J. R., & Luce, M. F.
(2008). Boundary conditions on unconscious thought in
complex decision making. Psychological Science, 19,
1118-1123.
Schmidt, H. G., Norman, G. R., & Boshuizen, H. P. (1990).
A cognitive perspective on medical expertise: Theory and
implications. Academic Medicine, 65(10), 611-621.

738

