UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Expertise Reversal in Multimedia Learning: Subjective Load Ratings and Viewing Behavior as
Cognitive Process Indicators

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/99r5z5fb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Cierniak, Gabriele
Gerjets, Peter
Scheiter, Katharina

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Expertise Reversal in Multimedia Learning:
Subjective Load Ratings and Viewing Behavior as Cognitive Process Indicators
Gabriele Cierniak (g.cierniak@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad Adenauer-Str. 40
72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad Adenauer-Str. 40
72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad Adenauer-Str. 40
72072 Tuebingen, Germany
Abstract
The phenomenon that more knowledgeable learners do not
benefit or even suffer from physically integrated text-picture
formats, which work successfully with less knowledgeable
learners, is called the expertise reversal effect in cognitive
load theory (CLT) literature. A possible explanation of the
expertise reversal effect is offered by CLT researchers, who
argue that more knowledgeable learners suffer from
extraneous cognitive load. Another explanation is given in the
context of the cognitive theory of multimedia learning
(CTML). In the CTML it is assumed that more
knowledgeable learners can deal with difficult formats
because of being able to invest germane load, that is applying
relevant learning strategies. This study examined the different
assumptions about the mechanism underlying the expertise
reversal effect. Sixty students were assigned to either a group
with low or high prior knowledge and to a group with either
separated or integrated format, resulting in a 2 x 2 design. All
students were eye tracked during learning. Subjective ratings
of cognitive load could not support the extraneous load
explanation. The results of the eye tracking data rather
supported the assumptions made in the CTML.
Keywords: prior knowledge; spatial contiguity; text-picture
integration; multimedia; extraneous cognitive load; subjective
ratings; eye tracking.

Introduction
One of several instructional design recommendations
derived by Cognitive Load Theory (CLT; Sweller, Van
Merriënboer & Paas, 1998) as well as by the Cognitive
Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML; Mayer, 2001)
suggests integrating separate but mutually referring
information sources like text and picture physically, when
both information sources are needed for understanding
complex issues. In a meta-analysis, Ginns (2006) showed
that students learning with integrated formats, which placed
relevant text information directly into the picture, had better
learning outcomes than students learning with separated
formats, which divided the textual from the pictorial
information. This phenomenon is called split-attention
effect in CLT research (e.g., Sweller, Van Merriënboer &

Paas, 1998) and spatial contiguity effect in CTML research
(e.g., Mayer, 2001). Although there are numerous studies
supporting the superiority of integrated formats over
separated ones (see Ginns, 2006), other studies showed that
more knowledgeable learners did not benefit or even
suffered from an integrated format (e.g., Kalyuga, Chandler
& Sweller, 1998; Mayer et al., 1995). The phenomenon that
more knowledgeable learners do not benefit or even suffer
from instructional design formats, which work successfully
with less knowledgeable learners, is called expertise
reversal effect in CLT research (Kalyuga, 2007) and
individual differences effect in CTML (Mayer, 2001). The
expertise reversal effect is a well-known aptitude-treatment
interaction phenomenon in the field of instruction, which
shows that learners’ benefit of an instructional format
depends on their learning prerequisites like for example
prior knowledge or intelligence. Therefore, Kalyuga (2007)
and Mayer (2001) recommend that in learning with texts
and corresponding pictures students with more prior
knowledge should learn with separated formats whereas
students with low prior knowledge should learn with
integrated formats.
Despite the empirical evidence of the expertise reversal
effect, there is only little empirical evidence of why more
knowledgeable learners do not benefit or suffer from
integrated formats (e.g., Kalyuga, Chandler & Sweller,
1998). However, this is an important issue because CLT and
the CTML assume different cognitive mechanisms
underlying the expertise reversal effect. We see the reason
behind the different assumptions given by both theories in
their original views on learning. CLT argues that learning
should be made as easy as possible, whereas the CTML
argues that meaningful learning corresponds to processes of
active knowledge construction. The purpose of this paper is
to examine the assumptions about the expertise reversal
effect, because it is important for teacher-student
interactions that teachers know why their students may have
difficulties with some materials. In the following, the
conflicting assumptions about the cognitive mechanisms are
outlined against the background of CLT and the CTML.

1906

CLT and Text-Picture Formats
CLT is an instructional design theory which focuses on the
human cognitive architecture, in particular on the limited
capacity of working memory to generate design
recommendations. The rationale of CLT is that instructions
impose cognitive load on learners’ limited working memory
and that the cognitive load in turn influences learning
outcomes. CLT distinguishes among three cognitive load
types that demand working memory resources during
learning: intrinsic, extraneous, and germane cognitive load
(for a detailed review see Sweller, Van Merriënboer & Paas,
1998). Intrinsic load is determined by the complexity or so
called element interactivity of the learning material and
learners’ prior knowledge. It is generally assumed that
intrinsic load is affected only by the learning content but not
by the instructional design. Extraneous load is defined as
unnecessary information processing, which is caused by the
instructional design. Extraneous load is harmful for
learning, because it is not directed to schema acquisition.
Germane load is also caused by instructional design, but
contrary to extraneous load, is beneficial for learning,
because it is directed to schema acquisition by directing
learner’s attention towards relevant learning processes that
were triggered by the design. The overall recommendation
is that an instructional design should reduce extraneous load
and increase germane load. When learning with text and
picture CLT recommends using integrated formats for low
prior knowledge learners to prevent a split-attention effect
and using a separated format for high prior knowledge
learners to prevent an expertise reversal effect. The assumed
mechanisms underlying both effects are outlined in the
following.
Split-Attention Mechanism Sweller and colleagues assume
that during learning with a separated format a high
extraneous cognitive load is put on learners’ working
memory, which impairs knowledge acquisition. The
extraneous load is attributed to three processes. These
processes are (a) holding textual information in working
memory while (b) visually scanning the pictorial
representation until the corresponding information is found,
and then (c) mentally integrating the information of both the
text and the picture. Chandler and Sweller (1992) assumed
that learners with a separated format have to switch visually
between verbal and pictorial information very often to
mentally integrate the corresponding information from both
sources. Furthermore, they assumed learners often have to
visually search the corresponding information in the picture
before the information can be mentally integrated. Such a
visual processing behavior (many switches between text and
picture as well as lots of visual scanning on the picture)
should be specific for low prior knowledge learners with
separated formats.
Expertise Reversal Mechanism Kalyuga (2007) argues that
instructions, well designed for novice learners like an
integrated format, impose high extraneous load on more

knowledgeable learners, because of redundant information.
That is, some information in the instruction may already be
known by more experienced learners, and therefore is
redundant and not necessary. However, with an integrated
format such redundant information cannot be ignored but
must be processed. However, attending to and integrating
redundant information causes extraneous cognitive load,
and thus impairs learning. This assumption was supported
by the finding that high prior knowledge learners reported
less mental effort on a subjective rating scale, when
studying an electric circuit diagram only compared to
studying an integrated version of the diagram accompanied
by text (Kalyuga, Chandler & Sweller, 1998).

CTML and Text-Picture Formats
CTML is an instructional design theory that first, bases on
cognitive constructivism and second, focuses on
instructional materials consisting of multiple representation
sources like textual information combined with pictorial
information (for a detailed review see Mayer, 2001). It is
assumed that the human information-processing system (a)
consists of two separate channels (one for auditory input
and verbal representations and one for visual input and
pictorial representations), (b) both channels belong to the
working memory and have only limited capacity, and (c)
that meaningful learning is an active process consisting of
selecting information from words and pictures, mentally
organizing the information into coherent mental
representations and integrating these representations with
existing knowledge. These processes are thought to be
essential and to correspond to the term germane load used in
CLT. Whereas the CTML also recommends integrated
formats for low prior knowledge learners and separated
formats for high prior knowledge learners, its assumptions
differ from those given by CLT. The assumptions made by
CTML about the mechanisms underlying both effects are
the following.
Spatial Contiguity Mechanism Mayer (2001) assumes that
integrated formats elicit the relevant cognitive processes of
selection, organization and integration in low prior
knowledge learners, whereas separated formats do not
support these meaningful learning processes. Hence, in
terms of CLT, low prior knowledge learners with integrated
formats should have higher germane cognitive load.
Because integrated formats support relevant learning
processes, it is assumed that some of these processes might
be reflected in visual processing behavior like more gaze
switches between text and its corresponding pictorial
information. Separated formats, however, do not support to
switch between text and picture, although low prior
knowledge learners require both information sources for
meaningful learning
Individual Differences Mechanism In contrast to CLT
researchers Mayer (2001; Mayer & Gallini, 1990) assumes
that high prior knowledge learners do not suffer from

1907

separated formats, because in contrast to low prior
knowledge learners they can compensate for a lack in
instructional guidance. That is, while reading a text high
prior knowledge learners are able to apply imagery
strategies. These processes correspond to germane cognitive
load. Furthermore, more knowledgeable learners do not
have to visually switch between text and corresponding
pictorial information to build a coherent mental
representation. They can focus on the textual information
and use their domain knowledge and do not require an
external picture to acquire new information.

Research Question and Hypotheses
This paper addresses the question which of the mechanisms
presented above underlies the expertise reversal effect. To
examine this research question, the assumptions
summarized in Table 1 about cognitive load and viewing
behavior were tested.
Table 1: Hypotheses of load types and viewing behavior
according to the mechanisms assumed by CLT and CTML.
Theory

CLT

low prior knowledge

high prior knowledge

separated

separated

integrated

integrated

higher ECL lower ECL

lower ECL higher ECL

(mental
(physical
integration)
integration)
visual search,
no visual
more text- search, fewer
picture
text-picture
switches
switches

(no
redundancy)
fewer textpicture
switches

(redundancy)
more textpicture
switches

lower GCL higher GCL higher GCL lower GCL

CTML

(no textpicture
integration)

(active textpicture
integration)

fewer textpicture
switches

more textpicture
switches

(strategy use) (strategy use
not needed)
fewer textpicture
switches

knowledge learners and were randomly assigned to either
the separated or the integrated format condition. Twentyeight participants were medical students. The medical
students served as high prior knowledge learners and were
randomly assigned to either the separated or the integrated
format condition. This resulted in a 2 x 2 design with prior
knowledge (low vs. high) and instructional format
(separated vs. integrated) as independent variables.
Materials The materials consisted of a computerized
learning environment, three knowledge tests and three
cognitive load items.
The learning material (see Figure 1) was about the
physiological functioning of the nephron, the functional unit
of the kidney. The environment consisted of a short
introduction into the topic and two complex instructional
graphics with accompanying text. The introduction was the
same for all participants and was about general functions of
the kidney. Subsequent to the introduction, the first
instructional graphic consisting of a colored picture of a
nephron with verbal information about its structure parts
was presented (46 words; font: Arial; size: 11). Afterwards,
the second instructional graphic consisting of the
visualization of the physiological processes in the nephron
accompanied by verbal explanations was presented (249
words; font: Arial; size: 9). Without knowledge about the
structure of a nephron the verbal information was
unintelligible in isolation, because the text about the
physiological processes lacked specific spatial information
about the structural places, where the processes take place.
Both instructional graphics and their accompanying text
were presented either in a separated or an integrated format,
and thus, differed only with respect to the spatial contiguity
between verbal and corresponding pictorial information.

more textpicture
switches

Note. ECL = extraneous cognitive load; GCL = germane
cognitive load.

Experiment
The aforementioned assumptions were tested by using two
types of variables indicating different learning processes.
First, learners’ subjective ratings of load type scales were
used as subjective post measures of different cognitive
processes (Cierniak, Scheiter & Gerjets, 2009). Second,
learners’ viewing behavior during studying was recorded
with an eye tracker and used as objective on-line measures
of processes related to learning (Hegarty & Just, 1993).

Method
Participants and Design Sixty university students (39
female, 21 male) participated in the study for payment.
Three participants had to be excluded because of technical
problems. Twenty-nine participants studied subjects like
politics or history. These students served as low prior

Figure 1: Illustrations of the learning material about the
functioning of a nephron used in both format conditions.
To measure participants’ learning outcomes three
computerized knowledge tests (labeling, complex facts, and
inferences) were used. (1) The labeling test consisted of 12
multiple-choice items. Participants had to chose one out of
twelve possible structure terms that matched the highlighted part in a given graphic that depicted a nephron. (2)
The test about complex facts consisted of 22 sentences

1908

about the physiological processes in a nephron (e.g., “The
urea concentration increases in the descending limb of loop
of Henle.”). Participants had to state whether these
sentences were either right or wrong. (3) The inference test
consisted of 20 sentences about causes and effects in a
nephron (e.g. “If proteins are found in the urea test of a
patient, a defect in the vas efferens can be assumed.”).
Again, participants had to state whether these sentences
were either right or wrong.
To measure the three types of cognitive load, subjective
rating scales with a labeled six-point Likert-type scale were
used ranging from “not at all” (1 point) to “extremely” (6
points). (1) The intrinsic load scale asked “How difficult
was the learning content for you?” (2) The extraneous load
scale asked “How difficult was it for you to learn with the
material?” (3) The germane load scale asked “How much
did you concentrate during learning?”

were given in a case of a wrong answer. The answers to all
test items were weighted with participants’ confidence
ratings concerning the response correctness by multiplying
both scores. Based on these products, the percentage of the
maximal score was determined for each participant on each
knowledge test.
To analyze the gaze recordings we created areas of
interest (AOIs). For each text unit as well as for each
pictorial unit an AOI was created. Because the position of
the text differed between the instructional formats, the text
AOIs differed according to the instructional format. The
identical pictorial AOIs were used for the structure graphics.
The pictorial units of the process graphics in the separated
format, however, included the labels. Each variable of the
viewing behavior (e.g., percentage of dwell time on AOIs)
consists of the respective data from both the structure and
the process graphic.

Apparatus Participants sat in a distance of about 60 cm from
a 21 inch computer monitor with a flicker rate of 100Hz and
resolution of 1152 x 864 pixels in a darkened room. While
subjects studied the learning materials, their eye movements
were recorded every ms from the right eye by a video-based
EyeLink 1000 Hz tracker (SR Research) with integrated
head support device and gaze accuracy of 0.25° to 0.5°. The
calibration was done with a 9 point grid.

Results
The means and standard deviations of knowledge outcomes,
cognitive load ratings, and variables of viewing behavior are
shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Means (and standard deviations) as a function of
prior knowledge and instructional format.

Data Analysis For each correctly answered test item
participants were assigned one point, whereas zero points

low prior knowledge

high prior knowledge

separated

integrated

separated

integrated

%
labels

54.17
(20.33)

72.64
(20.41)

98.07
(5.57)

94.79
(7.30)

%
facts

31.01
(11.20)

40.76
(11.38)

55.35
(6.77)

55.93
(9.49)

%
inferences

26.70
(11.48)

25.00
(5.71)

50.98
(9.17)

55.46
(12.19)

4.29
(0.61)
3.29
(0.83)

3.80
(0.86)
2.87
(0.74)

2.64
(0.63)
3.43
(1.09)

2.21
(0.43)
2.93
(1.07)

GCL

4.50
(0.65)

4.93
(0.59)

4.50
(0.76)

4.29
(0.83)

% dwell:
pic

26.60
(5.67)

20.39
(6.00)

26.02
(8.09)

21.31
(5.44)

% switch:
pic-pic

18.87
(5.17)

11.33
(3.19)

16.92
(6.48)

10.87
(3.98)

% switch:
corresp.
text-pic
% switch:
text-text

5.56
(2.50)

31.57
(3.73)

5.54
(2.61)

36.19
(3.47)

49.53
(7.98)

28.54
(6.26)

16.92
(6.48)

53.85
(9.79)

outcomes

Procedure The study consisted of four phases: an initial pretest phase, a subsequent learning phase, a phase to rate
cognitive load scales and a final post-test phase. Participants
were run in individual sessions. At the beginning of the
experiment participants answered three knowledge tests
about the nephron (labeling, complex facts, and inferences).
After pre-testing, participants changed seats and their eyes
were calibrated with the eye tracker system. After
calibration, participants started the computer based learning
environment by pressing the keyboard’s space bar and were
instructed to learn as well as possible. Whereas the
presentation time of the learning environment was fully
system paced in the low prior knowledge conditions
(structure graphic: 180 s; process graphic: 600 s), the
presentation time in the high prior knowledge conditions
were participant-paced. Participants in these conditions
were allowed to go on by pressing the space bar before the
system paced time ended, whenever they thought they had
learned the content. This difference was made to prevent the
collection of medical students’ eye movements that were not
related with learning any longer. After the learning phase,
students had to rate the cognitive load type scales, then they
had to answer the three knowledge tests again (labeling,
complex facts, and inferences). After each (pre-and post-)
test item, participants had to rate their confidence about the
correctness of their answers on a five-point Likert-type scale
ranging from “guessed” (0 point) to “very sure” (4 points).

viewing behavior variables

load ratings

ICL
ECL

Note. ICL = intrinsic cognitive load; ECL = extraneous
cognitive load; GCL = germane cognitive load; pic =
picture; corresp. = corresponding.

1909

Prior Knowledge and Learning Times First, learners’ pretest values in the three knowledge tests were analyzed. A 2
(prior knowledge) x 2 (instructional format) ANOVA with
knowledge test as repeated measure was run. Medical
students in the high prior knowledge conditions
outperformed students in the low prior knowledge
conditions (F(1,53) = 626.31, MSE = 154.02, p < .01; ηp2
= .92). Students assigned to the separated format conditions
did not differ from students assigned to the integrated
format conditions (F < 1). There was no interaction effect
(F < 1). In general, low prior knowledge students reached a
mean score from all three tests of 1.16% (SD = 2.88),
whereas high prior knowledge students reached an overall
mean score of 48.67% (SD = 12.59).
Because high prior knowledge students were allowed to
learn shorter than low prior knowledge students, learning
times were analyzed by a 2 (prior knowledge) x 2
(instructional format) ANOVA with type of graphic as
repeated measure. High prior knowledge students (structure
graphic: M = 55.37 s, SD = 23.17; process graphic: M =
340.89s, SD = 143) learned shorter than low prior
knowledge learners (structure graphic: M = 180 s, SD = 0;
process graphic: M = 600 s, SD = 0). There was no
interaction effect (F < 1), indicating that students in both
format conditions invested the same average learning time.
Learning Outcomes To test whether low prior knowledge
students benefited from the integrated format, whereas high
prior knowledge students did not, a 2 (prior knowledge) x 2
(instructional format) ANOVA was run for each knowledge
test. High prior knowledge students outperformed low prior
knowledge students on the test about labels (F(1,53) =
66.91, MSE = 232.10, p < .01; ηp2 = .56), complex facts
(F(1,53) = 56.68, MSE = 98.10, p < .01; ηp2 = .52), and
inferences (F(1,53) = 108.37, MSE = 98.07, p < .01; ηp2 = .
67).
Moreover, there was a significant interaction effect on the
labeling test (F(1,53) = 7.25, p < .01; ηp2 = .12). Bonferroniadjusted comparisons showed that low prior knowledge
students with the integrated format outperformed low prior
knowledge students with the separated format (p < 01),
whereas there were no differences between high prior
knowledge students (ns). Furthermore, there was a
marginally significant interaction effect on the test about
complex facts (F(1,53) = 3.06, p < .09; ηp2 = .06).
Bonferroni-adjusted comparisons showed that low prior
knowledge students with the integrated format outperformed
low prior knowledge students with the separated format (p <
.05), whereas there were no differences between high prior
knowledge students (ns). There was no interaction effect for
inferences (F(1,53) = 1.34, p < .26; ηp2 = .03).
Subjective Ratings To test how prior knowledge and the
instructional format influenced the cognitive load types, a 2
(prior knowledge) x 2 (instructional format) ANOVA was
run for each subjective rating scale. For intrinsic load,
students with high prior knowledge rated the difficulty of

the learning content lower than students with low prior
knowledge (F(1,53) = 86.14, MSE = .43, p < .01; ηp2 = .62).
Furthermore, students with the integrated format rated the
content difficulty lower than students with the separated
format (F(1,53) = 6.91, p < .05; ηp2 = .12). For extraneous
load, there was a marginally significant effect. Students with
the separated format rated the difficulty of the material
higher than students with the integrated format (F(1,53) =
3.39, MSE = .89, p < .08; ηp2 = .06). For germane load, there
was a marginally significant interaction effect (F(1,53) =
2.95, MSE = .51, p < .10; ηp2 = .05). Bonferroni-adjusted
comparisons indicated that high prior knowledge students
with the integrated format reported to have concentrated less
than low prior knowledge students in the same format
condition (p < .05).
Viewing Behavior To test whether low prior knowledge
students with the separated format showed a viewing
behavior that may reflect more visual search processes, a 2
(prior knowledge) x 2 (instructional format) ANOVA was
run for percentage of gaze dwell time on the pictorial AOIs
and for the percentage of all switches between two arbitrary
pictorial AOIs. Students with the separated format not only
looked longer on pictorial information than students with
the integrated format (F(1,53) = 57.29, MSE = 54.54, p < .
01; ηp2 = .52) but also switched more often directly from one
pictorial AOI to another pictorial AOI (F(1,53) = 28.06,
MSE = 23.43, p < .01; ηp2 = .35). There were no further
main or interaction effects (all Fs < 1).
To test whether students with the integrated format
showed a viewing behavior that may reflect more textpicture integration processes, a 2 (prior knowledge) x 2
(instructional format) ANOVA was run for the percentage
of switches between corresponding text and pictorial AOIs
and for the percentage of switches between two arbitrary
text AOIs. Students with the integrated format switched
more often between corresponding text AOIs and pictorial
AOIs (F(1,53) = 1163.33, MSE = 9.83, p < .01; ηp2 = .96).
Furthermore, there was a significant interaction effect
(F(1,53) = 7.78, p < .01; ηp2 = .13), Bonferroni-adjusted
comparisons indicated that students with high prior
knowledge switched more often between corresponding text
and pictorial AOIs than low prior knowledge students in the
integrated format condition (p < .01) but not in the separated
format condition (ns).

Discussion
The aim of this paper was to examine the mechanism(s)
underlying the expertise reversal effect. We investigated
whether the effect is caused by processes related to
extraneous cognitive load (CLT assumption) or whether it is
caused by processes related to germane cognitive load
(CTML assumption). To test these assumptions students
with low and high prior knowledge had to learn about the
physiological functioning of the kidney with either a
separated or an integrated format. Moreover, students had to
rate subjective load scales that were thought to measure

1910

intrinsic, extraneous, and germane cognitive load
individually. Additionally, students’ viewing behavior
during learning was recorded by an eye tracker.
With regard to learning outcomes an expertise reversal
effect was found for the learning material used. Low prior
knowledge students suffered from the separated format, but
high prior knowledge students did not. This result pattern
was shown in a test that asked students to label the different
structural units in a picture from a nephron and in a test that
measured complex factual knowledge. Note, however, that
we, like Mayer, did not find a real reversed but only a
neutralized result pattern in more knowledgeable learners.
The results of the subjective rating scales showed that
students with the separated format rated the learning content
as well as the material to be more difficult than learners
with the integrated format. These results are not in line with
the CLT assumption that high prior knowledge learners with
integrated formats suffer from high extraneous load. The
result that low prior knowledge students with the integrated
format had the highest ratings on germane load is a hint that
integrated formats may elicit learning relevant processes as
assumed in the CTML. Whether the three subjective ratings
scales are appropriate measures of the three load types is
debatable. However, the result that high prior knowledge
learners rated the content easier than low prior knowledge
students but not the material design suggests that these
scales probably measured the assumed load types.
The results of students’ viewing behavior did not support
the assumptions made by CLT either. Although low prior
knowledge students with the separated format looked longer
on the picture and switched more often from one pictorial
unit directly to another than students with integrated format,
what might be interpreted as visual search, high prior
knowledge students processed the material in the same way.
However, this is not expected by the CLT. The CLT
assumes that high knowledgeable learners would ignore one
source of information, whereas low knowledgeable learners
should not. Moreover, students with the integrated format
switched more often between text and corresponding
picture. This result may serve as an indication that
integrated formats elicit learning relevant processes. The
fact that students with the separated format switched more
often between different text information as well as between
different pictorial information but only very seldom
between text and corresponding pictorial information
suggests that learners with separated formats process a high
amount of textual information before switching to the
picture and vice versa. The way of processing both
information sources rather separately than in an interwoven
way might hinder students to construct well elaborated
mental representations. The fact that more knowledgeable
learners do not suffer from such a processing might indicate
that they are able to compensate for a lack in instructional
guidance as suggested by the CTML.
In conclusion, this study did not support the assumption
that the expertise reversal effect is caused by high
extraneous load in more knowledgeable learners, but

suggests that germane processes are more relevant. To test
whether the investment of germane processes are in fact
more relevant, further and more detailed process
assumptions as well as their measurement are needed.
Following this study one possibility is to create more
elaborated subjective rating scales to clarify the distinction
among the assumed load types. Another possibility is to
combine viewing behavior and thinking aloud protocols to
investigate when a learner (before or after a switch between
text and picture) invests extraneous or germane processing.
Finally, detailed knowledge about the mechanism
underlying the expertise reversal effect is important for
teachers, because teachers assuming that more
knowledgeable students are overloaded surely act
differently than teachers assuming that these students just
have to actively use their prior knowledge to succeed. If
teachers have wrong assumptions about cognitive
mechanisms, they may influence students’ motivation and
attributions negatively.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG;
[German
Research
Foundation]) as a part of the virtual graduate school
“Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with
New Media” (GRK 443).

References
Cierniak, G., Scheiter, K., & Gerjets, P. (2009). Explaining
the split-attention effect: Is the reduction of extraneous
cognitive load accompanied by an increase in germane
cognitive load? Computers in Human Behavior, 25,
315-324.
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1992). The split-attention effect
as a factor in the design of instruction. British Journal of
Educational Psychology, 62, 233-246.
Ginns, P. (2006). Integrating information: A meta-analysis
of the spatial contiguity and temporal contiguity effects.
Learning and Instruction, 16, 511-525.
Hegarty, M., & Just, M. A. (1993). Constructing mental
models of machines from text and diagrams. Journal of
Memory and Language, 32, 717-742.
Kalyuga, S. (2007). Expertise-reversal effect and its
implications for learner-tailored instruction. Educational
Psychological Review, 19, 509-539.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1998). Levels of
expertise and instructional design. Human Factors, 40,
1-17.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E., & Gallini, J. K. (1990). When is an
illustration worth ten thousand words? Journal of
Educational Psychology, 82, 715 - 726.
Sweller, J., Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. (1998).
Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.

1911

