UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Experimental and Computational Analyses of Strategy Usage in the Time-Left Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3kf246s9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Meijering, Ben
Van Rijn, Hedderik

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Experimental and Computational Analyses of Strategy Usage in the Time-Left Task
Ben Meijering (B.Meijering@student.rug.nl)
Hedderik van Rijn (D.H.van.Rijn@rug.nl)
Department of Artificial Intelligence
P.O. Box 407, NL-9700 AK Groningen

Abstract

claimed that the results refute the logarithmic
representation.
However, we will argue that the different types of
strategies that might be used to perform this task make it
impossible to derive any firm conclusions from Time-Left
data.

This paper investigates the usage of strategies in the TimeLeft task (Gibbon & Church, 1981). In that task, participants
are assumed to compare temporal intervals on their subjective
timescales (i.e., do temporal arithmetic), yielding different
hypotheses for linear and nonlinear subjective time. Here we
present an experiment and ACT-R model simulations that
show that participants probably use strategies different from
temporal arithmetic. Usage of other, alternative strategies
would allow for any subjective timescale. As the
interpretation of Time-Left results critically depends on
temporal arithmetic, these results invalidate the Time-Left
task for distinguishing between different internal timescales.

Time-Left Task

Keywords: Time-Left Task, time perception, linear vs
nonlinear time, computational models.

Introduction
Time plays an intricate part in many of the things we do in
our professional and everyday lives. For example, at the
beginning of a day at the office, we know beforehand that
we can compose and send a short e-mail in the time that it
takes for the coffee machine to finish percolating; the
loading time of a web page exceeding some time interval
predicts reasonably well failure to load at all; and, a long
enough moment of silence in a conversation is a cue to the
listener to respond to what has just been said.
Considering the ubiquitousness of time dependencies in
many of the things we do, it is striking that only so little is
known about how time is perceived or represented
internally. One theory of temporal processing is the Scalar
Expectancy Theory (SET, Gibbon, 1977) that postulates that
time is represented in a linear fashion. Although Staddon
and Higa (1999) have extensively argued that SET contains
a number of questionable assumptions, it still is the most
influential theory on time perception.
Other theories have assumed different types of internal
representations. For example, Staddon and Higa (1999) have
proposed a logarithmic representation and we, in earlier
work (Van Rijn & Taatgen, 2008; Taatgen, Van Rijn, &
Anderson, 2007), have proposed a representation that is
based on increasing intervals.
That the issue of the type of internal representation is still
not resolved is striking given a publication by Gibbon and
Church in 1981. In that paper, Gibbon, author of SET, and
Church, associated with a paper proposing a logarithmic
representation (Church & Deluty, 1977), joined forces to
conceive an experiment that would identify the underlying
timescale. This experiment is the Time-Left task and it is

In the original Time-Left experiment (Gibbon & Church,
1981), rats were initially trained to estimate two individual
temporal intervals. The rats were placed in a chamber in
which two levers could appear. In some trials, a lever was
inserted at the left that, if pressed, would provide the rat
with a food reward after 60 seconds. In the other trials, a
lever was inserted at the right, which primed food after 30
seconds. After being trained on these intervals, the rats were
presented combined trials, in which the entry of the left
lever indicated the start of a trial. Then, after 15, 30 or 45
seconds in the trial, the right lever was inserted. When
reinforcement on either lever was received, both levers were
removed, the trial ended and an inter-trial interval was
presented.
If rats experience time linearly, they should favor the
short interval (right lever) at 15 seconds, because the time
left before food is presented is (60 - 15 =) 45 seconds for the
left lever, and 30 seconds for the right lever. At 45 seconds
they should favor the long interval because the remaining
time is smaller than the short interval (60 – 45 < 30). At 30
seconds they should be indifferent and favor both intervals
equally likely. The entry point at which both levers are
selected equally likely is referred to as the indifference
point.
On the other hand, if rats experience time on a
logarithmic scale, a different behavioral pattern should
emerge. Assuming a logarithmic interval, subjective time
increases progressively slower than real time. Consequently,
at 30 seconds, rats should already favor the long interval
over the short interval as the remaining subjective time
(log(60) - log(30)) is smaller than the subjective duration of
the short interval (log(30)).
The results of Gibbon and Church’s (1981) experiments
did not show any evidence of nonlinearity: The point where
rats and pigeons were indifferent was close to the linear
optimum. Also, the indifference point increased as the
absolute duration of the long and short intervals increased,
which is to be expected on the basis of a linear timescale
(with predicted indifference points of 30 - 15 = 15 versus 60
- 30 = 30), whereas it would remain constant if time is

1615

experienced logarithmically (log(30) – log(15) = log(60) –
log(30)).
These results led Gibbon and Church to conclude: "In
summary, the data from both experiments argue that mean
subjective time is approximately linear in real time", but
immediately mediate this conclusion by stating: "The
alternative logarithmic process is ruled out if subjects
perform these tasks by comparing the two delays to food on
their subjective time scale." (p.106, our emphasis).
Although the main resonance of this work seems to proof
that time is perceived linearly, some researchers have
challenged this notion and proposed alternative explanations
in line with Gibbon and Church's caveat (e.g., Cerutti &
Staddon, 2004; Dehaene, 2001; Gallistel, 1999; Staddon &
Higa, 1999). For example, Dehaene (2001) has shown in a
numerical analogue of the time-left task that behavior can be
modeled as a strategy in which the best response alternative
is learned to be associated with the time elapsed since the
start of a trial. As the underlying timescale is not used in
determining an answer using this associative strategy, any
relation between subjective and real time would yield
similar behavior. Dehaene also indirectly raised the issue
that the original Time-Left explanation assumes relatively
advanced arithmetic skills. As these skills are not commonly
attributed to non-humanoids, it might be that other strategies
have indeed contributed to the observed results.

Human Analogue of Time-Left Task
Wearden (2002) tested whether humans show similar
behavior in the Time-Left task. In his human analogue of
this task, the two durations were presented as two trains that
one could take to a destination. The longer interval is
represented by a slow train. Sometimes, during travel with
the slow train, a special train becomes available to which
participants can transfer. This train is special in that it
always takes the same amount of time to reach its
destination, regardless of the time already travelled with the
slow train. This setup has an underlying one-to-one
mapping to the original setup. The results of the
experiments reported by Wearden (2002) support the
original conclusion that the internal representation is linear.
Although not discussed by Wearden, it is still the case
that these widely cited conclusions only hold when
participants do indeed "perform these tasks by comparing
the two [intervals] on their subjective time scale". Thus, to
be able to fully appreciate the data presented by Wearden, it
has to be ruled out that participants have done anything but
comparing the two intervals: Using alternative strategies
might remove the necessity of performing temporal
arithmetic and therefore render the results of Time-Left
experiments inappropriate for the discrimination of linear
and nonlinear subjective time.

Three Strategies for Accurate Performance
A review of the literature suggested two strategies that
match the earlier reported Time-Left behavior. The first
strategy is the original Gibbon and Church (1981) temporal

arithmetic account. According to this strategy, participants
wait until the start of the second interval is signaled,
calculate time left in the long interval (i.e, use temporal
arithmetic), and then compare that value with the short
interval to decide which interval leads to fastest reward (i.e.,
shortest travel time).
The second strategy is the earlier discussed associative
account proposed1 by Dehaene (2001). According to this
strategy, participants learn during the experiment to
associate with each entry point the best response option
(leading to shortest travel time).
A third possible strategy is based on informal feedback of
(human) participants in pilot Time-Left studies ran in our
lab. In the debriefing sessions, a frequently reported strategy
was using a switch point: Participants reported that they
waited for an estimated point in time after which enough
time has passed to warrant not switching to the short
interval. In many of these reports that were in fact based on
experiments in which the short to long ratio is 1:2,
participants mentioned using the short interval as switch
point.
It is important to note that the Time-Left task can only be
used to distinguish between linear and nonlinear internal
timescales if participants use the first, temporal arithmetic
strategy. The other two strategies are agnostic with respect
to the internal representation.
To assess the prevalence of these strategies, we devised a
new human analogue of the Time-Left task. As pilot studies
indicated that the train-travel cover stories confused rather
than helped participants in understanding the task, we
presented the experiment without a semantic cover story.
The main differences with earlier human Time-Left
experiments are that we also measured the RTs associated
with each response and that we removed a secondary task to
name rapidly presented digits. The digit-naming task was
introduced by Wearden to prevent participants from using
explicit timing strategies such as counting, but our pilot
studies indicated that the performance penalty associated
with this task was too high to warrant inclusion. Instead, we
instructed participants not to use any explicit timing
strategies. With respect to the RT measurements, it should
be noted that it is often difficult to analyze RTs in a
relatively off-line task. However, earlier work has shown
that RTs can yield informative insights in which strategies
are used (c.f., Van der Maas & Jansen, 2003, who assessed
the validity of the strategies proposed by Van Rijn, Van
Someren, & Van der Maas, 2003).
For each of the three strategies, specific predictions can
be made with respect to the RT patterns and the change of
behavior during the experiment. With RT patterns, we refer
to the pattern of RTs when the RTs are plotted against the
onset of the short interval (see Figure 4 for an example).
With respect to the temporal arithmetic strategy, especially
1
Although Dehaene's association hypothesis was associated
with a numerical analogue of the Time-Left task, he argues that
this hypothesis also holds for the temporal Time-Left task (S.
Dehaene, personal communication, October 2008).

1616

if considered in the context of SET, the expected RT profile
depends on the time it takes to calculate time left in the long
interval and compare that value with the short interval. If all
arithmetic problems take equally long at each entry point (of
the short interval), the temporal arithmetic strategy predicts
a flat profile. If we allow for variable durations to solve the
problems, a declining slope would be expected, as solving,
for example, 30 - 29 takes less time than solving 30 - 1
(Sprenger & Van Rijn, 2005). Moreover, as the decision to
respond short or time-left (in long interval) is based on a
single process, no qualitative difference is expected in the
response patterns for both options. With respect to changes
in behavior, no specific effect is expected if one assumes
that at the start of the experiment both short and long
durations are accurately represented.
The associative strategy predicts that RT profiles are flat,
because all entry points are equally likely and therefore
equally trained. However, the associative strategy does
predict a clear change in behavior over the experiment. As
the associations need to be learned over time, this account
predicts that the performance of the participants improves
with more training.
The switch point strategy predicts more pronounced RT
profiles. It predicts an increasing slope for the RTs
associated with the short responses, but a decreasing slope
for the time-left responses. This effect can also be described
as a negative effect of being closer to the switch point.
When a trial starts, a participant that aims to respond as fast
as possible could prepare the short response as at the start of
the trial short clearly is the best option. Thus, all motor
preparation for a short response can be made. However, the
closer the time-in-trial gets to the switch point, the less
likely it is that short is the appropriate response, so, more
time is needed to decide what is the best response. When the
time-in-trial passes the switch point, the same process
applies in reverse.

Experiment 1
Apart from the analyses suggested above, which could be
run on a Time-Left dataset without any experimental
manipulation, we also included a manipulation that could
provide additional insights in the viability of the different
strategies: If participants really use the short interval as an
indication of the switch point, short and long intervals with
a ratio slightly less than a half (e.g., 3.75s/8s or 2.75s/6s
instead of 4s/8s or 3s/6s), so-called competitive ratios, yield
opposite shifts in indifference point for the switch point
strategy and temporal arithmetic. The switch point strategy
predicts that, if participants use the short interval as switch
point, the indifference point will be at 3.75s, whereas the
temporal arithmetic account predicts the indifference point
to be at 8 - 3.75 = 4.25s. Thus, changing the duration of the
short interval from 4 to 3.75 seconds would cause a shift of
the indifference point to the left for the switch point strategy
whereas it would cause a shift to the right for temporal
arithmetic.

Method
Participants Twenty-five Psychology and Artificial
Intelligence students participated in exchange for course
credit. Five students were excluded from the analysis
because of not adhering to the instructions.
Design, Stimuli and Procedure The experiment consisted
of two blocks. In the half-ratio block, participants received a
short and long interval with a ratio of a half (4 and 8
seconds or 3 and 6 seconds). In the competitive-ratio block,
participants received a short and long interval with a ratio of
less than a half (3.75 and 8 seconds or 2.75 and 6 seconds).
Each participant received one 8s and one 6s block, the order
of half- and competitive-ratio blocks was counterbalanced.
During the first 16 (of 32) practice trials, participants
were presented both short and long intervals 8 times. All
trials started with a fixation cross, for 1000ms. Next, either
the short or the long interval was presented. For the short
interval, a blue circle was displayed at the right of the
fixation point, for the long interval a green circle was
displayed at the left. After the interval ended (i.e., after 2.75,
3, 3.75, 4, 6 or 8s), the circle was removed from the screen.
The screen remained blank for 500ms, after which the same
circle was presented again. However, instead of
automatically disappearing, the participants were asked to
press the spacebar when they thought that the circle was
displayed for the same duration as in the previous
presentation. After the response was given, the circle
disappeared, and feedback was presented. If the estimated
duration was more than 20% off, feedback stated that the
response was much too early/late, if it was more than 10%
off, feedback stated that the response was too early/late. If
the feedback deviated less than 10%, the feedback stated
that the response was correct. Feedback was displayed for
2500ms. After these 16 practice trials, participants received
another 16 practice trials that were similar except for the
removal of the presentation of the interval, requiring the
participants to estimate the durations from memory.
After the practice trials, participants were instructed that
in the next block, both circles would appear at different
onsets. Their task was to judge which circle would
disappear first, and to select that circle by pressing the "V"
key if they thought that the left, green circle (long interval)
would disappear first, and the "N" key if they thought that
the right, blue circle (short interval) would disappear first.
The "V" response is referred to as the time-left choice, as
participants preferred to stay with that option and wait for
the time that is still left in the long interval. As soon as a
choice was made, the other circle was removed from the
screen as not to give any feedback about the correctness of
the response, and the selected circle remained on the screen
for the remainder of the associated interval its duration. All
experimental trials started with the presentation of a fixation
cross for 1000ms. Next, the green circle was presented,
indicating the start of the long interval. Then, after a fraction
of the long interval had elapsed (n/10, where n is selected
from [1,..,9], resulting in n entry points), the blue circle was

1617

presented, indicating the start of the short interval.
Participants were provided a response window of 1500ms.
No explicit feedback was given, except for when the
response was too slow.

Figure 1: Interval estimations
(and SEs) per ratio group in
the last 16 trials of the
practice block.

t(16.51) < 1). Apart from the very similar indifference
points observed in all conditions, it is also noteworthy to
mention that the 95% confidence intervals are more than
three times the experimental manipulation (of 250ms): -463

Figure 2: Proportion Time-Left choice at entry points 1
to 9, for the 2.75/6, 3/6 groups (left), 3.75/8 and 4/8
groups (right).

Results
Practice Trials For both the switch point strategy and
temporal arithmetic, Time-Left behavior (in the
experimental trials) depends on how well the intervals are
learned during the practice trials. Visual inspection, see
Figure 1, shows that all intervals have been learned
relatively well. Furthermore, to be able to make valid
comparisons between the half-ratio and competitive-ratio
groups, estimations of the long intervals should not differ,
as these are equally long in the half-ratio and competitive
ratio groups. However, estimations of the short intervals
should differ, as these are not equally long in the half-ratio
and competitive ratio groups.
The data support these requirements. The mean
estimations of the long interval do not significantly differ
for the 3.75/8 and 4/8 groups: t(20.83) = 1.57, p = .131. The
same applies to the 2.75/6 and 3/6 groups: t(20.71) = -1.57,
p = .133. The mean estimations of the short intervals do
significantly differ for the 3.75/8 and 4/8 ratio groups:
t(19.94) = -2.16, p = .043. The same applies to the 2.75/6
and the 3/6 groups: t(20.92) = -2.74, p = .012.
Consequently, the presence/absence of an effect of ratio on
indifference point is not to be attributed to inaccurate,
differential representations of the intervals.
Indifference points Proportion of time-left choice was
calculated for each entry point, per participant and
condition. Remember, entry point is a fraction (1/10, ...
9/10) of the long interval. Figure 2 presents the overall
proportion time-left choice for half- and competitive-ratio
conditions. Cubic trends (or S-curves) were fitted on the
time-left proportions per participant. The location at which
the cubic trend crossed P(Time-Left)=.5 was taken as that
participant's indifference point.
Contrary to our predictions, the indifference points do not
significantly differ for the half- and competitive-ratio
conditions. (4/8 vs. 3.75/8: t(16.86) < 1, 3/6 vs. 2.75/6

Figure 3: Proportion TimeLeft choice in 1st and 2nd
half of the experiment block,
for all groups combined.

up to 524ms for the difference between the 4/8 and 3.75/8
groups and -329 up to 544ms for the difference between the
3/6 and 2.75/6 groups. As the 8 and 6-based groups do also
not differ (in choice and RT behavior), we have collapsed
the data over these manipulations in the remainder of this
paper.
Learning effects Time-left preference functions in the first
and second halves of the experimental blocks are compared
to investigate the presence of the associative strategy (see
Figure 3). Recall that an increase in the slope of the timeleft preference function over the two halves would be the
signature of associative learning. Visual inspection of
Figure 3 shows that the time-left preference function is not
steeper in the second half of the experiment. Within-subjects
comparisons of slopes also do not hint at a more pronounced
time-left preference function (average difference between
slopes for the 1st half - 2nd half: .01, t(45) < 1). However,
the indifference points do shift (with -.3 entry point) when
the first and second half of the experiment are compared
(t(45) = -2.69, p = .01).

Figure 4: Mean reaction time (in ms) for responses on the
short and long intervals, at entry points 1 to 9.
Reaction time Figure 4 presents mean RT curves per entry
point, plotted separately for short and time-left responses.

1618

As the number of long responses for entry points 1 to 3, and
the number of short responses for entry points 7 to 9 was
limited, we did not include these data points in Figure 4.
For both response alternatives, mean RT is (linearly)
regressed on entry point. Analyses confirm the pattern
visible in Figure 4: For short responses, the RT increases
with entry point, as indicated by the significant positive
slope: (β = 12.15ms, t(22) = 2.45, p = .023). On the other
hand, mean RT for time-left responses decreases with entry
point as the slope is estimated at -68.71ms (t(22) = -8.97, p
< .001).

Discussion
This experiment was conducted to assess which of the three
identified strategies was predominantly used in the TimeLeft task. The picture that emerges from the data does not
univocally support one strategy. The most informative data
comes from the RT data. As differential effects are found
for the short and the time-left responses, the conclusion
seems warranted that the underlying strategy cannot be a
continuous function of entry point. This rules out the usage
of the associative strategy, as this account predicts a flat RT
profile. It is also unlikely that a SET-based temporal
arithmetic explanation can account for the found results, as
in its current form SET does not identify different processes
for both response options. The account that comes closest to
the data is that based on debriefing interviews in our pilot
studies: the switch point strategy. However, although the
slopes of both RT profiles fit qualitatively well, our initial
assessment predicted similar slopes in absolute terms for the
short and the time-left responses. The difference between
our prediction and the data could be explained by assuming
that participants do not completely prepare the short
response before the switch-point, as they are not yet sure
whether that will be the correct response. Instead, they only
start preparing the time-left response when the switch-point
has passed. Additionally, the data corroborates the
assumption that additional time is needed to decide between
both options if current time is close to the switch point.
Given these additional assumptions, the switch point
strategy fits the RT data best.
If we look at the learning pattern, the strongest prediction
was made by the associative strategy, as participants who
follow this strategy need experience to perform accurately.
However, no such learning effects were observed. The
accuracy became slightly better, but no difference in slope
was observed. As both temporal arithmetic and the switchpoint strategies could also explain a shift to higher accuracy
(as more precise representations are learned), the conclusion
from the analysis of learning patterns should be that the
associative strategy does not play an important role in
human Time-Left behavior.
Interesting results were found when the half-ratio and
competitive-ratio conditions were compared. Our
assumption was that using a short interval slightly shorter
than .5 times the long interval yields either of two
behaviors. If participants would use the short interval as

switch point, the indifference point would be similar to the
short interval (i.e., 2.75s or 3.75s instead of 3s or 4s).
However, if participants use the temporal arithmetic strategy
proposed by Gibbon and Church (1981) and Wearden
(2002), or the associative strategy, the indifference point
should be close to 6 - 2.75 = 3.25s or 8 - 3.75 = 4.25s.
However, neither effect was found. The indifference points
in the half-ratio conditions did not differ from those in the
competitive-ratio conditions, disproving the predictions of
all three strategies.
To sum up: the associative strategy is supported by none
of the analyses; the predictions derived from the temporal
arithmetic strategy do not fit the RT data nor the
half/competitive ratio analyses; and the switch point
strategy, although it can explain the found RT data,
predicted a different result for the half/competitive ratio
analyses.

Time-Left Model
Given that the switch point strategy fared best, the question
is whether this strategy can be reconciled with a lack of an
effect in the half/competitive ratio conditions. Hereto, we
implemented the 3.75/8 and 4/8 ratios of the Time-Left
experiment as a model in the cognitive architecture ACT-R
(Anderson, 2007). This model is a complete model of the
task in that it produces both choice and RT behavior.
The model uses a pacemaker-accumulator that yields a
nonlinear scale because of increasing inter-pulse lengths
(Van Rijn & Taatgen, 2008; Taatgen, Van Rijn, &
Anderson, 2007) and uses the standard ACT-R declarative
memory system in which the durations of the short and long
intervals are stored. This system complies with the WeberFechner law due to pulse-by-pulse variability that is a
function of the pulse length. The model is based on the
following assumptions:
(1) A switch point strategy is used, with the short interval
as switch point (i.e., 3.75 or 4);
(2) Around the switch point, temporal uncertainty
(because of the similarity between switch point and current
time) causes a delay in the execution of a response;
(3) After the switch point has passed, a top-down
mechanism selects the time-left response in advance of the
actual response execution;
(4) All parameter settings of the temporal system are
copied verbatim from Van Rijn and Taatgen (2008).
After the practice trials, the model’s internal
representations result in similar behavior as shown in Figure
1: A significant difference between the estimations of the
short intervals (of 3.75 and 4 seconds), but no significant
difference between estimations of the long intervals.
Variability is greater at the long intervals (than at the short
intervals), which is in correspondence with the WeberFechner Law.
The RT patterns of the model, presented in the right panel
of Figure 5, show a clear dissociation between short and
time-left RTs. This pattern is caused by assumptions (2) and
(3) reported above. With respect to the time-left RTs, a

1619

participant can anticipate a time-left response as soon as the
current time becomes larger than the switch point, causing
the associated RT to decrease because of preparatory
processes. Top-down response selection does not occur at
the start of a trial because of startup costs and the
(increasing) likelihood of having to switch response option.
The short RTs (slowly) increase because the closer the entry
point gets to the switch point, the more likely it is that the
model confirms its decision by a second readout of the
accumulator (that counts ticks in time). This additional
process slightly increases reaction times. Note that even if
some participants did prepare a response in the early phases
of a trial, the mean reaction time would still be greater for
the first entry points than for the last entry points.

Figure 5: Model results. Left panel depicts the Time-Left
Preference for both half/competitive conditions; RT
behavior is depicted on the right.
Apparently, the model can account for the (human) RT
data, however, the main question was whether it could also
account for the half/competitive ratio results. As can be seen
in Figure 5 (left panel), the model replicates the lack of an
effect in the half/competitive ratio conditions, which is
partly caused by pacemaker-variability. That variability
causes multiple pulse-counts (stored in declarative memory)
to be associated with the short interval. Consequently,
retrieving the pulse-count associated with the short interval
does not always yield the same amount. Because of
pacemaker-variability and multiple pulse-counts, the
indifference points in the 3.75/8 and 4/8 groups do not
significantly differ, mimicking the results found in the
human data.

General Conclusions
In 2007, Wearden and Jones have argued that although a
number of procedural and theoretical considerations make it
difficult to interpret Time-Left data gathered using animals
these constraints "apply with less force to the human timeleft analogue" (p. 1292). Nevertheless, they argue that other
tasks might be more appropriate to distinguish between
linear and nonlinear time.
This study shows that it is not just more appropriate to use
other tasks to distinguish between linear and nonlinear
timescales, it is necessary. That is, the current experiment
and simulations show that participants use strategies

different from the temporal arithmetic strategy proposed by
Gibbon and Church (1981) and Wearden (2002). As the
interpretation of Time-Left results critically depends on the
usage of temporal arithmetic, the absence of that strategy
invalidates the Time-Left task for distinguishing between
different internal timescales.

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in
the physical universe? Oxford University Press.
Cerutti, D. T., & Staddon, J. E. R. (2004). Immediacy
Versus Anticipated Delay in the Time-Left Experiment: A
Test of the Cognitive Hypothesis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
30(1), 45 – 57.
Dehaene, S. (2001). Subtracting pigeons: Logarithmic or
Linear? Psychological Science, 12(3), 244–246.
Gibbon, J. (1977). Scalar Expectancy Theory and Weber’s
Law in Animal Timing. Psychological Review, 83(3), 279
– 325.
Gibbon, J., & Church, R. M. (1981). Time Left: Linear vs.
Logarithmic Subjective Time. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 7(2), 87 – 108.
Gibbon, J. (1992). Theoretical Note: Ubiquity of Scalar
Timing with a Poisson Clock. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 35, 283 – 293.
Sprenger, S. A., & Van Rijn, H. (2005). Clock time naming:
Complexities of a simple task. In B. Bara, L. Barsalou, &
M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th annual
conference of the cognitive science society. (pp. 2062–
2067). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Staddon, J. E. R. & Higa, J. J. (1999). Time and Memory:
Towards a Pacemaker-Free Theory of Interval Timing.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 71, 215
– 251.
Taatgen, N. A., Van Rijn, H., & Anderson, J. R. (2007). An
integrated theory of prospective time interval estimation:
The role of cognition, attention and learning.
Psychological Review, 114(3), 577 – 598.
Van der Maas, H. L. J., & Jansen, B. R. J. (2003). What
response times tell of children’s behavior on the balance
scale task. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 85
(2), 141–177.
Van Rijn, H., & Taatgen, N. A. (2008). Timing of multiple
overlapping intervals: How many clocks do we have?
Acta Psychologica, 129, 365 – 375.
Van Rijn, H., Van Someren, M., & Van der Maas, H.
(2003). Modeling developmental transitions on the
balance scale task. Cognitive Science, 27 (2), 227–257.
Wearden, J. H. (2002). Traveling in Time: A Time-Left
Analogue for Humans. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 28(2), 200 – 208.
Wearden, J. H., & Jones, L. A. (2007). Is the growth of
subjective time in humans a linear or nonlinear function
of real time? Quarterly Journal Of Experimental
Psychology, 60 (9), 1289–1302.

1620

