UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explanations of comparative facts: A shift in focus

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3bw1z8jt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Aldrovandi, Silvio
Hampton, James A.
Huessen, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explanations of comparative facts: A shift in focus
Daniel Heussen (Daniel.Heussen@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

Silvio Aldrovandi (S.Aldrovandi@city.ac.uk)
Petko Kusev (P.Kusev@city.ac.uk)
James A. Hampton (J.A.Hampton@city.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, City University, London EC1V 0HB, United Kingdom
Abstract
A comparative fact can be presented in two ways. ‘Among
white evangelical Christians, Obama had 40% fewer votes
than McCain.’ or ‘Among white evangelical Christians,
McCain had 40% more votes than Obama.’ Focusing on why
Obama had fewer votes than McCain may result in a different
explanation from focusing on why McCain had more votes
than Obama, although it is the same fact. Thus what
determines whether we focus in our explanation on Obama or
McCain?
In two studies, we show that people generally focused more
on the first part of the comparative fact. However, when the
comparative fact is presented in a negative frame (‘less …
than’) there was a shift in focus from the first to the second
part of the fact. For neutral items this moderating effect did
not occur. The Principle of Lexical Marking (Clark, 1969)
and Loss Aversion (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) are
discussed as possible accounts for this shift in focus.
Keywords: Explanation; Reasoning; Mental Representation

The focus of explanations
Absolute judgments are often more difficult than relative
judgments (Laming, 1984; Miller, 1956; Stewart, Brown, &
Chater, 2005). Evaluating whether the price of a new roof is
expensive or not is more difficult than judging whether one
quote is better value than another. As an aid, we often
present facts in a comparative manner. The severity of the
financial crisis in the UK, for instance, is seldom presented
by itself but rather in comparison with other nations (the US
or other European nations) or with previous crises.
Advertisers use comparisons to highlight key features of
their products in order to make a favorable evaluation easy
to form.
The advantage of a contrast or comparison is not,
however, restricted to judgments. It has also been argued
that explanations for contrasts are in some circumstances
easier than those for plain facts (Lipton, 2004). In line with
Mill’s Method of difference (Mill, 1862/2006), contrastive
explanations explain a fact by highlighting the causal
difference between the case to be explained and the
otherwise similar case in which the fact does not hold
(McGill, 1993). For instance, the severity of the financial
crisis in Britain might be easier to explain by comparing it
to that of the rest of Europe and finding differences between
the nations that might account for it.

Unlike this example where the target of the explanation
(the severity of the financial crisis in Britain) is apparent,
there are cases where describing a comparative fact leaves
open which part of the fact needs to be explained. Stating
that, among white evangelical Christians, Obama had 40%
fewer votes than McCain leaves open whether one needs to
explain the appeal of McCain or the disapproval of Obama
among those voters. Focusing on one or the other may result
in a different explanation for the same fact.
Previous research has looked at this problem in terms of
stereotyping (Grier & McGill, 2000), group typicality
(Hegarty & Pratto, 2001) and Norm Theory (Kahneman &
Miller, 1986). For instance, Miller, Taylor, & Buck (1991)
observed that gender differences in voting behavior in the
1988 US election seemed to be exclusively explained in
terms of women’s voting patterns. In line with Norm
Theory, they argued that men are considered the
stereotypical voter and therefore the norm, whereas women
are the more mutable voting group whose behavior could
more easily change. Hence the explanations of the
difference in voting patterns focused more on the ‘deviant’
behavior of women. To support their hypothesis, they asked
people to explain differences in the number of doctor-visits
that men and women in stereotypically male or female
professions have in a year. The results revealed that
explanations of a gender difference among University
Professors focused more on women whereas the same
difference among Elementary School Teacher was
explained more in terms of men.
In contrast, Hegarty and Pratto (2001) have argued that
the focus in explanations is not solely due to the mutability
of one of the two groups’ behavior but rather due to the
groups’ typicality within the relevant superordinate
category. They asked participants for explanations of group
differences between heterosexual and homosexual men in
compliance with a treatment and found that people generally
focused more on the characteristics of homosexual men.
However when they changed the overarching treatment
category from cancer to AIDS they found roughly equally
many references to each group. They also showed that
relative group size influenced who is considered the norm
and as a result who is focused on. Furthermore they did not
find any correlation of these effects with the mutability of
the two groups. The behavior of homosexual men was
consistently considered to be more mutable than that of
heterosexual men.

1716

Thus Hegarty and Pratto (2001) argued that rather than
mutability, it is the typicality and size of the group that
determines who is focused on in the explanation.

four conditions, here illustrated with the Football–Ambition
item:

Present research

–

–

The above studies have highlighted some key aspects that
influence what we focus on in our explanations—be it
mutability of one of the groups, relative group sizes or
typicality within an overarching group. In replicating one of
the previous studies (Miller et al., 1991), we discovered two
basic aspects of comparative facts that influence what we
focus on in our explanations. These effects are important
because they are more general than mutability, typicality
and group size and therefore apply in cases where the others
may not hold. To our knowledge these influences on the
focus of explanations have not been reported before.

Experiment 1
The aim of the first experiment was to replicate Miller et
al.’s (1991) study using adapted stimuli while addressing a
methodological issue. The results of their study showed an
overall main effect towards focusing on women in the
explanation of doctor-visits. They attributed this effect to a
high proportion of explanations that made reference to
gynecological issues. Thus in Experiment 1 of the present
study, doctor-visits were replaced with dentist-visits to
counteract this bias. In addition, we extended the
experiment by using an additional pair of professions
(Football player & Ballet dancer) and including typical as
well as neutral characteristics for each career.

–
–

Professional female football players are more ambitious
professional male football players.
Professional female football players are less ambitious
professional male football players.
Professional male football players are more ambitious
professional female football players.
Professional male football players are less ambitious
professional female football players.

than
than
than
than

Each participant saw four facts, one of each of these four
conditions rotated across the four professions each with one
of the four attributes according to career path.
Thus there was a total of 64 possible stimuli derived from
four conditions rotated across four professions with two
types of attributes (typical vs. atypical) each.
Three-page booklets were created with the first page
containing the instructions and a consent form. Each of the
subsequent pages contained two facts. Below each fact were
four empty lines for participant to write down their
explanations. The order of the four facts was randomized
with the constraint that neither facts for the same career path
nor attributes of the same type appeared on the same page.
Procedure The study was conducted in group-sessions and
participants took no longer than five minutes to complete
the questionnaire.

Method
Participants 242 students at City University, London, (172
female) participated in the study. Participants volunteered or
received course credits in return for participation.1
Materials Participants were asked to explain four facts. The
facts were presented as findings of a large-scale study from
a renowned research institute. Each fact described a
difference between males and females on either a typical or
neutral attribute for either a female- (Elementary school
teacher / Ballet dancer) or male-dominated profession
(Professor / Football player). Two facts were about
professions in a teaching career whereas the other two were
about professions in a sports career. The two neutral facts
were number of Dentist-visits for the teaching careers and
Cinema-visits for the sport careers whereas the typical
attributes were the Communication skills for the teaching
careers and Ambition for the sports careers.
Thus we had four professions with two attributes each.
For each attribute by profession combination there were

Pretest Forty-eight (33 female) City University students
completed a pretest to determine both typical and neutral
attributes for each profession and verify their gender
stereotypes. For each profession participants were asked to
imagine a particular person in as much detail as possible.
They were then asked to provide typicality ratings for nine
attributes (three of each type of attribute: typical, atypical
and neutral). After having provided typicality ratings for
four pairs of professions (Flight attendant – Pilot, Nurse –
Doctor, Ballet dancer – Football player, Elementary school
teacher – University Professor), they were asked again to
imagine a person in each profession, answer three filler
questions and indicate either the gender or the name of the
person they imagined to determine the gender stereotype.
No differences were observed between these two ways of
measuring the gender stereotype.
The Ballet dancer – Football player pairing showed the
strongest stereotyping with 92% and 98% respectively
confirming the stereotype. The Professor – Elementary
school teacher pair was the second strongest in stereotyping
with 90% and 85% confirming the stereotype. For each
profession pair we chose the attribute with the highest
average typicality rating as well as the one closest to the mid
point.

Results
1
An unequal distribution of male participants across the various
conditions due to the relatively small sample size made an
evaluation of the influence of gender on the focus of the
explanations impossible.

Coding Analysis Of the total of 968 possible explanations
across the 242 participants, 42 explanations were missing or
incomplete. Two independent judges coded the remaining

1717

Table 1)2. This effect seemed to be somewhat weaker for
neutral attributes than for typical attributes. However
exploratory hierarchical loglinear analysis showed the effect
to be constant across attribute types (χ2(1, N = 912) = 1.03,
p = .31) and career paths (χ2(1, N = 912) = .24, p = .62).

explanations as either overall focusing on male or female
characteristics. A further 12 explanations could not be coded
as they did not contain a reference to a specific gender (e.g.
“this is probably due to individual differences in this
profession” or “I think this may be caused by gender
socialisation processes”). The two judges had an agreement
of just under 94% with Cohen’s Kappa inter-rater reliability
of .9. Consensus was found through discussion.

Table 1: Chi-Square results for each attribute.
Attribute
C-skills
Dentist-visits
Ambition
Cinema-visits

Chi-Square
χ2(1, N = 227) = 8.58, p < .01
χ2(1, N = 230) = 4.99, p < .05
χ2(1, N = 234) = 17.4, p < .01
χ2(1, N = 221) = 5.48, p < .05

Influence of Position & Frame In addition to the influence
of Gender, the data revealed that in 66% of the explanations
people intuitively focused more on the group mentioned
first in the fact (e.g., “Profession male football players are
more ambitious than profession female football players.”).
This effect was independent of whether the profession was
stereotypically male or female and the same across items
(χ2(1, N = 912) = 90.9, p < .001).
However this bias towards focusing on the first part of the
fact was moderated for some items by the way the fact was
framed. Based on the odds ratio, framing a fact about a
typical attribute in terms of ‘less … than’ (47%/53%) made
it 5 times less likely that the explanation would focus on the
first part of the fact than when it was framed as ‘more …
than’ (82%/18%). For neutral attributes the framing did not
influence the bias toward the first part of the fact (see
Figure 2). Separate Chi-Square analyses for typical and
neutral attributes confirmed that the bias interacted with the
way the fact was framed for typical attributes
(χ2(1, N = 461) = 60.1, p < .01) but not for neutral attributes
(χ2(1, N = 451) = .7, p = .42).

Figure 1: The influence of Gender on the focus of
explanations.
Influence of Gender Figure 1 shows the percentage of
explanations that made overall more reference to female
characteristics. Each graph presents the profession pair for
one of the two career paths across the two types of attribute.
For both career paths, most explanations for stereotypically
female jobs focused on men, whereas the reverse was true
for explanations of attributes for stereotypically male jobs.
Separate Chi-square analyses for each career path by
attribute type inferentially supported these findings (see

Figure 2: The influence of Frame and Typicality on the
focus of explanations.
2

Separating the analyses by items was necessary to ensure
independence of cells.

1718

Discussion
The results showed that for explanations of comparative
facts people tended to focus on the less stereotypical
member of the group, corroborating Miller et al. ’s (1991)
findings. Explaining a gender difference among members of
a stereotypically male profession, most people pay more
attention to the characteristics of female members, whereas
the reverse was true for a stereotypically female profession.
Unlike Miller et al. (1991) however, we found that people
intuitively paid more attention in their explanation to the
group mentioned first. People tended to focus more on male
football players when males were mentioned first and
female ballet dancers when females were mentioned first
despite the fact that they are the stereotypical group for each
profession. In addition this bias towards focusing on the first
part was moderated in typical attributes by the way the fact
was framed. Thus when the fact was presented as ‘less …
than’ (e.g., “Professional female football players are less
ambitious than professional male football players”) a larger
proportion of people focused on the second group than
when it was presented as ‘more … than’.
To our knowledge this effect of framing in the realm of
explanation has not been reported before. It represents an
important finding because it shows that one can change
what people pay attention to in their explanation by simply
changing the way the to-be-explained fact is framed.
Presenting Hilary Clinton as more liberal than Obama may
elicit different explanations than presenting her as less
conservative than Obama.
What is interesting about our data is that, although fairly
strong for typical attributes (one is 5 times more likely to
focus on the first part of the fact when the attribute is
framed as ‘more … than’ than when it is framed as ‘less …
than’), the framing effect did not occur for neutral attributes.
For neutral items there was a constant bias towards
explaining the first part of the comparative fact.
What is the difference between being more or less
ambitious and going more or less often to the cinema that
makes the framing effect appear in the former but not the
latter case? We termed the attributes as typical and neutral
in regards to the different professions. However one might
also consider them as positive and neutral. Being ambitious
as a sports-professional and having good communication
skills in a teaching profession are positive attributes,
whereas the number of dentist- and cinema-visits do not
really have either a positive or negative connotation in
relation to either profession. If the typical attributes are
perceived as positive, then a ‘less … than’ frame would be
considered negative for the target group. Comparative facts
have the characteristic that makes it possible to turn the
negative frame for one group into a positive frame for the
other group. Male footballer being less ambitious than
female footballer means that the women are more ambitious
than their male counterparts. Thus our data suggest that
some people avoid focusing on the negative framing of a
positive attribute and instead turn their attention to the
positive framing of the attribute for the comparison group.

This shift in focus only occurred for attributes that have a
positive valence. It did not occur for attributes that are
neutral in valence. People did not avoid focusing on the
‘less … than’ frame of neutral attributes like going to the
cinema.

Experiment 2
The aim of Experiment 2 was primarily to replicate the
finding that both the position and the way the fact is framed
influence what we focus on in our explanations. A
secondary purpose was to validate a new procedure in the
testing process. Previous research including Experiment 1
used two independent judges to code the explanations. Here
we asked participants, after having provided their
explanation, to go through their explanation and evaluate
whether the reasoning in their explanation was more about
one or the other group presented in the comparison. This
procedure avoids difficulties of interpretation in the coding
stage and was more time-efficient.

Method
Participants 397 (55 male) students from the Catholic
University, Leuven, participated in the study in return for
course credits.
Design A between subjects design was used with Item topic
(Sports vs. Politics), Item (Footballer vs. Ballet dancer or
Liberal vs. Conservative), Frame (More vs. Less), and
Position (whether Males or Females / Professor or Teachers
constitute the first part of the fact) as factors. For the sports
profession we adopted the typical attribute of Experiment 1
(ambition). The political items compared Professors with
Teachers on either being liberal or conservative3.
Two dependent variables were used. The first reflected
the degree to which the explanation focused on one or the
other option on an 11-point scale with each end representing
one of the two comparison groups. The second measured the
overall focus in the explanation as a forced choice.
Materials Participants were asked to provide an explanation
for one particular fact. The fact was again presented as a
finding of a large-scale study from a renowned research
institute. Each fact was either about a gender difference in
sports professions (Football or Ballet) or a difference in
political attitude (being liberal or conservative) between
teachers and professors. As in Experiment 1 each fact could
take one of four forms depending on the Position (which
group constituted the first part of the fact) and the Frame
(‘more … than’ or ‘less … than’). The position of the two
comparison groups on the rating scale and the forced choice
options were counterbalanced. The items for Sports were
therefore identical to those from Study 1.

3

Note that for the political item people were asked to explain a
difference between teachers and professors rather than between
genders.

1719

Procedure The study was conducted as part of a series of
studies. Participants took part in groups of 25 and required
no more than 3 minutes to complete the questionnaire. Each
participant provided one explanation for a comparative fact
and subsequently rated that explanation for the degree to
which the explanation focused on one or the other
component of the fact. In addition, participants gave an
overall judgment of their focus in their explanation.

Results
Influence of Gender First we looked at the effect of gender
stereotyping on the focus in explanations in the sports
profession items in order to validate the procedure of
Experiment 2. Overall only 39% of explanations regarding a
gender difference among ballet dancers focused on women
whereas for football players it was 53% (χ2(1, N = 193) =
3.96, p < .05). Thus the data for sports professions
replicated the influence of gender stereotyping on who
received most attention in explanations.
Influence of Position & Frame In order to test the
influence of Position and Frame on the overall judgment of
focus, a 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 hierarchical loglinear analysis was
carried out with Item topic (Sports vs. Politics), Item
(Male/Professor vs. Female/Teacher), Position (e.g.,
Professor-First vs. Teacher-First) and Frame (more vs. less)
as independent variables. As in Experiment 1, we found an
overall preference to explain the first part of the fact (65%
of people; χ2(1, N = 374) = 32.4, p < .001). This bias was
again moderated by the way the attribute was framed with
81% focusing on the first part when it was framed as ‘more
... than’ and only 49% focusing on the first when it was
framed as ‘less ... than’ (χ2(1, N = 374) = 41.2, p < .001).
Figure 3 illustrates that this moderating effect on the bias
was not equally strong for all items. Similar to the neutral
items in Experiment 1, the moderating effect of the Frame
was smaller for explanations about why professors and
teachers have different levels of conservatism. This was
reflected in a significant interaction between Item topic,
Item and Frame on the proportion of people focusing on the
first part of the explanation (χ2(1, N = 374) = 4.7, p < .05).
The dependent measure reflecting the degree to which an
explanation focused on one or the other group matched the
forced choice option. The degree to which people focused
on the first part of the explanation was significantly above
the mid point of the scale on a one-sample t-test (M = 5.9,
SD = 3.1, t(373) = 5.9, p < .001). An Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) with the degree of focus on the first part as
dependent variable and Item topic, Item, Position and Frame
as between-subjects factors revealed a significant main
effect of Frame (F(1, 358) = 22.1, p < .001) reflecting the
moderating effect of Frame on the bias towards focusing on
the first part of the fact. 4
4

None of the effects reported here were influenced by the
participants’ gender.

Figure 3: The interaction between Item topic, Item and
Frame on the focus of explanations.

Discussion
Experiment 2 replicated the effect of gender stereotyping in
the sports profession items and thereby validated the change
in procedure. Using external judges or asking participants to
do their own coding did not affect the results. The data also
replicated the influence of Position and Frame on the focus
of the explanations. People again focused more on the first
part of the comparative fact, which was moderated by the
way the attribute was framed. This moderating effect
however was only present in the sports profession items and
the liberal attribute of the political items. Although the data
showed a similar pattern for the conservative attribute, the
moderating effect of Frame was not significant.
Although being liberal or conservative were assumed to
be roughly of the same valence, the data for the conservative
attribute behaved in a similar way as the neutral items in
Experiment 1. In a sample of 29 students from the Catholic
University of Leuven, the majority judged being liberal as a
positive (19/29) whereas being conservative a neutral
(18/29) characteristic. Thus people avoided focusing on the

1720

negatively framed attribute for the target group and rather
explained the positive characteristic of the comparison
group. In contrast participants did not avoid focusing on the
‘less … than’ frame when the attribute was more neutral.
Experiment 2 therefore provides additional evidence that
the shift in focus occurs for positively valenced rather than
neutral attributes. In hindsight, however, our data do not
entirely rule out the influence of the typicality of the
attribute for the group. Participants may well perceive being
liberal as a more typical attribute for Professors and
Elementary school teachers. This possibility will have to be
addressed in future studies.

General Discussion
Facts are often presented in relative terms by comparing one
case with another. This helps both in evaluating the fact
(Laming, 1984; Stewart et al., 2005) and in finding possible
explanations for the fact (Lipton, 2004). Presenting a fact in
a comparative manner offers at least two ways to present the
fact. We can, for instance, present the financial crisis in
Britain as more severe than in the rest of Europe or we can
present the financial crisis in Europe as less severe than that
in Britain. Our results suggest that these two ways of
presenting the same fact changes what people focus on in
their explanation and hence changes their explanation.
The Principle of Lexical Marking (Clark, 1969) may
provide an explanation for the shift in focus. This principle
suggests that for pairs of adjectival terms (high-low, brightdim, etc.) one of the terms is represented in a less complex
form in our semantic memory than the other. The so-called
unmarked term is the one that defines the scale (e.g., height,
brightness). It is also noncommittal. Asking ‘how high is the
bridge?’ leaves open whether the bridge is high or low,
whereas ‘how low is it?’ implies that it is low. In a
comparative question like ‘Why was Obama less popular
with evangelical Christian voters than McCain’, people
might focus more on McCain being more popular because
‘being popular’ is the unmarked term on a popularity scale.
If ‘being less’ popular is represented in a more complex
form, takes longer to process (Clark, 1969) and may
therefore be more difficult to explain, it is understandable
that people would think about the flipside of the coin and
explain the greater popularity of McCain. If lexical marking
was the complete story though, one might expect the shift in
focus not to be restricted to positively valenced attributes.
Although loss aversion (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) is
mainly a theory about subjective utility, it may be useful in
thinking about why this effect seems to be restricted to
valenced attributes. Negative events appear to mobilize
physiological, affective, cognitive, and certain types of
social resources to a greater degree than do positive or
neutral events (Kusev et al., 2008). For a negatively
presented difference, participants might therefore not restrict
their efforts to providing an explanation for the target group,
but also consider the comparison group. This would explain
the differential effect of neutral and positive attributes on
the shift in focus.

Previous research has suggested several factors that may
influence what we focus on in our explanation (Grier &
McGill, 2000; Hegarty & Pratto, 2001; Miller et al., 1991).
Here we have shown that over and above those influences,
there are also influences on the more fundamental level of
presentation. Future research will have to scrutinize possible
theories—including lexical marking and loss aversion—that
can account for this shift in focus. Here we have provided a
first demonstration of this effect in the realm of
explanations.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a postdoctoral
fellowship within the framework of international mobility
awarded to the first author by the University of Leuven
under the supervision of Gert Storms. The authors thank
I - Chant Chiang for a fruitful discussion of the findings.

References
Clark, H. H. (1969). Linguistic processes in deductive
reasoning. Psychological Review, 76, 387–404.
Grier, S. A., & McGill, A. L. (2000). How we explain
depends on whom we explain: The impact of social
category on the selection of causal comparisons and
causal explanations. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 36, 545–566.
Hegarty, P., & Pratto, F., (2001). The effects of social
category norms and stereotypes on explanations for
intergroup differences. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 80, 723–735.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263291.
Kusev, P., van Schaik, P., Ayton, P., Dent, J. & Chater, N.
(2008). Exaggerated risk: Prospect theory and probability
weighting in risky choice. (Under Review).
Laming, D. R. J. (1984). The relativity of ‘‘absolute’’
judgements. British Journal of Mathematical and
Statistical Psychology, 37, 152–183.
McGill, A. L. (1993). Selection of a causal background:
Role of expectation versus feature mutability. Journal of
Personality & Social Psychology, 67, 701–707.
Mill, J. S. (1862/2006). The Collected Works of John Stuart
Mill: System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive v. 7 &
8. Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund.
Miller, D. T., Taylor, B, & Buck, M. L. (1991). Gender
Gaps: Who needs to be explained? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 61, 4–12.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for information
processing. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97.
Stewart, N., Brown, G. D. A., & Chater, N. (2005).
Absolute
identification
by
relative
judgment.
Psychological Review, 112, 881–911.

1721

