UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Extraordinary Natural Ability: Anagram Solution as an Extension of Normal Reading
Ability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9cx1x71g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Accorsi, Emma
Cho, Pyeong Whan
Henin, Jonathan
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Cross-Cultural Study of Hindsight Bias and Conditional Probabilistic Reasoning
Hiroshi Yama (yama@mail.kobe-c.ac.jp)
Department of Psychological and Behavioral Sciences, Kobe College
Nishinomiya 662-8505, JAPAN

Ken I. Manktelow (K.I.Manktelow@wlv.ac.uk)
School of Applied Sciences, University of Wolverhampton, Wulfruna Street,
Wolverhampton, WV1 1SB, UK

Hugo Mercier (hmercier@isc.cnrs.fr)
Institut Jean Nicod, 1bis, Avenue Lowendal
Paris, 75007 FRANCE

Jean-Baptiste Van der Henst (vanderhenst@isc.cnrs.fr)
Institut des Sciences Cognitives, 67, boulevard Pinel
Bron, 69675 FRANCE

Kyung Soo Do (ksdo@skku.edu)
School of Social Sciences, Sung Kyun Kwan University
53 Myungryundon-3ga, Seoul 110-745, KOREA

Yayoi Kawasaki (yayoi@iris.dti.ne.jp)
P D Fellow of the JSPS, Humanities and Sciences, Nihon University
Sakurajosui 3-25-40, Setagaya, Tokyo 156-0045, JAPAN

Kuniko Adachi (k-adachi@osa.att.ne.jp)
Department of Vascular Dementia Research, National Institute of Longevity Sciences,
36-3, Gengo, Morioka, Obu, Aichi, 474-8511, JAPAN

Abstract

Key words: Social cognition; Psychology ; Cross-cultural analysis.

Choi and Nisbett (2000) reported that Koreans showed stronger
hindsight bias than Americans. The purpose of this study was to see
whether hindsight bias is stronger among Easterners than among
Westerners using a probability judgment task, and to test an
‘explicit-implicit’ hypothesis and a ‘rule-dialectics’ hypothesis. We
predict that the implicit process is more active among Easterners to
generate hindsight bias, and that Easterners are more dialectical thinkers,
whereas Westerners are more rule-based thinkers. French, British,
Japanese, and Korean participants were asked to make probabilistic

When we come across an unexpected event, we often
believe that we could have predicted it. This is a robust
psychological phenomenon known as the hindsight bias
(Fischhoff, 1975). This bias is a mistaken belief that one could
have predicted a given outcome once the outcome is known.
Hindsight bias has been assumed to be universal among
human beings. However, Choi and Nisbett (2000) reported that
Koreans showed greater hindsight bias than Americans. In their

judgments in a scenario including conditional probabilistic judgment
(Experiment 1) and in a Good Samaritan scenario (Experiment 2). In the

This research has been supported by a CHORUS grant from the

results, Easterners showed greater hindsight bias generally, and their

French Ministry of Research and the Japanese Society for the

cognition was more implicit and dialectic.

Promotion of Sciences and by a grant-in-aid from the Japanese Society
for the Promotion of Sciences (No. 19202012; The project leader is
Yukinori Takubo).

2124

experiment, Korean and American participants were asked to
estimate the probability of ‘help’ of a victim by a religious and

Easterners are more likely to do implicit processing the
‘explicit-implicit’ hypothesis. The process of hindsight bias is

generous man in a Good Samaritan scenario. People usually
expect that the man must help the victim in this scenario. Half of
their participants were given an outcome that actually he did not
help. When Korean participants knew the unexpected outcome,
they estimated that the probability of help was lower than
Americans did, even though they were asked to do so supposing
hypothetically that they did not know the outcome. This
decrease of estimated probability is the measure of hindsight
bias, and thus it was inferred that Koreans show a greater
hindsight bias. Choi and Nisbett (2000) inferred that these
tendencies among the Koreans were due to their having more
complex models for events than Americans. The term ‘complex

inferred to be implicit (Hawkins & Hastie, 1990). Therefore,
according to the ‘explicit-implicit’ hypothesis, the observation
by Choi and Nisbett (2000) that hindsight bias was stronger for
Easterners can be attributed to Easterners being more affected
by the outcome information implicitly.
This implicit process is contrasted with the explicit access.
We assume that people implicitly revise their working models
just by an unexpected outcome so that they make a causal
inference from their models to the outcome. However, if the
causal information is available explicitly, the hindsight bias is
reduced. Regarding causality, Cummins (1995) argued that
causal inference is sensitive to two factors: alternative causes

model’ is included in the concept of holistic cognition that is
contrasted with analytic cognition. Nisbett (2003; Nisbett, Peng,
Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001) argued that Westerners are more
likely to engage in analytic cognition, whereas Easterners are
more likely to engage in holistic cognition. According to his
definition, analytic cognition involves detachment of the object
from its context, a tendency to focus on attributes of the object
to assign it to a category, and a preference for using rules about
the categories to explain and predict the object’s behavior. On
the other hand, holistic cognition has an orientation to the
context or the field as a whole, attention to relationships
between a focal object and the field, and a preference for

(AC) and disabling conditions (DC). An AC is a cause that is
not the one cited in the causal rule but is capable of evoking the
effect cited in the rule. A DC is an event that could prevent an
effect from occurring in the presence of a cause.
Another specified hypothesis utilizes the distinction
between rule-based thinking and dialectical thinking.
Rule-based thinking is related to analytic cognition, whereas
dialectical thinking is related to holistic cognition. In the culture
of collectivism, rule-based thinking is not adaptive, because it
may lead to a conclusion that one side is completely justified
whereas the other is not in a conflict situation, and thus it may
break the in-group harmony that is an important goal of people

explaining and predicting events on the basis of such
relationships.
Nisbett et al. (2001) explained these cultural differences
using the distinction between individualist and collectivist
cultures. It has been claimed that Western people have
established an individualist culture, whereas Eastern people
have developed a collectivist culture. Analytic cognition is held
to be adaptive in the culture of individualism, whereas holistic
cognition is adaptive in the culture of collectivism. Regarding
the processes of hindsight bias, we consider two possible more
detailed hypotheses. One is a hypothesis based on the distinction
between explicit and implicit processes, and the other is one

in a collectivist culture. Instead, in a collectivist culture,
dialectical thinking, which requires people to consider
situational factors and thus leads them to find the middle way, is
preferred and holistic thought is appropriate to the use of
dialectics (Peng & Nisbett, 1999).
We name this the hypothesis of ‘rule-dialectics’. In
interpreting the cultural differences in hindsight bias reported by
Choi and Nisbett (2000), it is also possible to apply the
distinction between rule-based and dialectical thinking. The
participants could suppose a rule based on the scenario that, if a
person is very religious and generous, then (s)he is very likely to
help a victim. The given antecedent is true in the scenario, hence,

based on the distinction between rule-based thinking and
dialectical thinking.
As Yama, Nishioka, Horishita, Kawasaki, and Taniguchi
(2007) pointed out, the distinction between analytic and holistic
is also important and one of the properties that distinguish
between two systems proposed by dual process theorists (Evans
& Over, 1996). According to dual process theories, holistic
cognition is fundamentally implicit in that it requires processing
of many contextual elements. Analytic cognition is, on the other
hand, is assumed to be explicit. We call the account that

the probability that (s)he helped the victim is high. In the
outcome condition, their participants were asked to
hypothetically suppose that they did not know the outcome
information that John did not help the victim. If participants
stick to the rule, this supposition gets stronger, and thus, the
hindsight bias decreases, whereas if the participants use
dialectics and consider both the rule and the outcome
information, the hindsight bias gets greater.
The purpose of this study is to test the ‘explicit-implicit’
hypothesis and the ‘rule-dialectics’ hypothesis. We manipulate

2125

implicitness and explicitness in the following paradigm. The
first step is almost the same as that of previous studies on

from the ‘rule-dialectics’ explanation, they fit the ‘rule-based
with explicit revision’ model. However, if implicit revision is

hindsight bias (Choi & Nisbett, 2000; Fischhoff, 1975).
Participants receive information about a target event.
Participants in the control condition are asked to estimate the
probability of the plausible consequence of an event.
Participants in the outcome condition are informed of the
outcome that another unexpected consequence occurred, and
they are asked to estimate the probability of the original
expected outcome as if they had not received the outcome
information. In the second step, all the participants are asked to
suppose that the outcome is the unexpected one, and to point out
possible factors for the unexpected consequence. This
manipulation establishes explicit causal links between the

universal to some extent, they will fit the ‘rule-based with
implicit revision’ model. On the other hand, we predict that the
data patterns of Koreans and Japanese will fit the implicit
revision model.

original information and the unexpected consequence. In the
third step, the participants are asked to judge the probability that
the expected outcome occurred returning to the time when they
had not been yet been informed of the outcome.
As shown in Table 1, four possible models of ‘revision of
working models’ can be supposed based on the
‘explicit-implicit’ hypothesis and the ‘rule-dialectics’ hypothesis.
The ‘rule-based without explicit revision’ model supposes that
the rule-based tendency is so strong that even the explicit causal

RB: Rule-based, ER: Explicit revision, IR: Implicit revision.

inference does not revise the working models. Hence,

of the consequent. Half of the participants received information
on the outcome such that the consequent did not occur before
the probability judgment (the outcome condition), whereas the
other half did not (the control condition). In the probability
judgment of antecedent task, our participants were given an
indicative conditional with satisfied consequent, and were asked
to judge the probability of the antecedent.

according to this model, the estimations are high in all the
conditions. Secondly, the ‘rule-based with explicit revision’
model supposes that the outcome information does not make the
causal information available, and thus does not revise the
working models, but after pointing out possible factors for the
unexpected outcome, the models are revised explicitly so that
the estimated probability decreases. Hence the estimates
become low in the final judgment. Thirdly, the ‘rule-based
with implicit revision’ model supposes that, although implicit
revision is made by outcome information, the participants try to
reason hypothetically hence they keep the original models to
suppress the revised models, or adjust the implicitly revised
models to neglect the outcome information. Therefore, even
after they pointed out reasons, the estimated probability does not
decrease in the outcome condition. The fourth is the ‘implicit
revision’ model that is equivalent the dialectics model. It
supposes the implicit revision of the working models by the
outcome information, hence the estimate of probability of the
initial judgment in the outcome condition is lower. The
hindsight bias is predicted only by this model.
We used British and French participants as samples of
Westerners, and Koreans and Japanese as samples of Easterners.
We predict that the data patterns of British and French could fit
one of three rule-based models. According to the prediction

Table 1. Prediction on estimated probability.
Models

Control
Initial

Control
Final

Outcome
Initial

Outcome
Final

RB without ER
RB with ER
RB with IR

High
High
High

High
Low
Low

High
High
High

High
Low
High

IR (Dialectic)

High

Low

Low

Low

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we asked participants to do a conditional causal
reasoning task. When an indicative conditional is stated, people
often posit a causal relationship between the premise p and its
consequence q. In the probability judgment of consequent task,
we presented an indicative conditional with its antecedent
satisfied, and asked our participants to estimate the probability

Method
Design The design was 4 (nationality: British, French,
Japanese, Koreans) by 2 (outcome: control, outcome) by 2 (trial:
initial, final) in each task. ‘Nationality’ and ‘outcome’ were
between-subject factors .
Participants Ninety-eight British university students (49 in
the control condition and 49 in the outcome condition) , 86
French university students (44 in the control condition and 42 in
the outcome condition), 100 Japanese university students at (51
in the control condition and 49 in the outcome condition), and
95 Korean university students (46 in the control condition and
49 in the outcome condition) participated in this experiment.
About 70 percents of the participants were female in each
sample.
Materials Based on the mean generation counts of possible
DCs and ACs (Cummins, 1995), we chose two kinds of
conditionals (slightly revised so that natural scenarios were

2126

created). We created Scenario A with the conditional “if a
student studies hard, then (s)he will pass the exam” and

An ANOVA was conducted following the design of 4
(nationality) by 2 (outcome) by 2 (trial). The main effect of

Scenario B with the conditional “if fertilizer is put on the plants,
then they will grow quickly”. All the materials were initially
written in English. They were translated to French, Japanese,
and Korean, and then back-translated to English.
Procedure
Materials were printed on booklets. Each
participant was given a booklet containing either Scenario A or
B, either the probability judgment of antecedent task or the
probability judgment of consequent task, and was either in the
control condition or in the outcome condition. In the antecedent
task, each participant was given a conditional with the
information that the consequent occurred, and was asked to
estimate the probability that the antecedent was satisfied. Half of

nationality was significant (F(3,371)=2.83, p<.05). The main
effect of outcome was significant (F(1,371)=7.83, p<.01) :
surprisingly, the estimated probabilities were higher in the
outcome condition than in the control condition. The main effect
of trial was significant (F(1,371)=33.19, p<.01): the estimated
probabilities were lower in the final judgment.
The interactions between nationality and outcome
(F(3,371)=1.95, n.s.) and nationality and trial were not
significant (F(3,371)=1.21, n.s.). The interaction between
outcome and trial was significant (F(1,371)=30.58, p<.01).
Furthermore, the interaction between nationality, trial and
outcome was significant (F(3,317)=3.10, p<.05).

the participants received information on the outcome that the
antecedent had not been satisfied before the probability
judgment (the outcome condition), whereas the other half did
not (the control condition). The participants in the outcome
condition were asked to judge the probability supposing that
they did not know the outcome. On the next page, they were
informed that the antecedent was not actually satisfied, and were
asked to point out possible ACs in four minutes. On the final
page, they were asked to estimate the probability that the
antecedent had been satisfied thinking back to the time when
they were not yet informed of the outcome. In the probability
judgment of consequent task, each participant was given a

In order to interpret the interaction, a sub-analysis was
conducted in each nationality. For French participants, the simple
main effect of outcome was not significant (F(1,371)=3.56, n.s.).
The simple main effect of trial was significant (F(1,371)=16.74,
p<.01). The estimated probabilities were higher in the final
judgment. The simple interaction was not significant
(F(1,371)=.79, n.s.). These results show that the French
participants did not show hindsight bias. The outcome
information did not make them revise their working models.
They only revised their working models after pointing out the
DCs or ACs. The response patterns of the French fit the
‘rule-based with explicit revision’ model.

conditional with satisfied antecedent, and was asked to estimate
the probability that the consequent would occur. The procedure
was almost the same as that of the probability judgment of
consequent task. The experiment was run in regular classes in
French, British, Japanese, and Korean universities.

With the British, the simple main effects of outcome
(F(1,371)=1.48, n.s.) and trial were not significant
(F(1,371)=2.98, n.s.). The simple interaction was significant
(F(1,371)=26.03, p<.01). The simple-simple main effect of
outcome was not significant in the initial judgment
(F(1,742)=2.32, n.s.), whereas the estimated probabilities of the
final judgment were significantly lower in the control condition
(F(1,742)=13.18, p<.01). This pattern fits the ‘rule-based with
implicit revision’ model.
The pattern of the Japanese data was almost the same as
that of the British. The simple main effect of outcome was not
significant (F(1,371)=3.77, n.s.). The simple main effect of trial

Results and Discussion
Table 2. Mean estimated probabilities for each condition (%).
Control
Initial
French
British
Japanese
Korean

63.1
68.9
67.3
75.1

Control
Final
51.6
54.1
57.9
61.0

Outcome
Initial

Outcome
Final

68.5
62.4
73.8
66.4

61.1
69.7
72.8
66.5

The mean estimated probability of each condition is
shown in Table 2. Because we found no significant differences
between the probability judgment of consequent task and the
probability judgment of antecedent task, we analyzed both sets
of data together. We also found little difference between the data
of Scenarios A and B.

was significant (F(1,371)=5.85, p<.05). The simple interaction
was significant (F(1,371)=8.56, p<.01). The simple-simple
main effect of outcome was not significant in the initial
judgment (F(1,742)=2.38, n.s.), whereas it was significant in the
final judgment (F(1,742)=12.26, p<.01). The data pattern fits the
‘rule-based with implicit revision’ model.
In the Koreans, the simple main effect of outcome was
not significant (F(1,371)=.174, n.s.). The simple main effect of
trial was significant (F(1,371)=10.23, p<.01). The simple
interaction was significant (F(1,371)=10.53, p<.01). The

2127

simple-simple main effect of outcome was significant in the
initial judgment (F(1,742)=4.00, p<.05), whereas it was not

university students (57 in the control condition and 57 in the
outcome condition), and 102 Korean university students (52 in

significant in the final judgment (F(1,742)=1.64, n.s.). The
pattern of the Koreans was identical to our prediction for
Easterners. They exhibited hindsight bias. It means that, when
the outcome information was given, implicit access was made
to revise their working models.
Hindsight bias was thus seen only among Korean
participants. This might be consistent with both the result of
Choi and Nisbett (2000) that hindsight bias was stronger for
Koreans than Americans, and those of Heine and Lehman
(1995) that the Japanese did not show strong hindsight bias.
Heine and Lehman inferred that it was because Japanese were
less confident generally. But, it is an open question. We infer

the control condition and 50 in the outcome condition). About
70 percent of the participants were female in each sample.
Materials The same Good Samaritan scenario as that used
in Choi and Nisbett (2000) was used in Experiment 2, in which
the target man, John, is expected to help a victim. The
participants were asked to estimate the probability that John
helped the victim.
Procedure
Materials were printed in booklets. Each
participant was given a booklet containing the Good Samaritan
scenario, and was asked to estimate the probability that John
helped the victim. Half of the participants received information
on the outcome that he had not helped the victim before the

that hindsight bias is a product of implicit access to revised
working models, but it is not generated if the working models
are amended so that they compensate the implicitly decreased
probability.
The hypothesis of cultural differences based on the
distinction between explicit and implicit processing was not
completely supported. It can be inferred that the British used
implicit revision in Experiment 1. Although French did not
seem to use it, implicit revision may be universal to some extent.
The difference between Choi and Nisbett ‘s (2000) study and
our study is that they used a story about a seminary student who
was very likely to help others with a no-help outcome, whereas

probability judgment (the outcome condition), whereas the other
half did not (the control condition). The participants in the
outcome condition were asked to judge the probability
supposing that they did not know the outcome. The second and
the third pages were almost the same as those of Experiment 1.
The experiment was run in regular classes in French, British,
Japanese, and Korean universities.

we used conditionals. Generally speaking, people are enjoined
to assume the truth of the premises in logical reasoning. Hence,
the British and Japanese participants might suppose that the
premise was true, and suppose that they did not know the
unexpected outcome when estimating the probability. We
addressed these possibilities in a second experiment which
involved an adaptation of Choi and Nisbett’s materials.

effects of nationality (F(3,371)=1.49, n.s.) and outcome were
not significant (F(1,371)=.15, n.s.). The main effect of trial was
significant (F(1,371)=80.63, p<.01). The estimated probabilities
were generally lower in the final judgment.

Experiment 2
Method
Design The design was 4 (nationality: British, French,
Japanese, Koreans) by 2 (outcome: control, outcome) by 2 (trial:
initial, final) in each task. ”Nationality” and “outcome” were
between-subject factors.
Participants
Ninety-three British university students
participated. However, 24 of them had grown up in ethnic
minority, mainly South Asian, cultures in Great Britain, and so
33 in the control condition and 36 in the outcome condition
were used for the ANOVA. Ninety-seven French university
students participated (three participants had missing data, hence
46 in the control condition and 48 in the outcome condition
were used for statistical analysis), along with 114 Japanese

Results and Discussion
The mean estimated probabilities in each condition are
shown in Table 3. An ANOVA was conducted following the
design of 4 (nationality) by 2 (outcome) by 2 (trial). The main

Table 3. Mean estimated probabilities for each condition (%).
Control
Initial

Control
Final

Outcome
Initial

Outcome
Final

French
British
Japanese

76.2
66.9
86.7

63.5
57.8
71.7

75.1
78.4
74.5

73.1
73.4
69.1

Korean

81.9

70.8

72.2

66.2

The interaction between nationality and outcome was
significant (F(3,371)=5.25, p<.01). Hence the following
analyses were done. The simple main effect of outcome in the
French data was not significant (F(1, 742)=1.75, n.s.). The
simple main effect of outcome in the British was significant
(F(1, 742)=13.02, p<.01); very surprisingly, the estimated
probabilities were higher in the outcome condition. The simple
main effect of outcome in the Japanese was significant (F(1,
742)=6.42, p<.05); the estimated probabilities were lower in the

2128

outcome condition. The simple main effect of outcome in the
Korean data was significant (F(1, 742)=5.40, p<.05); the

stronger in Experiment 1. The difference between Experiments
1 and 2 is reflected in the data of the French participants.

estimated probabilities were lower in the outcome condition.
The interaction between nationality and trial was not
significant (F(3,371)=.77, n.s.). The interaction between
outcome and trial was significant (F(1,371)=16.11, p<.01). The
simple main effect of outcome of initial judgment was
significant (F(1, 742)=4.10, p<.05). The estimated probabilities
were generally lower in the outcome condition. The simple
main effect of outcome of final judgment was not significant
(F(1, 742)=1.97, n.s.). Finally, the two-way interaction was not
significant (F(3,317)=.77, n.s.).
In short, the data patterns of the French and British fit the
‘rule-based with implicit revision’ model, whereas that of the

Finally, another possible interpretation of these results is
that Easterners are more likely to revise their belief. Further
investigation is needed to access this open question.

Koreans and Japanese fit the ‘implicit revision’ model.

Table 4. The inferred summary of Experiment 1 and 2.

French
British
Japanese
Korean

Experiment 1
(Conditional)

Experiment 2
(Good Samaritan)

RB with ER
RB with IR
RB with IR
IR(hindsight bias)

RB with IR
RB with IR
IR(hindsight bias)
IR(hindsight bias)

Note. RB: Rule-based, ER: Explicit revision, IR: Implicit
revision.

General Discussion

References

As shown in Table 4, the best fit model is assigned to
each condition of Experiments 1 and 2. Neither the
‘explicit-implicit’ hypothesis nor the ‘rule-dialectics’ hypothesis
alone was able to explain all the aspects of cultural differences
seen in these experiments. Rather, we believe that they explain
them in combination with each other as shown in Table 4.
Hindsight bias can be caused by the implicit revision of
working models. This was inferred to be made not only by
Easterners but also by Westerners based on the results that the

Choi, I. and Nisbett, R. E. (2000). Cultural psychology of
surprise: Holistic theories and recognition of contradiction.

estimated probabilities did not decrease in the outcome
condition in some conditions. Only the French data of
Experiment 1 fit the prediction about Westerners based on both
the ‘explicit-implicit’ and ‘rule-dialectics’ hypotheses. The
Japanese data of Experiment 2 and the Korean data fit the
prediction about Easterners based on both the hypotheses. In
other cases, although the participants were inferred to be
affected by the outcome information implicitly, they did not
show hindsight bias, presumably because of adjusting their
working models while keeping the original ones. These cases
mean that implicit revision is universal to some extent,
especially since the data of Experiment 2 show that both French
and British participants did it. The reason why they did not
show hindsight bias is inferred to be that they adjusted their
working models so that they followed a rule originally induced
from the scenario.
Whether people adjust their working models to follow a
rule is sensitive to the situation. Comparing the results of
Japanese participants in Experiments 1 and 2, they made this
adjustment when conditionals were used, whereas they did not
when the Good Samaritan scenario was used. We interpret the
differences as showing that the pressure to compensate was

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 890-905.
Cummins, D. D. (1995). Naïve theories and causal deduction.
Memory and Cognition, 23, 646-658.
Evans, J. St. B. T, & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Fischhoff, B. (1975). Hindsight ≠ foresight: The effect of
outcome knowledge on judgment under uncertainty. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 1, 288-299.
Hawkins, S. A. & Hastie, R. (1990). Hindsight: Biased
judgments of past events after the outcomes are known.
Psychological Bulletin, 107, 311-327.
Heine, S. J. & Lehman, D. R. (1996). Hindsight bias: A
cross-cultural analysis. Japanese Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 35, 317-323.
Nisbett, R. E. (2003). The geography of thought: How Asians
and Westerners think differently…and why. New York: The
Free Press.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and system of thought: Holistic versus analytic
cognition. Psychological Review, 108, pp 291-310.
Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and
reasoning about contradiction. American Psychologist, 54,
741-754.
Triandis, H. C. (1995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder,
CO* Westview Press.
Yama, H., Nishioka, M., Horishita, T., Kawasaki, Y., &
Taniguchi, J. (2007). A dual process model for cultural
differences in thought. Mind and Society, 6,143-172.

2129

