UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
Title
Finding Your Way in Chronoland: Visual Metaphors for Orientation of Temporal Data Explorers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/44j565bq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Mayr, Eva
Risku, Hanna
Smuc, Michael
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Finding Your Way in Chronoland:
Visual Metaphors for Orientation of Temporal Data Explorers
Michael Smuc (michael.smuc@donau-uni.ac.at)
Eva Mayr (eva.mayr@donau-uni.ac.at)
Hanna Risku (hanna.risku@donau-uni.ac.at)
Florian Windhager (florian.windhager@donau-uni.ac.at)
Research Center KnowComm, Danube University Krems, Dr.-Karl-Dorrek-Str. 30
3500 Krems, Austria
Abstract

In the following, we will use situated, embodied cognition
as the theoretical basis, explaining why visual metaphors are
central to human thinking and, thus, also potentially
appropriate as a structuring principle for the presentation of
complex heterogeneous data. We suggest using visual
metaphors for structuring and presenting the underlying
structures of complex information for communication
purposes, using the “Chronoland”1-landscape metaphor in
our example.

With their deeper procedural knowledge, experts are superior
to beginners in solving ill-defined problems. To support
beginners, we suggest using a method for presenting complex,
heterogeneous data that can serve as a good basis for
visualizing its inherent information. To demonstrate this
approach, we conducted focus group interviews with temporal
data analysts to identify their problem solving strategies. To
make the results usable as a scaffold for beginners in the
domain, we designed a visualization based on a metaphor of
the flow of time and water – Chronoland. By providing a
landscape-like decision support system, experts and beginners
alike are assisted on their path towards a problem’s solution.

Situated, Embodied Cognition
Traditional cognitive scientific theories aim at simulating
human problem solving through computation. They are
based on a propositional theory of mind: Cognition is seen
as a linguistic activity in which symbols are manipulated
using
fixed
rules
(computational-representational
understanding of mind – CRUM, Thagard, 1996, pp.10ff).
In order to design systems suitable for such information
processing, presentation of data in a symbolic and rulebased manner seems appropriate. However, human
cognition and interaction have proved to be quite different
to the abstract code switching operations seen in
computerized information processing. It is being argued that
human understanding is not based on a structural, syntactic
analysis of linguistically transparent material. This is why
logically structured corpi, semantic networks and other
well-ordered, well-defined systems quickly reach their
limits as mirrors of the mind when faced with “real-life”
situations and ill-defined problems, primarily as a result of
their ignorance of the actual textual and situative context.
Indeed, human cognition and interaction prove to be far
more flexible and constructive than had been assumed by
the grammatically and semantically “correct” programs
prior to the birth of various approaches of situated,
embodied cognition in the 1980s. From these perspectives,
the brain is no longer seen as a database, but as a dynamic,
holistic network able to create patterns of activation – our
memories are rich with all manners of different scenes,
tones, smells, tastes, motions and emotions. As a result,
CRUM and its symbolic models were substituted for
example by experience-based, non-linguistic and
emotionally loaded metaphors (Lakoff, 1987), action-

Keywords: visual metaphors, situated cognition, humancomputer interaction, knowledge management, information
design, temporal data analysis

Introduction
Complex, ill-defined problems are a major challenge for
experts in different domains. For example, personnel
planning analysts and consultants analyze time-oriented
personnel data and have to identify factors influencing
personnel requirements (Smuc et al., 2008). For such a task,
there is no single correct solution and no single best way to
reach a solution. Instead experts have to engage in multiple
rounds of problem solving, are often confronted with dead
ends, and have to start from the beginning once more. These
task and process characteristics resemble those of ill-defined
problems (cp. Schraw, Dunkle, & Bendixen, 1995). An
important factor in solving ill-defined problems is domain
expertise: Experts have a better idea of how and when to
apply different strategies (Schunn, McGregor, & Saner,
2005). Therefore, an important question which is addressed
in this paper is how novice users can be supported in
acquiring and using this knowledge of how and when to use
which problem solving strategy.
To address this question, we review different methods for
generating visualization taxonomies and ontologies.
Applying a bottom-up strategy, we discuss problem-solving
strategies with experts in focus groups and generate
information maps from their results. These maps serve as
visual metaphors and, thereby, provide beginners with an
overview of expert problem solving strategies and help them
navigate the complex problem solving space of temporal
data exploration.

1

467

From the Greek Χρόνος (Chronos) meaning time.

centered representations (Clark, 1997, pp.47ff) or prototypes
(Rosch, 1973). However, the central concern of Situated,
Embodied Cognition is not the brain and its mental
structures, but the fact that they allow us to interact with the
environment, artifacts and other human beings (Clark,
1997). Situated cognition not only examines individuals and
their previous knowledge and skills, it also looks at their
interaction with artifacts and their social environment and
postulates that this interaction process is dependent on the
artifacts and the environment at hand (Suchman, 2007).
Metaphors and other conceptual structures are initial
hypotheses, but always adapt to the specifics of the
anticipated situation.

In line with the proposals of Duke et al. (2005), three
levels of classification types can be distinguished:
terminology, taxonomy and ontology.
(1) Terminology is used on a rather informal level to stake
out the limitations of the jargon. Following this approach,
the meaning of statistical or visualization concepts is
introduced on a moderate formalization level, as known
from glossaries. Although the definition of concepts can be
treated as a precise mathematical description, it “is precise
within the body of theory in which it is located, [whereas]
shared meaning of the concept relies on social and cultural
mechanisms” (Duke et al., 2005, p. 6).
(2) When developing a taxonomy (vocabulary), the
definition of concepts remains as informal as it does for
terminologies, but the concepts themselves are organized in
a structured way.
(3) Ontologies are the most formalized approach. Here,
(domain) concepts and their relationships are highly
formalized in a fixed way, thus making it possible to process
them even with machines.
While terminologies are widely published in glossaries,
statistical manuals and papers, there is a lack of a common
vocabulary. Brodlie (1992) tried to overcome this
shortcoming by developing a taxonomy based on new
“language” using mathematical notations (e.g. E-notation).
In the last decade, a top-down approach seems to be the
most prominent method used to structure information.
Following this approach, user models, design models or data
models are used to generate taxonomies (e.g. Tory &
Möller, 2004) or ontologies (e.g., Herman, Melançon, &
Marshall, 2000). Shneiderman (1996) proposed a data type
by task matrix, while Card and Mackinlay (1997) used a
task by attribute matrix to generate taxonomies in a similar
way, also taking the role of the user into account. Although
these models often claim to focus on the users, elaborated
cognitive models about the user are seldom published.
Recently, some progress has been made in designing
decision support systems based on ontologies and semantic
webs (e.g. Duke et al., 2005; Shu, Avis, & Rana, 2006). Shu
et al. (2006) designed a prototypical ontology for
visualizations aimed at supporting semantic webs for grid
computing (search, browsing), establishing common
vocabularies and capturing and organizing visualization
domain knowledge.
All the efforts described above share a common aim: to
provide a decision system for selecting a proper
visualization (tool) for the users – and in some cases – also
for the designers of information visualization tools.
In our view, the decision systems mentioned above rely
on the same assumptions. Firstly, they assume that highly
formalized systems and a standardized language are a
desirable way of supporting communication. Metaphors and
analogies do not play a central role in these systems.
Secondly, they assume that the typical user has more or less
clearly defined goals or at least a “picture of the results in
mind”. However, according to the approaches of situated
cognition and activity theory, this does not necessarily seem

Activity Theory
As an approach in psychology, activity theory places
particular emphasis on the social use and design of artifacts:
humans and their environments reciprocally transform each
other in the process of interaction (Kaptelinin & Nardi,
2006). The main focus turns to authentic human activity and
real-life work processes. Used in the field of humancomputer interaction and interaction design, it offers an
analytic framework that enables us to take the dynamic,
socially and environmentally mediated nature of human
interaction and understanding into account. Because of the
contextual, situated nature of activity, it also emphasizes the
empirical analysis of the specific user group and situation of
use instead of just relying on general usability heuristics or
merely structuring information in a logical and rational
manner. It also explains the importance of testing interactive
systems in (near-)authentic situations with (near-)authentic
users.
Thus, situated cognition and activity theory reorient our
focus as cognitive scientists to activities in real-world
contexts. An important aspect of real-world activities are
authentic tasks – in our case the daily ill-defined problems
of personnel planning consultants. By analyzing the users’
problem-solving strategies from their particular perspective,
we can better understand how artifacts (i.e. computer
programs, data …) are used by experts to solve problems,
what strategies they apply and when they are successful.
These insights, in turn, can be used to structure information
in a way that helps beginners2 in this domain to successfully
solve problems with these artifacts.

Approaches to Structuring Information
Visualizations
Research on structuring different kinds of information
visualizations has made remarkable progress in the last two
decades. Many models have been developed in the field of
computer science, providing highly formalized systems for
classifying visualizations according to their graphical
attributes and data processing procedures.
2
By beginners we do not mean laypersons. Rather, we refer to
persons who have already some expertise in the domain, but are
novel to the artifacts (e.g., the information system).

468

Figure 1: Clustering by experts of the main purpose of visualizations.

to be so. Developing a decision support system should
therefore provide a path to easily finding an adequate
visualization (tool) – often implemented as a database
matching process – by taking desired visualization features
and data constraints into account (in some systems task
demands or pre-processing algorithms were also
considered).
A general problem with such top-down decision support
systems is their lack of inclusion of the experts’ domain and
sub-domain knowledge in their structuring of information.
In contrast, the bottom-up-approach presented in this paper
generates a structure of information visualizations from the
domain experts’ perspective, with their domain knowledge
laying the base for the information structure generated.

Gathering Structured Information in Focus
Groups with Temporal Data Explorers
In a research and development project on visual analytics3
tools for time-oriented data, we conducted three focus group
interviews with six temporal data analysts. These experts
have to solve ill-defined problems on a daily base using a
software package ([TIS] - Time Intelligence® Solutions, is a
flexible Business Intelligence Software developed by
XIMES GmbH) to analyze and forecast time-oriented data.
This software package includes a large set of visualizations.
In prior analyses, we found that even experts have problems
in maintaining an overview of all these visualizations.
Indeed, one expert stated that it was “like looking for a
needle in a haystack”. With this in mind, we sought to
generate a content-based taxonomy for such visualizations.
3
The basic idea of “visual analytics” is the integration of human
visual information exploration capabilities and the enormous
processing power of computers to form a powerful knowledge
discovery environment. Both visual and analytical methods are
combined and intertwined to support the knowledge discovery
process. Most importantly, the user is not seen merely as a passive
element who interprets the outcome of visual and analytical
methods but as the core entity who drives the whole process
(Thomas & Cook, 2005).

469

To reach this goal, we conducted a first focus group
interview to clarify the terminology used by the experts and
build ourselves an overall picture. In the second focus
group, experts discussed their workflow when they solve illdefined problems. The third focus group interview centered
around the visualizations included in the software package:
Experts were asked to cluster these visualizations by sorting
them and naming the clusters according to the common
purpose of the visualizations.

experiences in some user groups had already established a
widely applied terminology. Consequently, our objective
was to transform the existing terminology into a
comprehensible taxonomy for daily use. Visual metaphors
offer a possible solution.
In addition, we compared the clustering of visualization
templates by our experts with the existing clustering in the
software documentation, revealing huge differences as a
result of the different terminologies used. In contrast to the
grouping of the templates in the software package, our
experts grouped them off their own accord by content. This
offered us a further confirmation of our content-based
approach.

Results
A major finding with the first focus group was that it is
difficult to describe the data analysis using a common
terminology. Different metaphors (forest, building supply
store, treasure chest) were discussed for the experts’
problem solving strategies, which centered on the questions
of the tools to use to solve the problem (i.e. open the
treasure chest) and how to identify other problems (i.e. find
new treasure chests). In the first (but also the second) focus
group interview, experts found it difficult to describe their
problem-solving process. They could not explain their
analysis scripts explicitly. In the second focus group, we
also struggled with the ill-defined nature of daily tasks:
Experts often reach a dead end in their analysis, have to turn
back and start again from the beginning. A common
workflow could only be identified in the first part of the
problem solving process (i.e. variable selection, data import,
data cleaning). The second part – finding a solution to the
problem – varied greatly for the different problems the
experts faced. An important scaffold for the second part of
analysis are the visualization templates in the software
package – especially the experts’ procedural knowledge of
which kind of template to use to solve which kind of
problem. These visualizations are normally seen as the
result of an analysis.
In the third focus group interview, we focused in
particular on these visualization templates. The experts
sorted 51 visualizations into five major clusters (relation to
the past, chronology, multivariate relation, time of day
aggregation) and two minor clusters (display of sorted
results and single values). All these clusters are highly
related to the time-oriented structure of the data and its
temporal transformations. These visualization clusters are
represented by colored areas and thumbnails in Figure 1.
Although Figure 1 provides a good overview of the
different visualizations, it is difficult for beginners and
laypersons to understand the analysis processes and data
transformations behind the actual clusters. As far as
language and documentation issues are concerned, the
typical users of the software package come from various
academic backgrounds and have heterogeneous perspectives
on statistics and different mathematical skills. Therefore, the
use of a highly formalized language would require great
effort and time on the part of the users and the software
instructors. Furthermore, the availability of a comprehensive
software manual, partly shared domain knowledge, the
peculiarities of exploration in the time domain and common

Visual Metaphors as Scaffolds
According to Lakoff (1987) metaphors are central to human
thinking – not just as linguistic forms, but as fundamental
ways of understanding. Thus, in our opinion, using visual
metaphors to visualize experts’ problem solving processes
seems an appropriate way of communicating this
information, even to beginners in a domain.
According to the situated cognition approach, one of the
main reasons for our intelligence is that we delegate
knowledge to our environment. Thus, we reduce the need to
store it, search for it and process it in our brains. When
exploring complex heterogeneous data and trying to grasp
any possible structuring dimensions and dynamics, design
metaphors and schematic descriptions allow us to make best
use of the resources at our disposal at a given moment and
to interpret the situation and the artifact in a way that makes
sense. The aim of metaphors is, thus, to support the
exploration and enable the user to construct coherent mental
models. External aids, such as maps, are used as scaffolds
(Clark, 1997) and serve as teaching aids, learning aids and
organizational aids (“plan as resource”).

Visualizing Chronoland
Following this argumentation, we generated visual
metaphors for the clusters shown in Figure 1 to make them
easy to understand (see Figure 2). The central metaphor
representing time-related data is water: Like time, the water
in a river flows constantly. The data originates in the
organization and is regulated and directed by the expert
according to the problem at hand. On the high plateau, the
time flow and its variables (different colored fish) are preprocessed (i.e. rastered, filtered, aggregated, transformed
and grouped). Exemplary time-oriented variables are the
number of employees, sales or stock levels. Downhill, the
time flow is dispersed over the different clusters and
processed in different ways. The results are displayed as
various aquaria.
Initial feedback from laypersons supports this approach
and indicates that this way of presentation is more
comprehensible and easier to grasp than the approach used
in Figure 1.

470

Figure 2: Chronoland Landscape: Data originates from the organization, is regulated and directed by stop and go
signs for rastering, filtering (see close-up A), aggregating, transforming and grouping the time flow and variables
(different colored fish). Downhill, the time flow is dispersed over the different clusters and processed in different
ways (e.g. in the “calendar view with daytime information” shown in close-up B). The results are displayed in
numerous aquaria (e.g. in “relation to previous days” as shown in close-up C).

471

Duke, D. J., Brodlie, K. W., Duce, D. A., & Herman, I.
(2005). Do You See What I Mean? IEEE Computer
Graphics & Applications, 25(3), 6-9.
Herman, I., Melançon, G., & Marshall, M. S. (2000). Graph
visualization and navigation in information visualization:
A survey. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 6, 24-43.
Kaptelinin, V., & Nardi, B. A. (2006): Acting with
Technology. Activity Theory and Interaction Design.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things.
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Rosch, E. (1973). Natural categories. Cognitive Psychology,
4, 328-350.
Schraw, G., Dunkle, M. E., & Bendixen, L. D. (1995).
Cognitive processes in well-defined and ill-defined
problem solving. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9,
523-538.
Schunn, C. D., McGregor, M. U., & Saner, L. D. (2005).
Expertise in ill-defined problem-solving domains as
effective strategy use. Memory & Cognition, 33,
1377-1387.
Shneiderman, B. (1996). The eyes have it: A task by data
type
taxonomy
for
information
visualizations.
Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual
Languages (pp. 336-343). Washington, DC: IEEE
Computer Society.
Shu, G., Avis, N. J., & Rana, O. (2006). Investigating
visualization ontologies. Proceedings of the UK e-Science
All Hands Conference 2006 (pp. 249-257). Nottingham,
UK: National e-Science Centre.
Smuc, M., Mayr, E., Lammarsch, T., Bertone, A., Aigner,
W., Risku, H., & Miksch, S. (2008). Visualizations at first
sight. Do insights require training? In A. Holzinger (Ed),
HCI and usability for education and work. Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
Suchman, L. A. (2007). Human-Machine Reconfigurations:
Plans and situated actions. 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Thagard, P. (1996): Mind. Introduction to Cognitive
Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thomas, J. J., & Cook, K. A. (2005). Illuminating the path:
The research and development agenda for Visual
Analytics. Washington, DC: IEEE CS Press.
Tory, M., & Möller, T. (2004). A model-based visualization
taxonomy (Tec. Rep. SFU-CMPT-TR2002-06). Burnaby,
Canada: Simon Fraser University, Computing Science
Department.

Conclusions and Discussion
In this paper, we suggested a design method for
presenting complex, heterogeneous information during data
analysis so that it can serve as a good basis for the design of
an easy-to-use information system that visualizes complex
information for both beginners and experts. We argue that
visual metaphors can serve as a “bootstrap” for ill-defined
problem solving strategies. They act as a scaffold for
cognitive processing by minimizing the workload and
making use of the expert knowledge inherent to such
strategies.
In a subsequent step, we intend to include Figure 2 as a
clickable map in the online software documentation. This
will support users at their daily work – not only in opening
existing treasure chests, but also in finding new ones and
moving into unchartered waters.
What also remains to be done in further studies is an
analysis of how the visual metaphors support the problem
solving processes of experts, beginners and laypersons at the
actual workplace.
In contrast to many traditional top-down-approaches to
structure information, the bottom-up-approach used in this
paper builds on actual users’ expertise and the content of
their problem solving strategies rather than on theoretical
taxonomies. By taking this situated approach with real-lifeusers, the resulting content-based clustering of information
is also suited to ill-defined problems and everyday situations
at the workplace. Due to the differences between the
content-based clustering by our experts and the technologybased clustering in the software documentation, we
conclude that technical disciplines have many different
terminologies and taxonomies, but everyday visual
metaphors are common to everybody and have the potential
to show everyone the way in Chronoland!

Acknowledgments
The DisCō project (project number: 813388) is supported by
the program “FIT-IT Visual Computing” of the Federal
Ministry of Transport, Innovation and Technology, Austria.
We would like to extend our thanks to our project partners,
primarily Johannes Gaertner and Dieter Punzengruber, for
their valuable feedback and help in finding participants for
our study.

References
Brodlie, K. (1992). Visualization techniques. In K. Brodlie,
L. Carpenter, R. Earnshaw, J. Gallop, R. Hubbold, A.
Mumford, C. Osland, & P. Quarendon (Eds.), Scientiﬁc
visualization - techniques and applications. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Card, S. K., & Mackinlay, J. (1997). The structure of the
information visualization design space. Proceedings of
the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (pp.
92-99). Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there. Putting brain, body, and
world together again. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

472

