UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fish can use numerical information when discriminating between small discrete quantities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8hr5m0t1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Agrillo, Christian
Bisazza, Angelo
Dadda, Marco
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fish can use numerical information when discriminating between small discrete
quantities
Christian Agrillo (christian.agrillo@unipd.it)

Laura Piffer (laura.piffer@unipd.it)

Department of General Psychology, Via Venezia 8
35131 Padova (Italy)

Department of General Psychology, Via Venezia 8
35131 Padova (Italy)

Marco Dadda (marco.dadda@unipd.it)

Angelo Bisazza (angelo.bisazza@unipd.it)

Department of General Psychology, Via Venezia 8
35131 Padova (Italy)

Department of General Psychology, Via Venezia 8
35131 Padova (Italy)

Giovanna Serena (giovanna.serena@unipd.it)
Department of General Psychology, Via Venezia 8
35131 Padova (Italy)
Abstract
Research on human infants and non-human animals has
demonstrated that rudimentary numerical abilities pre-date the
evolution of human language. Nonetheless animals can base
their quantity judgments on continuous perceptual cues that
correlate with number and it is unclear whether animals other
than mammals and birds can use number. In the present work
we adopted two different approaches to investigate whether
basal vertebrates, such as fish, can discriminate between small
quantities by using numerical information only. In experiment
1 we investigated the non numerical perceptual cues
preferentially used by fish to discriminate between two and
three elements; in experiment 2 fish were then trained to
distinguish between the two quantities when continuous
variables were controlled for. Lastly (experiment 3) we
observed the spontaneous choice between a group of two and
a group of three social companions using a method similar to
‘item by item’ presentation of the stimuli to prevent the
access to non-numerical information. On the whole, our
results suggest that fish can represent and use numerical
information for discriminating small quantities.
Keywords: Numerical competence; Continuous variables;
Comparative cognition.

Introduction
The ability to count objects or discriminate among sets
containing different number of items can affect survival and
reproduction in many natural contexts. Laboratory studies
have shown that mammals (Beran, 2008; Kilian et al., 2003;
West & Young, 2002), birds (Brannon et al., 2001)
amphibians (Uller et al., 2003) and fishes (Agrillo et al.,
2007) are able to discriminate between two quantities of
objects.
However, since stimulus numerousness co-varies with nonnumerical extent, such as the total area occupied by objects,
the sum of their contour, their density and luminance,
organisms can provide quantity judgments without
necessarily being capable of abstract numerical

representation (Feigenson et al., 2002b; Pisa & Agrillo,
2009).
In a recent study (Agrillo et al., 2008) we systematically
investigated the ability to discriminate between two
quantities in a small freshwater fish, the mosquitofish
(Gambusia holbrooki). As many other fish, mosquitofish
placed in an unknown, potentially dangerous environment,
select the larger of two simultaneously presented shoal,
probably because larger groups offer better protection from
predators (Agrillo & Dadda, 2007; Hager & Helfman,
1991). In choice tests mosquitofish were found to
discriminate between two shoals that differed by one
element when the paired numbers were 1vs2, 2vs3 and 3vs4,
but not 4vs5 or larger group sizes, a limit that coincides with
that observed in monkeys and apes when using a
spontaneous preference paradigm. Using larger shoals as
stimulus, a discrimination was still possible provided the
number ratio was 1:2 or smaller (e.g. 4vs8, or 8vs16 fish but
not 4vs6 or 8vs12 fish). Within the large number range (> 4
elements), preference for the large shoal significantly
increased with decreasing numerosity ratio in accordance
with Weber’s Law while such relationship was not observed
within the small number range, suggesting the possible
existence in fish of two numerical systems as evidenced in
primates (Flombaum et al., 2005; Hauser et al., 2000) and
human infants (Feigenson et al., 2002a). However we found
that, when we controlled for continuous variables (the
cumulative area occupied by fish and the overall quantity of
movements of the fish within a shoal), fish failed to
discriminate, suggesting that they attend more to nonnumerical extent than to numerosity itself.
The fact that mosquitofish spontaneously compare different
quantities by using non numerical perceptual cues that
correlate with number does not necessarily imply that fish
are unable to discriminate two groups on the basis of the
numerosity of the items alone. Overall perceptual cues may
simply be the easiest indicators of numerosity in this task,
and indeed both adult humans and non-human mammals, in
many circumstances, base number estimation primarily on

2414

proxy measures such as density or the cumulative surface
area occupied by items (Durgin, 1995; Vos et al., 1988;
Kilian et al., 2003).
The present work aims at investigating fish ability to
discriminate between small quantities (2 and 3 elements) by
using numerical information only. We adopted two different
approaches: in the first two experiments we set up a training
procedure similar to that used with mammals, consisting in
training animals to discriminate between sets containing
different numbers of geometric figures while controlling for
the perceptual non-numerical variables (Brannon & Terrace,
1998; Judge et al., 2005).
In detail, the first experiment aimed to determine which
cues mosquitofish used spontaneously when both numerical
information and continuous physical attributes were
available. Subjects learned a discrimination between 2 and 3
objects in the absence of any manipulation of the stimuli;
after animals had achieved learning criterion they were
tested without reward while controlling for one perceptual
non-numerical variable at a time.
In the second experiment we trained fish to discriminate
between 2 and 3 objects while we simultaneously controlled
for non-numerical variables, in order to determine whether
fish could discriminate by using only numerical
information.
In the third experiment we adapted the procedure of ‘item
by item’ presentation (Beran, 2004; Beran & Beran, 2004;
Hauser et al., 2000) to spontaneous choice of social groups.
Fish were placed in a new environment where they could
choose between a group of two and a group of three social
companions. During the test the subject could only to see
the members of each stimulus shoal one at a time, thus
preventing the possibility that they could use non-numerical
cues, such as the cumulative surface area occupied by
stimulus fish, to estimate the larger set.

Experiment 1
Cues spontaneously used by fish to discriminate between
quantities. The first experiment investigated which cues
fish tend to use when distinguishing between two and three
figures. Ten female mosquitofish were subjected to a pretraining phase of 7 days in which they accustomed to doors
and stimuli similar to those they encountered in the training
phase. Each female was then singly placed in an unfamiliar
and uncomfortable place (Fig. 1) and were trained to
discriminate between two doors in order to re-join their
social group. Doors were associated with a pair of stimuli
consisting of two or three small figures (Fig. 2). These
figures were randomly selected with replacement from a
pool of approximately 100, and no control for nonnumerical variables was operated in the training phase.
Subjects were given six trials per day for a maximum of ten
days; after each trial, a new set of two and three figures was
presented. Once a subject had reached the learning criterion,
it was admitted to the test phase and was examined in the

same apparatus without reward while controlling for one
perceptual non-numerical variable at time. We controlled
those variables that were shown to be relevant in previous
studies with vertebrates, namely the total luminance of the
two stimuli, the sum of perimeter of the figures, the
cumulative surface area, and the overall space occupied by
the sets.
Results. All ten subjects reached the learning criterion in
the training phase (chi square test, p < 0.05), but one was
excluded from the subsequent phase due to poor health, and
hence nine started the test phase. We found no difference in
proportion of correct choices between fish trained with the
three figures as positive (mean ± std. dev.: 0.753 ± 0.065)
and those trained with two figures as positive (0.678 ±
0.028; t(7) = 2.337, p = 0.052). A significant discrimination
was observed when no perceptual cue was controlled for
(t(8) = 2.449, p = 0.020) and when the total luminance was
controlled for (t(8) = 2.310, p = 0.025); no significant
choice toward the trained quantity was found when the sum
of perimeter of the figures (t(8) = 1.316, p = 0.225), the
cumulative surface area (t(8) = -1.512, p = 0.169), and the
overall space occupied by the sets (t(8) = -0.373, p = 0.719)
were controlled for.

Figure 1: Apparatus used in Experiment 1. Subjects are
singly placed in the middle of a white cubic tank and two
doors (one associated to three and the other associated to
two elements) were available at two opposite corners. Only
the door associated to the reinforced quantity permits fish to
re-join shoal mates in the outer tank (not shown).

Figure 2: Example of stimuli used in Experiment 1.
However, since area and perimeter of the figures are strictly
related to each other, in this experiment by controlling one
variable we inevitably affected the other, so that it was not
possible to conclude whether one or both variables were

2415

important in the discrimination. We thereby set up a control
test with ten new subjects, using the same procedure as
before in training phases, whereas in the test phase fish were
presented with only two different sets of stimuli: one in
which the cumulative surface area of the stimuli was paired
whereas the sum of perimeter was not (i.e. the perimeter
could suggest the exact ratio between the quantities), and
one in which the sum of the perimeter was paired whereas
the cumulative surface area was not (i.e. the area could
suggest the exact ratio between the quantities).
When the relative ratio of the areas (but not the perimeter)
was predictive of the numerical ratio, we observed a
significant choice toward the trained quantity (t(9) = 3.786,
p = 0.004) whereas no significant choice was observed in
the condition in which the perimeter, but not the area, could
be used to distinguish between two quantities (t(9) = -0.653,
p = 0.530). The difference between the two conditions was
significant (paired t-test, t(9) = 2.865, p = 0.019).
On the whole results showed that fish seemed to attend the
cumulative surface area and the overall space occupied by
the sets: interestingly we observed a negative correlation
between the proportion of correct choices when the
cumulative surface area was controlled and when the overall
space of the sets was paired (Spearman test, ρs = -0.734, p =
0.024). This seems to suggest an individual variability in the
strategy used, since some subjects tended to rely on the
cumulative surface area for discriminating, while other fish
attended the overall space to solve the task.

Experiment 2
Discrimination of small quantities using only numerical
information. In the second experiment we trained fourteen
fish to discriminate between 2 and 3 figures while we
simultaneously controlled stimuli for non-numerical
variables in both the pre-training and the training phase,
with the aim of determining whether fish could learn the
discrimination using only numerical information. Using the
same geometric figures as the previous experiment, we
designed pairs of stimuli in which the total luminance, the
cumulative surface area and the overall space occupied by
the sets were paired between the groups with two and three
elements.
Results. We found no difference in the proportion of correct
choices between fish trained with the three figures as
positive (mean ± std. dev.: 0.690 ± 0.037) and those trained
with two figures as positive (0.651 ± 0.070; t(12) = 1.328, p
= 0.209). All 14 fish reached the learning criterion (chi
square test, p < 0.05), proving thus able to select the trained
numerosity. Overall the choice for the trained stimuli is
highly significant (t(13) = 11.103, p < 0.001).
As a by-product of controlling for three perceptual
variables, stimuli differed for two other non-numerical
variables that fish could have used instead of number to
learn the discrimination. The by-product of pairing the
cumulative surface area between sets with two and three

elements was that in the latter sets smaller-than-average
figures were more frequent. The by-product of pairing the
overall space occupied by configuration was that figures
were more spaced out in the sets containing two figures.
After reaching the criterion, fish were thereby subjected to a
test phase without reinforcement using pairs of stimuli
composed of figures of identical size and similarly spaced.
Results showed that fish significantly selected the trained
numerosity even in this case (t(13) = 4.397, p = 0.001).
When we compared the number of trials necessary to reach
criterion in experiment 1 (when all numerical and nonnumerical cues were available) and experiment 2 (where
only numerical cues were available), we found no
significant difference (trials in experiment 1: 25.2 ± 11.7;
trials in experiment 2: 29.14 ± 9.7; F(1,33) = 1.064, p =
0.170).

Experiment 3
Spontaneous use of number in a shoal choice test. There
is a substantial evidence that single mosquitofish, that
happen to be in a unknown environment, tend to join other
conspecifics and, if choosing between two shoals, they
exhibit a preference for the large one (Agrillo et al., 2008).
We then used this spontaneous tendency to join the larger
shoal to study the ability to distinguish between 3 and 2
social companions by calculating the time spent near the
shoals.
The experimental apparatus was composed by three separate
sectors built within a large aquarium (Fig. 3). The central
hourglass-shaped sector housing the subject consisted of a
corridor interconnecting two identical choice areas provided
with a glass front allowing seeing the stimuli. Each stimulus
sector consisted of a rectangular area, subdivided
longitudinally by glass panes in four identical compartments
housing the stimulus fishes. In the area facing the stimuli we
placed 9 artificial vertical green plastic screens aligned a
grid of 3 by 3, so that the subject could only see one
stimulus fish at time from any position of its sector.

Figure 3: Schematic representation of the apparatus.
Subjects are singly inserted in the central sector (a) and two
groups of conspecifics differing in numerosity were visible
in the ‘stimulus sectors’ (b). Subjects could not see more
than one stimulus fish at time.

2416

Stimulus females were introduced in the apparatus, one
female per compartment, the afternoon before the test and
allowed to settle overnight. At the beginning of the test, the
subject was introduced in the corridor and allowed to
explore the apparatus for one hour. Hence the position of the
subject was recorded for 60 minutes with a digital cam.
Eighteen subjects were observed choosing between 3 and 2
stimulus fishes. Half of the trials started with the larger
group on the left whereas half of the trials started with the
larger group on the right. Furthermore in half of the trials
we matched the distance between each stimulus fish and in
the other half we matched the proportion of space occupied
by the group (i.e. the distance between the two most lateral
fish).
Results. Shoal preference was calculated as the time spent
by the subject female shoaling within a distance of 5 cm
from the glass facing the stimulus sector. The observer of
the video was blind with respect to the aim of the
experiment. A repeated measure ANOVA was performed,
with the numerosity (larger or smaller shoal) as withinsubject factor, while the position of the larger shoal (right or
left) and the composition of the stimulus shoals (same
distance among the fish or same proportion of space of the
shoals) as between-subject factors. Subjects spent more time
near the larger shoal (F(1,14) = 7.420, p = 0.016). We found
no effect of left-right position of the stimuli (F(1,14) =
0.180, p = 0.677) and no difference between trials in which
we matched the distance between fish in the two shoals and
trials in which we matched the proportion of space occupied
by the shoals (F(1,14) = 1.363, p = 0.263). No interaction
was significant (all ps > 0.05).
There is a simple explanation for these results based on the
possibility that fish do not represent number but simply are
attracted by a companion when they could see one and leave
that side of the apparatus when they could not see another
fish. Because two out of four places are empty by the
smaller shoal and only one out of four is so by the larger
one, this would imply a larger probability of leaving the
former. To test this possibility, we measured the number of
times subjects moved away from each of the eight
compartments and calculated the average departure rate
when subjects could see a companion (total departures from
occupied compartments/5) and when subjects could not see
another fish (total departures from empty compartments/3).
The proportion of departures from an occupied compartment
was slightly greater (0.561 ± 0.238) than the proportion of
departures from an empty one (0.439 ± 0.238) but the
difference was not statistically significant (one sample t-test,
t(11) = 1,092; p = 0.290).

Discussion
The present work aimed at assessing whether fish can use
numerical information in order to discriminate between
small quantities. We have tackled the problem using two

complementary approaches. In the second experiment fish
were trained to distinguish between two sets of figures that
differed in numerosity but were paired for non-numerical
variables. In the third experiment, fish were observed in a
free choice test between two shoals differing in numerosity
using a procedure similar to ‘item by item’ presentation that
prevented them to use non-numerical information. The
results of experiment 2 and 3 support the conclusion that
mosquitofish can discriminate small discrete quantities
using numerical information only. Fish should thus likely be
added to the list of organisms, six month old infants, nonhuman primates, dolphins, dogs and birds that have been
shown up to now to be capable of mentally representing
number and comparing numerosities (Brannon et al., 2001;
Hauser et al., 2000; Kilian et al., 2003; West & Young,
2000; Xu & Spelke, 2000).
In detail, the results of the first experiment show that the
ability of mosquitofish to discriminate among sets
containing a different amount of elements is not limited to
the socio-sexual context (Agrillo et al., 2007, 2008), but
also applies to sets of abstract elements. Indeed, experiment
1 provides evidence that fish trained to discriminate
between small sets of figures spontaneously base their
discrimination on non-numerical features of the stimuli,
namely the cumulative surface area occupied by figures and
the overall space occupied by the sets, while they apparently
ignored the numerical information and other available cues
such as the sum of perimeters or the total luminance of the
stimuli. We found a negative correlation between the
proportion of correct choices when the cumulative surface
area was controlled and when the overall space of the sets
was paired, thus indicating that there was an individual
variability in the strategy used, with some subjects relying
on the cumulative surface area for discriminating and not
being affected by the overall space, while others used the
overall space but not area to solve the task.
The results of experiment 2 clearly show that, when the
access to the non-numerical information was prevented by
matching them between the stimuli, mosquitofish could still
learn the discrimination and indeed they required
approximately the same number of trials suggesting that the
priority of perceptual over numerical information is
probably not related to a greater cognitive load imposed by
direct numerical computation.
Why do mosquitofish preferentially use continuous extent
over numerical information given that the two alternatives
are similar in cognitive demand? One possibility is that
quantity information is ecologically more relevant for this
species. For example, in foraging contexts animals often
tend to maximise the amount of resources acquired with a
minimum of energy expenditure. Even though number of
items and total amount of resources gained frequently
correlate, sometimes this does not occur, for example when
there is a large variation in the size of food items. Selection
for optimising food intake could have favoured mechanisms
based on continuous extent, such as area, as they are more
reliable indicators of the resource potentially gained.

2417

Alternatively, perceptual cues of the stimuli may simply be
the quickest indicator of the numerosity, for example
because they involve earlier stages in neural visual or
auditory processing (Beran et al., 2008; Breukelaar &
Dalrymple-Alford, 1998; Stevens et al., 2007).
The third experiment, using a method similar to ‘item by
item’ presentation, provided the indication that fish are
capable of spontaneously selecting the larger set relying
exclusively on numerical information and without the need
of an extensive training procedure. In fact in our test fish
were able to choose between shoals containing different
numbers of fish even if they could only see one fish at time
by swimming along the glass divider beyond which the
group of fish was located. However a simpler possibility to
explain these results is that the focal fish did not represent
the numerosity of the shoals, but simply tended to stay in
places where they could see another fish and leave when
they could not see companions. Because there are two
empty places by the smaller shoal and only one by the larger
shoal, this would imply a smaller probability of leaving the
larger shoal and hence longer time spent near it.
Nonetheless an analysis of the frequency of departures from
each compartment revealed that fish were equally likely to
leave a sector occupied by a stimulus fish or an empty one
and thus apparently ruled out an explanation based on non
cognitive processes.
In a previous study (Agrillo et al., 2008) we found that
mosquitofish confronted with two fully visible shoals were
influenced by the total areas covered by fishes when
discriminating between small numbers; here we report that
in different conditions they can spontaneously use number
to discriminate the same quantities. The comparison of these
studies hence suggests that mosquitofish can rely on
multiple cues to estimate numerosity and that the access to
the numerical information over the non numerical one may
be task- and context-depend. To discriminate which of two
mosquitofish shoals is more numerous is likely to be a
complex endeavor. Shoals may be spaced out and often not
simultaneously visible, fishes frequently move within the
shoal, can change orientation and occlude each other. In this
condition it may be advantageous to encode multiple
attributes of the stimulus (number, area, movement, etc) and
base number estimation on different combinations of cues
depending on contextual variables such as the structure of
environment, the time available for the choice, the
numerosity and numerical ratio of items. Recent studies on
humans and non-human primates suggest that this may be a
common situation. Hurewitz and colleagues (2006) showed
that adult humans asked to order two arrays of dots,
spontaneously and automatically encoded information about
size, area and number of dots. This study has provided
evidence that the extraction of the representation of discrete
quantity proceeds more rapidly than the extraction of a
representation of continuous extent (the overall area
occupied by stimuli) when there is a large numerical
distance, while the reverse occurs when the numerical ratio
comes close to 1. Experiments on pre-verbal infants using a

habituation paradigm also suggest that they attend to
continuous extent and numerosity simultaneously. The
relative salience of these two dimensions depends on the
type of task, with infant preferentially attending to number
over continuous extent when tested with large sets of
objects (reviewed in Cordes & Brannon, 2008). Similarly
Cantlon and Brannon (2007) showed that macaques
spontaneously encode information about number, despite
the fact that continuous dimensions are available to
discriminate quantities. When number and continuous extent
were contrasted, monkeys were more likely to use number if
the numerical ratio was favorable and if they had previous
laboratory experience with numerical discrimination.
For a long time numerical abilities were thought to be
uniquely a human capacity, until researchers discovered that
preverbal children, non-human primates and some other
species of mammals and birds possess rudimentary abilities
to judge quantities that are based on representation of
number. Many authors now agree about the possible
existence of phylogenetically shared core systems
underlying number abilities of these animal species and our
non-verbal numerical abilities (Dehaene, 1997). Here we
found evidence that similar capacities are present also in
fish suggesting that large, complex brains are not a
necessary prerequisite for adding small numbers (within the
subitizing range) and raising the intriguing possibility that
foundation of numerical capacity may be evolutionarily
more ancient, dating back at least as far as the divergence
between fish and the land vertebrates.

References
Agrillo, C., & Dadda, M. (2007). Discrimination of the
larger shoal in the poeciliid fish Girardinus falcatus.
Ethology, Ecology & Evolution, 19(2), 145-157.
Agrillo, C., Dadda, M., & Bisazza, A. (2007). Quantity
discrimination in female mosquitofish. Animal Cognition,
10, 63-70.
Agrillo, C., Dadda, M., Serena, G., & Bisazza, A. (2008).
Do fish count? Spontaneous discrimination of quantity in
female mosquitofish. Animal Cognition, 11(3), 495-503.
Beran, M. J. (2004). Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)
respond to non visible sets after one-by-one addition and
removal of items. Journal of Comparative Psychology,
118, 25-36.
Beran, M. J., & Beran, M. M. (2004). Chimpanzees
remember the results of one-by-one addition of food items
to sets over extended time periods. Psychological Science,
15, 94-99.
Beran, M. J. (2008). Monkeys (Macaca mulatta and Cebus
apella) track, enumerate, and compare multiple sets of
moving items. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 34, 63-74.
Beran, M. J., Evans, T. A., & Harris, E. H. (2008).
Perception of food amount by chimpanzees based on the

2418

number, size, contour length, and visibility of items.
Animal Behaviour, 75, 1793-1802.
Brannon E. M, & Terrace, H. S. (1998). Ordering of the
numerosities 1 to 9 by monkeys. Science, 282, 746-749.
Brannon, E. M., Wusthoff, C. J., Gallistel, C. R., & Gibbon,
J. (2001). Subtraction in the pigeon: Evidence for a linear
subjective number scale. Psychological Science, 12(3),
238-243.
Breukelaar, J. W., & Dalrymple-Alford, J. C. (1998).
Timing ability and numerical competence in rats. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
24, 84-97.
Cantlon, J. F., & Brannon, E. M. (2007). How much does
number matter to a monkey (Macaca mulatta)? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
33(1), 32-41.
Cordes, S., & Brannon, E. M. (2008). Quantitative
competencies in infancy. Developmental Science, 11(6),
803-808.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Durgin, F. H. (1995). Texture density adaptation and the
perceived numerosity and distribution of texture. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 21, 149-169.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S., & Hauser, M. (2002a). The
representations underlying infants' choice of more: objectfiles versus analog magnitudes. Psychological Science,
13, 150-156.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. S. (2002b). Infants’
discrimination of number vs. continuous extent. Cognitive
Psychology, 44, 33-66.
Flombaum, J. I., Junge, J. A., & Hauser, M. D. (2005).
Rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) spontaneously
compute addition operations over large numbers.
Cognition, 97, 315-325.
Hager, M. C., & Helfman, G. S. (1991). Safety in numbers:
shoal size choice by minnows under predatory treat.
Behavioral Ecology, 29, 271-276.
Hauser, M. D., Carey, S., & Hauser, L. B. (2000).
Spontaneous number representation in semi-free-ranging
rhesus monkeys. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B, 267, 829-833.
Hurewitz, F., Gelman, R., & Schnitzer, B. (2006).
Sometimes area counts more than number. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 103, 19599-19604.
Judge, P. G., Evans, T. A., & Vyas, D. K. (2005). Ordinal
representation of numeric quantities by brown capuchin
monkeys (Cebus apella). Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 31, 79-94.
Kilian, A., Yaman, S., Fersen, L., & Gunturkun, O. (2003).
A bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncates) discriminates
visual stimuli differing in numerosity. Learning and
Behaviour, 31, 133-142.
Pisa, E. P., & Agrillo, C. (2009). Quantity discrimination in
felines: a preliminary investigation of the domestic cat

(Felis silvestris catus). Journal of Ethology, 27(2), 289293.
Uller, C., Jaeger, R., Guidry, G., & Martin, C. (2003).
Salamanders (Plethodon cinereus) go for more: rudiments
of number in a species of basal vertebrate. Animal
Cognition, 6, 105-112.
Vos, P. G., Van Oeffelen, M. P., Tibosch, H. J., Allik, J.
(1988). Interactions between area and numerosity.
Psychological Research, 50, 148-154.
West, R. E., & Young, R. J. (2002). Do domestic dogs show
any evidence of being able to count? Animal Cognition, 5,
183-186.
Xu, F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Large number discrimination
in 6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74, B1-B11.

2419

