UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Frequency Trajectory Gives Rise to an Age-Limited Learning Effect as a Function of InputOutput Mapping in Connectionist Networks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1ch5m4rh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bonin, Patrick
Ferrand, Ludovic
Mermillod, Martial
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Frequency Trajectory Gives Rise to an Age-Limited Learning Effect as a
Function of Input-Output Mapping in Connectionist Networks
Martial Mermillod

Patrick Bonin

LAPSCO - (CNRS UMR 6024)
Université Blaise Pascal

LAPSCO - (CNRS UMR 6024)
Université Blaise Pascal

Tiffany Morisseau

Alain Méot

L2C2 - (CNRS UMR 5230)
Institut des Sciences Cognitives

LAPSCO - (CNRS UMR 6024)
Université Blaise Pascal

Ludovic Ferrand
LAPSCO - (CNRS UMR 6024)
Université Blaise Pascal

Abstract
According to the age of acquisition (AoA) hypothesis, words
acquired early in life are processed faster and more accurately
than words acquired later (see Juhasz, 2005; Johnston &
Barry, 2006 for reviews). Connectionist models have begun to
explore the influence of the age/order of acquisition of the
items (and also their frequency of encounter) (Ellis &
Lambon Ralph, 2000; Lambon Ralph & Ehsan, 2006; Zevin
& Seidenberg, 2002). We explored age-limited learning
effects in a connectionist model similar to that used by
Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006) but with the use of a
frequency trajectory (Zevin & Seidenberg, 2002), which
refers to changes in the frequency of the words over long
periods of age, since frequency trajectory is thought to better
index age-limited learning effects than traditional AoA
measures (Bonin, Barry, Méot, & Chalard, 2004). Our
simulations show that the influence of frequency trajectory
varies as a function of the mappings between input and output
units in a similar type of neural network to that used by
Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006).

Introduction
An important issue in psychological science is to
determine whether items (words, objects, faces, etc.)
which are acquired early in life are processed faster and
more accurately by adults than those which are acquired
later in life, namely whether there is a late influence of
early acquisitions. A large number of studies have
convincingly shown that words acquired early in life are
processed faster and more accurately than words
acquired later in life (Johnston & Barry, 2006; Juhasz,
2005 for recent reviews) using age of acquisition (AoA)
norms collected from either adult ratings or from
children's performance. The so-called age-of-acquisition
effects have been found in a large variety of tasks (e.g.,
object, face and action naming, word reading, lexical
decision) and in different populations (e.g., children,
young and old adults, aphasics). However, despite
robust AoA effects in a wide variety of lexical tasks,
there is a current debate as to whether the order of
acquisition of the words is per se an important factor in
determining the ease of processing the words in both

normal and impaired adults or whether AoA measures
actually underlie other hidden factors. It is plausible
that the order of acquisition of the words is a factor
which is directly responsible for the ease of processing
the words, and indeed this is the crucial tenet of the
“AoA hypothesis”. Recent attempts to independently
manipulate this factor have shown a reliable influence
on the learning of artificial patterns in laboratory
settings (Stewart & Ellis, 2008). However, as far as the
learning of the words of a language is concerned, there
are obviously, factors other than the order in which the
words and/or concepts were encountered also clearly
underlie the speed and accuracy of acquisition (with the
result that certain words are acquired before others).
These factors are truly responsible for the AoA effects
found in lexical processing in adults. Among these
factors are (1) the frequency of encounter of the words
(e.g., during certain period of life, during one's entire
life) and (2) the kind of relationships (i,e., systematic,
quasi-systematic, arbitrary that exists between different
types of codes (e.g., between phonological and
orthographic codes, between semantic codes and
phonological codes). Frequency trajectories refer to the
fact that some words are more frequent during certain
periods of acquisition (e.g., “dragon” during childhood)
than others (e.g., “tax” during adulthood) and the words
which are frequently encountered are acquired earlier
than those which are encountered less frequently
(Bonin, Barry, Méot, & Chalard, 2004; Hazard, De
Cara, & Chanquoy, in press; Zevin & Seidenberg,
2002). But as we shall explain, the question of whether
words which have been frequently encountered during a
period of acquisition are easier to process later in life
than words encountered less frequently also depends on
the kind of relationships that exists between different
types of codes (and which have to be learned). In
alphabetic languages such as English or French, there
are quasi-systematic relationships between sound units
and orthographic units, whereas the relationships
between semantic units and phonological (or
orthographic) units are arbitrary. When quasi-

2322

systematic relationships are present, what is learned
from certain items can be generalized to other items,
and as a result, the processing of new items is easier
than when no such generalization is possible, as is the
case with arbitrary mappings (Zevin & Seidenberg,
2002). In several studies, Zevin and Seidenberg (2002,
2004) and Bonin et al. (2004) suggested that lexical
processing varies as a function of both the frequency
trajectory of the words and the kind of relationships that
exist between semantics, phonology and orthography.
More precisely, Bonin et al. (2004) have shown agelimited learning effects in both oral and written naming
(where the relationships between object names and
semantics are arbitrary) but not in reading aloud and in
spelling to dictation (because in alphabetic languages
such as French or English, the relationships are quasisystematic between orthography and phonology).
However, Ellis and Lambon Ralph (2000) or
Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006) obtained age-limited
learning effects by manipulating the age of acquisition
of the items. The authors manipulated the order of
introduction of the patterns instead of the frequency
trajectory of the items. Thus, for systematic and quasisystematic relationships, it remains to be determined
whether frequency trajectory, as proposed by Zevin and
Seidenberg (2002), can generate age-limited learning
effects similar to what was obtained by Ellis and
Lambon Ralph (2000) and Lambon-Ralph and Ehsan
(2006) when manipulating the order of introduction of
the items. As far as arbitrary mappings are concerned,
Zevin and Seidenberg (2002) have shown that
frequency trajectory had an effect on network
performance. However, it is worth stressing that this
effect was obtained when background items were not
included in the simulation (Simulation 3). Also, a
potential problem is that their Simulations 3 and 4
significantly differ from what Ellis and Lambon Ralph
(2000) and Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006) have
defined as “arbitrary mappings”. Zevin and Seidenberg
(2002) used “critical” items having few neighbors in
order to manipulate arbitrary mapping, whereas in the
simulations performed by both Ellis and Lambon Ralph
(2000) and Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006) completely
arbitrary mappings were used (it should be remembered
that this situation is thought to approximate to picture
naming which involves arbitrary relationships between
semantics and names). In other words, Zevin and
Seidenberg (2002) did not actually test the effect of
frequency trajectory on items having arbitrary
relationships. Instead, what they have shown was a very
specific age-limited learning effect produced by the
manipulation of the frequency trajectory of the items
under exceptional conditions (when the neural network
was trained on critical items but with all the background
items removed). The main purpose of our study is to
reduce the gap between the Lambon Ralph and Ehsan
(2006) and the Zevin and Seidenberg (2002) approaches
by using the same networks and procedures used by
Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006) to investigate the
influence of the frequency trajectory of the items
instead of their order of introduction. Of importance

also is the fact that we included items having a flat
frequency trajectory as baseline items in order to better
index the true influence of high-to-low frequency
trajectory items and low-to-high frequency trajectory
items.

Simulation 1
Frequency trajectory effects in artificial
neural systems for arbitrary mappings
The goal of Simulation 1 is to test the influence of
frequency trajectory as reported by Zevin and
Seidenberg (2002) on arbitrary relationship between
input-output units. The initial findings suggested that
the nature of the relationships between input and output
patterns is crucial if age-limited learning effects on
network performance are to emerge. Thus, whereas agelimited learning effects should emerge in tasks requiring
the involvement of arbitrary mappings such as in face or
object naming, little or no age-limited learning effects
should be found in tasks requiring the involvement of
componential (i.e. systematic or quasi-systematic)
representations. This pattern of findings has indeed
been observed on behavioral data (Bonin et al., 2004).
At a computational level, Lambon Ralph and Ehsan
(2006) identified a significant effect of the order of
introduction of the patterns when the relationships
between input-output patterns were arbitrary. Zevin and
Seidenberg (2002) did not find a reliable effect of
frequency trajectory on network performance when
cumulative frequency was equalized across each
training regime and background items were introduced
in the network, even when a high level of arbitrariness
was introduced between the input-output patterns
(Simulation 4). According to these latter authors, what
is learned from early items can be generalized to later
items by means of associative learning functions which
are provided by the background items. To our
knowledge, the influence of frequency trajectory, when
cumulative frequency is controlled for, has never been
tested using a simple back-propagation neural network
and arbitrary items.

Method
The connectionist network was a standard 3-layer backpropagation neural network. It was in all respects
identical to the one used by Lambon Ralph and Ehsan
(2006), namely a 100-50-100 neural network
architecture. Like Ellis and Lambon Ralph (2000) and
Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006), we did not include
background items in the simulation relating to
arbitrarily mapped items. For these items, the input and
output vectors were 100 randomly generated binary
vectors. The first 33 vectors were encoded with a
frequency of 16.7 % (each vector was presented once at
each iteration of the neural network), the next 34
vectors with a frequency of 33.3 % (each vector was
presented twice at each iteration of the neural network)
and the remaining 33 with a frequency of 50 % (each
vector was presented three times at each iteration of the
neural network) during a first training stage consisting

2323

of 5,000 epochs. During the second training stage of
5,000 epochs, all the vectors were encoded with the
same frequency, namely 33.3% (each vector was
presented once at each iteration of the neural network).
Finally, during the last training stage of 5,000 epochs,
the first 33 vectors were encoded with a frequency of 50
%, the 34 next vectors with a frequency of 33.3 % and
the remaining 33 vectors with a frequency of 16.7 %.
To summarize, the first 33 vectors had a low-to-high
frequency trajectory, the next 34 vectors were perfectly
stable over time (i.e., they had a flat frequency
trajectory) and the last 33 vectors had a high-to-low
frequency trajectory. However, by the end of training,
the cumulative frequency of the items was as shown in
Table 1. Initial synaptic weights were randomly
initialized between 0 and 1 at the beginning of the first
training phase. The learning rate was fixed to 0.1 and
momentum to 0.9.
Time
Low-to-high trajectories
Flat trajectories
High-to-low trajectories

1
2
3
16.7 33.3 50
33.3 33.3 33.3
50 33.3 16.7

Table 1. Frequency trajectories used in Simulation 1,
2 and 3

Results
Like previous connectionist simulations, we used the
Sum Squared Error (SSE) as the standard dependent
variable (Ellis & Lambon Ralph, 2000; Lambon-Ralph
& Ehsan, 2006 and Zevin & Seidenberg, 2002).

21.36, MSE = 34.43, p < .001), and more errors on flat
items than on high-to-low items (mean SSE = 11.28;
F(1, 291) = 34.43, MSE = 21.5, p < .001). More
importantly, the frequency trajectory effect was
significant during the last training period (representing
adult performance). More errors were observed for lowto-high items (mean SSE = 25.59) than for flat items
(mean SSE = 20.48; F(1, 291) = 10.66, MSE = 41.14, p
< .001), and more errors for flat items than for high-tolow items (mean SSE = 16.22; F(1, 291) = 7.39, MSE =
41.14, p < .01).

Discussion
An effect of frequency trajectory on the age-limited
learning effect in terms of network performance was
found when the mappings between the input and output
units were arbitrary. Compared to previous
connectionist data, this finding means that it is possible
to obtain an age-limited learning effect on arbitrary
items without any reference to the order of introduction
of the encounters (Ellis & Lambon Ralph, 2000,
Lambon-Ralph & Ehsan, 2006). Instead, these effects
were obtained through the simple manipulation of the
frequency trajectories of the items. These results are
consistent with the hypotheses proposed by Zevin &
Seidenberg (2002). Moreover, we have to remember
that these results were obtained using the same neural
network (standard back-propagation algorithm) and the
same material as Lambon-Ralph & Ehsan (2006). This
effect mimics that observed on behavioral picture
naming data (Bonin, Barry et al., 2004) when
cumulative frequency is controlled for. In line with
previous data (Munro, 1986), these findings suggest
that age-limited effects arise from a generic aspect of
learning, that is to say that the plasticity of the network
reduces with learning. The consequence of the
reduction of network plasticity is that the point during
learning at which items are first encountered has a longterm, stable effect on behavioral data if relationship
between input/output units is arbitrary.

Simulation 2
Frequency trajectory effects in artificial
neural systems for quasi-systematic mappings

Figure 1. Frequency trajectory effect on Sum Square
Error for arbitrary items.
As far as the first training period is concerned, there
were more errors on low-to-high items than on flat
items, F(1, 291) = 41.75, MSE = 31.28, p < .001, and
more errors on stable items than on high-to-low
frequency items, F(1, 291) = 41.35, MSE = 31.28, p <
.001. In the second training period, the frequency
trajectory effect was also significant. There were more
errors for the low-to-high items (mean SSE = 26.57)
than the flat items (mean SSE = 19.94; F(1, 291) =

A second simulation was run using a new pattern of
vectors (generated from Lambon Ralph and Ehsan,
2006) having a quasi-systematic relationship between
the input and the output layers. As in the previous
simulation, the frequency trajectory of the items was
manipulated while their cumulative frequency was held
constant. This context is thought to operationalize
reading aloud in alphabetic languages. The input and
output representations were based on data provided by
Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006). These data instantiate
the quasi-regular mapping of English or French
languages. Based on the findings reported by Zevin and
Seidenberg (2002), no reliable effect of frequency
trajectory was predicted on neural network performance
with a quasi-systematic coding of the input-output
relationship (except in one very specific condition,

2324

namely critical items without background items). This
represents a clear contrast to Lambon Ralph and Ehsan's
(2006) study which obtained small but significant agelimited learning effects for quasi-systematic
relationships in a simulation which used the order of
introduction of the items as independent variable.

Method
The network was identical to the one used in Simulation
1. For the quasi-systematic items, we used the structure
relationship provided by Lambon Ralph and Ehsan
(2006). The quasi-regular mappings were created by
dividing the 100 unit vectors into three sections (33; 34;
33) in order to represent a CVC-like word. We used the
identical abstract patterns for 10 consonant and 10
vowel components generated by Lambon Ralph and
Ehsan (2006) to produce a hundred representations that
were formed by joining the CVC patterns using a Latinsquare type combination. In other words, each input
vector Cn Vn Cn was associated with an output vector
Cn Vn Cn+1. Likewise, all the ten consonant and vowel
patterns were used 10 times each in both the onset and
offset positions. As in the previous simulation, the first
33 vectors had a low-to-high frequency trajectory, the
next 34 vectors had a flat trajectory and the last 33
vectors a high-to-low frequency trajectory. The
cumulative frequency of the items was controlled for.

Results
Unlike in Simulation 1, at the end of the training period,
no reliable differences were observed between the
different types of items (see Figure 2). Although small
differences between item types were found at the end of
the first training period, none of these was significant.
There was a dramatic reduction in the error rate on
quasi-systematic items compared to that observed for
the arbitrary items, F(1, 291) = 621.37, MSE = 99.07, p
< .001.

Simulation 3
Frequency trajectory effects in artificial
neural systems for systematic mappings
In Simulation 3, the influence of frequency trajectory
was examined for systematic input-output relationships.
As in the previous simulation, we used the input and
output patterns provided by Lambon Ralph and Ehsan
(2006). Given the findings from Simulation 2, in which
quasi-systematic relationships were used, we expected
the systematic regularities of the input-output patterns
to completely suppress age-limited learning effects in
the artificial neural network.

Method
As in the case of the quasi-systematic data, one hundred
unit vectors were created to form CVC-like words
based on the 10 consonant and 10 vowel components
generated by Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006). The
only difference to Simulation 2 was that each input
vector Cn Vn Cn was associated with itself as an output
vector. In other words, the connectionist network was
an auto-associator neural network which permitted the
reproduction of perfectly predictable input-output
correspondences. As in the previous simulations, the
first 33 vectors had a low-to-high frequency trajectory,
the next 34 vectors had a flat trajectory and the
remaining 33 vectors had a high-to-low frequency
trajectory. The cumulative frequency of the items was
controlled for.

Results
As in Simulation 2, no reliable differences were
observed between the different types of items (see
Figure 3). Therefore, the effect of frequency trajectory,
which was reliable on the SSE when arbitrary patterns
were used (Simulation 1), was eliminated when the
relationships between input and output units were
systematic. Moreover, the mean SSE were very similar
to those of quasi-systematic items (F<1).

Figure 2. Frequency trajectory effect on SSE for
systematic items.

Discussion
We shall return to these results in the Discussion of
Simulation 3.

Figure 3. Frequency trajectory effect on SSE for quasisystematic items.

2325

Discussion of Simulation 2 and 3
The findings obtained for systematic mappings are
consistent with previous behavioral (Bonin et al., 2004;
Zevin & Seidenberg, 2004) and computational studies
(Lambon Ralph & Ehsan, 2006; Zevin & Seidenberg,
2002), thus showing that no age-limited learning effect
emerges when grapheme-to-phoneme correspondences
are perfectly predictable. Early in training, the network
performance is better (albeit not significantly so) on
items which are trained more often, that is to say a
frequency effect occurs during the early phase of the
training regime. However, as training continues, the
performance of the network for the different kinds of
items converges to the same level. The effect of
frequency trajectory occurs early in training, but then
decreases rapidly and no residual effect of this factor is
observed at the end of training, when the cumulative
frequencies are equalized. The results of Simulation 2
(on quasi-systematic relationships) were more
ambiguous with respect to the previous connectionist
data reported by Lambon-Ralph & Ehsan (2006).
Whereas Lambon-Ralph & Ehsan (2006) identified a
small but significant age-limited learning effect with
quasi-systematic relationships, we did not find this
effect in our simulations. This difference was probably
due to a quantitative difference in the training regime
since we used more iterations during the different stages
of the training (we used 5,000 iterations for each stage
whereas Lambon-Ralph & Ehsan (2006) used 5,000
iterations in total and added late patterns to the training
set after 750 epochs of training). Even if convergence is
very fast using the back-propagation algorithm, the
improvement we added at the level of each training
period might qualitatively change the size of the effect
(in the same way that training improves cognitive
performance in humans). However, our results are
consistent with behavioral data which indicates no agelimited learning effect in quasi-systematic languages
like French or English (Bonin et al., 2004; Zevin &
Seidenberg, 2004). With the exception of this
difference, the findings obtained from Simulations 2
and 3 are compatible with the hypothesis that agelimited learning effects are not expected when the
mappings between input and output units are quasisystematic (or systematic) as has been empirically
observed in word reading in alphabetic languages such
as French (Bonin et al., 2004), English (Zevin &
Seidenberg, 2004) or Italian (Burani, Arduino, & Barca,
2007). At a computational level, the findings from
Simulation 2 suggest that the reduction of plasticity
phenomenon demonstrated by Munro (1986) might be
considerably reduced in componential representations
when cumulative frequency is adequately controlled for.
Furthermore, these three simulations have shown that
the theoretical framework proposed by Zevin and
Seidenberg (2002) is able to explain the results reported
by Lambon Ralph and Ehsan (2006). Neither
background items nor attractor networks seem
necessary to observe a reliable influence of frequency
trajectory in connectionist networks. At a behavioral
level, we suggest that frequency trajectories better

quantify age-limited learning effects than the simple
order of introduction of the encounters. We therefore
suggest that the influence of frequency trajectories on
age-limited learning effects should be widely
generalized to artificial but also to biological cognitive
systems.

Conclusions
Following previous studies (Bonin et al., 2004; Bonin,
Méot, Mermillod, Ferrand, & Barry, in press; Zevin &
Seidenberg, 2002, 2004), a new theoretical framework
has been put forward to account for age-limited learning
effects in mature cognitive systems. This theory is
explicit regarding the influence of AoA, cumulative
frequency and frequency trajectory in lexical
processing. Objective or rated AoA measures constitute
a performance variable which has to be accounted for.
Among other factors, the frequency trajectory of the
items has an influence on the age/order of acquisition of
the words. Frequency trajectory can thus be used to
investigate age-limited learning effects in lexical
processing. According to this theory, the influence of
frequency trajectory is confined to the specific cases
where learning about some items cannot be generalized
to new items (when specific links between input-output
patterns have to be learned). No or only a reduced
influence of frequency trajectory is predicted when
generalization is possible. This theory has been
confirmed by both computational and empirical data
(Bonin et al., 2004; Zevin & Seidenberg, 2002, 2004).
The aim of this paper was to provide further
computational evidence in support of this general
connectionist theory.
In the present study, we have used the same
networks and procedures employed by Lambon Ralph
and Ehsan (2006), but we have investigated the
influence of the frequency trajectory of the items
instead of their order of introduction. The kind of
relationships between input and output units was also
manipulated (Simulations 1, 2 and 3). We also included
items having a flat frequency trajectory in order to gain
a better approximation of the true influence on the
network performance of high-to-low frequency
trajectory items compared to low-to-high frequency
trajectory items. Simulations 1, 2 and 3 showed that
frequency trajectory had a reliable influence when
arbitrary mappings, but not quasi-systematic or
systematic mappings, were used. These findings are
consistent with previous empirical findings showing an
effect of frequency trajectory on spoken and written
picture naming latencies but not on word reading and
spelling to dictation (Bonin, Barry, Méot, & Chalard,
2004).
In the theoretical framework that we suggest, the
order/age of acquisition of the items is partly dependent
on their frequency of encounter. Items which are more
frequent during a certain period of life are those which
are learned first. From this perspective, AoA should not
be considered as an independent variable for further
behavioral experiment but rather as an outcome variable
which is actually determined by frequency trajectories.

2326

In other words, the precise quantification of frequency
trajectory should be a better method in order to
carefully address the question of age limited learning
effects.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported in part by the National
Center for Scientific Research (CNRS UMR 6024) in
addition with 2 grants from the french Research
National Agency (ANR Grant BLAN06-2_145908 and
ANR Project BLAN08-1_353820) to Martial
Mermillod. We specially thank Matt Lambon-Ralph and
Andrew Ellis for useful comments on a previous
version of this manuscript.

References
Barry, C., Morrison, C. M., & Ellis, A. W. (1997).
Naming the Snodgrass and Vanderwart pictures:
Effects of age of acquisition, frequency and name
agreement. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 50, 560-585.
Bonin, P., Barry, C., Méot, A., & Chalard, M. (2004).
The influence of age of acquisition in word reading
and other tasks: A never ending story? Journal of
Memory and Language, 50, 456-476.
Bonin, P., Méot, A., Mermillod, M., Ferrand, L., &
Barry, C., (in press). The influence of age of
acquisition, cumulative frequency and frequency
trajectory in picture naming: Comments on Perez
(2007). Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology.
Burani,C., Arduino, L.S., & Barca, L. (2007).
Frequency, not age of acquisition affects Italian
word naming . European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 19, 828-866.
Cuetos, F. Alvarez, B., Gonzales-Nosti, M., Méot, A.,
& Bonin, P. (2006). Determinants of lexical access
in speech production: Role of word frequency and
age of acquisition. Memory & Cognition, 34, 9991010.
Ellis, A. W., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2000). Age of
acquisition effects in adult lexical processing reflect
loss of plasticity in maturing systems: Insights from
connectionist networks. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26,
1103–1123.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Phonology,
reading, and dyslexia: Insights from connectionist
models. Psychological Review, 163, 491-528.
Hazard, M.-C., De Cara, B., & Chanquoy, L. (in press).
Normes de fréquence cumulée et trajectoire
fréquentielle comme prédicteurs de l’âge
d’acquisition (Cumulative frequency and frequency
trajectory norms as predictors of age of acquisition).
L'Année Psychologique.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). Organization of Behavior. New
York, N. Y.: Wiley & Sons.
Hinton, G. E., & Shallice, T. (1991). Lesioning an
attractor network: Investigations of acquired
dyslexia. PsychologicalReview, 98, 74-95.
Johnston, R.A., & Barry, C. (2006). Age of acquisition

and lexical processing. Visual Cognition, 13, 789845.
Juhasz, B. (2005). Age-of-Acquisition effects in word
and picture identification. Psychological Bulletin,
131, 684-712.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., & Ehsan, S. (2006). Age of
acquisition effects depend on the mapping between
representations and the frequency of occurrence:
Empirical and computational evidence. Visual
Cognition, 13, (7-8), 884-910.
Lewis, M. B. (1999). Age of acquisition in face
categorisation: Is there an instance based account?
Cognition, 71, 23-39.
Meschyan, G. & Hernandez, A. E. (2002). Is native
language decoding skill related to second language
learning? Journal of Educational Psychology, 94,
14-22.
Moore, V., & Valentine, T. (1999). The effects of age
of acquisition in processing famous faces and
names: Exploring the locus and proposing a
mechanism. Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive ScienceSociety,
Vancouver. Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Munro, P. W. (1986). State-dependent factors influence
neural plasticity: A partial account of the critical
period. In J. L. McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart, & the
PDP Research Group (Eds.), Parallel distributed
processing: Explorations in the microstructure of
cognition, Vol. 2 (pp. 471–502). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Raman, I. (2006). On the age-of-acquisition effects in
word naming and orthographic transparency:
Mapping specific or universal? Visual Cognition, 13
(10), 1044-1053.
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A
distributed, developmental model of word
recognition and naming. Psychological Review, 96,
523-568.
Stewart, N., & Ellis, A. W. (2008). Order of acquisition
in learning perceptual categories: A laboratory
analogue of the age of acquisition effect?
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(1), 70-74.
Vitkovitch, M., & Tyrrell, L. (1995). Sources of
disagreement in object naming. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 48, 822-848.
Zevin, J. D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2002). Age of
acquisition effects in word reading and other tasks.
Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 1-29.
Zevin, J.D., & Seidenberg, M.S. (2004). Age-ofacquisition effects in reading aloud: Tests of
cumulative frequency and frequency trajectory.
Memory and Cognition, 32, 31-38.

2327

