UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Frequency and Contextual Diversity Effects in Cross-Situational Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1jh968zh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kachergis, George
Shiffrin, Richard
Yu, Chen

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Frequency and Contextual Diversity Effects in Cross-Situational Word Learning
George Kachergis, Chen Yu, and Richard M. Shiffrin
{gkacherg, chenyu, shiffrin}@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological & Brain Science / Cognitive Science Program
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Prior research has shown that people can use the cooccurrence statistics of words and referents in ambiguous
situations to learn word meanings during a brief training
period. The present studies investigate the effects of allowing
some words and referents to appear more often than others, as
is true in real learning environments. More frequent wordreferent pairs are often—but not always—learned better, and
also boost learning of other pairs. Superior learning for
training sets with varying pair frequency may be a result of
learning frequent pairs first, and using this knowledge to
reduce ambiguity in later trials to learn other items. However,
contextual diversity – the number of other pairs a given pair
appears with – is naturally confounded with frequency, and
presents an alternative explanation. The experiments in the
present study systematically manipulate three critical factors
in cross-situational learning – frequency, contextual diversity,
and within-trial ambiguity – and measure their individual and
combined effects on statistical word learning.
Keywords: statistical learning; language acquisition; crosssituational learning; contextual diversity; word frequency

Introduction
Human infants learn word meanings with astonishing speed
(e.g., Bloom, 2000). As in many other cognitive learning
tasks, a key challenge in word learning is to deal with
uncertainty and ambiguity in everyday environments.
Recent research has focused on how regularities in the cooccurrence of words, objects, and events in the world can
significantly reduce ambiguity across situations. This
approach, dubbed statistical learning, relies on two
assumptions: 1) that spoken words are often relevant to the
visible environment, and 2) that learners can remember to
some degree the co-occurrence of multiple words and
objects in a scene. Thus, as the same words and objects are
observed in different situations across time, learners can
apprehend the correct word-object mappings. Both infants
(Smith & Yu, 2008) and adults (Yu & Smith, 2007) have
demonstrated cross-situational statistical word learning.
In the adult version of cross-situational learning studies
reported in Yu & Smith (2007), participants were instructed
to learn which word goes with which object and then
studied a series of training trials. Each trial consisted of a
display of several novel objects and pseudowords spoken in
succession. Each pseudoword referred to a particular
onscreen object, but the correct referent for each
pseudoword was not indicated, thus making meanings
ambiguous on individual trials. In a typical learning
scenario, participants attempted to learn 18 pseudowordobject pairings from 27 12-second trials, with four
pseudowords and four objects concurrently presented in a

trial. This design allowed each stimulus (and hence each
correct word-referent pairing) to be presented six times. In
one form or another, the learning of a pairing involved the
accumulation of pseudoword-object co-occurrence statistics
across the training trials. Learning was assessed by testing
pseudowords after the brief training, showing that
participants acquired on average nine of the 18 pairs.
Although previous statistical learning studies (Klein, et
al., 2008; Yurovsky & Yu, 2008; Smith & Yu, 2008; Yu &
Smith, 2007) convincingly demonstrated that human
learners can efficiently learn word-referent pairs through
statistical information alone, it remains unknown exactly
which statistical regularities help (or hinder) learning. One
intuition is that statistical learning will succeed better for
more frequently appearing word-referent pairs, including the
greater number of opportunities to store and learn them.
However, a closer examination of the learning task suggests
that manipulating frequency alters other factors, some of
which may benefit low frequency pairs. These other factors
typically involve learning, memory and inference. Consider
several examples: Suppose one has learned via cooccurrence statistics several word-referent pairings: A-a, Bb, and C-c. Encountering a trial with four words (A B C D)
and referents (a b c d) then allows the participant to infer
that D-d is the correct pairing, even if this is the first
occurrence of D-d. As another example, suppose the first
two trials are (A B C D; a b c d) and (A B C E; a b c e).
Memory for both trials would allow the participant to infer
that D-d and E-e are correct pairings, though the mappings
from (A B C) to (a b c) would remain ambiguous. Many
other and more complex examples of this sort can be
generated. Note that a pair A-a will be learned better if it
appears in a set of trials with sufficiently diverse contents
(i.e., contexts). If words (A B) and referents (a b) always
occur together, then the correct pairings for these stimuli
would remain ambiguous, regardless of the number of
occurrences of these trials. Thus, a stimulus pair that
appears with only a few other specific stimuli (i.e., has low
contextual diversity) will be difficult to learn. Conversely,
the more diverse the contexts in which a pair appears, the
more likely is the acquisition of that pair. Motivated by
these examples and by modeling efforts (Yu…2005; 2007;
Frank, et al., 2007), the present study focuses on three
potentially influential factors: 1) frequency: repetitions per
word-referent pair, 2) within-trial ambiguity: the number
of co-occurring words and referents per trial; and 3)
contextual diversity: the diversity of other pairs each pair
appears with over time. The role of each individual factor in
the context of cross-situational learning has not been
systematically studied. Moreover, the potential interactions

2220

among these factors, as illustrated in the above examples,
remain unexplored.
Until a pair has appeared with all other pairs in the
vocabulary, increasing within-trial ambiguity can yield
greater contextual diversity. Will the toll of increased
ambiguity outweigh the advantages of increased contextual
diversity? Similarly, greater pair frequency can yield greater
contextual diversity until that pair has been seen with all
other pairs. Are repetitions solely crucial as learning
opportunities, or as a means to increase contextual
diversity? The current studies systematically investigate
these three factors – both individually and in combination –
and measure their effects on word learning. More
specifically, Experiment 1 will focus on frequency alone,
while Experiment 2 will explore contextual diversity and
within-trial ambiguity. Experiment 3 will explore the
interaction of contextual diversity and frequency. By
manipulating the learning input and measuring the learning
results, we can not only discover factors that are predictive
of successful learning, but also shed light on the principles
and constraints of the underlying learning mechanisms that
operate on such learning input. Although these experiments
investigate the learning of novel word-referent pairs, these
findings may generalize to the learning of other types of
associations.

Experiment 1
Participants were asked to simultaneously learn many wordreferent pairs from a series of individually ambiguous
training trials using the cross-situational word learning
paradigm (Yu & Smith, 2007). Each training trial is
comprised of a display of four novel objects with four
spoken pseudowords. With no indication of which word
refers to which object, learners have a small chance of
guessing the four correct word-referent pairings from the 16
possible ones. However, since words always appear on trials
with their proper referents, the correct pairings may be
learned over the series of trials.
The key manipulation of this study is to repeat some pairs
more often than others within the same set of trials. As
discussed above, the more often a stimulus pair is repeated,
the more opportunities there are to deduce and rehearse that
pairing. In addition, more frequent pairs appear with more
other pairs, and thus have greater contextual diversity. In
light of this, we created two training conditions with subsets
of pairs that appear with different frequency. In both
conditions, training consisted of 27 training trials containing
18 word-referent pairs, four of which were displayed on
each trial. In the two frequency subsets condition (Fig. 1,
left), 9 of the stimulus pairs appeared 9 times, and 9 of the
pairs appeared only 3 times. In the three frequency subsets
condition, 6 pairs appeared 3 times, 6 pairs appeared 6
times, and 6 pairs appeared 9 times. A dramatic frequency
effect was predicted: the more frequent pairings would be
learned more often, and pairs with a mere 3 repetitions may
not be learned at all. Importantly, the same pair was never
allowed to appear in neighboring trials.

Figure 1: Word-referent co-occurrence matrices for the two
learning conditions in Exp. 1. Each cell represents the cooccurring frequency of a specific word-referent pairs. The
18 correct pairs are on the diagonal. The other cells show
spurious co-occurrences of incorrect word-referent pairs.
Co-occurrences range from 0 (red) to 9 (white). Left: in the
two frequency condition, 18 pairs form two frequency
groups: 9 repetitions (the top 9 pairs) and 3 repetitions (the
bottom 9). Right: in the three frequency condition, 18 pairs
appear at three different frequencies: 3, 6, and 9 (the top,
middle, and bottom 6 pairs, respectively).

Subjects
Participants were 33 undergraduates at Indiana University
who received course credit for participating. None had
participated in other cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli
Each training trial consisted of four uncommon objects
(e.g., strange tools) concurrently shown while four
pseudowords were spoken sequentially. The 36
pseudowords generated by computer are phonotacticallyprobable in English (e.g., “bosa”), and were spoken by a
monotone, synthetic female voice. These 36 arbitrary
objects and 36 words were randomly assigned to two sets of
18 word-object pairings, one set for each learning condition.
Training for each condition consisted of 27 trials. Each
training trial began with the appearance of four objects,
which remained visible for the entire trial. After 2 seconds
of initial silence, each word was heard (randomly ordered,
duration of one second) followed by two additional seconds
of silence, for a total duration of 14 seconds per trial.
After each training phase was completed, participants
were tested for knowledge of word meanings. A single word
was played on each test trial, and all 18 referents were
displayed. Participants were instructed to click on the
correct referent for the word. Each of the 18 words was
presented once, and the test trials were randomly ordered.

Procedure
Participants were informed that they would see a series of
trials with four objects and four alien words. They were also
told that their knowledge of which words belong with which
objects would be tested at the end. After training, their
knowledge was assessed using 18-alternative forced choice
(18AFC) testing: on each test trial a single word was played,
and the participant was instructed to choose the appropriate

2221

object from a display of all 18. Condition order was
counterbalanced.

Results & Discussion
Fig. 2 displays the learning performance1 for the subsets of
pairs in both training conditions. In the condition with two
frequency subsets, participants were significantly more
likely to learn 9-repetition pairs (M = .46) than 3-repetition
pairs (M = .34, paired t(30) = 3.070, p < .001), which agrees
with our hypothesis of the frequency effect on statistical
learning. However, this frequency advantage disappeared in
the condition with three subsets of differing frequency: all
three subsets were learned approximately equally well.
Overall, participants learned almost the same number of
pairings in the two conditions (two freq. subsets: M = .40,
three freq. subsets: M = .38, paired t(30) = .373, p > .05).

Figure 2: Accuracy for subsets of pairs with different
frequency in two training conditions. Learning was well
above chance (18AFC chance = .056) in every condition.
Error bars show +/-SE.
Why did increased frequency aid learning in one
condition, but not the other? How can it be explained that
pairs of frequency 3, 6, and 9 are learned at equal levels?
One plausible explanation is that once a pair is learned,
future trials containing that pair effectively have reduced
within-trial ambiguity. For example, if a learner sees (A B; a
b) and has already learned A-a, then B-b may be inferred
where it would not otherwise be certain. In this way, high
frequency pairs may reduce the degree of ambiguity in later
trials, and increase the learning of low frequency pairs. If
this is true, the contexts in which each high frequency and
low frequency pairs co-occur should play a critical role in
effective statistical learning. In the next experiment,
contextual diversity is varied in order to understand the
counterintuitive finding in Experiment 1 and to directly
measure the role of context diversity.
1
Data from two subjects were excluded after it was found that
their average performance in every condition was below chance
(chance in an 18AFC test is .056). This did not change the outcome
of any statistical tests.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed that higher frequency can result in
greater learning, but does not necessarily do so. In
Experiment 2, we hold word-referent frequency constant
and vary the contexts in which each pair appears to measure
how the learning of a given pair can be affected by the other
pairs it co-occurs with during training. The contextual
regularities for each word-referent pair can be captured by
two factors: 1) the number of co-occurring words and
referents within a trial, namely, within-trial ambiguity; and
2) the number of different co-occurring words and referents
over all the training trials, namely, contextual diversity
(CD). The three conditions in this experiment manipulated
both factors. In a low/medium CD condition, 18 pairs were
divided into two groups. Six word-referent pairs in the low
CD group were constrained to appear only with other pairs
in this group during training. Likewise, the 12 pairs in the
medium CD group only co-occurred with each other, and
never with the 6 low CD pairs (Fig. 3, left). Thus, whenever
a low CD pair appeared, the other stimuli on that trial had to
be selected from the 5 remaining low CD pairs. In contrast,
a given medium CD pair could appear with any of the 11
other medium CD pairs. Note that frequency was held
constant – each of the 18 pairs was seen 6 times during
training – and within-trial ambiguity was the same (3 words
and 3 referents per trial). Only contextual diversity varied
between these two groups. In each of the other two
conditions in this experiment, all 18 pairs were randomly
distributed to co-occur without constraint. To explicitly test
the role of within-trial ambiguity, we implemented two
versions of this design: the uniform CD/3 pairs condition
with 3 words and 3 referents per trial, and the uniform
CD/4 pairs condition with 4 words and 4 referents per trial
(Fig. 3, middle and right, respectively).

Figure 3: Word-referent co-occurrences for Exp. 2 (0=red,
6=white). Left: in the low/medium CD condition, each
group’s pairs co-occur only with other pairs within that
group. Middle and Right: in the uniform CD/3 pairs and
the uniform CD/4 pairs conditions, each pair randomly cooccurs with any of 17 other pairs.
Table 1 shows two metrics describing contextual diversity
in this experiment: the mean number of other pairs that each
pair co-occurs with during training, and the mean frequency
of those co-occurring pairs. These two metrics are inversely
related: if a given pair is made to co-occurs with more other
pairs, it must occur with each of these other pairs fewer
times, on average. For example, if pair A-a often appears
with pair B-b, the incorrect associations A-b and B-a may be

2222

learned. However, if A-a appears with many other pairs, it is
unlikely to occur very often with any one of them (e.g., Bb). This is an example of how contextual diversity may be
important for learning.
Table 1: Contextual Diversity in Experiment 2
Condition \ CD
Pairs per CD Group
Mean # of different
co-occurring pairs
Mean frequency of
co-occurring pair

Low/Med
6
12

Uniform/3
18

Uniform/4
18

4.0

9.2

8.8

12.2

3.0

1.3

1.4

1.5

Greater within-trial ambiguity not only creates more
possible associations on each trial, but also influences CD:
In the 3 pairs/trial conditions, each pair appears on 6 trials,
and thus appears with 12 other pairs during training (unique
or not), In the 4 pairs/trial condition, each pair appears with
18 other pairs during training, as it occurs on 6 trials with 3
other pairs. Thus, pairs in the 4 pairs/trial condition
appeared with more diverse pairs than pairs in the 3
pairs/trial conditions. Moreover, note in Table 1 that the 12
medium CD group pairs have very similar CD – by both
metrics – to the uniform/3 pairs condition, since pairs in
both these groups appeared with only 12 other pairs.

Subjects
Undergraduates at Indiana University received course credit
for participating. The varied contextual diversity condition
had 63 participants, the 3 pairs/trial 18 condition had 38,
and the 4 pairs/trial 18 condition had 77 participants. None
had previously participated in cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli & Procedure
The sets of pseudowords and referents for Experiment 2
were identical to those used in Experiment 1, but several
new trial orderings were constructed to vary contextual
diversity and within-trial ambiguity. The 27-trial, 4
pairs/trial conditions had the same timing as Experiment 1.
The 36-trial, 3 pairs/trial conditions also had 3 seconds per
stimulus pair, with 2 seconds of initial silence, making a
total of 11 seconds. Knowledge was assessed after the
completion of each condition using 18AFC testing, as in
Experiment 1.

Results & Discussion
Figure 4 displays the average levels of learning achieved in
Experiment 2. In the low/medium CD condition, the 12
medium CD pairs were learned significantly better than the
6 low CD pairs (12 pairs M = .47, 6 pairs M = .34, paired
t(62) = 4.11, p < .001), demonstrating a clear advantage for
greater contextual diversity. Moreover, incorrect responses
in the low/medium CD condition were largely chosen from
the subset of pairs within the same group (thus co-occurring
with the target pair): 56% percent of incorrect answers for
low CD words were chosen from the 6 low CD referents
(chance=33%, t(55) = 5.48, p < .001), and 76% of incorrect

answers for medium CD words were chosen from the 12
medium CD referents (chance=66%, t(55) = 3.72, p < .001).
Thus, even incorrect answers reflected co-occurrences
encountered during training, rather than arbitrary guesses.
Overall performance on the low/medium CD condition
was no different than on the uniform CD/3 pairs
(low/medium CD M = .43, uniform CD/3 pairs M = .43,
Welch t(72.7) = .08, p > .05). As discussed, these two
conditions have nearly the same degree of CD (see Table 1),
which may explain their equal difficulty.

Figure 4: Accuracy for 4 pair groups that differ in CD and
within-trial ambiguity. Error bars show +/-SE.
Finally, the uniform CD/4 pairs condition yielded less
learning than in the uniform CD/3 pairs condition (4
pairs/trial M = .31, 3 pairs/trial M = .43, Welch t(59.6) =
2.13, p < .05), suggesting that the increased within-trial
ambiguity of the 4 pairs/trial condition is more deleterious
than any advantage conferred by the increased CD in this
condition. In sum, this experiment demonstrated that greater
CD alone improves learning, but that increased within-trial
ambiguity is a powerful inhibitor. In Experiment 3,
frequency and contextual diversity are manipulated within
several conditions to clarify the interactions of these factors.

Experiment 3
Experiment 2 showed that greater contextual diversity
results in greater learning of those pairings, but that greater
within-trial ambiguity can counteract this advantage. In
Experiment 3, within-trial ambiguity was held constant, and
frequency and contextual diversity were varied within 4
training conditions. Each condition had 18 pairs divided into
3 subsets of 6 pairs occurring at 3 frequencies: 3, 6, and 9.
In the low CD condition, the pairs in each of the three
frequency subsets appeared on trials only with pairs in the
same group – never with pairs in other groups (Fig. 5a).
That is, a 3-repetition pair would only be seen with other 3repetition pairs, and similarly for 6- and 9- repetition pairs.
In this way, learning a 3-repetition pair could help
disambiguate only other 3-repetition pairs, etc. In the high
CD condition, pairs of different frequencies co-occurred
randomly throughout training (Fig. 5b). In this condition,

2223

learning a given pair may help participants learn any pairs it
co-occurred with in the future. In the final two conditions,
the 12 pairs from two frequency subsets were allowed to cooccur, and the remaining 6 pairs co-occurred only with
themselves (i.e., within-frequency). In the 3/6 mingled
condition, the 3- and 6-repetition pairs co-occurred during
training, and the 9-repetition pairs only appeared with other
9-repetition pairs (Fig. 5c). In the 3/9 mingled condition, 3and 9-repitition pairs were mixed, and the 6-repetition pairs
could only appear with other 6-repetition pairs (Fig. 5d).
This final condition (Exp. 3-b) was run on a separate group
of participants than the first three conditions (Exp. 3-a).

a.

b.

c.
d.
Figure 5: Exp 3. Co-occurrence matrices (0=red, 9=white).
There were three frequency subsets in each condition (3, 6
and 9). To-be-learned pairs were manipulated in four ways
to co-occur within and between each subset.

diversity and frequency within-block. Each training block
consisted of 36 trials, each of which displayed 3 stimulus
pairs over the course of 11 seconds (equivalent to the 3
pair/trial conditions in Experiment 2). Word learning was
measured using an 18AFC test after each set of training
trials, as in Experiments 1 and 2.

Results & Discussion
Figure 6 displays the average levels of learning achieved in
Experiment 3. In the low CD condition, increased frequency
resulted in significant increases in learning (freq=3 M = .25,
freq=6 M = .42, freq=9 M = .71; freq 6>3 paired t(35) =
3.74, p < .001; freq 9>6 paired t(35) = 5.7, p < .001).
However, in the high CD condition, in which all pairs were
allowed to co-occur, significantly more 3- and 6- repetition
pairs were learned than in the low CD condition (freq=3 M
= .45, paired t(35) = 4.29, p < .001; freq=6 M = .64, paired
t(35) = 4.47, p < .001), although slightly fewer 9-repetition
pairs were learned (M = .6, paired t(35) = 2.09, p < .05). In
fact, there was no significant difference between the 6- and
9-repetition groups. Overall, learning was greater in the high
CD condition than in the low CD condition (high CD M =
.56, low CD M = .46, paired t(35) = 2.45, p < .05). Thus,
mixing pairs of different frequency increases learning of the
lower frequency pairs, and allows more total pairs to be
learned. This is further demonstrated in the two mingled
conditions which mixed two of the three frequency subsets
(Fig. 3 c & d). When the 3- and 6-repetition subsets were
allowed to co-occur, more 3-repetition pairs were learned
than in the low CD condition (M = .38, paired t(35) = 2.45,
p < .05), and performance on the 6- and 9- repetition pairs
remained about the same.

Table 3: Frequency & Contextual Diversity in Experiment 3
Cells display (mean number of different co-occurring pairs)
/ (mean frequency of those co-occurring pairs)
Freq. \ CD Low
High
3&6
3&9
3
4 / 1.5
5 / 1.2
5.5 / 1.1
4.5 / 1.4
6
4/3
8.5 / 1.4 7.5 / 1.7
4/3
9
4.7 / 3.9 9.8 / 1.8 4.7 / 3.9
7.5 / 2.4

Subjects
Participants were undergraduates at Indiana University who
received course credit for participating. Exp. 3-a had 36
participants, and Exp. 3-b had 31. None had previously
participated in cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli & Procedure
The 36 pseudowords and referents from Experiments 1 and
2 were used in Experiment 3, in addition to 36 additional
word-referent unique pairs that were constructed in a similar
fashion. Four conditions were constructed to vary contextual

Figure 6: Accuracy for subsets of pairs with different
frequency and contextual diversity. Error bars show +/-SE.
In the 3/9 mingled condition, 3-repetition pairs were learned
even better than in the 3/6 mingled condition (M = .63,
Welch t(61.7) = 3.7, p < .001). Finally, in the two mingled
conditions, learning of each 9-repetition subset remained at
the same level as in the low CD condition (3/6 mingled:
paired t(35) = 1.37, p > .05; 3/9 mingled: Welch t(63.2) =
.08, p > .05). Thus, increasing CD helped learning, on
average, by boosting acquisition of low frequency pairs.

2224

General Discussion
Three factors that significantly determine the success of
cross-situational statistical learning are word-referent
frequency, contextual diversity, and the degree of withintrial ambiguity. These three factors are related: picking
values for two of the factors somewhat constrains the value
of the third. For example, consider a pair that is to appear 6
times during a 3 pairs/trial training set. On each of the 6
trials it occurs on, 2 other pairs must also appear. These 12
pairs may each be distinct, or some particular pairs may
appear more often than once. If two pairs always co-occur,
the “correct” word-referent pairs cannot be disambiguated.
However, if one of the two pairs is learned prior to the
appearance of the other (as may be the case for a high
frequency pair), then the other may be learned more easily,
since the prior knowledge of the frequent pair reduces the
within-trial ambiguity.
Experiment 1 demonstrated that although varied
frequency can result in increased performance for more
frequent pairs, it is also possible for varied frequency to
perplexingly yield equal performance, perhaps as a result of
contextual diversity and effectively reduced within-trial
ambiguity. Experiment 2 showed that increased contextual
diversity improves learning for equal-frequency pairs.
Moreover, pairs with greater within-trial ambiguity were
learned less well – despite greater contextual diversity.
Experiment 3 confirmed that more frequent pairs are learned
more often, even when contextual diversity is controlled. In
addition, increasing the contextual diversity of two groups
of different frequency by allowing these groups to co-occur
augmented learning of the less frequent of these groups.
Indeed, the highest learning performance observed was in
conditions with varied frequency and high contextual
diversity. Intriguingly, these two characteristics that yield
high performance are also embedded in real-world learning
environments: words in any natural language have a skewed
frequency distribution (Zipf, 1949), and naturalistic learning
situations are highly complex, with many co-occurring
words, events and objects (Hart & Risley, 1995). Varied
frequency and contextual diversity seem to make situations
more complex, but our results suggest that they facilitate
statistical learning. Much structure is present in our world:
some words and objects occur more than others, some
appear in many situations and others in few, and situations
vary greatly in complexity. The above experiments
demonstrate that human learners are sensitive to these
different kinds of regularities.
Frequency may be the most important factor yet
investigated in cross-situational word learning: the more
times a word-referent pair appears, the more opportunities
there are to properly associate those stimuli. However, if
that pair always appears with only a few other pairs, or
simultaneously appears with many other pairs, each learning
opportunity is worth very little. Thus, given enough
contextual diversity to disambiguate proper pairings, and a
reasonably small degree of within-trial ambiguity, learning
can proceed with considerable ease. Because the presence of

known high frequency pairs reduces within-trial ambiguity,
highly ambiguous situations containing some familiar
referents become feasible learning opportunities. This
process of bootstrapping may account for the rapid
acquisition of vocabulary in infants, who are known to learn
frequent nouns earlier than less common nouns (Goodman,
et al., 2008). Once known, the ubiquitous nouns make
possible the rapid acquisition of infrequent nouns. Thus, the
results suggest a learning system that does not learn
independent associations between individual words and
referents, but one that rather learns a system of associations
(see Yu, 2008). In such a system, a single word-referent
pairing is correlated with all the other pairings that share the
same word and all the other pairings that share the same
referent, which are in turn correlated with more wordreferent pairs—the whole system of them. We contend that
the improvement in statistical word learning is in part due to
the recruitment of accumulated latent lexical knowledge,
used to learn subsequently appearing pairs. In future
empirical and modeling studies, we plan to further
investigate the mechanistic nature of statistical learning.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Institute of Health Grant
R01HD056029 and National Science Foundation Grant BCS
0544995. Special thanks to Tarun Gangwani for data collection.

References
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meaning of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). A
Bayesian framework for cross-situational word-learning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 20
(pp. 457-464). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goodman, J. C., Dale, P. S., Li, P. (2008). Does frequency
count? Parental input and the acquisition of vocabulary.
Journal of Child Language, 35(03), 515-531.
Hart, B. & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in
the everyday experience of young American children.
Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Klein, K. A., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2008). Prior
knowledge bootstraps cross-situational learning. Proceedings
of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1930-5). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Smith, L. & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Yu, C. (2008). A statistical associative account of
vocabulary growth in early word learning. Language
Learning and Acquisition, 4(1), 32-62.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.
Yurovsky, D. & Yu, C. (2008). Mutual exclusivity in crosssituational statistical learning. Proceedings of the 30th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
715-720). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Zipf, G. K. (1949). Human behavior and the principle of
least effort. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.

2225

