UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Good Enough Language Processing: A Satisficing Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5vr5976s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Engelhardt, Paul E.
Ferreira, Fernanda
Jones, Manon W.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Good Enough Language Processing: A Satisficing Approach
Fernanda Ferreira (fernanda.ferreira@ed.ac.uk)
Paul E. Engelhardt (Paul.Engelhardt@ed.ac.uk)
Manon W. Jones (manon.wyn.jones@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK EH8 9JZ

Abstract
The “Good Enough” approach to language comprehension
assumes that listeners do not always engage in full detailed
processing of linguistic input. Rather, the system has a
tendency to develop shallow and superficial representations
when confronted with some difficulty. In this study, we
investigated Good Enough processing using a challenging
version of the Visual World Paradigm, in which participants
had to process a garden-path sentence, and then complete a
second instruction. The main hypothesis was that if there is a
tradeoff between dealing with current difficulty and keeping up
with the incoming material, then we might expect superficial
processing of the garden path, which would be observed in
more errors. The results showed more errors in completing the
garden path instruction compared to the immediately following
second instruction. In this version of the task, participants did
not show evidence of using the visual context to constrain the
interpretation of a temporary ambiguity.
Keywords: Visual World Paradigm, Good Enough processing,
syntactic ambiguity resolution, satisficing, eye movements.

Introduction
One prominent theory that has been offered to account for
the fact that listeners will often develop inaccurate
representations is called “Good Enough” processing
(Ferreira, Ferraro, & Bailey, 2002; Ferreira, & Patson, 2007;
Sanford & Sturt, 2002). Under this explanation, listeners
may generate an interpretation of an ambiguous or a
temporarily ambiguous utterance that is not consistent with
the actual input. Instead the system has a tendency to
generate shallow or superficial representations, and much of
the time the inaccuracies are consistent with the plausibility
of events in the real world (Christianson, Hollingworth,
Halliwell, & Ferreira, 2003; Ferreira, Christianson, &
Hollingworth, 2001). For example, Christianson et al. found
that subjects would often misinterpret sentences like
examples (1) and (2) below, in which they believed that the
italicized noun phrase was simultaneously the object of the
first verb and the subject of the second verb. This
interpretation is not consistent with a grammatical syntactic
structure (see also Engelhardt, Patsenko, & Ferreira, 2007,
for similar results with spoken versions).
(1) While Anna bathed the baby played in the crib.

(2) While the man hunted the deer ran through the woods.
The theory of Good Enough processing focuses on two
main issues. The first is that representations formed from
complex or difficult material are often shallow and
incomplete. The second is that limited information sources
are often consulted in cases where the comprehension
system encounters difficulty. It is important to note that the
comprehension errors that have been observed in previous
studies are not completely wrong. Rather the system seems
to make systematic errors. In the subject-object ambiguity in
example (2), it is possible that the man was hunting deer,
but crucially this inference is not specified in the sentence.
In previous work, we have argued that this result is
evidence that language comprehension is a matter of
satisficing. Satisficing is a term originally used by Herbert
Simon to describe the search for information in order to
make a decision (Simon, 1956). He assumed that decision
makers would search for information until a solution was
found that achieved or surpassed aspiration levels. A great
deal of work in the field of decision making has focused on
the use of heuristics in a wide variety of tasks (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974). One of the overarching ideas from that
literature is that humans in many instances do not consider
all available information when making a decision. This is
especially true in situations when time and cognitive
resources are limited. What is surprising about the results
from many studies is that people can perform quite
accurately, though not perfectly, by applying a small set of
simple heuristics (Gigerenzer, 2008; Gigerenzer & Selten,
2001). The main characteristic of these heuristics is that
they operate quickly, using minimum processing resources.
Taking this perspective as background, some interesting
similarities emerge with models of sentence comprehension.
For example, the Garden Path model of sentence processing
assumes that the comprehension system uses simple
heuristics for building initial interpretations (Frazier, 1987).
The most important of these is Minimal Attachment, which
assumes that the parser will always build the simplest
syntactic structure first. The competing approach in
sentence processing, and one that has had a great deal of
support over the past twenty years involves an interactive
processing architecture (MacDonald, Pearlmutter, &
Seidenberg, 1994). The key aspect of this type of model is
that the parser can immediately draw on any relevant

413

information source. Some models even assume that all
possible interpretations of an ambiguity will be maintained
in parallel until one is selected (Tanenhaus, & Trueswell,
1995). This type of processing is akin to what researchers in
decision making refer to as “unbounded rationality”.
If language comprehension did not depend on processing
resources, then it is hard to imagine why people would ever
make mistakes at all, let alone the seemingly systematic
misinterpretations that have been observed with both garden
path sentences and passives (Ferreira, 2003). We
hypothesize that the good-enough representations that have
been observed in previous work arise by the application of
heuristics, which allow the processor to operate quickly
while minimizing the demand on cognitive resources.
Indeed, much of the evidence for Good Enough processing
can be explained by a semantic plausibility heuristic. If the
syntactic parse breaks down, then the system will derive an
interpretation most consistent with what is likely to have
occurred given the normal state of affairs in the real world.
In the current work, however, we were interested in
exploring the situations under which people will abandon
the revision of a garden path sentence. In spoken language,
listeners do not control the rate at which they receive input.
Therefore, if listeners encounter difficulty, they do not have
the luxury of taking unlimited processing time because new
material is likely to be arriving. In these cases, the
processing system may have a tendency to generate a goodenough interpretation of the difficult part in order to keep up
with the new material. Alternatively, the system might
continue to work on the difficulty and sacrifice processing
of the new input. Examining these sorts of tradeoffs and the
conditions under which people engage in Good Enough
processing were the goals of the current study. An
additional goal was to investigate whether the processing
system, under challenging conditions, will draw on the types
of information sources that have been argued to support
interactive processing architectures.

entertained the goal analysis of on the towel. When the
display contains two apples, a different fixation pattern is
reported. With two-referent displays, subjects almost never
look to the empty towel, but instead show competition
between the two apples after which they look to the correct
goal (i.e. the box). This fixation pattern is taken as evidence
that the visual context (i.e., the presence of two apples) can
immediately resolve the temporary ambiguity, and is
evidence for an interactive processing architecture.
In the current studies, we addressed two main questions.
The first was to examine Good Enough processing. To do
this, we created a situation to specifically examine the
tradeoffs between local difficulty and later processing. The
second question we asked was whether subjects show
evidence of using visual context to resolve a temporary
ambiguity when visual displays are more demanding than in
previous visual world studies.
To increase the processing demands we made three
modifications. The first was that we used arrays of twelve
objects instead of four. Second, we eliminated the preview.
In this study, the objects appeared at the same time as the
spoken instruction began. These two manipulations affected
visual demand. In addition, we added a second instruction,
so that subjects could not linger on the garden path sentence,
without sacrificing processing of the subsequent words. A
two-referent example display is shown in Figure 1, and the
corresponding instructions are given in (3) and (4). A onereferent display was similar, but the lone book was replaced
with, for example, a football. The tradeoffs that we
predicted could be observed in several measures. Do
subjects put the correct book on the chair or in the bucket?
Do subjects show evidence of considering the empty chair
as a goal location? How quickly do subjects execute the
instructions?

D

Experiment
In the active version of the Visual World Paradigm,
participants are presented with a 2 x 2 grid of objects, and
they are given spoken instructions to move objects in a
workspace (Ferreira & Tanenhaus, 2007). Two quadrants,
typically on the left side of the display, contain the target
and the distractor object, and are usually the objects that are
moved first. The right side of the display contains two goal
locations. Participants hear either ambiguous or
unambiguous instructions featuring a prepositional phrase
modifier. The commonly reported result is that when
subjects hear an instruction such as put the apple on the
towel in the box, and the display contains a single apple,
participants will often fixate the empty towel shortly after
hearing the ambiguous prepositional phrase (Spivey,
Tanenhaus, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 2002). These fixations are
interpreted as showing that subjects momentarily

Figure 1: Example display for the two-referent condition.
(3) Put the book on the chair in the bucket. Then click on
the balloon.
(4) Put the book that’s on the chair in the bucket. Then click
on the balloon.

414

Methods
Participants
Twenty-eight students from the University of Edinburgh
participated. Participants were native speakers of British
English, and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

Materials
Each visual display consisted of a 4 x 3 array of common
objects taken from the Hemera Photo Objects database
(Figure 1 is reduced color & quality). Each display was
accompanied by a pair of auditory instructions. These
utterances were recorded by a female native speaker of
British English. The first instruction required the participant
to move one object in the array to a specific location, and
this instruction was either ambiguous or unambiguous. The
ambiguous utterance was created by digitally excising the
complementizer that’s from the unambiguous instruction.
The second instruction occurred immediately after the first
and required the participant to click on a different object in
the display. The visual array of objects on average
subtended 22° degrees of visual angle horizontally and 17°
vertically, for a viewing distance of 60 cm. For each of the
24 critical displays, both one-referent and two-referent
versions were created. These were placed into four lists that
were counterbalanced with instruction type. Lists were
rotated in a Latin Square design, so that each subject saw
each display only once.

Design and Procedure
We used a 2 x 2 mixed design. Display type contained either
one or two referents and was manipulated between subjects.
Instruction type was either ambiguous or unambiguous, and
was manipulated within subjects. Participants completed six
practice trials, 24 experimental trials, and 96 fillers.
Participants were told that they would see an array of
pictures, which would be accompanied by instructions to
perform certain actions on the objects depicted. They were
asked to execute the instructions as quickly and accurately
as possible. The session lasted approximately 35 minutes.

Results
Results were analyzed using a logit mixed effects model
because our dependent variables were binomial (Baayen,
Davidson, & Bates, 2008). The first dependent variable was
whether participants made a movement or click error (see
“total correct” in Table 1). The second dependent variable
was whether a fixation was made to a particular object
during a specific time window. We analyzed four 1.5 sec
time windows, which were time locked to the onset of each
of the nouns in the instructions. Each time window was
shifted forward by 200 ms to account for saccade planning
time (there was almost no overlap between any of the four
windows). Logit mixed models have been advocated as
more appropriate for binomial data than are ANOVAs

(Jaeger, 2008). These models allow multiple random
factors, so we included both subjects and items.
For each analysis, we first created a baseline model,
which included an intercept and the two random factors.
This model was then compared to successive models that
included an additional predictor. If the inclusion of an
additional factor significantly improves fit over the baseline,
then we can conclude that it accounts for a significant
amount of variation in the data. Factors were entered one
after the other, and a third model tested the interaction. We
assessed model improvement via log-likelihood ratio tests
using the R statistical package (Bates, Maechler, & Dai,
2008). This test compares models using a 2 test which
determines whether an additional predictor significantly
improves model fit. Each model includes an intercept and
slopes representing the effects of each of the factors in the
model. In cases where a predictor significantly improved fit,
the Wald statistic was used to show that coefficients differed
significantly from zero (Agresti, 2002).

Errors
We began the analysis by examining the number and types
of errors participants made (see Table 1). As can be see
from the table, there are substantially more errors with the
two-referent display than with the one-referent display.
Trueswell et al. (1999), and Farmer, et al. (2007) both
reported a main effect of instruction type, in which there
were more errors with the ambiguous instructions. However,
in both studies there were more errors in the one-referent
compared to the two-referent condition. Our results showed
the opposite effect of number of referents. The analysis
showed that model fit was significantly improved with the
inclusion of both instruction type and display type as factors
[ 2(1) = 17.46, p < .001]. However, fit did not improve
when the interaction was included [ 2(1) = 2.04, p = .15].
Table 1: Summary of mouse movements for each condition

Total correct
Distractor pickup
Distractor drop
Click error

Ambiguous
1-ref
2-ref
95%
69%
2
42
1
23
2
9

Unambiguous
1-ref
2-ref
97%
89%
0
9
0
3
2
5

To evaluate tradeoffs between the garden path and the
second instruction, we examined three types of errors.
“Distractor pickups” were errors in which the subject picked
up the single book. “Distractor drops” were when a subject
placed a book on the incorrect goal (i.e. the chair). Lastly,
“click errors” were when the subject clicked on the wrong
object. The majority of errors were when the participant
picked up the distractor, and on about half of those trials the
participant dropped it on the incorrect goal. In contrast,
there were relatively few click errors.

415

Eye Movements
For the eye movement analysis, we began by examining the
time window beginning with the onset of the first noun (e.g.
book). Here we were particularly interested in examining
both looks to the target object (e.g. the book on the chair)
and to the distractor (e.g. the single book or the football).
Figure 2 shows the proportion of trials with a fixation to the
target. Error bars show the standard error of the mean.
Looks to target object

Looks to incorrect goal

Unambiguous

Unambiguous

0.9

Proportion of trials with fixation

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

Ambiguous

1

Ambiguous

1

Proportion of trials with fixation

interaction. The interesting result from this analysis is that it
is opposite of previous studies. The “typical” pattern is for
there to be more looks to the incorrect goal in the onereferent ambiguous condition, but here we see significantly
more looks with two-referent display. We will discuss
possible reasons for the conflicting data in the Discussion.

0.3

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.2

0
1 Referent

0.1

2 Referent

Display type
0
1 Referent

2 Referent

Display type

Figure 2: Proportion of trials with fixation to target object.
The mixed model analysis showed that model fit was
significantly improved with the inclusion of the interaction
[ 2(1) = 2.68, p < .01]. The interaction is primarily driven by
the decreased likelihood of fixating the target object in the
two-referent ambiguous condition. The analysis of looks to
the distractor object showed the expected effect of display
type, with the one-referent display showing ~30% of trials
with a fixation, and the two-referent display showing ~70%.
There were no differences based on instruction type and no
interaction. The model containing only display type was a
significantly better fit over the baseline model [ 2(1) = 43.2,
p < .0001]. This analysis shows the expected pattern. In the
two-referent condition there should be competition between
the two potential referents (e.g. book’s), and in the onereferent condition the distractor object is an irrelevant item,
and so looks to this object should be low.
The second time window was time locked to the onset of
the second noun in the instruction (e.g. chair). Again, we
analyzed a 1.5 sec window, but this time we were interested
in examining the looks to the incorrect goal, which in the
example display is the empty chair. The results from this
analysis showed that model fit was only improved with the
inclusion of display type [ 2(1) = 3.81, p = .05]. The
proportion of trials with a fixation to the incorrect goal are
shown in Figure 3, and there is a trend towards an

Figure 3: Proportion of trials with fixation to incorrect goal.
The analysis of the third and fourth time windows
showed very similar results (see Figure 4). The third
window was time locked to the onset of third noun (e.g.
bucket). The results showed that model fit was improved
only with the inclusion of instruction type [ 2(1) = 9.63, p <
.01]. The fourth time window was time locked to the onset
of the click object (e.g. balloon), and it showed virtually the
same result. Model fit was improved with the inclusion of
instruction type [ 2(1) = 10.1, p < .01]. In these two
windows, we see a large effect of instruction type in which
the ambiguous instructions showed fewer looks than did the
unambiguous instructions. However, in all conditions the
majority of trials contained a fixation to the relevant object.

Discussion
This study had two goals. The first was to examine whether
there is a tradeoff between current processing difficulty and
the comprehension of subsequent material. The results
showed substantially more errors on the garden path
sentence than on the second instruction. This suggests that
subjects have a tendency to sacrifice reanalysis of the
garden path in order to keep up with the later material. This
pattern of results is consistent with the assumptions of the
Good Enough theory of language processing, which
assumes that processing resources are limited, and therefore
predicts that garden-path reanalysis processes will be
curtailed if upcoming material must also be processed.

416

A.

Looks to correct goal

Ambiguous
Unambiguous

1

Proportion of trials with fixation

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1 Referent

2 Referent

Display type

B.

Looks to click object

Ambiguous
Unambiguous

1

Proportion of trials with fixation

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1 Referent

2 Referent

Display type

Figure 4: Panel (A) show proportion of trials with fixation
to correct goal. Panel (B) shows proportion to click object.
The second goal of the study was to examine the use of
visual information on the resolution of temporary syntactic
ambiguity. Here the results showed a different pattern from
that reported in previous visual world studies. The first
unique finding was that there were few looks, essentially at
chance, to the incorrect goal with the one-referent display.
Recall that looks to the incorrect goal in response to hearing
the ambiguous prepositional phrase with the one-referent
display were previously interpreted as evidence that subjects
initially adopted the goal analysis of the ambiguous phrase.
We believe that the absence of looks to the incorrect goal
in this condition can be explained by our previous work in

which we examined the types of utterances that people
produced with a one-referent display using the standard four
object visual arrays (Engelhardt, Bailey, & Ferreira, 2006).
Those results showed that on one-third of trials, naïve
subjects produced an unnecessary modifier when instructing
another person to move the target object to the correct goal.
For example, one third of trials were Put the book on the
chair in the bucket, even though Put the book in the bucket
would have been communicatively sufficient. We also
showed that when subjects had to produce an instruction to
move, for example, a book on a chair to an empty chair,
almost all of the instructions contained a pre-nominal
modifier to distinguish the two chairs (e.g. Put the book on
the other chair.). Therefore, “unnecessary” modifiers are
relatively common, and because the noun chair isn’t
modified with a word such as other, subjects should
interpret the prepositional phrase as a modifier rather than a
goal even in one-referent displays.
The second novel finding in this study was that we found
looks to the incorrect goal in two-referent contexts. Recall
that Tanenhaus et al. (1995) showed few looks to the
incorrect goal, and they interpreted this result as evidence
that visual context can immediately influence the resolution
of the temporary ambiguity. In contrast, we did get
significantly more fixations to the incorrect goal with the
two-referent display. The interaction for this particular
analysis did not quite reach significance (it is possible the
study is underpowered with only 14 subjects in each group),
but there are clearly more looks with the ambiguous
instruction. Setting the significance issue aside for the
moment, it is still surprising that we observed such a high
number of trials with a fixation to the incorrect goal with the
two-referent display, because this is exactly the opposite of
what has been found in previous studies. What these results
show is that with this version of the task, subjects do not
seem to immediately adopt the modifier interpretation.
Therefore, it does not seem that the subjects use visual
context to help interpret the ambiguous linguistic input
when task demands are high.
One issue that was brought up in the review process was
that since we eliminated the preview phase and increased
the number of distractors, subjects perhaps did not have
enough time to process the display, thus making the tworeferent display a one-referent display. We believe that this
explanation can be ruled out because looks to the target
object in the two-referent ambiguous condition are well over
chance, and looks to the distractor object were only slightly
greater (.68 vs. .56). This suggests that on the majority of
trials participants did fixate the target object during the first
time window. Moreover, the error movement analysis
showed that on 25% of trials participants began moving the
distractor object, and on over half of those trials they
actually made the garden path error. What is clear from
these results is that subjects have tendency to get the goal
interpretation despite the fact that the majority of trials
contained a fixation to both the target and the distractor. We

417

are currently running follow up experiments to isolate which
of the unique features of our experimental set-up might have
caused the distinct pattern of results.
In conclusion, we have shown that task demands affect
processing of temporarily ambiguous sentences in complex
visual contexts. We believe that the differences are likely
due to the fact that previous paradigms were atypically easy,
which perhaps allowed subjects to anticipate (or predict) the
type of structure they might receive. The results also
indicate that when the task is made more difficult, the tworeferent condition becomes more difficult than the onereferent condition. We also showed that participants did not
use the visual context to resolve the ambiguity in this
particular situation. These results are broadly consistent
with many results that have been obtained in the decision
making literature (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1996), and
further evidence that humans have a tendency to engage in
good-enough processing.

Author Note
The authors would like to thank Fiona Allen, Oliver
Stewart, and Laura Speed for the running experiment and
the preparing stimuli. We would also like to thank Jens Apel
and Martin Corley for help with the statistical analysis.

References
Agresti, A. (2002). Categorical data analysis. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language,
59, 413-425.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Dai, B. (2008). Lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes [Computer
software manual]. Available from http://lme4.r-forge.rproject.org/.
Christianson, K., Hollingworth, A., Halliwell, J., & Ferreira,
F. (2001) Thematic roles assigned along the garden path
linger. Cognitive Psychology, 42, 368-407.
Engelhardt, P. E., Bailey, K. G. D., & Ferreira, F. (2006).
Do speakers and listeners observe the Gricean maxim of
quantity. Journal of Memory and Language, 54, 554-573.
Engelhardt, P. E., Patsenko, E., G, & Ferreira, F. (2007).
Pupillometric indices of visual and prosodic information
on spoken language comprehension. In D.S McNamara
& J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 971–
976). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ferreira, F. (2003). The misinterpretation of noncanonical
sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 164-203.
Ferreira, F., Christianson, K., & Hollingworth, A. (2001).
Misinterpretations of garden-path sentences: implications
for models of reanalysis. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 30, 3-20.
Ferreira, F., Ferraro, V., & Bailey, K. G. D. (2002). Good

enough representations in language comprehension.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 11-15.
Ferreira, F., & Patson, N. (2007). The good enough
approach to language comprehension. Language and
Linguistics Compass, 1, 71-83.
Ferreira, F. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2007). Introduction to the
special issue on language-vision interactions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 57, 455-459.
Farmer, T. A., Cargill, S. A., Hindy, N.C., Dale, R., &
Spivey, M. J. (2007). Tracking the continuity of language
comprehension: Computer mouse trajectories suggest
parallel syntactic processing, Cognitive Science, 31, 889909.
Frazier, L. (1987). Sentence processing: A tutorial review.
In M. Coltheart (Ed.), Attention and performance XII:
The psychology of reading (pp. 601-681). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gigerenzer, G. (2008). Why heuristics work. Perspectives
on Psychological Science,3, 20-29.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G., & Selten, R. (2001). Bounded rationality:
The adaptive toolbox. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit
mixed models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
434-446.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S.
(1994). Lexical Nature of Syntactic Ambiguity
Resolution. Psychological Review, 101, 676-703.
Sanford, A. J., & Sturt, P. (2002). Depth of processing in
language comprehension: not noticing the evidence.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 6, 382-386.
Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of
environments. Psychological Review, 63, 129-138.
Spivey, M. J., Tanenhaus, M. K., Eberhard, K. M., &
Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Eye movements and spoken
language comprehension: Effects of visual context on
syntactic ambiguity resolution. Cognitive Psychology,
45, 447-481.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632-1634.
Tanenhaus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. C. (1995). Sentence
comprehension. In J. L. Miller & P. D. Eimas (Eds.),
Speech, language, and communication (pp. 217-262).
San Diego: Academic Press.
Trueswell, J. C., Sekerina, I., Hill, N., & Logrip, M. (1999).
The kindergarten-path effect: Studying on-line sentence
comprehension in young children. Cognition, 73, 89-134.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.

418

