UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grammaticized concepts and event conceptualization in language production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/95w6v758

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Carroll, Mary
Flecken, Monique
Von Stutterheim, Christiane

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grammaticized Concepts and Event Conceptualization in Language Production
Mary Carroll (carroll@idf.uni-heidelberg.de)
Department for general and applied linguistics, Plöck 55, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany

Monique Flecken (flecken@idf.uni-heidelberg.de)
Department for general and applied linguistics, Plöck 55, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany

Christiane von Stutterheim (stutterheim@idf.uni-heidelberg.de)
Department for general and applied linguistics, Plöck 55, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany

Keywords: Event conceptualization; eye tracking; crosslinguistic analyses; grammatical aspect
The area under focus in the present study relates to the
concept of temporal aspect, i.e. the perspective under which
temporal properties of an event are presented in language.
The study investigates language-specific differences in
patterns of attention in language production when temporal
concepts are expressed by grammatical means, in contrast to
languages that express similar concepts by lexical means.
Focus is placed on the phase of conceptualization (Levelt,
1989) in language production, i.e., the phase in which
speakers prepare information for expression. The findings
show that message preparation is language-specific and
linked to concepts that are grammaticized (v. Stutterheim &
Nüse, 2003; Carroll, v. Stutterheim & Nüse, 2004).
Language-specific patterns in event conceptualization are in
evidence not only in information intake and direction of
attention (eye tracking) but in memory performance as well
(v. Stutterheim & Carroll, 2006; v. Stutterheim et al, in
prep.).
The approach taken in the current framework uses
dynamic live-action stimuli (video clips) showing everyday
events. The role of grammaticized linguistic means in
directing attention in language production was explored in
this framework in an eye tracking study on motion events.
The comparison covers speakers of typologically different
languages (Arabic, Czech, Dutch, English, German,
Spanish, Russian) and looks at differences in processing the
relevant visual input when asked to view the clips and tell
what is happening (v. Stutterheim et al., in prep.): The
extent to which endpoints of motion events are attended to,
verbalized, and remembered correlates with the extent to
which aspectual concepts (progressive, imperfective) are
used to describe the events. Speakers of languages that have
grammaticized means to express the concept of ongoingness
(e.g. be +ing, in English) scan the scenes differently and
fixate the endpoint of the motion event less often than
speakers of languages that do not encode this aspectual
concept in grammatical terms.
The current study is carried out in the same
framework and looks at how speakers of English, German,
Dutch and Italian proceed when talking about causative
events (e.g. knitting a scarf). Eye tracking data indicate that
direction of attention to particular elements of the events

(agent of the action; the affected/effected object) varies
depending on the linguistic system and the means available
to express the temporal perspective of progressive aspect.
The languages selected differ with respect to the degree of
grammaticization for this domain. English provides a highly
grammaticized marker for progressive aspect (-ing) which is
used by all speakers when referring to the events. Although
German provides lexical options to express ongoingness,
this perspective is not used by native speakers when
describing the same events. Italian and Dutch are interesting
in this context: Both languages have grammatical forms that
express progressive aspect (stare + gerund; aan het X zijn),
however, Italian and Dutch speakers need not necessarily
adopt this concept when verbalizing the event (see also
Flecken, to appear). This contrast with English can be
attributed to the stage of grammaticization of the means
available. Our study investigates the use of eye tracking as a
tool in exploring subtle differences in patterns of visual
attention and cognitive processing in languages in which use
of a given concept is subject to differing constraints.

References
Carroll, M., Stutterheim, C. v. & Nüse, R. (2004). The
language and thought debate: a psycholinguistic
approach. In C. Habel & T. Pechmann (eds.), Approaches
to language production, pp. 183–218. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Flecken, M. (to appear). Event conceptualization by early
Dutch-German bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition (special issue ed. by S. Jarvis).
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stutterheim, C. v. & Nüse, R. (2003). Processes of
conceptualisation in language production: Languagespecific perspectives and event construal. Linguistics, 41,
851– 881.
Stutterheim, C. v. & Carroll, M. (2006). The impact of
grammatical temporal categories on ultimate attainment in
L2 learning. In H. Byrnes, H. Weger-Guntharp & K.
Sprang (eds.), Educating for Advanced Foreign Language
Capacities, pp.40–53. Georgetown: GUP.
Stutterheim, C. v., Bastin, D., Carroll, M., Flecken, M.,
Schmiedtová, B. (in preparation). How grammaticized
concepts shape event conceptualization in language
production.

74

