UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Granularity and the acquisition of grammatical gender: How order-of-acquisition affects
what gets learned

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/86t911bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Arnon, Inbal
Ramscar, Michael

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Granularity and the acquisition of grammatical gender:
How order-of-acquisition affects what gets learned
Inbal Arnon & Michael Ramscar
Stanford University,
CA 94305.
Abstract
Why do adult language learners typically never achieve
the same level of language mastery as native speakers?
We examine how prior knowledge and experience might
influence the size of the linguistic units employed in
learning, and as a consequence, what gets learned. We
hypothesize that adult learners tend to learn from more
segmented representations, and that these can hinder
learning about the relations between segments (e.g.
between articles and nouns). In particular, we focus on
the acquisition of grammatical gender, an aspect of
language later learners show difficulty with compared to
native speakers. In a study of adults, we show that
participants are better at learning grammatical gender in
an artificial language when they are exposed first to
article-noun sequences and then to noun-labels as
compared to learners that start out with noun-labels and
then hear article-noun sequences. This striking finding
can be explained by a simple blocking effect. We discuss
how the units children and adults learn from impact
language learning.

Introduction
Why is acquiring a language to native proficiency in
adulthood so difficult? Numerous studies have revealed
that the expertise levels of native and non-native
speakers diverge across many aspects of language,
including pronunciation (Moyer, 1999), morphological
processing (Johnson & Newport, 1989), and the use of
formulaic speech and idioms (Vanlancker–Sidits,
2003). Given the many differences between children
and adults, both in terms of cognitive and neural
development and in terms of the social contexts in
which they learn languages, it is perhaps not surprising
that children and adults differ in their ability to learn.
What is surprising, given adults’ proficiency when it
comes to learning in other domains, is that children
appear to learn languages far more successfully than
adults.
Various approaches have been taken in seeking to
understand this pattern: Lennenberg (1967) argues that
adults no longer have access to a biological window of
opportunity for learning language. Newport (1990) and
Elman (1993) emphasize differences in cognitive
capacity, suggesting that adult’s increased memory
hinders correct generalization by preventing them from
ignoring some of the variability and complexity in their
input. Other researchers (Kuhl, 2000; Neville &
Bavelier, 2001) highlight the changes in neural

plasticity and the way early neural commitment shapes
consequent learning (e.g. learning the phonetic
distinctions that are relevant to your language changes
the sensitivity to non-phonemic distinctions, Werker &
Tees, 1984).
Here, we propose another difference: the linguistic
units that adults learn from often differ from the ones
children use. We suggest that the different background
knowledge that children and adults bring to language
learning shapes the linguistic units they employ in early
language learning, and this in turn shapes subsequent
learning. Adults come to the task of language learning
with a great deal of prior knowledge about language;
they know about words and grammar, and know the
words and grammatical elements of their first language.
Children, on the other hand, have none of this
knowledge, and as a result are far more likely to be
learning segmentation, meaning, and structure,
interdependently, at the same time.
We explore the hypothesis that these differences in
background knowledge influence the linguistic units
learners employ: adults learn from more segmented
representations – with word boundaries more clearly
marked – while children begin with larger, less
segmented representations (that cross word boundaries).
We suggest that the more segmented representations
adults’ employ actually make it harder for them to learn
about the relations between units.
To examine this idea, we focus on the task of learning
the agreement patterns between articles and nouns in
languages with grammatical gender, an aspect of
language that non-native speakers have considerable
difficulty with (see e.g., Harley, 1979; Scherag,
Demuch, Roesler, Neville & Roeder, 2004). If some of
this difficulty is indeed related to the units that adult
learners employ, manipulating these units should result
in changes in learning. Having adults learn from larger
units of language should enhance learning.
Specifically, starting with sequences of language in
which the article and the noun are less differentiated
should facilitate learning of the relation between them.

Learning grammatical gender: A case study
Grammatical gender is a system found in many
languages. It assigns all nouns (including inanimate
ones) to noun classes, and marks neighbouring words
for agreement (Corbett, 1991). In Hebrew, for example,

2112

verbs and adjectives are marked for gender. In Spanish
and French, articles have to agree in gender with the
nouns they precede. Knowing a nouns’ gender in
gender-marking languages is essential for correct
sentence construction.
Grammatical gender provides a good test case for
studying differences between L1 and L2 learning.
Native and non-native speakers show different patterns
of learning grammatical gender. Children master
grammatical gender relatively early (see Slobin, 1985
for cross-linguistic reports), and make few mistakes in
spontaneous speech. In contrast, L2 learners have
persistent difficulty with grammatical gender even after
extensive exposure (Scherag et al., 2004). Native and
non-native speakers also differ in their ability to use the
gender information conveyed by the article in real time
processing. Native speakers (adults and children) can
use this information to guide lexical access; they
anticipate a feminine noun following a feminine article
(Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007) and slow down if
there is a gender mismatch between the article and the
noun (Grosjean et al., 1994; Dahan et al., 2000).
Non-native speakers do not show these effects
(Guillelemon & Grosjean, 2001; Scherag et al., 2004).
These findings suggest that native speakers treat the
article and the noun as a more cohesive unit than do
non-native speakers; this allows them to select the
correct article in production, and use it to facilitate
recognition in comprehension.
Several suggestions have been advanced to explain
these different patterns of grammatical gender learning,
including: that grammar cannot be fully mastered in
adulthood (Clahsen & Muyksen, 1986), or at least not
aspects of it that are not found in the learner’s native
tongue (Hawkins & Chan, 1997); and that L2 learners
form more shallow grammatical representations that are
hard to access in real time (Clahsen & Felser, 2006).
These accounts describe the difficulty L2 learners have
with grammatical gender, but they do not fully explain
why this difficulty arises.
Could the units that learners start out with play a role
in creating these different learning patterns?
Researchers from various theoretical backgrounds have
suggested that children initially treat the article and the
noun as a single unit, rather than two separable ones, as
an adult might (J. Carroll, 1939; S. Carroll, 1989;
Chevrot et al., 2008; MacWhinney, 1978). This would
be a natural consequence of the way children encounter
nouns, which most often is in the company of articles
(especially in gender-marking languages, Mariscal,
2008).
Numerous findings support this observation:
Children’s early knowledge of articles appears to be
lexically-specific. Instead of productively using articles
with many nouns, children often initially only use a
given article with a given noun. (e.g., produce only the

definite article with one noun and only the indefinite
with another, Mariscal, 2008; Pine & Lieven 1997).
Patterns of liaison acquisition in French (variation in
pronunciation of the final consonant of certain articles
depending on the beginning of the following word) also
support the idea that articles and nouns are initially
stored as a single unit; children make mis-segmentation
errors where the liaison consonant is incorrectly treated
as part of the noun (Chevrot et al., 2008).
Adults, on the other hand, may be less likely to treat
the article and the noun as a single unit. Adult L2
learners may know that nouns and articles are separate
entities from their experience with their first language,
and the way they encounter nouns and articles,
especially in a classroom setting, may emphasize their
independence (Doughty & Williams, 1998). While none
of children’s early language input is written, adults are
likely to learn from written input in which the
distinction between the article and the noun is explicit
and visually salient. Finally, there is evidence that while
adults can use cognitive control to selectively attend to
particular aspects of the input, children may largely lack
this facility (Ramscar & Gitcho, 2007). In other words,
adults not only know that articles and nouns are
separate, but they can also ‘choose’ to focus their
attention on one or the other.

Training experiment
Does adults' difficulty with grammatical gender stem
from the fact that they begin with more segmented
linguistic units, in which the article and noun are not
initially treated as a single unit? If so, adult learning
should improve if the linguistic environment
emphasizes larger linguistic units. To examine this, we
created an auditorily presented novel language and
contrasted the effect on learning of initially exposing
adult learners to article-noun sequences—in which the
boundaries between articles and nouns were less
prominent—with that of initially presenting them with
the noun-labels as identifiable units (we use the term
noun-label to refer to a noun appearing without an
article).
Learners were divided into two groups. In the
sequence-first group, learners were first exposed to
article + noun sequences in whole sentences and then to
noun-labels. In the noun-label-first group, learners were
first exposed to noun-labels and then to full sentences.
By the end of the experiment, both groups had received
exactly the same input, but in different orders. By
manipulating the initial units that learners were exposed
to while keeping the frequency of exposure constant,
we could examine the way that initial learning with
different sized units affected subsequent learning. We
then assessed how well participants learned the
article-noun pairings. We predicted that participants in
the sequence-first group would be more likely to

2113

produce the correct article for a given noun, and more
able to detect a mismatch between the article and the
noun.

Participants
Thirty-two native English-speaking undergraduate
students at Stanford University participated.

Materials
The artificial language had 14 novel labels for familiar
concrete objects (e.g., piano-‘slindot’), two articles
(‘sem’ and ‘bol’) and a carrier phrase (‘os ferpal en’).
The nouns were divided into two “noun classes”; each
noun could only appear with one article. There were no
semantic or phonological cues to class membership.
Articles always followed the carrier phrase and
preceded nouns. An example of a full sentence in the
language is given in (1).
(1) Os-ferpal-en
Carrier phrase

bol
article 1

slindot
“piano”

All noun labels were two syllables long. The objects
were matched for familiarity, and for frequency and
Age-of-Acquisition of the English word. Participants
were exposed to auditory stimuli of two kinds:
noun-labels, and full sentences consisting of the
carrier-phrase and an article + noun sequence. A male
speaker recorded the carrier phrase, the articles, and the
nouns separately. These were concatenated using Praat
to create the full sentences. One recorded token of each
noun, each article and the carrier phrase was used
throughout the experiment to ensure that the nouns had
the same prosody in full sentences and in isolation and
that the articles had the same acoustic features with all
nouns. The duration of the two articles was kept
identical ensuring that neither had any acoustic
prominence.
Another block of phrases in the artificial language
was constructed in addition to the experimental items.
This “distracter block” comprised the same carrier
phrase, seven different nouns and two additional
articles (‘tid’ and ‘gob). In contrast to the experimental
items, the mapping between the articles and the nouns
was not consistent (nouns could appear with either
article).

Procedure
The experiment was divided into two phases: learning
trials, and test trials. Participants were told that they
would be tested on the novel language and were asked
to repeat the sounds they heard to enhance learning.
The experiment lasted 25 minutes (20 minutes of
training and around 5 minutes of testing). Training and
testing sessions took place in a quiet room. All sessions

were video-taped. Forced-choice responses and reaction
times were collected using a response box.
Learning Trials. Pictures of objects were presented
on screen with an accompanying “description” in the
artificial language. Participants were exposed to two
kinds of stimuli: noun-labels and full sentences
(carrier-phrase + article + noun) that were presented in
separate blocks of trials. In noun-label trials, a picture
of the named object was presented on screen alone; in
full-sentence trials a picture of the named object was
presented on screen along with a picture of a male
gesturing to the object. Stimuli presentation was timed;
objects appearing with full-sentences stayed on the
screen for 3500 ms and objects appearing with noun
labels stayed on the screen for 2000 ms. Participants in
both learning conditions were exposed to the same
number of noun-labels (each noun-label was repeated
five times, with a total of 70 labels) and full sentences
(each noun in a sentence five times, with a total of 70
sentences).
Participants in the sequence-first condition heard a
block of full sentences followed by a block of
noun-labels while participants in the label-first
condition heard a block of noun-labels followed by a
block of sentences. The only difference between the
two conditions was the order of the blocks. Following
the two learning blocks, participants in both learning
conditions were exposed to a distracter block of 35
sentences (accompanied by pictures of the objects). The
distracter block was introduced to eliminate recency
effects during testing, and ensured that the last block
before testing was identical in the two learning
conditions.
Test Trials. Test trials were identical in the two
learning conditions. Participants completed a
forced-choice task and then a production task. In the
forced-choice task, participants saw a picture, heard two
sentences and had to indicate which sentence was the
correct one in the language. They were told that only
one sentence was correct.
Half of the forced-choice trials tested knowledge of
the article + noun pairing. On these trials, the incorrect
sentence had the right noun label but the wrong article
(e.g. participants saw a piano and heard: *Os-ferpal-en
sem slindot versus Os-ferpal-en bol slindot). The other
half of the trials tested knowledge of the noun-labels.
On these trials, the incorrect sentence had the right
article but the wrong noun-label (see piano and hear:
*Os-ferpal-en bol viltord versus Os-ferpal-en bol
slindot). Because participants heard a full sentence,
they could also use the mismatch between the article
and noun as a cue. Each object was presented once in
an article trial and once in a noun trial yielding 28
forced-choice trials (half testing article + noun pairing
and half testing noun knowledge). Order of presentation
was randomized for each participant.

2114

In the production task, participants saw a picture and
had to produce a full sentence to describe it. They were
encouraged to produce full sentences even if they were
unsure about all the parts. There were 14 production
trials (one for each object). Order of presentation was
randomized for each participant. Responses were coded
for accuracy by a research assistant blind to the study
goals (reliability with coding by the first author was
high, κ = .95). Nouns and articles were coded as correct
if they didn’t differ from the target in more than one
sound (slipdot for slindot, and vol for bol were coded as
correct). An article+noun sequence was coded as
correct only if both the article and the noun were
correctly produced. The carrier-phrase was coded for
accuracy on a scale from 1-3 (1-fully accurate,
2-partically accurate, 3-not accurate).

Results
As predicted, participants in the sequence-first
condition showed better learning of the article + noun
pairing. They were significantly above chance (61%) in
choosing the correct article t(15) = 3.55, p = .003, while
participants in the label-first condition were at chance
t(15) = .81, p > .4. A mixed-effect regression model
with trial type and learning condition as fixed effects,
and subject and item as random effects, revealed a main
effect of learning condition that was not qualified by a
significant interaction: participants in the sequence-first
condition were more accurate overall (80% vs. 71%
correct, B = .44 (SE = .21), p < .05). They were better
at selecting both the correct article (61% vs. 54%) and
the correct noun-label (98% vs. 92%, B = 1, p > .1).
Not surprisingly, given the difficulty of grammatical
gender, participants selected the correct noun-label
more often than they selected the correct article (95%
vs. 57.5% correct, B = 2.72 (SE = .26) p < .001).
The production results showed a similar pattern.
Participants in the sequence-first condition were more
likely to produce a correct article + noun sequence
(40% of the time) than were participants in the
label-first condition (29% of the time), B = .76 (SE
= .32), p < .05. Overall accuracy rates were not high,
which is not surprising given the short exposure time
(20 minutes) and the number of noun-labels taught (14).
Importantly, there was no difference between the
groups in the production of the carrier-phrase, t(30) =
-1.08, p > .2. That is, participants in the sequence-first
condition showed better learning precisely of the
association between the articles and the nouns.
In summary, both measures (forced-choice and
production) produced the same pattern of performance:
Participants in the sequence-first condition showed
better learning on all measures: recognition of the
correct article, recognition of the correct noun, and
production of the article + noun sequence.

Discussion
Our artificial grammatical gender system was learned
better when participants started with “less segmented”
input, where the boundaries between individual
segments (in this case articles and noun) were less
prominent. Participants in the sequence-first condition
were more likely to choose the sentence with the correct
article in a forced-choice task and more likely to
produce the appropriate article for a given noun in a
production task. This was despite the fact that by the
end of training, all participants had seen exactly the
same training items exactly the same number of times.
As we noted above, there is reason to believe that
adults are more likely to focus on noun-labels in
learning. Thus these results offer one explanation why
they struggle to learn grammatical gender, and why the
representations they learn are shallow and hard to
access in real time (Clahsen & Felser, 2006): starting
from noun-labels may hinder learning about the relation
between articles and nouns.
Why is it harder to learn about the relations between
nouns and articles when you start with noun-labels?
What kind of mechanism underlies these effects? One
answer lies in the effect of blocking on learning
(Kamin, 1969). Blocking occurs when a new cue is
introduced into a situation where a set of previously
learned cues fully predict a response. In the absence of
any discrepancy between what was encountered and
what was anticipated, the new cue will not be
associated with the event (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972;
Rescorla, 1988). This principle of learning can be
extended to grammatical gender in a relatively
straightforward manner. Learners starting with
noun-labels will initially associate an object and a
noun-label: their knowledge about the object will center
on the noun. This will make it harder to later learn
about the relation between the article and the noun:
because the noun will fully predict the object, the article
will add no information. Because the largest gains in
associativity come in the earliest stages of learning
(Rescorla & Wagner, 1972), the more adults treat
articles and nouns as separate in these stages, and the
more they associate the noun alone with an object, the
less they will come to associate the article with the
noun. In effect, initially focusing on the noun may
cause learners to ‘listen through’ the article, because it
doesn’t add any information.
In contrast, if learning starts with larger article-noun
sequences, the initial association will be between the
object and the article + noun sequence. Generally, an
article can appear with many nouns, but a noun will
appear with a more limited set of objects. Because of
this, over time, cue competition will cause objects to
become more strongly associated with nouns. The
presence of a noun with an object (but without the

2115

article) will strengthen the association between the noun
and object; similarly, the presence of an article without
the given object or noun will weaken its association
with them. Speakers will thus come to largely dissociate
articles and nouns over time. Crucially, however, the
article will still remain associated with the object and
the noun as a result of initial learning (Rescorla &
Wagner, 1972; see also Ramscar, Yarlett, Dye, Denny
& Thorpe, submitted).
This insight from learning theory suggests that our
results may reflect a broader pattern: learning segments
individually may have the potential cost of blocking
later learning about the relations between segments.
Furthermore, what is learned about the relationships
between units may in turn be affected by the
information they convey. This may offer a way of
reconciling our results with the extensive research
demonstrating speakers’ ability to detect and use
co-occurrence information in language learning. Both
children and adults learn transitional probabilities for
sound sequences in a robust and reliable fashion
(Saffran, Aslin & Newport, 1996). However,
participants in our experiments did not learn the
relations between articles and nouns equally well in
both conditions, even though they had access to the
same co-occurrence information. They learned them
better when they were segmenting speech and learning
semantics at the same time. That is, when the articles
initially carried more semantic information - because
they were more closely tied to the object.
The results underline the effect that prior knowledge
has on what gets learned: if you already know
noun-labels, you may learn about articles differently.
There are many other examples of this: the initial sound
patterns children learn influence the acquisition of later
forms (Kuhl et al., 1992); the stress pattern of children’s
first words in English affects the segmentation of later
words (Swingley, 2005); and children are more likely to
pick up new words that conform to their existing
production templates (Velleman & Vihman, 2002). All
these findings demonstrate the way prior knowledge
shapes subsequent learning in non-obvious ways.
The present study offers a novel perspective on
adults' difficulty with mastering certain aspects of
language in adulthood and suggests testable predictions
as to how that difficulty may arise. Specifically, starting
from more segmented units may be especially
problematic when the relation between the segments is
more semantically opaque. This problem may extend to
other linguistic domains like verb-preposition pairing
(e.g., that you say hit him in English but hit to-him in
Hebrew), and idioms (where semantic meaning is
non-compositional); indeed, this does seem to be the
case (DeKeyser, 2007). Learning in such domains may
be improved by a 'starting big' process where smaller
units are initially part of a larger chunk.

While the current study did not test children’s
language learning (we have not shown that children
start from larger units), we found that starting with units
of different sizes influenced learning in adults (Elman,
1993; Newport, 1990), and that starting with larger
units, and slowly increasing segmentation with
learning, may prove advantageous.
How might these factors play out in a model of first
language-learning? Infants enter the world without
knowledge of word boundaries. Much like a second
language learner, they cannot immediately detect word
boundaries. But unlike that learner, they do not even
know those boundaries exist. As a result, their initial
units may correspond to major prosodic boundaries,
yielding units that cross word boundaries. This in turn
may allow children to learn about grammatical relations
(like those between articles and nouns) from the
“analysis” and segmentation of such larger sequences.
This fits nicely with usage-based models of language
(Bybee, 1998; Tomasello, 2003), which posit that
grammatical relations emerge from a gradual process of
abstraction over stored utterances. It also fits well with
evidence about what children can and do attend to in
learning. Infants appear to be sensitive to larger
prosodic units before smaller ones (Jusczyk et al,.
1992): 9-month-old infants are sensitive to both clausal
and phrasal boundaries, whereas 6-month-old ones can
only detect the larger clausal boundaries. Young
children produce under-segmented utterances like
‘give-it the ball’ where give-it is treated as a single unit
(Peters, 1983). They also produce multi-word
utterances like ‘how-are-you’ at a stage where their
other utterances are mostly single words (see
Tomasello, 2003). Older children also attend to
sequences (Bannard & Matthews, 2008)—they are
better at repeating frequent four-word sequences, even
when the frequency of individual words is matched
(e.g., at ‘a drink of milk’ compared to ‘a drink of tea’).
Finally, production of irregular plurals is facilitated in
familiar sequences (e.g., ‘teeth’ in ‘brush your teeth’;
(Arnon & Clark, 2009).
We have shown in this study that adults were better at
learning grammatical gender in an artificial language
when they were first exposed to article-noun sequences
and only then to noun-labels, demonstrating an effect of
size and order-of-acquisition on adult learning. There
are multiple differences between children learning a
first language and adults learning a second. In the
current study we have tried to highlight one of these:
how adult’s prior knowledge of language and their
ability to ‘break it down’ may adversely affect how well
they learn a novel one.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by NSF
Grant Nos. 0547775 and 0624345 to Michael Ramscar

2116

References
Arnon, I. & Clark, E.V. (2009). Children’s word
production is facilitated by familiar phrases. Talk
presented at the LSA Annual Meeting, SF.
Bannard, C., & Matthews, D.E. (2008) Stored Word
Sequences in Language Learning: The Effect of
Familiarity on Children's Repetition of Four-Word
Combinations, Psychological Science , 19, 241-248.
Bybee, J. (1998). The emergent lexicon. In: Chicago
Linguistic Society, 34, 421-435.
Carroll, J. B. (1939). Determining and numerating
adjectives in children’s speech. Child Development,
10, 215-229.
Carroll, S. (1989). Second-language acquisition and the
computational paradigm. Language Learning, 39,
535-594.
Chevrot, J. P., Dugua, C., & Fayol, M. (2008). Liaison
acquisition, word segmentation and construction in
French: a usage-based account. Journal of Child
Language, 1-40.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical
processing
in
language
learners.
Applied
Psycholinguistics, 27, 3-42.
Corbett, G.G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
DeKeyser, R. M. (2007). What makes learning second
language grammar difficult? A review of issues.
Language Learning, 55, 1-25.
Doughty, C. and Williams, J (eds.) (1998). Focus on
Form in Classroom Second Language Acquisition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Elman, J.L., (1993) Learning and development in neural
networks: The importance of starting small.
Cognition, 48, 71-99.
Grosjean, F., Dommergues, J. Y., Cornu, E.,
Guillelmon, D., & Besson, C. (1994). The gender
marking effect in spoken word recognition.
Perception & Psychophysics, 56, 590-598.
Guillelmon, D., & Grosjean, F. (2001). The gender
marking effect in spoken word recognition: The case
of bilinguals. Memory and Cognition, 29, 503-511.
Harley, B. (1979). French gender ‘rules’ in the speech
of
English-dominant,
French-dominant
and
monolingual French-speaking children. Working
Papers in Bilingualism, 19, 129–156.
Hawkins, R., & Chan, C. Y.-H. (1997). The partial
availability of UG in second language acquisition.
Second Language Research, 13, 187-226.
Johnson, J.S., & Newport, E.L. (1989). Critical period
effects in second language learning: The influence of
maturational state on the acquisition of English as a
second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60-99.
Jusczyk, P. W., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Kemler Nelson, D.G.,
Kennedy, L.J., Woodward, A. & Piwoz, J. (1992).
Perception of acoustic correlated of major phrasal
units by young infants. Cognitive Psychology, 24,
252-293.

Kamin L.J. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention,
and conditioning. In: Campbell B, Church R (eds).
Punishment
and
Aversive
Behaviour.
Appleton-Century-Crofts: New York.
Kuhl, P.K. (2000). A new view of language acquisition.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.
97(22), 11850-11857.
Lenneberg, E. H. (1967). Biological Foundations of
Language. Wiley.
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2007). Young
children learning Spanish make rapid use of
grammatical gender in spoken word recognition.
Psychological Science, 18, 193-198.
Mariscal, S. (2008). Early acquisition of gender
agreement in the Spanish noun phrase: starting small.
Journal of Child Language, 1-29.
Moyer, A. (1999). Ultimate attainment in L2
phonology: the critical factors of age, motivation, and
instruction. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
21, 81-108.
Neville, H.J. and Bavelier, D. (2001). Variability of
developmental plasticity. In J. McClelland and R.
Siegler (Eds), Mechanisms of cognitive development:
Behavioural and neural perspectives.
Newport, E.L. (1990). Maturational constraints on
language learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 11-28.
Pine, J. M., & Lieven, E. (1997). Slot and frame
patterns and the development of the determiner
category. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18, 123-138.
Ramscar, M., & Gitcho, N. (2007). Developmental
change and the nature of learning in childhood.
Trends In Cognitive Science, 11(7), 274-279.
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny. K., &
Thorpe, K. (in submission) The Feature-Label-Order
Effect In Symbolic Learning.
Rescorla R.A. (1988). Pavlovian Conditioning: It’s Not
What You Think It Is, American Psychologist, 43(3),
151-160.
Rescorla R.A. and Wagner A.R. (1972). A Theory of
Pavlovian
Conditioning:
Variations
in
the
Effectiveness
of
Reinforcement
and
Nonreinforcement. In A.H. Black & W.F. Prokasy
(Eds.), Classical Conditioning II: Current Research
and
Theory
(pp.
64-99).
New
York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274, 1926–1928.
Scherag, A., Demuth, L. Roesler, F., Neville, H.J. and
Roeder, B. (2004). The effects of late acquisition of
L2 and the consequences of immigration on L1 for
semantic and morpho-syntactic language aspects.
Cognition, 93, B97-B108.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language: A
Usage-Based Theory of Language Acquisition.
Harvard University Press.

2117

