UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Graphical Production of Complex Abstract Diagrams:Drawing Out Chunks and Schemas

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5qj8n57p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Cheng, Peter
Obaidellah, Unaizah

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Graphical Production of Complex Abstract Diagrams:
Drawing Out Chunks and Schemas
Unaizah H. Obaidellah (u.obaidellah@sussex.ac.uk)
Peter C-H. Cheng (p.c.h.cheng@sussex.ac.uk)
Representation and Cognition Research Group, Department of Informatics, University of Sussex, Brighton, U.K.
Abstract
What cognitive processes and strategies are used to reproduce
complex abstract diagrams? Over ten sessions, a complex
diagram was traced, copied, drawn immediately from memory
and drawn after a delay. The five adult participants rapidly
learned to make near perfect productions of the diagram.
They converged on an approach that exploits chunks, which
was used across all the modes of drawing, rather than a strategy that minimizes motor effort. They appear to use an overarching spatial schema to organize their access and production of the chunks.
Keywords: chunks, spatial schemas, drawing, tracing copying, graphical protocol analysis, Rey figure

der of production of the graphic elements in simple line
drawings (consisting of about 5 lines and no more than two
chunks). A complex abstract diagram without particular
conceptual content was used as the stimulus in this experiment, which is shown in Figure 1. To what extent does
drawing invoke the same cognitive structures and processes
that are commonly implicated in other types of tasks? This
study will consider the role chunks and use of schemas. Are
there generic task strategies for drawing? If so what are
they and how do they interact with the factors associated
with the preceding questions?

#

Introduction
Drawing is a common human activity that has been rather
neglected by Cognitive Science. Compared to the extensive
studies on the nature of writing or the work on perception,
reasoning and learning with diagrams, our understanding of
the mechanisms underlying production of graphical artifacts
at the cognitive level is relatively meager. There have been
some notable studies. The classic work of van Sommers
(1984) explored and described some of the underlying processes of drawing and Goel (1995) examined the more fluid
nature of sketching particularly in the task of design problem solving. Some studies have used drawing as a means to
investigate other aspects of cognition such as children’s increasing flexibility in their use of schemas during cognitive
development (Karmiloff-Smith, 1990) or the impact of alternative representational systems on conceptual leaning
(Cheng, 2003).
Nevertheless, there are many questions and issues to be
addressed concerning the underlying processes of drawing.
The experiment reported here concerns well-structured diagrams. This experiment examines four modes of drawing:
(a) tracing by drawing directly over the target diagram; (b)
copying by transcribing the target diagram on to an adjacent
blank sheet; (c) immediate drawing from memory when
there has been exposure to the target diagram just prior but
not during production; (d) delayed drawing from memory
when the target has not been seen for some time. In this experiment what changes as the same diagram is drawn many
times over an extended periods of many days is investigated, rather than, say, how generic drawing abilities change
with cognitive development. How does the drawing process
vary when the diagram does or does not have rich semantic
content for the drawer? Van Sommers (1984) showed the
interpretation that participants possessed influenced the or-

Figure 1: Modified Rey figure used in the experiment.

Figure 2: Six example patterns (not to scale).
The diagram in Figure 1 is a modified version of the ReyOsterrieth Complex Figure (Meyers & Meyers, 1995). The
original figure is used in a well-validated test of memory
function. The modifications make it more suitable for our
graphical protocol analysis approach to the study of graphical production, which is described below. The modifications include: inserting a space between the end of all lines,
replacing circles and dots with lines, and breaking up long
lines into shorter segments. The diagram has 56 lines (excluding the #).
Figure 2 shows a selection of the patterns of lines that appear to correspond to putative perceptual chunks, based on
the normal scoring scheme used for the original Rey figure.
The six patterns are shown in Figure 2 but Figure 1 incorporates 13. We presume that if participants are using chunks

2843

then the chunks may correspond to these patterns, which
seem like plausible candidates, for example on the basis of
the Gestalt principles of perception.
More precisely this experiment examines three sets of related questions in an exploratory fashion. First, to what extent is the process of drawing dominated by chunking? The
use of an abstract diagram allows strategies that are not reliant on chunks to be manifest, as the stimulus does not have
given semantic content that relates specific configurations of
diagrammatic elements to particular conceptual chunks.
The four modes of drawing were chosen in order to vary the
likely use of chunks. Delayed drawing from memory is the
most likely to involve chunking, because the lines of the
diagram that share similar characteristics could be encoded
as perceptual chunks. At the other extreme, one may expect
that participants instructed to trace the target diagram ‘as
quickly and as accurately possible’ might adopt a strategy
that minimizes unnecessary movements of the pen by selecting successive lines that are in close proximity. If such a
strategy is strictly used it will operate independently of
whatever chunks the drawer perceives or retrieves from the
memory. One might predict that the extent of chunk use in
the copying mode of drawing will fall somewhere between
that of the tracing mode and drawing from memory modes,
as the stimulus is present but components must still be
briefly remembered.
The second question: Is there a generic strategy (or strategies) for drawing complex abstract diagrams? Humans
naturally adapt their behaviour in order to reduce the cognitive and physical effort expended on tasks, so one might expect that even moderately experienced drawers will adopt
some generic approach to drawing that (to some extent) rationally organizes the process of graphical production. If
the participants are not drawing in a haphazard or random
fashion, what are they doing? One possibility, if they are
not relying upon chunks, is some strategy that operates at
the level of individual lines, such as selecting the nearest
neighbouring line to be the next one to draw in order to
minimize pen/hand movements and the need for higher level
sequential planning.
The third set of question concerns learning. How will the
process of drawing gradually change over time with improvements to the accuracy of the reproductions? To address this, the participants did ten repeated sessions of drawing each separated by a number of days. With repeated reproductions of the same complex diagram does the use of
chunks change (if they are used) and how are the overall
drawing strategies affected?
One means for probing chunking processes in drawing
will be the temporal chunk signal that we have found in our
studies using graphical protocol analysis. Our previous experiments on writing and drawing have demonstrated the
existence of this signal that reveals the structure of chunks
in memory. The signal has been found in the writing of
simple sentences (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2006) and artificial sentences (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2008), in the writing
of number sequences (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2005), in the

copying of mathematical formulae (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya,
2007), and in the production of simple geometric figures
(Cheng, McFadzean & Copeland, 2001). The temporal
chunk signal is based on the pause between successive pen
strokes (i.e., the time between lifting the pen from the paper
at the end of the previous mark and placing it down to begin
the current mark). Significant differences between the duration of pauses at different levels of the hierarchy of chunks
possessed by the participants were found across all types of
task. The pauses for elements within a chunk (e.g., letter
level, L1) are smaller than the pauses for the chunk itself
(e.g., word level, L2). This finding is consistent with classic
findings on chunking processes, for example, in chess
(Chase & Simon, 1973), go (Reitman, 1976), electric circuits (Egan & Schwartz, 1979) and word lists (Bushke,
1976). However, the temporal chunk signal in graphical
production is (remarkably) strong and robust with significant differences found between the chunk levels in the data
for individual participants on a single trial; i.e., with no aggregation into groups. Graphical protocol analysis (GPA)
is the term we use to describe our method for studying cognitive processes involving free-hand writing and drawing
using the temporal chunk signal.
Another means for probing chunk structure, which also
provides evidence on drawing strategies, is to examine the
particular sequence of production of the elements within the
different patterns of the target diagram. This will involve
the analysis of whether drawing progresses in a consistent
fashion with all the elements of each pattern being drawn
together, or whether transitions occur between partially
completed patterns.

Method
Participants
The participants were graduate students and research assistants at the University of Sussex. Each had a moderate
amount of experience of drawing diagrams typical of graduates in technical subjects. One of the six participants originally recruited for the experiment was unable to complete
the trials due to unrelated commitments. One participant
was left-handed the rest were right-handed.

Apparatus
The single target stimulus is the complex abstract diagram
in Figure 1. All drawing occurred with an inking pen on a
sheet of paper taped to a standard graphics tablet (Wacom
Intuos2®). Specially designed drawing/writing analysis
software, TRACE (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2004), was used
to record the writing actions, to extract the pen positions and
times, and to compute the duration of pauses between drawn
elements. Participants were instructed to produce drawings
that largely filled an A4 page in landscape orientation. For
the tracing mode, a copy of Figure 1 with faint grey lines
was used. For the copying mode, a copy of Figure 1 was
placed near the tablet for the participant to refer while drawing.

2844

Procedure

(a) Tracing

(b) Copying
!$""#

'$""#

!!""#
'!""#

%'""#

,-./0#

,-./0#

'"""#
&""#

%&""#
%"""#

%""#

$""#

$""#
!""#

!""#
'#

!#

(#

$#

)#

%#

*#

&#

+#

'"#

%#

!#

(#

&#

)#

$#

*#

'#

+#

%"#

("

)"

*"

+"

$!"

10//234#

10//234#

(c) Immediate drawing

(d) Delayed drawing

%#!!"

'!!!"

#*%!"

&#!!"

%!!!"

&!!!"

$#!!"

%#!!"
,-./0"

,-./0"

There were ten sessions each
lasting about 30 minutes. They
were spaced no less than two
and no more than seven days
apart, with the precise timing
dependent on the individual
participant’s availability. The
time between the first and last
sessions was between 3 and 10
weeks (No evidence was found
that the different durations
affected the overall results). In
the first session the participant
traced the diagram, then copied
the diagram and finally drew the
diagram
from
memory
(immediate recall drawing). In
the second and subsequent
sessions the participant first
drew the diagram from memory
(delayed recall drawing). Then
it was copied and traced, the
order of which alternated with
session. Finally an immediate
recall drawing was done. For all
drawings the participant first
drew the hash (#) at the top right
of the diagram to ensure that
they were fluently drawing
before any of the elements of the
target was produced.
The
participants were told not to
practice between sessions.

$!!!"

%!!!"
$#!!"
$!!!"

#!!"

#!!"
!"

!"
$"

%"

&"

'"

#" ("
10//234"

)"

*"

+"

$!"

$"

%"

&"

'"

#"

10//234"

Figure 3: Median L1 within (dashed) and L2 between pattern (solid) pauses for each
mode of drawing. (Each symbol type is a particular participant.)

Results
Overall performance
Participants overall success at producing the diagram was
initially assessed by coding the errors made in their drawings in terms of omissions, commissions and structural
(misshapen) errors at the level of whole patterns and elements within patterns. The structural errors are minor compared to the omissions and commissions errors. Except for
the omission of one element by one participant in the very
first session there were no errors with the tracing mode. In
the copying mode there were slight structural errors in six of
the drawings. For the immediate recall drawing mode there
were (remarkably) few errors even in the first session. The
worst participant omitted three patterns and six elements,
but by the third session just two participants each made one
structural error. With the delayed recall mode (beginning in
the second session) the number of errors also declined from
about 10-20 to near perfect drawings by the second or third
attempt. The rapidity of reaching ceiling level performance
was unexpected.

Between and within pattern/chunk pauses
On the assumption that if the participants were chunking the
diagram they may be doing so in terms of the default patterns (Figure 2), each drawn line was coded either as L2between or L1-within a pattern. A between pattern element
is the first occurrence of any line of a particular pattern. All
subsequent lines of the same pattern are within pattern elements. Figure 3(a)-(d) show the median values of the
pauses for all the between and within pattern lines, for every
participant, in every session, for all four modes of drawing.
(There is no data for delayed recall drawing in session 1 and
data for immediate recall drawing for one participant is
missing due to experimenter error.) The solid line corresponds to L2 between pattern pauses and the dashed line to
L1 within pattern pauses.
Simple visual inspection of the graphs reveals that in all
194 drawings the median of the L2 between pattern pauses
is greater than the median of L1 within pattern pauses. If either were equally likely to be larger, then the probability of
L2>L1 for all the 10 drawings of one participant in one
mode is p=0.510=.0001, by the Binomial theorem. Separate
t-test (one-tail, paired) comparisons of the L1 and L2 pauses

2845

over the 20 sequences of drawings for the 5 participants in
the 4 modes were significant (p<.05 once; p<.01 once; 18 at
p<.001). Further, t-test (one-tail, paired) comparisons of the
pauses over the five participants for the 39 sessions (10 sessions by 4 modes minus 1) are significant, in all but two
cases (p>.05 twice, p<.05 three times, p<.01 34 times.)
(The outcomes of an ANOVA test is consistent with these
results.) As longer pauses are associated with chunks (see
above), it is clear that: (1) the participants are using chunks
in the drawings in all modes; (2) these chunks largely correspond to the default patterns, some of which are shown in
Figure 2.
The medians of the L1 within pattern/chunk pauses are
similar across participants, sessions and modes of drawing.
The L2 pauses are more variable. Overall, they are largest
for delayed recall drawing, then for copying, immediate recall and least for tracing, respectively, 1453, 1336, 1047,
885 ms. Figure 4 shows the mean of the participants’ median pauses. If there is a ¼ probability of any one of the
modes being the shortest in any given session, then by the
Binomial theorem, the chance of the tracing mode having at
least nine of the smallest values is p=.00001. The mean of
immediate recall drawing mode falls between the tracing
mode and the other two modes in seven of the ten sessions,
which by the Binomial theorem has as chance of p=.0031.
T-tests (paired, one tail) of the between pattern pauses for
all the pairs of modes across all the sessions were computed.
The L2 pauses for tracing was shorter than each of the other
three modes (p<.01 in all three). The L2 pauses for immediate recall drawing are shorter than for copying (p<.001)
and for delayed drawing (p<.01). The difference between
delayed drawing and copying is not significant. In summary, tracing has the shortest L2 pauses, immediate drawing
the next, and copy and delayed drawing comparably long
pauses.
The within pattern pauses are relatively constant over the
sessions. There is an apparent decline of the magnitude of
the between pauses over the sessions. The curves in Figure
4 show that the median L2 between pattern/chunk pauses
declined over sessions. This is confirmed for the copying,

immediate drawing and delayed drawing modes by the ttests (one tail, paired) of the difference between the participants’ first and last session median pauses (at p<.05 for each
one). The particularly large drop between the second and
third session magnitude of the delayed drawing model parallels the drop in the errors between the same sessions.

Sequences of drawing individual patterns
Another measure of whether the participants were treating
the patterns as chunks is the number of times within a particular drawing that a switch occurs from the production of
an element in one pattern to an element from another. The
minimum possible number of switches is the number of patterns minus one (i.e., 12). The number of switches above
this will be called the transition count, which is a measure
of excess number of switches between patterns. When this
is zero each and every pattern will have been drawn as a
separate group that presumably are distinct chunks.
To obtain a sense of the transition count when chunks are
not being used for drawing, the nearest neighbour drawing
strategy was examined. It minimizes pen movements between lines using a strategy that selects the next line to draw
by: (a) finding the undrawn line whose centre is the closest
to the pen at the end of the just completed line; (b) moving
the pen to the end of the selected line that is closest to the
pen. The strategy was applied to the diagram using five different obvious starting points in Figure 1 (e.g., top left, centre) giving a mean transition count of approximately 12.
Values less than this suggest of the use of chunks.
Figure 5 shows the mean transition counts across participants for the four modes across the sessions. By the second
drawing in every mode the transition count has dropped to
approximately half the value for the nearest neighbour strategy. A decline in the transition counts for each mode is apparent in Figure 5 and t-tests (one-tail, paired) between the
first and last session over participants indicates that the drop
is significant for the copying, immediate recall and the delayed recall drawing modes (p<.05, all modes), but not for
the tracing mode.

Sequences of drawing groups of patterns
Inspecting all of the lines for each drawing over the ten ses'$"

01.:3/;"
65<=3/;"
>-?.=-@"@1.A3/;"
B,,-@3.8-"@1.A3/;"

01./2345/"657/8"

'#"
'!"
&"
%"
$"
#"
!"
'"

Figure 4: Mean of the L1-within (dashed) and L2-between
(solid) pattern median pauses for all modes of drawing.

#"

("

$"

)"
%"
9-2235/"

*"

&"

Figure 5: Mean transition counts.

2846

+"

'!" ,-./"

sions, the groups of patterns are (very) often drawn together
suggesting an amalgamation process of the individual patterns as drawing progresses over the sessions. One such
group that often appeared in the drawings will be called the
frame group, which consists of the large rectangle, triangle
to the right, the top triangle and the lines radiating from the
centre. The patterns within and beyond the large rectangle
also appeared sometimes to be drawn as groups. To test
whether these groups really have a substantive role in drawing, group transition counts were obtained for every drawing, in a fashion similar to the patterns but at the aggregated
group level. Applying the nearest neighbour drawing strategy with different starting points gives transition counts in
the range of 6 to 16.
Figure 6 shows the mean transition count over participants for each mode of drawing. The group transition count
is substantially less than that for the nearest neighbour strategy indicating that the groups may have had a meaningful
role. The measure is relatively constant for each mode with
the exception of tracing. A t-test (one-tail, paired) on the
first and last session of this mode has a large variance so the
difference is not significant (p=.095).
Closer inspection of the sequence of patterns reveals that
patterns from the frame group were always the first to be
drawn in every diagram without exception. Twenty-three
lines constitute the patterns of that group. For the tracing,
copying, immediate and delayed recall modes the mean
number (and range) of lines produced from the frame group
before the start of any other groups were, respectively, 16.1
(11-21), 18.9 (16-21), 19.7 (18-22) and 19.8 (17-21). This
suggests that frame group of patterns had a primary role in
all of the modes of production, including the tracing mode
but to a lesser extent than the others.

Discussion
With regard to the drawing of complex abstract diagrams
using four modes of drawing, the questions posed for this
experiment concerned: the role of chunking in graphical
production; the existence and nature of generic drawing
strategies; and the effects of learning over multiple sessions
of reproducing the diagrams.
The experiment provides converging evidence that chunks
have a central role in the drawing of one instance of a com-

plex abstract diagram. The coincidence of longer pauses before the production of lines between the default patterns
compared to pauses for lines within the patterns indicates
that the participants were treating the patterns as chunks.
The relatively low level of transitions counts also supports
the claim that chunks had a causal role in the production of
the diagram, because the participants on the whole tended to
complete each pattern before moving to the next.
The strong and robust temporal chunk signal that was
found in other writing and drawing tasks using the Graphical Protocol Anaysis (GPA) method (Cheng & RojasAnaya, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008; Cheng, McFadzean &
Copeland, 2001) was also clearly found in this experiment.
This extends the scope of the GPA for studying the nature
of chunk-based phenomena in Cognitive Science. The
magnitude of the L1 within chunk pauses was approximately 500 ms across all of the modes of drawing and fairly
constant across sessions. In the latter sessions, the L2 between chunk pauses were approximately 900 ms. These
times are longer than those found in the drawing of simple
geometric figures in which L1≈400 ms and L2≈600 ms
(Cheng, McFadzean & Copeland, 2001). Possible reasons
for the difference are the great complexity of the stimulus in
the experiment and the larger physical scale of the drawing.
As with the previous studies, the constancy of L1 pauses
and the variability of L2 pauses suggest that the drivers of
the observed effects are largely occurring at the chunk level.
Tracing had the shortest L2 pause times, then immediate recall drawing, with copying and delayed recall drawing
equally longest. A plausible explanation for why the immediate recall drawing L2 pauses is shorter than those for delayed recall drawing is the more recent and presumably
greater activation of the chunks in memory for the former
mode. The need to switch attention between the target diagram and drawing is one explanation for the greater L2
pauses for copying than immediate recall drawing. Tracing
is the mode that one would expect to be the most different to
the others, because the recall of chunks is not strictly necessary and shifts of attention to a remote target are not needed.
Nevertheless the difference between L2 and L1 pauses indicates that chunking has an important role in the tracing
mode. Notice in Figure 4 that the magnitude for copying
converges with the immediate recall drawing line, which is
consistent with the participants using their remembered
chunks in the copying mode in later sessions. At a high
level, chunks are being used substantially in the process of
drawing as indicated by both the between pattern pauses being greater than the within pattern pauses and the low transition count (Figure 5). This raises an intriguing question for
further research: Is the use of chunks during tracing (in the
later sessions) somehow a more effective strategy than the
nearest-neighbour strategy, even though the recall of chunks
is strictly unnecessary, as all the required information for
production is present in front of the participant? Alternatively, is this a case of the processes of chunking interfering
with a potentially more efficient strategy, because the pro-

Figure 6: Transition count for groups of patterns.

2847

pensity of the mind to retrieve known chunks of information
cannot be intentionally suspended?
As the participants are using chunks the overall approach
to drawing cannot be the nearest neighour line strategy or
some other that primarily operates at the level of individual
lines. The early dominance of the frame group of patterns
suggests that a strategy based on a spatial schema or template (Gobet & Simon, 1996) was being used. The participants draw the frame first, which then provides spatial locations (or slots) as cues for the retrieval of particular chunks.
This interpretation is preferable to a strategy in which the
order of production of patterns/chunks is in terms of their
perceptual salience or memorability. There are other patterns/groups that appear more salient than the frame group,
which is relatively diffuse and masked by other patterns.
In the early sessions the transition count data suggests that
the patterns/chunks had less of a role: the initial few drawings may have used something akin to the nearest neighbour
strategy. Learning is occurring over the sessions in the experiment. What is surprising is how quickly the participants
were drawing near perfect versions of the diagram consisting of 13 patterns and 56 lines. The effects of learning are
seen in the declines in the pause data (Figure 4) and transition counts for the patterns (Figure 5), and suggested by the
transition counts for the groups in the tracing mode (Figure
6). The rapidity may be explained by the likely use of the
spatial scheme drawing strategy. The spatial schemas provide a systematic way of organizing the information that
does not require production to follow a single rigid sequence
of elements that is vulnerable to breaking down as a whole
if any one subsequence is forgotten. Further, although the
diagram is supposed to be abstract, it is possible that the
participants may have impose a meaning on the diagram for
themselves (e.g., fish, rocket) and thereby adding semantic
information that associates particular patterns to specific locations as part of the schema. It would be interesting in future work to manipulate the presence of the overall spatial
schema and the degree of semantic content.

Acknowledgments
The research was in part supported by the Ministry of
Higher Education, Malaysia. We would like to thank the
members of the Representation and Cognition Research
Group for their participation in this study.

References
Buschke, H. (1976). Learning is organized by chunking.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 15,
313-324.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Cheng, P. C.-H., McFadzean, J., & Copeland, L. (2001).
Drawing out the temporal structure of induced perceptual
chunks. In J. D. Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 200-205). Mahwah, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum.

Cheng, P. C. H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2008). A Graphical
Chunk Production Model: Evaluation Using Graphical
Protocol Analysis with Artificial Sentences. In B. C.
Love, K. McRae & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Thirtieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1972-1977). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Cheng, P. C. H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2007). Measuring
Mathematical Formula Writing Competence: An Application of Graphical Protocol Analysis. In D. S. McNamara
& J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty Ninth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
869-874). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Cheng, P. C. H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2006). A temporal
signal reveals chunk structure in the writing of word
phrases. In Proceedings of the Twenty Eighth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cheng, P. C. H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2005). Writing out a
temporal signal of chunks: patterns of pauses reflect the
induced structure of written number sequences. In B. G.
Bara, L. Barsalou & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Twenty Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 424-429). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Cheng, P. C.-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2004). TRACE user
guide: Representational Systems Laboratory, University
of Sussex.
Cheng, P. C.-H. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
principles for effective representational systems. Cognitive Science, 26(6), 685-736.
Egan, D. E., & Schwartz, B. J. (1979). Chunking in recall of
symbolic drawings. Memory and Cognition, 7(2), 149158.
Gobet, F., & Simon, H. A. (1996). Templates in chess
memory: a mechanism for recalling several boards. Cognitive Psychology, 31, 1-40.
Goel, V. (1995). Sketches of Thought. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1990). Constraints on representational
change: Evidence from children's drawing. Cognition, 34,
57-83.
Meyers, J. E., & Meyers, K. R. (1995). Rey complex figure
test and recognition trial. Professional manual. N. Florida Avenue, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources,
Inc.
Reitman, J. S. (1976). Skilled perception in Go: Deducing
memory structures from inter-response times. Cognitive
Psychology, 8, 336-356
van Sommers, P. (1984). Drawing and Cognition, Descriptive and experimental studies of graphic production process. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

2848

