UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Heuristics and biases in autism: Less biased but not more logical

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5bd053jb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Evans, Jonathan
Handley, Simon
Morsanyi, Kinga

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Heuristics and Biases in Autism: Less Biased But Not More Logical
Kinga Morsanyi (kinga.morsanyi@plymouth.ac.uk)
Simon J. Handley (S.Handley@plymouth.ac.uk)
Jonathan S. B. T. Evans (J.Evans@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth
Drake Circus, Plymouth, PL4 8AA, UK

Abstract
In this study we compared the performance of autistic and
typically developing adolescents on three well-known tasks
from the heuristics and biases literature. As heuristic
reasoning is based on the contextualisation of problems (e.g.,
Stanovich, 2003) and autistic people are known to be less
sensitive to contextual features (e.g., Frith & Happé, 1994) we
expected them to exhibit less bias on these tasks. In line with
our predictions, autistic children were less susceptible to the
conjunction fallacy, and they also gave more base rate
responses in one version of the engineers and lawyers task.
However, their performance on the control tasks indicated
that they were not any more sensitive to probabilistic
information than the control group (i.e., they were not more
logical in a normative sense).
Keywords: cognitive development; psychology; reasoning.

Introduction
Heuristics are ‘‘mental shortcuts’’ used in reasoning and
decision making. They save time and effort, and most of the
time they lead to good solutions to problems. In certain
cases, however, they lead to systematic errors (i.e., biases).
Decision theorists have identified so many such reasoning
errors that their study has developed into an independent
field known as ‘‘heuristics and biases’’ (e.g., Gilovich,
Griffin, & Kahneman, 2002). According to dual-process
theorists (Evans & Over, 1996; Stanovich, 1999) heuristics
reflect the tendency for people to automatically
contextualize presented information. As a consequence, in
cases when context needs to be disregarded, reasoners can
only do it through conscious effort.
In contrast to the findings in the general population, a
number of studies have reported that autistic participants do
not automatically contextualize information. Autistic
children show very good performance on tasks which
require attention to local features, such as the embedded
figures task (Joliffe & Baron-Cohen, 1997; Shah & Frith,
1983) and the block design task (Shah & Frith, 1993). On
the other hand, they are less able than typically developing
children to benefit from sentence context in disambiguating
the meaning of homographs (Frith & Snowling, 1983;
Joliffe & Baron-Cohen, 1999), and they do not show the
expected facilitatory effects of context on text
comprehension and reading (see Happé & Frith, 2006 for a
review) an effect which seems to be limited to complex
verbal stimuli (Lopez & Leekham, 2003). Importantly, it

appears that this effect cannot be attributed to deficits in the
automatic inferences involved in text comprehension, or to
the lack of activation of relevant knowledge (Saldana &
Frith, 2007). This also does not seem to be specific to text
comprehension in the social domain, as stereotypes are
activated and used as readily by autistic as typical
populations (Hirschfeld, Bartmess, White & Frith, 2007).
According to the Weak Central Coherence (WCC) theory
(Frith & Happé, 1994; Happé, 1999) the reason for this
difference is that typically developing individuals tend to
engage in global processing which encodes the overall
meaning of the input at the expense of local features. This
process involves integrating incoming information with its
context in order to derive higher level meaning. By contrast,
autistic individuals engage in more detailed, local or
piecemeal processing, lacking the drive for global
coherence.
In the present study we compared autistic and typically
developing adolescents’ performance on three well-known
tasks from the heuristics and biases literature: the
conjunction fallacy (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983), and two
versions of the engineers and lawyers problem (Kahneman
& Tversky, 1973). The conjunction fallacy violates a
fundamental rule of probability, that the likelihood of two
independent events occurring at the same time (in
"conjunction") should always be less than, or equal to the
probability of either one occurring alone (P(A) ≥ P(A & B)).
People who commit the conjunction fallacy assign a higher
probability to a conjunction than to one or the other of its
constituents. In the original demonstration of the fallacy
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1983) people read a description of
Linda, a 31-year-old, smart, outspoken woman who was a
philosophy major, concerned with discrimination and social
justice, and a participant in antinuclear demonstrations.
When asked to judge a number of statements about Linda
according to how likely they were, most people ranked the
statement “Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist
movement” above the statement “Linda is a bank teller,”
thus committing the fallacy.
In the classic “engineers and lawyers” problem
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1973) participants were told that
descriptions have been prepared of 30 engineers and 70
lawyers (the base rates were reversed in another condition).
Then participants were shown a description of a person from
this sample, and they had to decide whether it referred to an

75

Conjunction fallacy
Conflict
Sue is a very intelligent woman, who works in a hospital.
She wears glasses and a green uniform. Her bookshelves in
her office are full of medical books. Mark the following
statements with number 1 to 4 according to how likely they
are. (1: most likely, 4: least likely)
______Sue is a plumber.
______Sue is a doctor.
______Sue is a doctor and a mechanic.
______Sue is a mechanic.

Non- conflict
Brian has a studio, where he works alone. He is a very creative man,
and he likes to experiment with colours. He takes his work to
exhibitions, and sells some of them too. Mark the following statements
with number 1 to 4 according to how likely they are. (1: most likely, 4:
least likely)
--------Brian is an aerobics instructor.
--------Brian is a painter.
--------Brian is an aerobics instructor and an accountant.
--------Brian is an accountant.

Engineers and lawyers problem – representative description
Conflict
A group of tourists visit the Eiffel tower in Paris. There are
15 old people in the group and 3 young ones. The tourists can
choose between taking the lift or climbing up the tower (which
takes half an hour). Only one person wants to climb up the
tower. Do you think it is more likely that it’s an old person, or
that it’s a young one?
• It’s more likely that it’s a young person.
• It’s more likely that it’s an old person.
• Both are equally likely.

Non-conflict
In a bird-watching club there are 6 women and 30 men. After a nice
bird-watching trip a member of the club decides on going to a pub to
watch a cricket-match. Who do you think is going to the pub?
•
A man.
•
A woman.
•
Both are equally likely

Engineers and lawyers problem – non-representative description
Conflict
Laura is a member of a sailing club and she also sings in a
choir. She has 20 friends in the sailing club and 4 friends in
the choir. Now she’s going to Spain with a friend. Do you think
it is more likely that she goes to Spain with somebody from the
sailing club or with somebody from the choir?
•
It’s more likely that it’s somebody from the choir.
•
It’s more likely that it’s somebody from the sailing club.
•
Both are equally likely.

Non-conflict
In a chocolate factory 10 people’s offices are in Building A, and 2
people are working in Building B. They are working on a new
chocolate drink, and they want to decide who should try the drink first,
so they organize a raffle. Do you think it is a person who works in
building A or is it a person who works in Building B who’s going to try
out the drink first?
• It’s more likely that it’s somebody who works in Building A.
• It’s more likely that it’s somebody who works in Building B.
• Both are equally likely.

Figure 1: An example of the ‘conflict’ and ‘non-conflict’ version of each problem.
engineer or a lawyer. Participants’ judgments were mostly
based on the description, and base rates had a significant but
very small effect on responses. When participants were
given a non-representative description (that was not
characteristic of either a lawyer or an engineer) the average
rating of the likelihood of the person being a
lawyer/engineer was 50%. This indicated that participants
tended to disregard base rates (which were readily available)
even when there was no other information provided.
Instead, if an individual’s description was neither
characteristic of an engineer or a lawyer they concluded that
their group membership could not be determined.
Based on the WCC theory (Frith & Happé, 1994; Happé,
1999) we predicted that autistic children will give less
heuristic responses to the conjunction fallacy and to the
engineers and lawyers problems, because heuristic
responding is based on the perceived contextual links
between the task and a particular response option, and
autistic children are less sensitive to contextual cues.
Besides the traditional “conflict” versions of the problems

which pit heuristic responses against a normative rule, we
included control (non-conflict) problems. This allows for a
direct comparison between the two groups in terms of their
capacity to observe a normative rule (i.e., to base their
responses on probabilistic information). This makes it
possible to discard the alternative explanation, that autistic
children are less biased because they are more sensitive to
the logical structure of the tasks (and not because they are
less able to or inclined to contextualize).

Method
Participants Twenty-three high functioning children with
autism took part in the study (mean age 14 years).
Diagnostic records of the children showed that every child
had received a diagnosis of autism by experienced
clinicians. No child had a diagnosis of Asperger’s syndrome
or Pervasive Developmental Disorder. Additionally, 41
typically developing children (mean age 13 years 2 months)
participated in the study as a control group.

76

As a measure of general intelligence we used a short form
of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-III,
Wechsler, 1991) consisting of the block design and the
vocabulary subtests. Additionally, we used Set 1 of the
Raven Advanced Progressive Matrices (Raven, Raven &
Court, 1998) consisting of 12 items, as a measure of fluid
intelligence. We also administered the counting span task, a
typical measure of verbal working memory with a
processing and a storage component (see Handley, Capon,
Beveridge, Dennis, & Evans, 2004).
There was no significant difference between the groups on
the measures of cognitive ability apart from a marginally
significant difference on the working memory measure
(t(57)=1.89, p=.06) indicating a trend for the autistic
participants to score lower on this task. There was also a
significant difference in the mean age of the two samples,
the autistic group being significantly older than the control
group (t(62)=2.06, p<.05). In order to take account of these
differences, we included age and working memory as
covariates in our main analyses. None of the effects were
moderated by these variables. Consequently we report the
simpler ANOVA models below.
Materials and procedure We used twelve tasks, four tasks
(two conflict, and to non-conflict problems) measuring each
type of heuristic (the conjunction fallacy, the
representativeness heuristic, and the equiprobability bias see Figure 1 for examples). In the conjunction fallacy tasks
participants had to rate four statements according to their
likelihood. In the conflict tasks the measure of the
conjunction fallacy was whether participants judged the
probability of the conjunction of a representative and a nonrepresentative statement as more likely to be true than the
non-representative statement alone. In the non-conflict tasks
the dependent measure was whether participants judged the
conjunction of two non-representative events as more likely
to be true than either of the non-representative events alone.
In the engineers and lawyers tasks participants had to
choose between three response options. In the
representative conflict tasks participants were given a
heuristic point if they chose the representative response, and
a normative point if they chose the response that
corresponded to the base rates. In the representative nonconflict task the representative response corresponded to the
base rates. In the non-representative conflict version of the
task paricipants were given a heuristic point if they gave the
“equally likely” response, and they were given a normative
point if they chose the base rate response. In the nonrepresentative non-conflict tasks we did not provide any
individuating information about the groups that would invite
an association of the groups with social stereotypes (instead
of “engineers and lawyers” or “people who go sailing and
people who sing in a choir” we called the two groups
“people working in building A and B”, for example). Here
we expected participants to mostly choose the base rate
response.

All the problems were presented in a booklet with
different types of problem mixed together in a pseudorandom order. The experimenter read out the instructions
and the participants worked through the problems at their
own pace. The individual differences measures were
administered individually in a separate testing session.

Results
Conjunction fallacy. Our first analysis aimed to address two
questions. First we wanted to determine whether the
conjunction fallacy was more common amongst the control
group than the autistic group. The second aim was to
evaluate whether autistic participants show greater
sensitivity to the conjunction rule. We conducted a 2
(group) x 2 (problem type) mixed ANOVA to compare
fallacy rates on the conflict and non-conflict problems for
the two groups (see Table 1 for descriptive statistics). The
analysis revealed a main effect of problem type
(F(1,62)=12.14, p<.01, ηp2 = .16) showing, as expected,
higher rates of conjunction fallacy for the conflict compared
to the non-conflict problems (82% vs. 61%). There was no
main effect of group which indicates that the autistic
participants are not in any general sense more sensitive to
the conjunction fallacy than the control group. There was
also a significant interaction between group and problem
type (F(1,62)=4.9, p<.05, ηp2 = .07) which indicated that the
control group made more conjunction errors on the conflict
problems (88%) than on the non-conflict problems (56%).
In contrast, there was no significant difference in the
number of errors made on the conflict (72%) and nonconflict problems in the autistic group (65%). This analysis
confirms that the lower rates of the conjunction fallacy
amongst the autistic group cannot be attributed to increased
sensitivity to the conjunction rule.
Table 1: Mean proportion of conjunction fallacies
committed for each type of problem across groups (standard
deviations in brackets).

Typically developing
Autistic

Conflict
.88 (.32)
.72 (.45)

Non-conflict
.57 (.51)
.65 (.49)

We also compared the proportion of participants in each
group who rated the representative item as the most likely
option on the non-conflict problems (where there was no
difference between groups in fallacy rates). The purpose of
this analysis was to evaluate whether both groups identified
the representative item as the most likely to the same
degree. This would indicate that similar knowledge was
activated and employed in making judgments about the
simple options. The analysis revealed no significant
difference in the proportion of participants from the two
groups ranking the representative item as the most likely (78
vs. 65% of the control and the autistic group, respectively,
gave the representative option the highest rating on both
tasks, and 20 vs. 22 % of the children in each group gave the

77

Table 2: Mean proportion of representative, non-representative and other responses for each type of problem across groups
on the engineers and lawyers problem with representative description (standard deviations in brackets).

Typically developing
Autistic

Representative
Conflict
Non-conflict
.74 (.32)
.77 (.32)
.73 (.33)
.81 (.25)

highest rating to the representativeness option on one task;
χ2(2)=3.02, n.s.).
Engineers and lawyers problem with representative
description: Table 2 shows the mean proportion of
representativeness-based, base rate and equally likely
responses for each of the problem types and groups. First
we wanted to determine whether there was any difference in
the tendency to give representativeness-based (heuristic)
responses between the autistic and the control group. We
conducted a 2 (group) x 2 (problem type) mixed ANOVA to
compare representativeness-based responses on the conflict
and non-conflict problems for the two groups. The analysis
revealed no effect of problem type or group. This indicated
that autistic participants’ responses were as much driven by
representativeness as the control groups’. A similar
ANOVA on the non-representative responses showed a
significant effect of conflict (F(1,62)=5.19, p<.05, ηp2 =
.07), but no effect of group, and no interaction. This
indicated that children in both groups tended to choose the
non-representative option more often if it corresponded to
the base rates. Thus, both groups showed equal sensitivity to
probabilistic information.
Engineers and lawyers problem with non-representative
description: Table 3 shows the mean proportion of base rate,
equally likely, and other responses for each of the problem
types and groups. Our first analysis was aimed at
determining whether there was any difference in the
tendency to give equiprobability responses between the
autistic and the control group. We conducted a 2 (group) x 2
(problem type) mixed ANOVA to compare equiprobability
responses on the conflict and non-conflict problems for the
two groups. The analysis revealed no effect of problem type
or group. This indicated that there was no difference
between groups in their tendency to give equiprobability
responses and the number of equiprobability responses was
the same in the conflict and non-conflict tasks. A similar
ANOVA on the base rate responses showed a significant
effect of conflict (F(1,62)=7.89, p<.01, ηp2 = .10) and a
significant group by problem type interaction (F(1,62)=4.01,
p<.05, ηp2 = .05). This indicated that typically developing
children gave less base rate responses when the groups
could be associated with social stereotypes, but when the
groups were neutral (i.e., the groups’ descriptions were not
informative) children in the autistic and control group gave
the same amount of base rate responses. This showed that
autistic children were not more sensitive to probabilistic
information, but they were less inclined to engage in further
processing based on contextual cues (i.e., presumably
because they did not assume that the individuating

Non-representative
Conflict
Non-conflict
.15 (.25)
.08 (.21)
.17 (.28)
.05 (.15)

Equibrobable
Conflict Non-conflict
.10 (.20)
.15 (.27)
.10 (.25)
.14 (.23)

information provided about the groups should be taken into
consideration). Instead they continued to rely on base rates
which were readily available.

Discussion
The findings presented here suggest that the conjunction
fallacy is less likely to occur with autistic participants. This
effect was predicted because autism has been associated
with deficits in contextual processing, the sort of automatic
processing commonly claimed to underlie the conjunction
effect (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002). In addition, the
comparison between the experimental and control problems
demonstrates that autistic participants are not generally
more sensitive to the conjunction rule; that is, they do not
show improved normative performance on the non-conflict
problems. Finally, an examination of the likelihood
judgments on the representative item alone indicates that the
groups do not differ in the degree to which they are
influenced by background knowledge in their ratings of the
simple options.
Performance on the engineers and lawyers problem with
representative description showed similar tendencies.
Autistic children were as much influenced by the
representativeness of a description as typically developing
children, mostly ignoring base rates. More specifically, they
showed the same significant but not very strong effect of
conflict between base rates and representativeness as the
control group. This result is in line with the finding on the
conjunction fallacy tasks where there was no difference
between groups in their ability to choose the representative
option as most likely. This also concurs with the findings of
Hirschfeld et al. (2007) who reported similar activation and
use of stereotypes in autistic as in typical populations. In
addition, (just as in the conjunction fallacy task) the two
groups were equally sensitive to probabilistic information.
On the engineers and lawyers problem with nonrepresentative description autistic children showed less
sensitivity than the control group to whether the description
of groups could be associated with social stereotypes or not.
Although the performance of the two groups was
indistinguishable on the control problems (which confirmed
once more that autistic children were not any more sensitive
to probabilistic information than the control group).
However, typically developing children gave less base rate
responses than the autistic group when the description of the
groups in the task seemed socially meaningful. This shows,
in accordance with the findings on the conjunction fallacy
task, that autistic children are less inclined to engage in

78

Table 3: Mean proportion of base rate, equiprobable and other responses for each type of problem across groups on the
engineers and lawyers problem with non-representative description (standard deviations in brackets).

Typically developing
Autistic

Conflict
.30 (.33)
.54 (.39)

Base rate
Non-conflict
.60 (.42)
.60 (.39)

contextual processing than the control group based on subtle
cues. This corresponds to the lower impact of context on
complex verbal processing in autism that was reported by a
number of studies (for a review, see Happé & Frith, 2006).
In two out of three types of task autistic children engaged
in less contextual processing than typically developing
children. This raises the question of how the
contextualization process involved in the three tasks might
differ. Lopez and Leekham (2003) suggested that autistic
children were able to use context to draw simple inferences,
but they were impaired in the contextual processing of
complex material. One possible way of defining complexity
could be through the amount of cognitive effort needed to
carry out an operation. Recently, we found evidence that
amongst children between the age of 5 and 11 committing
the conjunction fallacy (and giving heuristic responses on
some other tasks) was positively correlated with cognitive
abilities (Morsanyi & Handley, 2008). However, this trend
reverses for older children and adults (Kokis, Macpherson,
Toplak, West & Stanovich, 2002) resulting in a
developmental pattern where young children with higher
cognitive ability give more heuristic responses than lower
ability children from the same age group. Later on the
contextualization process becomes effortless and automatic,
and at this stage suppressing contextual processing (i.e.,
decontextualization) requires conscious effort. As a result,
amongst adolescents higher ability participants give less
heuristic responses than their lower ability peers. Similar
reversed U-shaped developmental patterns have been found
in the area of conditional reasoning (De Neys & Everaerts,
2008) and false memories (Brainerd, 2004).
It is possible that for autistic children contextual
processing requires more cognitive effort than for typically
developing children. Consequently, it occurs less often than
amongst typically developing adolescents where these
effects are the result of more automatic contextualization
processes. If this conjecture is right, then we would expect
that the relationship between working memory capacity and
heuristic/normative responding amongst the autistic and the
control group might be different, at least on the tasks where
we found a difference in response patterns between groups.
In the present study, we collected data from the counting
span task, a typical measure of working memory capacity.
Consistent with the analysis above the correlation between
the number of conjunction fallacies made on the conflict
tasks in the autistic group and working memory scores was
significant and positive (r (21) = .44, p<.05), whilst the
correlation in the control group was negative and nonsignificant (r (38) = -.09, n.s.) indicating that committing the

Conflict
.30 (.35)
.19 (.29)

Other
Non-conflict
.13 (.22)
.16 (.24)

Equibrobable
Conflict Non-conflict
.40 (.37)
.27 (.32)
.27 (.33)
.23 (.33)

conjunction fallacy was the result of effortful reasoning in
the autistic, but not in the control group.
Giving heuristic (representativeness-based) responses in
the first version of the engineers and lawyers problem
(where we found no difference between the autistic and the
control group) was not correlated with working memory
capacity in either the autistic (r (21)=-.26, n.s.) or the
control group (r (38) =-.02, n.s.). This indicates that
choosing the representative option was a fairly automatic
process for both groups.
Applying the same procedure for the base rate responses
on the conflict version of the engineers and lawyers problem
with a non-representative description, we found that it was
positively correlated with working memory capacity in the
control group (r (38) =.30, p<.05), whilst the correlation in
the autistic group was non-significant and negative (r (21)=.07, n.s.). This suggests that resisting the heuristic in the
case of this task requires conscious effort for the control
group. By contrast, autistic children could resist the
heuristic effortlessly, presumably because they did not
engage in the contextualization process in the first place.
This is also indicated by their virtually identical
performance on the conflict and non-conflict version of this
task.
Taken together, the correlational patterns suggest that the
tasks that we used in this study differed in the complexity of
the contextualization process involved. The engineers and
lawyers problem with a representative description involved
a simple matching of the description with a response option
which was done with equal ease in the autistic and the
control group. Committing the conjunction fallacy involved
a more complex contextualization process which was
automatic (i.e., effortless) for the typically developing group
but which was effortful for the autistic children. This
corresponds to the findings with younger typically
developing children (Morsanyi & Handley, 2008), and it
suggests a delay in the autistic group in developing the
ability to contextualize. Finally, on the engineers and
lawyers task with a non-representative description, giving
the normative response (which is presumably based on the
inhibition of the heuristic equiprobability response – see
e.g., Kokis et al., 2002) required conscious effort in the
typically developing sample, whereas it was effortless in the
autistic group, suggesting that the contextualization process
did not occur in the autistic group - again giving the
impression of a developmental delay.
Although dual-process theories (e.g., Stanovich, 1999)
generally assume that the contextualization process that
underlies heuristic reasoning is automatic and effortless, this

79

is mostly based on evidence with adult participants. The
developmental data in Morsanyi and Handley (2008)
together with evidence from the area of conditional
reasoning (e.g., De Neys & Everaerts, 2008) and with the
data from the present study suggest that contextualization
does not take place automatically in the case of young
children, and autistic adolescents. Instead of being more
rational or more sensitive to the logical structure of the
problems, autistic participants were less able to integrate
contextual information into their representation of the tasks,
or, potentially, less able to combine information from
different sources. Autistic children can process complex
nonverbal information, and they are also able to reason with
relations, as suggested by their performance on the Raven
test (e.g., Dawson et al., 2007), and pictorial tests of
analogical reasoning (Morsanyi & Holyoak, in press).
Nevertheless, in the case of the present tasks autistic
children showed less contextualization than the control
group. Moreover, when contextualization did occur it
required more effort than in the control group. Taken
together these data suggest a delay in the development of
the ability to contextualize complex verbal material in the
autistic group (see also Lopez & Leekham, 2003).

References
Brainerd, C. J. (2004). Dropping the other U: An alternative
approach to U-shaped developmental functions. Journal of
Cognition and Development, 5, 81–88.
Dawson, M., Soulières, I., Gernsbacher, M. A., & Mottron,
L. (2007). The level and nature of autistic intelligence.
Psychological Science, 18, 657-662.
De Neys, W., & Everaerts, D. (2008). Developmental trends
in everyday conditional reasoning: The retrieval and
inhibition interplay. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 100, 252-263.
Evans, J. St. B. T. & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
Reasoning. Hove: Psychology Press.
Frith, U., & Happé, F. (1994). Autism: beyond "theory of
mind". Cognition, 50, 115-132.
Gilovich, T., Griffin, D. & Kahneman, D. (Eds.) (2002).
Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgment, Cambridge University Press, New York, USA.
Happé, F. (1999). Autism: cognitive deficit or cognitive
style? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 216-222.
Handley, S., Capon, A., Beveridge, M., Dennis, I. & Evans,
J.S.B.T. (2004). Working memory, inhibitory control, and
the development of children’s reasoning, Thinking and
Reasoning, 10, 175–195.
Happé, F., Frith, U. (2006). The weak coherence account:
detail-focused cognitive style in autism spectrum
disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 35, 5-25.
Hirschfeld, L., Bartmess, E., White, S. & Frith, U. (2007).
Can autistic children predict behavior by social
stereotypes? Current Biology, 17, 451-452.
Jolliffe, T., & Baron-Cohen, S. (1997). Are people with
autism or Asperger's Syndrome faster than normal on the

Embedded Figures Task? Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 38, 527-534.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology
of prediction. Psychological Review, 80, 237-251.
Kahneman, D. & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness
revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment. pp.
49-81 in T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman (eds).
Heuristics & Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgment. New York. Cambridge University Press.
Kokis, J., Macpherson, R., Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., &
Stanovich, K. E. (2002). Heuristic and analytic processing:
Age trends and associations with cognitive ability and
cognitive styles. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 83, 26–52.
Lopez, B., & Leekham, S. R. (2003). Do children with
autism fail to process information in context? Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines,
44, 285–300.
Morsanyi, K. & Handley, S. J. (2008). How smart do
you need to be to get it wrong? The role of cognitive
capacity in the development of heuristic-based
judgment. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 99,
18-36.
Morsanyi, K., & Holyoak, K. J. (in press) Analogical
reasoning ability in autistic and typically-developing
children. Developmental Science.
Raven, J., Raven, J.C. & Court, J.H. (1998). Manual for
Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices (1998 Edn.).
Oxford, England: Oxford Psychologists Press.
Saldana, D.; Frith, U. (2007). Do Readers with Autism
Make Bridging Inferences from World Knowledge?
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 96, 310-319.
Shah, A., & Frith, U. (1983). An islet of ability in autistic
children: a research note. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 24, 613-620.
Shah, A., & Frith, U. (1993). Why do autistic individuals
show superior performance on the block design task?
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 34, 13511364.
Stanovich, K.E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of
Individual Differences in Reasoning. Mahway, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stanovich, K. E. (2003). The fundamental computational
biases of human cognition: Heuristics that (sometimes)
impair decision making and problem solving. In J. E.
Davidson & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), The psychology of
problem solving (pp. 291-342). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional vs.
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293-3l5.
Wechsler, D. (1991). Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children–third edition (WISC-III), Psychological
Corporation, San Antonio, TX.

80

