UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How an Embodied Mind Perspective can Influence the Study of Emotion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3j42685s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Davis, Joshua
Keysers, Chrisitan
Strack, Fritz
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How an Embodied Mind Perspective can Influence the Study of Emotion
Joshua Ian Davis (jdavis at barnard.edu), Moderator
Department of Psychology, Barnard College of Columbia University
3009 Broadway, New York, NY 10027, USA

Christian Keysers (c.m.keysers at rug.nl)
Department of Neuroscience, University Medical Center Groningen &
BCN NeuroImaging Center, University of Groningen
A. Deusinglaan 2, 9713AW Groningen, The Netherlands

Fritz Strack (strack at psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de)
University of Würzburg
LS Psychologie II, Röntgenring 10, 97070 Würzburg, Germany

Jamil Zaki (jamil at psych.columbia.edu)
Department of Psychology, Columbia University
1190 Amsterdam Avenue, New York, NY, 10027, USA
Keywords: Embodied Mind, Embodied Cognition, Embodiment,
Emotion,
Affect,
Empathy,
Botox,
Facial
Feedback,
Neuroimaging, Psychophysiology

Embodied approaches to studying the mind have received
increasing attention over the last decade (e.g. Barsalou,
2008; Damasio, 1999; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999; Niedenthal,
2007). Common to these approaches is the goal of
understanding how our processes for perception and action
form a basis for our higher-level thoughts and emotions.
While there has been a great deal of interest in embodied
cognition as a theoretical stance, there have only been hints
at the value of this approach to researchers across the
cognitive sciences. This symposium is intended to help
illustrate how an embodied mind perspective can change the
research questions we ask and the ways we interpret results
when studying emotion. We present four lines of research,
bringing to bear psychophysiological, muscle paralysis,
neuroimaging, and behavioral methods. We aim to broaden
the discussion on the role of an embodied approach in
emotion research and the cognitive sciences more generally.
Jamil Zaki will begin the symposium by presenting
research on the physiological mechanisms underlying
empathic accuracy. Joshua Davis will then discuss research
on the paralyzing effects of Botox on emotional experience.
In the third talk, Christian Keysers will explore the
embodied nature of the brain mechanisms by which we
understand the emotions of others. Finally, Fritz Strack will
discuss the various psychological mechanisms by which
bodily actions can influence affect.

Zaki: Shared physiological states and interpersonal
understanding
Empathy research has demonstrated that when perceivers
and targets share autonomic arousal, perceivers can more
accurately recognize those targets’ emotions (empathic

accuracy). In particular, empathic accuracy has been shown
when changes in skin conductance response for both
perceivers and targets are correlated over time (known as
physiological linkage).
This finding suggests that
embodying the states of others is an important route to
interpersonal understanding. We replicated and extended
this finding, illustrating how these effects depend on
qualities of the target.
Targets differ in emotional
coherence (correlation between targets’ arousal and targets’
affect ratings), and empathic accuracy is highest when
perceivers view targets with greater emotional coherence.
Targets whose emotional states are accompanied by
congruent bodily states become affectively “readable,”
partially through facilitating shared arousal. We will
discuss these findings and what they reveal about the
mechanisms underlying the role of physiological linkage in
empathic accuracy.
Jamil Zaki will receive his Ph.D. in Psychology from
Columbia University in 2010. His work on empathic
accuracy has appeared in Psychological Science (Zaki,
Bolger, & Ochsner, 2008). He is the recipient of a 2008
Autism Speaks Pre-Doctoral Award.

Davis: The effects of Botox on emotional experience
Prior research suggests that facial expressions are more than
outward signals of what a person feels, but can also
influence a person’s emotional experience.
Earlier
experiments guided participants to voluntarily pose or
inhibit facial expressions. The voluntary nature of these
tasks can lead to issues (e.g. participant awareness of the
hypothesis, distraction, and various cognitive mediating
variables) that can make interpretation of the findings more
difficult. We compared participants receiving Botox – to
treat facial wrinkles – to those receiving a control treatment.
Crucially, Botox injections leave muscles in a state of
flaccid paralysis by disrupting neural transmission at the

2073

neuromuscular junction. The control injection (Restylane),
by contrast, has no effect on muscle movement. Participants
were seen before and after treatment, were tested on
reactions to both positive and negative stimuli, and were not
aware of the study hypothesis. Under these conditions,
Botox was found to have an effect on emotional experience.
We will discuss these findings and potential moderating
variables, with a focus on what they suggest about the
mechanisms by which facial feedback influences emotional
experience.
Joshua Ian Davis is Term Assistant Professor in the
Department of Psychology at Barnard College of Columbia
University. He received a 2007 Young Scholar Award from
the American Psychosomatic Society.

Keysers: How our brain embodies the emotions of
others
Contemporary psychological models assume that perceiving
the emotions of others depends on the processes of
emotional contagion and/or of facial mimicry. Here I will
show how neuroimaging can test and refine these concepts.
I will show that viewing the facial expressions of others
activates inferior frontal areas involved in producing similar
facial expressions(van der Gaag, Minderaa, & Keysers,
2007). I will show how viewing the positive and negative
emotions of others also activate regions involved in
experiencing similar emotions(Jabbi, Swart, & Keysers,
2007; Wicker et al., 2003). Finally, using functional
connectivity analysis, I will show how sharing the motor
program of other people’s facial expressions seems to
trigger our sharing of their inner states(Jabbi & Keysers,
2008). These findings show that our perception of the
emotions of others is a deeply embodied process depending
on representations of our own actions and emotions(Keysers
& Gazzola, 2006). Finally, I will show how these findings
help resolve one of the anomalies of the traditional
psychological model: if sharing the facial expressions of
others is the cause for feeling their emotions, why does the
amount of overt facial mimicry fail to correlate with the
amount of emotional contagion and understanding?
Christian Keysers is Scientific Director of the BCN
Neuroimaging Center and Full Professor for the Social
Brain at the medical faculty of the University Medical
Center Groningen. He is a recipient of the Marie Curie
Excellence Award.

Strack: Embodiment – Features and Functions
While the phenomenon of embodiment has been frequently
demonstrated, its’ underlying psychological mechanisms
have not been sufficiently identified. In my presentation, I
shall describe different routes on which physical behavior
may influence psychological representations. I shall
illustrate these proposals with examples from my own work
ranging from influences of facial and postural action to head
movements and chewing activities on affective judgments,
memory and aesthetic assessments.

Fritz Strack is Professor and Chair in Social Psychology
at the University of Würzburg. From 2005-2008, he was
President of the European Association of Experimental
Social Psychology (EAESP). He holds a 2003 Theoretical
Innovation Prize of the Society of Personality and Social
Psychology (SPSP), a 2004 Wilhelm-Wundt-Medal of the
German Psychological Society, and a 2005 Thomas M.
Ostrom Award of the Person Memory Interest Group.
Related representative papers include Topolinski & Strack
(in press), Strack & Deutsch (2004), and Strack, Martin, &
Stepper (1988).

References
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body
and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness. New
York: Harcourt Brace & Company.
Jabbi, M., & Keysers, C. (2008). Inferior frontal gyrus
activity triggers anterior insula response to emotional
facial expressions. Emotion, 8(6), 775-780.
Jabbi, M., Swart, M., & Keysers, C. (2007). Empathy for
positive and negative emotions in the gustatory cortex.
Neuroimage, 34(4), 1744-1753.
Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2006). Towards a unifying
neural theory of social cognition. Progress in Brain
Research, 156, 383-406.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh:
The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western
Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Niedenthal, P. M. (2007). Embodying Emotion. Science,
316, 1002.
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Reflective and impulsive
determinants of social behavior. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 8, 220-247.
Strack, F., Martin, L., & Stepper, S. (1988). Inhibiting and
facilitating conditions of the human smile: A nonobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(5), 768-777.
Topolinski, S., & Strack, F. (in press). Motormouth: Mere
exposure depends on stimulus-specific motor
simulations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
van der Gaag, C., Minderaa, R. B., & Keysers, C. (2007).
Facial expressions: what the mirror neuron system can
and cannot tell us. Soc Neurosci, 2(3-4), 179-222.
Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J. P., Gallese, V.,
& Rizzolatti, G. (2003). Both of us disgusted in my
insula: the common neural basis of seeing and feeling
disgust. Neuron, 40(3), 655-664.
Zaki, J., Bolger, N., & Ochsner, K. (2008). It takes two: The
interpersonal nature of empathic accuracy. Psychological
Science, 19(4), 399-404.

2074

