UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How can Euler diagrams improve syllogistic reasoning?
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/472479g2
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Mineshima, Koji
Okada, Mitsuhiro
Sato, Yuri
et al.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

              How can Euler diagrams improve syllogistic reasoning?
                                                     Yuri Sato
                                                   Keio University
                                                 Koji Mineshima
                                                   Keio University
                                                  Ryo Takemura
                                                   Keio University
                                                Mitsuhiro Okada
                                                   Keio University
Abstract: The present study investigates the question of whether and how Euler diagrams can improve syllogistic
reasoning. Previous research reports that there is no evidence to show the psychological advantage of Euler diagrams
in solving syllogisms. In our experiments, we use Euler diagrams with “named points”, which are formulated within
the simple Euler system introduced in our previous work. The diagrams in our system are distinctive in that they can
represent a single categorical statement by a single diagram. It is predicated that the diagrams improve syllogistic
reasoning in general, and in particular that some well-known errors in linguistic syllogistic reasoning could be blocked,
mainly due to the fact that diagrams make explicit the subject-predicate relation of a categorical statement. The
results show that the reasoning with Euler diagrams significantly improve subjects’ performance, compared to the
one without diagrams. We also discuss some models of diagrammatic inferences involved in solving syllogisms.
                                                          940

