UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hyperlearning: A Connectionist Model of Psychosis in Schizophrenia

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/31d5h9qq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Grasemann, Uli
Hoffman, Ralph
Miikkulainen, Risto

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hyperlearning: A Connectionist Model of Psychosis in Schizophrenia
Uli Grasemann

Risto Miikkulainen

Department of Computer Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin
{uli, risto}@cs.utexas.edu

Ralph Hoffman
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine
ralph.hoffman@yale.edu
Abstract

clinical research, the brain processes underlying these and
other symptoms of schizophrenia remain incompletely understood (Harrison, 1999). Only recently, theories have begun to
emerge that have the potential to explain how abnormalities
at the brain level might lead to the emergence of symptoms.
One recent theory, put forth by Kapur (2003), is based
on the view that dopamine (DA) mediates the significance,
or “salience”, of subjective experience (Berridge & Robinson, 1998). Kapur proposes that in schizophrenia, an overabundance of midbrain DA leads to a pathological enhancement of salience, which in turn causes psychotic symptoms.
Delusions, for example, are explained as secondary reactions
to an altered experience of the world — i.e. as an attempt
by the brain to make sense of the excessive significance assigned to insignificant events. The theory that some symptoms of schizophrenia are caused by excessive salience has
been widely endorsed in the psychiatric literature, and forms
the theoretical basis of the present computational study.
Excessive salience (and thus excessive DA release) was
simulated in a neural network model of human story processing using artificially high network learning rates. In contrast
to other network disturbances, this “hyperlearning” simulation was shown to produce a compelling model for both delusional and derailed language.

Abnormal brain processes that underlie schizophrenia are incompletely understood. Diagnosis of this disorder relies in
large part on psychotic symptoms that are observed through
conversational language. In this paper, two such symptoms,
delusions (fixed false beliefs) and derailments (inability to follow a coherent discourse plan) are modeled using DISCERN,
a connectionist model of human story processing. Simulations
of alternative pathologies thought to underlie schizophrenia are
applied to DISCERN, and the resulting language abnormalities
are evaluated for symptoms of schizophrenia. “Hyperlearning”, a simulation of excessive dopamine release, is shown to
produce a compelling model for both delusional and derailed
language. Applied to different locations in the model, hyperlearning led to different symptoms, suggesting how clinical
subtypes of schizophrenia could arise from a common underlying process.
Keywords: Neural Networks; Schizophrenia; Natural Language Processing.

Introduction
No current laboratory or imaging technique can reliably identify individuals with schizophrenia. Instead, diagnosis of this
disorder relies on symptoms observed in clinical interviews
using conversational language. The symptoms of schizophrenia are complex and span a wide range of altered behavior
and perception. The present study focuses on delusions and
derailment, two psychotic symptoms that play an important
role in diagnosing patients with schizophrenia.
Delusions, a major characteristic of the “paranoid type”
of schizophrenia, can take many different forms. In general, delusions are are fixed false beliefs that cannot be
changed through rational refutation. Delusions in schizophrenia occur in more than 60% of patients, and often have
grandiose or paranoid content (Harrow et al., 2004; Applebaum, Clark Robbins, & Roth, 1999), i.e. a patient might
believe that he is the lost son of John Lennon, or that he is
being monitored by the CIA. In this way, delusions in schizophrenia often insert the self or persons close to the patient into
rigid, implausible or bizarre narrative schemata.
Derailment behavior, the second focus of the present study,
is fluent speech that fails to adhere to an organizing topic or
frame of reference (Bleuler, 1911; Andreasen, 1979). When
telling a story, for example, a patient may repeatedly skip to
other unrelated stories, leaving the listener in a bewildered
state. Derailments often occur in “disorganized type” schizophrenia, where symptoms are dominated by disorganized language and behavior.
Establishing the brain processes that lead to delusions and
derailment in schizophrenia would greatly advance our understanding of this disorder. Yet after almost a century of

Approach
The approach taken in the present study is based on DISCERN (Miikkulainen, 1993; Fidelman, Miikkulainen, &
Hoffman, 2005; Grasemann, Miikkulainen, & Hoffman,
2007), a neural network model of human story processing.
Simulations of alternative pathologies thought to underlie
schizophrenia, including “hyperlearning”, a model of excessive salience, were applied to the model. The resulting language disturbances in DISCERN were then evaluated for
characteristic signs of delusions and derailments in schizophrenia.
Several computational studies in the past were based on
similar approaches. Hoffman (1987) and Ruppin, Reggia,
and Horn (1996), for example, propose models of psychotic
symptoms based on attractor networks. Cohen and colleagues
(Cohen & Servan-Schreiber, 1992; Braver, Barch, & Cohen,
1999) focus on modeling behavioral deficits and cognitive
impairment based on a neural network-based model of the
frontal cortex. Spitzer (1997) uses self-organizing maps to
simulate aspects of disturbed lexical access in schizophrenia. Finally, Hoffman and colleagues (1997; 2006) investigate mechanisms by which hallucinations can arise in speech
perception networks.

224

Input text

Sentence
Parser

Story
Parser

Sentence
Generator

Lexicon

Memory
Encoder

[$job Vito Mafia head likes New-York famous gangster]
Vito is a gangster.
[Vito is _ _ gangster]
Vito is the head of the Mafia.
[Vito is Mafia _ head]
Vito works in New-York.
[Vito works New-York _ _]
Vito likes his job.
[Vito likes _ his job]
Vito is a famous gangster.
[Vito is _ famous gangster]

Output text

Episodic
Memory

[$driving Vito _ scared airport LA recklessly _]
Vito wants to go to LA.
[Vito wants LA goes _]
Vito enters his car.
[Vito enters _ his car]
Vito drives to the airport.
[Vito drives airport _ _]
Vito is scared.
[Vito is _ _ scared]
Vito drives recklessly.
[Vito drives _ _ recklessly]

Story
Generator

[$pulled-over Vito cop arrests _ murder _ _]
Vito is pulled-over by a cop.
[Vito is cop _ pulled-over]
The cop asks Vito for his license. [Cop asks license his Vito]
Vito gives his license to The cop. [Vito gives cop his license]
The cop checks the license.
[Cop checks _ _ license]
The cop arrests Vito for murder.
[Cop arrests murder _ Vito]

Figure 1: DISCERN is a neural network model of story understanding and recall. The task of understanding and reproducing a story is
achieved by a chain of neural network modules, each building on the
results of the previous module and providing input for the next.

[$trial Vito _ walks clears free murder good]
Vito is accused of murder.
[Vito is murder _ accused]
Vito is brought before the court. [Vito is court _ brought]
Vito has a good lawyer.
[Vito has _ good lawyer]
The court clears Vito of murder.
[Court clears murder _ Vito]
Vito walks free.
[Vito walks _ free _]

The most important way in which DISCERN differs from
these previous models is the level of behavior at which symptoms are observed. Using a model of human story processing
makes it possible to observe the effects of network disturbances at the level of conversational language — the same
level at which the clinical symptoms that define schizophrenia are diagnosed.
The remainder of this section first gives a brief overview of
DISCERN, and then discusses the network disturbances used
to model possible causes of schizophrenic symptoms.

Figure 2: An example input story about a gangster getting arrested
for a crime committed earlier. The story consists of four scripts: the
slots of each script are on top, followed by the sentences of the script
(left) and their static representations used by DISCERN (right). During story understanding, DISCERN translates such stories from individual words to sentence representations, slot-based script representations, and finally episodic memory traces. Story recall reverses
this process.

The DISCERN Model

The modules in DISCERN communicate using distributed
representations of word meanings, i.e. fixed-size patterns of
neuron activations, stored in a central lexicon. These representations are learned based on how the words are used in the
example stories, using the FGREP algorithm (Miikkulainen,
1993), a modified version of backpropagation that treats input
representations as an additional layer of weights.
Words in the input text are first presented to the lexicon,
which translates them into word representations. The representations are then passed on to the sentence parser one word
at a time. The sentence parser builds a static representation
of each sentence as it comes in. At the end of each sentence,
that representation, which consists of a concatenation of word
representations, is passed on to the story parser. The story
parser in turn transforms a sequence of sentences into a static
representation of a script, simultaneously building a representation of the story’s emotional context. Script representations
are called slot-filler representations, because they consist of a
representation for the name for the script (the words starting
with $ in Figure 2) and a sequence of concepts filling its slots.
At this point, the internal representation of a story consists
of its emotional context and a list of slot-filler representations, one for each script in the story. The memory encoder
turns this representation into a string of episodic memories
that can be successively recalled and reproduced by the story
generator. This behavior is achieved using Recursive AutoAssociative Memory, or RAAM (Pollack, 1990), a neural network architecture that forms fixed-size distributed representations of recursive data structures like lists or trees.
The representations of script sequences produced by the
memory encoder are later used by the story generator as
memory cues to address the episodic memory.

DISCERN is a neural network-based model of human story
understanding and recall. Stories in DISCERN are sequences
of scripts – stereotypical event sequences that can be adapted
to match specific situations. A classic example for a script
is visiting a restaurant: The sequence of events (i.e. waiting
to be seated, ordering, etc.) usually stays the same, and can
be adapted to match a specific restaurant visit by filling in
open slots such as the type of restaurant or the kind of food.
Using scripts, specific events (called script instances) can be
understood and remembered by storing only the type of script
they follow and the concepts filling the script’s slots.
In DISCERN, the task of understanding, recalling, and
then paraphrasing a story is achieved by a chain of modules,
each building on the results of the last module in the chain,
and providing input for the next. The modules consist of simple recurrent or feedforward neural networks that are trained
with backpropagation and linked together to form the final
system, as shown in Figure 1.
DISCERN reads and produces natural language. Each
story consists of a sequence of scripts, but is presented to the
system in plain text, one word at a time. While DISCERN
understands and recalls the story, it is at different times represented at the level of words, sentences, scripts, and episodic
memories. Figure 2 shows an example story and the representations used by DISCERN to encode the individual scripts.
Each story in DISCERN is associated with an emotional context, represented as a pattern of neuron activations that encodes either positive, negative or neutral emotional tone. The
emotion of a story plays an important role in story memory
and recall, affecting the system’s choice between alternative
continuations of a story.

225

With the episodic memory in place, the system is now
ready to recall the stories that were presented to it earlier.
The story generator module is cued with the first memory in
each story, then called repeatedly, producing a representation
for a sentence each time, until it outputs a special “end of
story” pattern. In addition to the next sentence, every cycle
of the story generator produces a cue to the episodic memory
that determines the next input. A memory cue consists of the
compressed version of the rest of the current story.
While the story generator produces sentences belonging to
the same script, the memory cue stays the same. Then, at the
same time the last sentence of a script is produced, the cue
changes, and the input is replaced by a memory of the next
script. In this way, the story generator steps through each
sentence of a story, and recalls each memory encoding it.
Finally the sentence generator, last in the chain, takes the
static sentence representations produced by the story generator and turns them back into a sequence of individual words.
The system then outputs plain text translations of these words
as provided by the lexicon.

iments reported below, hyperlearning was therefore used as a
first approximation to modeling Kapur’s theory.
Hyperlearning was applied separately to DISCERN’s
memory encoder network and to its story and sentence generators, reflecting the possible impact of increased salience on
episodic memory encoding and recall.
Additionally, a range of other network disturbances were
investigated for comparison. First, loss of cortical connectivity was modeled in DISCERN by removing connections in
the story generator or memory encoder networks whose absolute weights were below a threshold. Following the theory
that symptoms in schizophrenia may be the result of brain
processes that try to compensate for lost connectivity, pruning was investigated both by itself and in combination with
additional backpropagation learning.
Noise contamination of working memory, intended to
model impaired processing of context associated with schizophrenia, was simulated by adding increasing levels of noise to
the context layer of the story generator during each cycle.
Finally, impaired lexical access, thought to underlie language disorganization in schizophrenia, was modeled by
adding noise to the word representations in the lexicon.

Modeling Impaired Story Processing
DISCERN’s architecture is complex and provides a wide
range of opportunities to simulate pathological brain processes and observe their effects. The main focus of this work
is Kapur’s (2003) theory that psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia are the result of excessive salience.
Within Kapur’s framework, excessive salience is assumed
to be caused by increased midbrain DA release. However,
since the theory does not build on a detailed physiological
model, brain processes by which increased salience may in
turn cause psychotic symptoms remain necessarily abstract:
Symptoms are simply the result of the brain trying to adapt to
an altered experience of the world.
The present paper extends Kapur’s theory by adding “hyperlearning”, a specific mechanism that could link excessive
DA release and psychotic symptoms directly, and may serve
as a possible neural substrate for excessive salience. Hyperlearning simulates excessive DA release in DISCERN by performing additional backpropagation learning with artificially
increased learning rates.
The approach is motivated by two pieces of evidence linking excessive DA release, psychotic symptoms, and overly
intense learning in humans. First, excessive midbrain DA release is likely to occur during some stages of schizophrenia
(Laruelle, 2000), and has been linked to increased learning intensity (Gibbs et al., 2007). Second, a tendency to mismatch
expectancy of observed experience and outcome has been associated with delusions in patients with schizophenia (Corlett
et al., 2007); elevated prediction errors of this kind have been
shown to produce a “super-learning” state in human subjects
(Aitken, Larkin, & Dickinson, 2000).
A reasonable assumption, then, is that DA imbalance
causes both excessive salience and overly intense learning.
Furthermore, hyperlearning in DISCERN may capture important aspects of the impact of excessive salience. In the exper-

Experiments
The experiments reported below are based on a set of 28
hand-coded input stories. The stories ranged between three
and seven scripts long and were divided into two groups: The
first group described normal experiences in the daily life of
a “Self” character, a person that was overrepresented in the
corpus to simulate the one experiencing and reproducing the
stories. This part of the corpus included stories with a negative emotional tone, such as the self character driving drunk
and getting caught by the police, as well as stories about positive events, like visiting relatives, or the self character being
praised by his boss. The second group of stories consisted of
stories about a group of gangsters going about their gangster
business – committing crimes, killing each other, and occasionally getting caught. Figure 2 shows an example.
All stories were assembled from 14 different scripts describing stereotypical sequences of events such as meeting
someone for a drink or being pulled over by the police. Overall, the corpus contained approximately 550 single sentences
in 120 script instances. The lexicon contained about 170
words, including 20 names or descriptions of characters in
the stories (e.g. “Joe” or “lawyer”).
The first step in the experiments was to develop word representations to be used in the lexicon. A sentence parser network was trained using the FGREP algorithm to obtain the
word representations. Each word representation consisted of
a pattern of 12 neuron activations. After 500 iterations of the
entire corpus, the word representations had converged to good
semantic representations of the concepts. Similar word representations tended to stand for similar concepts, and usually
belonged to the same word category. Names of story characters, for instance, formed a tight and well-defined cluster:
with only a single exception, the five words closest to each of

226

the ten names were either another name, or the word “man”.
With the word representations in place, ten complete DISCERN systems were trained to reproduce all 28 input stories.
Network sizes and training parameters were determined empirically. Sentence parsers and generators had 250 hidden
neurons, story parsers had 225, and story generators had 150.
Memory encoder networks had 48 hidden neurons.
All modules were first trained separately until they
achieved a reasonable performance, and then linked in a chain
and trained for an additional 10,000 epochs for fine-tuning.
The training algorithm was standard backpropagation, so the
word representations were not changed any further. The
learning rate for each module was recalculated after each iteration of the story corpus by multiplying the module’s average output error by a constant factor (0.4). In this way, the
learning rate was automatically decreased during the training
process to allow for more accurate training.
After training, the resulting DISCERN systems were able
to reproduce all 28 stories almost perfectly. The average recall performance (measured as the percentage of sentences
correctly reproduced) ranged from 95% to 97%. Errors usually involved substituting one word for another that was used
in a very similar way in the input stories. Two of the ten
systems switched once from one story to another, but both
times, the switch was to a closely related story. This type of
“benign” derailment is not uncommon in healthy idividuals
(Hoffman, Stopek, & Andreasen, 1986).
Each of the lesions discussed previously was applied to all
ten healthy DISCERN systems. The intensity of each lesion
was increased until a realistic reduction of recall performance
was reached (about 50% of heathy performance). Statistics
on recall performance, number and type of lexical errors, and
derailment behavior were collected for each lesion.
The results were then evaluated to determine whether or
not the models produced language disturbances consistent
with schizophrenia. Specifically, a realistic model would
be expected to generate grammatically correct language with
low but non-zero levels of lexical errors, while at the same
time showing signs of delusions and/or derailments.
Derailments were scored when DISCERN switched from
one story context to another. Plausible derailment behavior
should contain frequent jumps between dissimilar stories.
Delusions are harder to quantify than derailments, but
should involve recurring and well-formed new narratives that
do not occur in the original story corpus. In patients, delusions are associated with “agency shifts”, i.e. migrations of
characters from one story context to another. Often, delusional stories involve the self being inserted into implausible
or bizarre narrative schemata.

tives. These agency shifts often involved the “self” character
migrating to gangster stories and other violations of global
context, while the local story structure stayed intact. The following text is an example from such a story.

Results

[...]
I was drunk.
I drove recklessly.
I was pulled-over by a cop.
The cop asked *Vince(me) for *his(my) license.
[Derailing to story 25]
Vito was pulled-over by a cop.
the cop asked Vito for his license.

[...]
*I(Tony) was scared.
*I(Tony) drove carefully.
*I(Tony) entered City-Hall for bombing.
*I(Tony) bomb(ed) City-Hall.
The *wedding(bombing) was a success.
*I(Tony) made a phone-call.
*I(Tony) smoked a cigarette.
[...]

Here, the “self” consistently replaces the gangster Tony.
Apart from this agency shift, the word “wedding” intrudes
from another context to replace the word “bombing. Patterns
like these often recurred many times in the output of a single
DISCERN system, creating a compelling simulation of delusional narratives.
Agency shifts in this simulation dominated other types of
errors. Consistent with language behavior in patients with
delusions, the syntax of the output language remained intact,
and levels of lexical errors besides agency shifts were low but
non-zero. Derailments following this type of hyperlearning
were rare, which is consistent with the “delusional type” of
schizophrenia, where symptoms do not tend to include prominent language disorganization.
Hyperlearning did, however, produce frequent derailments
when applied to the memory encoder instead of the story and
sentence generators. The following output was produced by
a DISCERN system after 500 epochs of hyperlearning:
[...]
Vince went to Starbucks.
[Derailing to story 13]
I went to Starbucks.
*Vince(I) sat at a table.
I ordered coffee.
I drank the coffee.
*Vince(I) met *Joe(Mary) at Starbucks.
[Derailing to story 15]
Mary was the girlfriend of Joe.
[Derailing to story 12]
*Vito(Joe) was the fiancee of *Tony(Mary).
I hated Joe.
*Vince(I) distrusted Joe.
[...]

The language in this case seems clearly disorganized, and
the system becomes unable to follow a coherent story line.
This example is particularly interesting because derailments
are accompanied by intrusions of characters from the original
story context, suggesting that the disorganization occurs at
a deeper level than just that of distorted memory retrieval.
Other examples where word substitutions seemed to serve as
a segway into derailed discourse appear to confirm this view:

Of all lesions investigated, only hyperlearning lead to plausible simulations of delusional language. Applied to the story
and sentence generator networks, hyperlearning robustly produced stable patterns of “agency shifts” where characters migrated between stories and produced meaningful new narra-

227

[...]
*Kate(Stacy) was from New-York.
*Mary(Stacy) *smoked(drove) a *praised(compact).
*Mary(Stacy) liked *baseball(movies).
[Derailing to story 22]
Vince talked to Vito about guns.
*Tony(Vince) *kissed(liked) guns.
Vince talked to *Bob(Vito) a long time.
Vince liked talking to *Tony(Vito).
Vince gave a *hand-shake(kiss) good-bye to *man(Vito).
[...]

200

Repeated Within Story

A
150
B
100
C
D

50

The system does derail to another story, but sentences like
“Mary smoked a praised” and “Tony kissed guns” make the
output random and non-sensical rather than disorganized.
Finally, when pruning was applied to the memory encoder
during training, DISCERN did produce derailments without
ungrammatical language or frequent lexical errors. However,
over 90% of network connections had to be cut in order to approximate a realistic reduction in recall performance, which
makes this kind of pruning an unlikely candidate pathology.
Furthermore, since pruning does not lead to a model for delusions, two separate processes would have to be assumed unnecessarily for derailments and delusions.
Additional results, including the full output text of all ten
DISCERN systems for all lesions investigated, can be found
at http://nn.cs.utexas.edu/?schizo.

0
0

50
100
150
Unique Character Substitutions

Figure 3: The average number of unique vs. repeated character
substitutions resulting from (A) hyperlearning of generator modules,
(B) semantic noise, (C) connection pruning, and (D) working memory noise. As the intensities of the network disturbances increase,
all produce more and more character substitutions. However, the
substitutions following hyperlearning are by far the most consistent,
leading to the emergence of stable patterns of “agency shifts” that
resemble delusional narratives.
Vito gave his license to the cop.
the cop checked the license.
the cop arrested Vito for bombing.
[...]

In this case, the switch to a gangster story is preceded by
the intrusion of a gangster character. Note also how DISCERN adjusts the pronoun to match the new subject.
Not all instances of derailed language were equally consistent with disorganized language in schizophrenia. In particular, DISCERN tended to oscillate between two stories, which
occurs only rarely in patients with schizophrenia. Future refinements of the model will address this issue.
To summarize the results so far: The hyperlearning simulation of aberrant salience led to plausible simulations of
both delusions and derailed language. Different symptoms
emerged depending on the subset of modules to which hyperlearning was applied, suggesting a possible mechanism
by which different clinical subtypes of schizophrenia could
emerge from a common brain process.
The remainder of this section compares hyperlearning to
the other lesions applied to the model. First, as mentioned
above, the simulation of delusional language was unique to
hyperlearning – no other lesion led to patterns of agency shifts
that were as stable, or tended to insert the “I” character as frequently. Figure 3 compares the consistency of agency shifts
across different lesions, i.e. how many times specific substitutions of story characters were repeated within the same
story. Substitutions following hyperlearning are much more
likely to be repeated, leading to the consistent “delusional”
patterns observed.
Derailments, on the other hand, did occur frequently following several lesions, including pruning and working memory noise. However, with lesions that did not include additional training, derailments were accompanied by high levels
of ungrammatical language and lexical errors, both of which
are inconsistent with the kind of language seen in schizophrenia (Figure 4). The following text, for example, was produced
by a DISCERN system while noise was added to the story
generator’s working memory:

Discussion and Future Work
The results demonstrate that hyperlearning provides plausible simulations of both delusions and derailment behavior in
schizophrenia. The present study therefore supports Kapur’s
(2003) theory of increased salience, and furthermore offers a
computational account of a brain process through which abnormal salience could lead to psychotic symptoms.
Additionally, the model suggests a possible refinement,
namely that different clinical subtypes of schizophrenia may
arise depending on the impact of overly intense learning on
different functional modules. These findings demonstrate
how computational models of psychopathology can complement clinical reearch by creating and fomulating hypotheses
about the link between mind and brain, between underlying
brain processes and their behavioral manifestations.
Other possible pathologies underlying derailment and
delusions in schizophrenia, including working memory impairment, loss of cortical connectivity, and disturbed lexical
% Ungrammatical Language

10

Working memory noise
Pruning
Semantic noise
Hyperlearning (generators)
Hyperlearning (memory enc.)

8
6
4
2
0
100

90

80

70
% Recall

60

50

40

Figure 4: Lesions without additional training lead to high levels of
ungrammatical language as recall performance declines. In contrast,
hyperlearning produces almost no ungrammatical language.

228

access, were not supported by simulations. However, DA imbalance in schizophrenia is likely a secondary effect of other
abnormal processes, and future research may provide insight
into the role of further pathologies involved in schizophrenia.
The present model focuses on delusions and derailments,
and does not account for other symptoms of schizophrenia.
Specifically, negative symptoms (as opposed to psychotic
symptoms) are not addressed. Negative symptoms include
reduced language output and flattened emotions. In future
work, emotional intensity will in part determine the intensity
of the learning process, and the possible role of emotional
flattening as a compensatory mechanism will be investigated.
A further symptom that is not addressed at present are
hallucinations, which primarily occur as spoken speech in
schizophrenia. Within the framework of abnormal salience,
hallucinations are assumed to arise from “the abnormal
salience of the internal representations of percepts and memories.” (Kapur, 2003). However, a previous computational
model suggests that connection loss in speech perception networks similar to those in DISCERN can model hallucinated
speech (Hoffman & McGlashan, 1997). Future work will attempt a unified account of hallucinations in schizophrenia.

Cohen, J., & Servan-Schreiber, D. (1992). Context, cortex
and dopamine: A connectionist approach to behaviour and
biology in schizophrenia. Psychol Rev, 99, 45–77.
Corlett, P., Murray, G., Honey, G., Aitken, M., Shanks, D.,
Robbins, T., et al. (2007). Disrupted prediction-error signal in psychosis: evidence for an associative account of
delusions. Brain, 130, 2387–400.
Fidelman, P., Miikkulainen, R., & Hoffman, R. E. (2005).
A subsymbolic model of complex story understanding. In
Proc of CogSci’05.
Gibbs, A. A., Naudts, K. H., Spencer, E. P., & David, A. S.
(2007). The role of dopamine in in attentional and memory biases for emotional information. Am J Psychiat, 164,
1603–9.
Grasemann, U., Miikkulainen, R., & Hoffman, R. E. (2007).
A subsymbolic model of language pathology in schizophrenia. In Proc of CogSci’07. Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
Harrison, P. (1999). The neuropathology of schizophrenia a
critical review of the data and their interpretation. Brain,
122, 593–624.
Harrow, M., Herbener, E. S., Shanklin, A., Jobe, T. H., Rattenbury, F., & Kaplan, K. J. (2004). Followup of psychotic
outpatients: dimensions of delusions and work functioning
in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bull, 30, 147–61.
Hoffman, R. (1987). Computer simulations of neural information processing and the schizophrenia-mania dichotomy.
Arch Gen Psychiat, 44, 178-88.
Hoffman, R., & McGlashan, T. (1997). Synaptic elimination, neurodevelopment and the mechanism of hallucinated
’voices’ in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiat, 154, 1683–9.
Hoffman, R., & McGlashan, T. (2006). Using a speech
perception neural network computer simulation to contrast
neuroanatomic versus neuromodulatory models of auditory
hallucinations. Pharmacopsychiat, 39 (suppl 1), 554–64.
Hoffman, R., Stopek, S., & Andreasen, N. (1986). A comparative study of manic versus schizophrenic speech disorganization. Arch Gen Psychiat, 43, 831–8.
Kapur, S. (2003). Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: a
framework linking biology, phenomenology, and pharmacology in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiat, 160(1), 13–23.
Laruelle, M. (2000). The role of endogenous sensitization in
the pathophysiology of schizophrenia: implications from
recent brain imaging studies. Brain Research - Brain Research Reviews, 31(2–3), 371–84.
Miikkulainen, R. (1993). Subsymbolic natural language processing: An integrated model of scripts, lexicon, and memory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pollack, J. (1990). Recursive distributed representations. Artif Intell, 46(1), 159–216.
Ruppin, E., Reggia, J., & Horn, D. (1996). Pathogenesis
of schizophrenic delusions and hallucinations: A neural
model. Schizophrenia Bull, 22(1), 105–23.
Spitzer, M. (1997). A cognitive neuroscience view of schizophrenic thought disorder. Schizophrenia Bull, 23(1), 29–50.

Conclusion
A computational model of language disturbance in schizophrenia was proposed and evaluated. Using DISCERN, a
neural network-based model of human story processing, different brain abnormalities thought to underlie schizophrenia
were simulated and compared with respect to their ability to
model symptoms of schizophrenia. “Hyperlearning”, a simulation of Kapur’s (2003) theory of abnormal salience as the
basis for psychosis in schizophrenia, was shown to provide
a plausible model of delusions and derailment behavior, two
key symptoms of schizophrenia.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIMH under grant
R01MH066228 and by NSF under grant IIS-0083776.

References
Aitken, M. R., Larkin, M. J., & Dickinson, A. (2000). Superlearning of causal judgments. Qt J Exp Psych, 53, 59–81.
Andreasen, N. C. (1979). Thought, language, and communication disorders. II. diagnostic significance. Arch Gen
Psychiat, 26, 1325–30.
Applebaum, P. S., Clark Robbins, P., & Roth, L. H. (1999).
Dimensional approach to delusions: comparison across
types and diagnoses. Am J Psychiat, 156, 1938–43.
Berridge, K., & Robinson, T. (1998). What is the role of
dopamine in reward: hedonic impact, reward learning, or
incentive salience? Brain Res Brain Res Rev, 28, 309–69.
Bleuler, E. (1911). Dementia praecox oder die Gruppe der
Schizofrenien. In G. Aschaffenburg (Ed.), Handbuch der
Psychiatrie. Leipzig: Breithep und Hartel.
Braver, T., Barch, D., & Cohen, J. (1999). Cognition and control in schizophrenia: A computational model of dopamine
and prefrontal function. Biol Psychiat, 46(3), 312-28.

229

