UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inhibition and Facilitation in Auditory Comprehension Across the Lifespan

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/10f857hg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Ali, Zahra R.
Blumenfeld, Henrike K.
Marian, Viorica
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inhibition and Facilitation in Auditory Comprehension Across the Lifespan
Henrike K. Blumenfeld (hblumenf@mail.sdsu.edu)

School of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, 5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182 USA

Scott R. Schroeder (schroeder@u.northwestern.edu)
Zahra R. Ali (zahraali2007@u.northwestern.edu)
Viorica Marian (v-marian@northwestern.edu)

Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 2240 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract

threshold becomes necessary for successful word selection.
Therefore, we reasoned that the relationship between
inhibition and activation during word recognition would
dynamically change with age. In an auditory word
identification task, participants identified the picture of a
target word (cab) from among a picture of a similarsounding competitor (cat) and pictures of two neutral filler
words (bus, ant). Immediately following each picture
identification trial, participants completed a priming trial,
where residual target activation and competitor inhibition
were probed. Younger adults were predicted to inhibit
competitors and efficiently identify target words. In
contrast, older adults were predicted to show greater targetcompetitor interference, less competitor inhibition, and
increased target activation at the time of word selection.

The relationship between activation and inhibition in word
comprehension was examined in younger and older adults by
using a novel Picture Identification / Negative Priming
paradigm. Picture identification results showed increased
interference from similar-sounding competitor words in older
(compared to younger) adults. Subsequent priming probe
results yielded reduced competitor inhibition with increased
target word facilitation in older (compared to younger) adults.
Findings suggest a link between activation and inhibition in
younger adults and age-related changes in word selection
mechanisms, with increased compensatory target facilitation
accompanying decline in inhibitory control. Implications for
models of word recognition are discussed.
Keywords: Inhibition; facilitation; negative priming; auditory
word recognition; cognitive aging.

Methods

Introduction
A number of distributed and connectionist models formalize
mechanisms of auditory word recognition (e.g., MarslenWilson, 1987; McClelland & Elman, 1986). These models
posit that words are identified from the speech stream via
parallel activation of multiple similar-sounding candidates,
where target words are selected once sufficient acoustic
information becomes available. In addition, some models,
such as McClelland and Elman’s (1986) TRACE Model,
posit that lexical-level lateral inhibition between competing
word candidates contributes to target word selection.
Indeed, inhibitory control has been experimentally shown to
contribute to comprehension (Gernsbacher, 1990; Swinney,
1979). While it is intuitive that activation and inhibition
mechanisms interact, few accounts specify the nature of this
interaction. Since abilities of inhibitory control decline with
age (Comalli, Wapner, & Werner, 1962; Hasher & Zacks,
1988), one way to examine the interaction between
inhibition and activation is to study their magnitude during
comprehension in younger vs. older adults.
In older adults, decline in inhibitory control has been
linked to decline in auditory comprehension abilities (e.g.,
Sommers & Danielson, 1999; Taylor et al., 2005). However,
it is likely that, as inhibitory control abilities decline, older
adults employ compensatory strategies to maintain
performance. For example, it is possible that, as inhibitory
control becomes less efficient, target activation to a higher

Participants
Thirty English-native younger monolingual adults (Mage =
21.4, SD = 3.9; 4 males) and 28 English-native older
monolingual adults (Mage = 73.3, SD = 10.3) were recruited.
Participants were administered the Language Experience
and Proficiency Questionnaire (Marian, Blumenfeld, &
Kaushanskaya, 2007) and a number of standardized
linguistic and cognitive tasks (see Table 1). Younger and
older adults were matched on the percentage of time they
were currently exposed to their native English (as opposed
to foreign languages), on expressive vocabulary knowledge
(as measured by the standard score on the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test-III), on nonverbal IQ (as measured by the
Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence), and on digit
span performance (as measured by the Comprehensive Test
of Phonological Processing), p > .05.

Task
The paradigm included two types of trials, which were
presented in alternating order (see Figure 1). Word
Recognition / Picture Identification trials were presented
first and indexed activation of target and competitor words,
relative to control words, during word recognition. Priming
Probe trials were presented next and indexed inhibition of
preceding competitor words and facilitation of preceding

267

Table 1: Linguistic and cognitive characteristics of younger and older adult participants. Standard Deviations in parentheses.
Age (in years)
Vocabulary (PPVT-III)
Current percentage use of English
Nonverbal IQ (WASI)
Digit Span (CTOPP)

Younger group (n = 30)
21.4 (3.9)
116.6 (11.6)
98.1 (2.7)
110.5 (11.9)
17.5 (2.1)

Picture Identification
(Interference Index)

target words, relative to control words. Priming Probe trials
immediately followed Word Recognition trials, and
contained grey asterisks that occurred in the locations
previously occupied by pictures of competitor, filler, or
target words.
On Word Recognition trials, if longer reaction times and
/or lower accuracy rates were found during identification of
target pictures in the presence of competitor words than in
their absence, it would be concluded that the competitor
word interfered during target selection. On Priming Probe
trials, if identification latencies for priming probes in
locations preceded by competitor pictures would exceed
identification latencies for priming probes in locations
preceded by filler pictures, then it would be concluded that
the competitor-location was inhibited, suggesting prior
inhibition of the competitor word. If filler probe
identification latencies would exceed target probe
identification latencies, then it would be concluded that
target words were facilitated. Together, competitor
interference / inhibition and target facilitation were indexed.
Priming Condition A
Auditory
target:
“hamper”
Competitor
picture:
“hammer”
Response
(key-press):
Priming Probe
(Inhibition Index)

Group differences (t-test)
t (56) = -24.96, p < .05
t (56) = -1.50, p > .05
t (56) = -0.10, p > .05
t (56) = -0.81 , p > .05
t (56) = 1.47 , p > .05

Study Design
The study design included two components. First, to
examine interference of similar-sounding competitor
words during auditory comprehension, reaction times and
accuracy rates were compared for trials with and without
competitors in a 2 x 2 ANOVA, with trial type
(competitors, no competitors) as a within-subjects factor
and group (younger, older) as a between-subjects factor.
Second, to examine subsequent inhibition of competitor
words, and facilitation/activation of target words,
identification latencies of competitor-, target-, and fillerprobes were compared in a 3 x 2 ANOVA, with priming
probe type (competitor probe, target probe, filler probe) as a
within-subjects factor, and with group (younger, older) as a
between-subjects factor. Three dependent measures were
collected: (1) target-word picture identification times, (2)
target-word picture identification accuracies, and (3)
identification times of priming probes that immediately
followed each picture identification trial.

Priming Condition B
Auditory
target:
“judge”
Competitor
picture:
“jug”
Response
(key-press):

Competitor
Probe
(Inhibition)

Response
(key-press):

Older group (n = 28)
73.3 (10.3)
122.0 (14.7)
98.2 (4.5)
113.6 (16.7)
16.5 (2.9)

Priming Condition C
Auditory
target:
“plum”
Competitor
picture:
“plug”
Response
(key-press):

Filler
Probe
(Neutral)

Response
(key-press):

Target
Probe
(Facilitation)

Response
(key-press):

Figure 1: The Picture Identification / Negative Priming paradigm. To probe interference of similar-sounding words,
participants heard words and identified corresponding pictures in the presence of phonological competitors (top panel). To
probe word inhibition and facilitation, picture identification trials were followed by priming probe trials (bottom panel) that
probed inhibition / facilitation of competitor items (Condition A: grey asterisks appeared in locations previously occupied by
competitor pictures), filler items (Condition B: grey asterisks appeared in locations previously occupied by filler pictures),
and target items (Condition C: grey asterisks appeared in locations previously occupied by target pictures).

268

Materials

preceding Picture Identification trials via positive location
priming. After each Picture Identification trial, a Priming
Probe trial was presented. One of the four quadrants on the
visual display contained a grey asterisk, and the remaining
three quadrants contained a black asterisk. Asterisks were
presented in each of the four quadrants because behavioral
evidence suggests that negative priming effects are reduced
if response competition is not maintained during priming
probe trials (May, Kane, & Hasher, 1995). Three types of
priming probe trials were employed: (1) filler probe trials,
(2) competitor probe trials, and (3) target probe trials. On
filler probe trials, the grey asterisk occurred in the same
quadrant location as a filler trial on the preceding Picture
Identification trial. Since filler objects on Picture
Identification trials were likely to be minimally attended to
and minimally inhibited, response latencies on filler probe
trials should reflect minimal facilitation or inhibition, and
acted as a baseline. On the competitor probe trials, the grey
asterisk occurred in the same quadrant location as the
competitor in the previous Picture Identification trial. Since
competitor objects on Picture Identification trials were
likely to be only briefly and partially attended to and then
inhibited, response latencies on competitor probe trials
would reflect location inhibition, and would therefore be
delayed relative to filler probe trials. Finally, on the target
probe trials, the grey asterisk occurred in the same quadrant
location as the target on the preceding Picture Identification
trial. Since target objects on Picture Identification trials
were likely to be maximally attended to and fully activated,
response latencies on target probe trials would reflect
location facilitation, and would therefore be shorter relative
to filler probe and competitor probe trials.
All filler Picture Identification trials were followed by
“dummy” priming probe trials that had grey asterisks
assigned to each quadrant an equal number of times. Of the
234 Priming Probe trials, 26 trials were filler probe trials, 26
trials were competitor probe trials, 26 trials were target
probe trials, and 156 trials were dummy trials. In order to
reduce effects due to stimulus characteristics, pairings
between the 26 filler probe, competitor probe, and target
probe trials and the three lists of Word Recognition trials
were counterbalanced across participants so that each set of
Word Recognition trials was paired with each type of
Priming Probe trial an equal number of times.

For Picture Identification Trials, stimulus displays included
four pictures and a central fixation cross (see Figure 1, top
row). The four pictures in each display included (1) a targetword picture, (2) a competitor- or filler word picture, and (3,
4) two filler word pictures. A total of 234 Picture
Identification trials were presented. In one third of all trials
(n = 78), target words were paired with competitor words
that overlapped phonologically. For example, when the
target word was cab, the competitor word was cat.
The ratio of competitor- to filler trials was 1:2 in order to
minimize awareness of phonological overlap, and to
maximize competition effects (Botvinick et al., 2001;
Green, 1998; Henik, Bibi, Yanai, & Tzelgov, 1997). In the
remaining two thirds of Picture Identification trials (i.e.,
filler trials, n = 156), target words were paired with three
neutral filler words. Target-competitor pairs were chosen to
have high phonological overlap. This overlap consisted of at
least 2 word-initial shared phonemes. Phonological overlap
was also measured in terms of duration of acoustic overlap
by a native speaker of English, and averaged 279.4 msec
(SE = 20.8) across target-competitor pairs. Based on
findings by Dahan, Magnusson, and Tanenhaus (2001) and
using the CELEX word frequency database (Baayen,
Piepenbrock, et al., 1995), competitors were selected to be
of higher word frequency (M = 91.9, SE = 16.9) than targets
(M = 15.7, SE = 2.3), t (154) = 4.5, p <.001, since highfrequency words would yield more competition with targets.
Auditory stimuli in the form of single words were
presented concurrently with picture displays. Recordings of
auditory stimuli were made in a sound-proof booth (44,100
Hz, 16 bits) by a female native speaker of American
English, using a Marantz Solid State recorder. During the
experimental session, the name of the target picture was
presented 500 msec after the onset of the picture display.
Picture stimuli were selected from Blumenfeld and Marian
(2007), the International Picture Naming Database
(Székely et al., 2004), the IMSI Master Clips database, and
the Alta Vista search engine. Pictures were black linedrawings, and were manipulated in Photoshop so that
pictures appearing within the same display were similar in
terms of salience and line thickness. Positioning of target
and competitor pictures in display quadrants I-IV was
counterbalanced across conditions.
To match picture identification trials to the three types of
priming probe trials (target probes, competitor probes, and
filler probes), the 78 picture identification trials with
competitors were divided into three lists of 26 stimuli.
Across these three lists, stimuli were matched for target
frequencies, F (2, 75) = 0.2, p > .5, and competitor
frequencies, F (2, 75) = 0.2, p > .5. Finally, the three lists
were balanced for duration of phonological overlap between
targets and competitors, F (2, 75) = 0.02, p > .5.
For Priming Probe Trials, the purpose was to index extent
of inhibition of competitors on preceding Picture
Identification trials via negative location priming (e.g.,
Simone et al., 2006), and extent of facilitation of targets on

Data Coding
Only trials with correctly identified target pictures were
included in reaction time analyses. On Picture Identification
trials, trials with reaction times that exceeded 3 Standard
Deviations from the participants’ mean were excluded for
that participant. When picture identification trials were
removed from analyses due to incorrect responses or
reaction time outliers, corresponding priming probe trials
were also omitted from analyses. Finally, priming probe
response latencies that exceeded 3 standard deviations from
the participants’ mean were also excluded.

269

Results

and with group (younger, older) as a between-subjects
variable. Results yielded a main effect of trial type, F (1, 56)
= 83.1, p < .001, p2 = 0.6, with response latencies to probes
in target position (M = 575.4 msec, SE = 17.2 msec) shorter
than latencies to probes in filler positions (M = 640.5 msec,
SE = 20.1 msec). In addition, a main effect of group was
found, F (1, 56) = 55.8, p < .001, p2 = 0.5, with younger
adults (M = 483.2 msec, SE = 25.8 msec) showing shorter
response latencies than older adults (M = 760.4 msec, SE =
26.7 msec). Finally an interaction was found between trial
type and group, F (1, 56) = 18.3, p < .001, p2 = 0.3.
A follow-up 2 x 2 ANOVA with trial type (target, filler)
as a within-subjects variable and group (younger, older) as a
between-subjects variable yielded an interaction between
trial type and group, F (1, 56) = 21.9, p < .001, p2 = 0.3.
Follow-up t-tests suggested larger differences between
target and filler probe identification latencies for older
adults (103.4 msec, t (27) = 6.4, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 0.5)
than younger adults (26.9 msec, t (29) = 5.5, p < .001,
Cohen’s d = 0.4).
A 2 x 2 ANOVA with trial type (competitor, filler) as a
within-subjects variable and group (younger, older) as a
between-subjects variable yielded an interaction between
trial type and group, F (1, 56) = 6.1, p < .05, p2 = 0.1, with
younger adults showing longer identification times (M =
505.4 msec, SE = 14.3 msec) for competitor probes than
filler probes (M = 485.5 msec, SE = 12.9 msec), t (29) = 4.3, p < .001, and older adults showing no difference
between competitor (M = 793.6 msec, SE = 37.5 msec) and
filler probes (M = 795.6, SE = 39.2), t (27) = 0.3, p > .5.

Word Interference across the Lifespan (indexed by
Picture Identification / Word Recognition Trials)

Competitor trial
2600
2400
2000

No-competitor trial

*a

2200

Priming probe identification
latencies (msec)

Target picture identification
latencies (msec)

Accuracy rates and reaction times of target word
identification were analyzed using 2 x 2 ANOVAs, with
trial type (competitor trial, filler trial) as a within-subjects
variable and group (younger, older) as a between-subjects
variable. For accuracy rates, results yielded a main effect of
trial type, with more correct responses for filler trials (M =
98.1%, SE = 0.6%) than for competitor trials (M = 94.7%.
SE = 0.4%), F (1, 56) = 58.2, p < .001, p2 = 0.5, and a main
effect of group, with more correct responses for younger
adults (M = 97.4%, SE = 0.6%) than for older adults (M =
95.3%, SE = 0.6%), F (1, 56) = 6.1, p < .05, p2 = 0.1. No
interaction was found between trial type and group, F (1,
56) = 0.4, p > .5, p2 = 0.006.
For participants’ response latencies, results yielded a main
effect of trial type, with faster responses for filler trials (M =
2052.4 msec , SE = 36.2 msec) than for competitor trials (M
= 2237.4 msec. SE = 49.7 msec), F (1, 56) = 121.8 , p <
.001, p2 = 0.7, and a main effect of group, with faster
responses for younger adults (M = 1936.5 msec, SE = 59.3
msec), than for older adults (M = 2353.3 msec, SE = 61.4
msec), F (1, 56) = 23.9, p < .001, p2 = 0.3. In addition, an
interaction was found between trial type and group, F (1,
56) = 12.6, p = .001, p2 = 0.2, with younger adults showing
a smaller response latency difference between filler and
competitor trials (125.5 msec, t (29) = 8.4, p < .001,
Cohen’s d = 0.5) than older adults (244.3 msec, t (27) = 7.9,
p < .001, Cohen’s d = 0.6), suggesting greater interference
of similar-sounding words in older adults (see Figure 2).

*

*

1800
1600

Target probe
Competitor probe

Filler probe (baseline)

900
800

*

700

*a

600
500

*

*

400
Younger Adult

1400
Younger Adult

Older Adult

Figure 3: Priming probe identification latencies for
younger and older adults in target, filler (baseline) and
competitor conditions, p < .001 (*a indicates an
interaction and a main effect).

Older Adult

Figure 2: Target identification latencies for younger and
older adults in competitor and no-competitor conditions, p
< .001 (*a indicates an interaction and a main effect).

Discussion

Word Inhibition and Facilitation across the
Lifespan (indexed by Priming Probe Trials)

The present study shows that both accuracy rates and
response latencies in word comprehension decline with age.
In addition, older adults show more interference from
similar-sounding competitor words than younger adults.
Consistent with these word recognition findings, evidence
from the present study’s priming component suggests that

Response latencies on target, competitor, and filler priming
probe trials were analyzed using a 3 x 2 ANOVA, with trial
type (target, competitor, filler) as a within-subjects variable

270

(activation-inhibition) in younger adults to a single
mechanism (activation) in older adults. Findings of
decreased reliance on competitor inhibition in older adults’
word identification are consistent with Comalli, Wapner,
and Werner (1962)’s findings that interference on the Stroop
task increased significantly in individuals aged 65-80.
Findings of increased reliance on target facilitation are
consistent with Spieler, Balota, and Faust (1996)’s findings
that facilitation effects on the Stroop task maintain with age.
Current models of auditory word recognition do not
specify the effects of aging on cognitive change in the
linguistic system. Future models may allow for such
dynamic changes over time. Specifically, parameters such as
activation thresholds and lateral inhibition strength may be
dynamically adjusted to simulate changes in auditory word
recognition with aging. It is expected that a combination of
experimental approaches and cognitive modeling will be
most useful in further elucidating cognitive and linguistic
aspects of aging.
As a methodology to examine mechanisms of word
comprehension, the Picture Identification / Negative
Priming paradigm introduced in the present study is unique
in that it allows for independent measurements of
interference and inhibition / activation during auditory word
identification. The location-based negative priming
paradigm has characteristics that make it particularly
suitable for use in older adults. First, behavioral findings
suggest that (in contrast to identity-based negative priming
effects, Tipper, 1985), location-based negative priming
effects are not sensitive to age1 (Connelly & Hasher, 1993).
This finding suggests that any age-differences found using
the Picture Identification / Negative Priming paradigm can
be ascribed to inhibition at the word level.2 Secondly, the
task is relatively easy, and requires minimal motor
coordination and task demands. In sum, coupling of the
interference measure with a more direct measure of previous
inhibition (negative priming) and facilitation (positive
priming) strengthens the conclusion that, in addition to
generalized cognitive slowing, a weakened inhibitory
mechanism is likely to contribute to changing patterns of
target selection during auditory word comprehension in
older adults.

inhibition-/activation-based mechanisms of word selection
undergo change with age. The previously-established
decline of inhibitory control with age (Comalli, Wapner, &
Werner, 1962) is reflected in reduced competitor inhibition
effects in older adults. In addition, older adults show a
greater reliance on target word activation for word selection,
which is reflected in higher target facilitation levels at the
time of word selection.
The consequences of age-related decline in inhibitory
control for word comprehension may be twofold. First, less
efficient lateral inhibition of competitor words may result in
prolonged competition between multiple word candidates
(i.e., greater interference). Second, it has been suggested
that less efficient inhibitory control results in an
accumulation of irrelevant information in working memory,
therefore rendering the processing system overall less
efficient (i.e., causing general slowing, Van der Linden et
al., 1999). It is possible that aging individuals find
compensation strategies to counteract these two sources of
lower efficiency. Specifically, they may let activation of the
target word accrue beyond a higher threshold, where it can
be correctly identified from multiple candidates. Therefore,
as inhibitory control mechanisms decline with age, target
word facilitation beyond the activation level of similarsounding competitors may become the predominant
mechanism of auditory word identification.
To further examine the relationship between inhibition
and activation in younger and older adults, we conducted
correlation analyses comparing younger and older
participants’ degrees of target activation and competitor
inhibition. We found that positive priming (target
facilitation) and negative priming (competitor inhibition) are
closely related in younger adults (r = 0.6, p = .001), with
stronger competitor inhibition associated with reduced
target activation at the time of word selection, and weaker
competitor inhibition associated with greater target
activation. This correlation between competitor inhibition
and target facilitation in younger adults provides support for
the idea that inhibition and activation mechanisms are
tightly linked, with robust competitor inhibition
necessitating less target activation for successful selection.
However, when the same correlation analysis was
conducted for older adults, we found that competitor
inhibition and target facilitation effects may become less
associated with age (r = .3, p = .1). This finding suggests
that, in older adults, inhibition and activation mechanisms
may no longer operate in tandem.
While the present findings suggest more reliance on word
activation (instead of inhibition) with aging, it is important
to recall that young adults also resolve ambiguity via
facilitation of relevant information. Notably, Egner et al.
(2005) conducted a neuroimaging study that showed
amplified activation in the visual cortex during incongruent
trials on a visual Stroop task. This finding is consistent with
target facilitation effects in young adults. The greater target
facilitation in older adults, relative to the absence of
inhibition, points to a gradual shift from a dual-mechanism

Conclusions
Findings of the present study suggest that, in younger
adults, activation and inhibition mechanisms are tightly
1

While spatial negative priming relies on a dorsal path,
with activation in occipital and parietal cortices, non-spatial
negative priming relies on a ventral path, with activation in
occipital and fusiform cortices (May et al., 1995).
2

While it can not be ruled out that decreased negative priming
in older adults is due to longer picture identification times, this
interpretation is unlikely given that longer picture identification
times are associated with longer negative priming times in both
younger (r = .8, p < .0001) and older (r = .7, p < .0001)
monolinguals. Consistently, prior research suggests that negative
priming effects can last up to 8 seconds (May et al., 1995).

271

linked during auditory word comprehension in a dualmechanism context. With aging, it appears that inhibitory
mechanisms become less involved in auditory
comprehension, with greater reliance on an activation
mechanism. This age-related change in word comprehension
likely reflects a quantitative change (stronger target
facilitation with decreasing competitor inhibition) rather
than a change towards a qualitatively different mechanism.
Cognitive and computational models of word recognition
are needed to reflect the dynamic interplay between
activation and inhibition mechanisms across the lifespan.

G.H. Bower (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation (Vol. 22, pp. 193-225). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Henik, A. Bibi, U., Yanai, M., & Tzelgov, J. (1997). The
Stroop effect is largest during first trials. Abstracts of the
Psychonomic Society, 2, 57.
Marian, V., Blumenfeld, H.K., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2007).
The Language Experience and Proficiency Questionnaire
(LEAP-Q): Assessing language profiles in bilinguals and
multilinguals. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing
Research, 50 (4), 940-967.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1987). Functional parallelism in
spoken word recognition. Cognition, 25, 71-102.
May, C.P., Kane, M.J., & Hasher, L. (1995). Determinants
of negative priming. Psychological Bulletin, 118 (1), 3554.
McClelland, J.L., & Elman, J.L. (1986). The TRACE model
of speech perception. Cognitive Psychology, 18 (1), 1-86.
Simone, P.M., Ahrens, K., Foerde, K.E.G., & Spinetta, M.
(2006). Influence of attended repetition trials on negative
priming in younger and older adults. Memory and
Cognition, 34 (1), 187-195.
Sommers, M.S., & Danielson, S.M. (1999). Inhibitory
processes and spoken word recognition in young and
older adults: The interaction of lexical competition and
semantic context. Psychology and Aging, 14 (3), 458-472.
Spieler, D.H., Balota, D.A., & Faust, M.E. (1996). Stroop
performance in healthy younger and older adults and in
individuals with dementia of the Alzheimer’s type.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 22 (2), 461-479.
Swinney, D.A. (1979). Lexical access during sentence
comprehension: (Re)consideration of context effects.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18,
645-659.
Székely, A., Jacobsen, T., D'
Amico, S., Devescovi, A.,
Andonova, E., Herron, D., Lu, C. C., Pechmann, T., Pleh,
C., Wicha, N., Federmeier, K., Gerdjikova, I., Gutierrez,
G., Hung, D., Hsu, J., Iyer, G., Kohnert, K., Mehotcheva,
T., Orozco-Figueroa, A., Tzeng, A., Tzeng, O., Arevalo,
A., Vargha, A., Butler, A. C., Buffington, R., & Bates,
E.(2004). A new on-line resource for psycholinguistic
studies. Journal of Memory and Language, 51(2), 247250.
Taylor, J.L., O’Hara, R., Mumenthaler, M.S., Rosen, A.C.,
& Yesavage, J.A. (2005). Cognitive ability, expertise, and
age differences in following air-traffic control
instructions. Psychology and Aging, 20 (1), 117-133.
Tipper, S.P. (1985). The negative priming effect: inhibitory
priming by ignored objects. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 37A, 571-590.
Van der Linden, M., Hupet, M., Feyereisen, P., Schelstraete,
M.-A., Bestgen, Y., Bruyer, R., Lories, G., El Ahmadi,
A., & Seron, X. (1999). Cognitive mediators of agerelated differences in language comprehension and verbal
memory performance. Aging, Neuropsychology, and
Cognition, 6 (1), 32-55.

Acknowledgments
This project was supported by a John and Lucille Clarke
Dissertation Scholarship and seed funds at San Diego State
University to the first author, and NSF grant # BC-0418495
to the last author. Thanks go to Margarita Kaushanskaya,
members of the Bilingualism and Psycholinguistics
Laboratory at Northwestern University, and members of the
Bilingualism and Cognition Laboratory at San Diego State
University for helpful discussions of this work.

References
Baayen, H., Piepenbrock, R., & Van Rijn, H. (1995). The
CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania Linguistic Data Consortium.
Blumenfeld, H.K., & Marian, V. (2007). Constraints on
parallel activation in bilingual spoken language
processing: Examining proficiency and lexical status
using eye-tracking. Language and Cognitive Processes,
22 (5), 633-660.
Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T.S., Barch, D.M., Carter, C.S.,
& Cohen, J.D. (2001). Conflict monitoring and
cognitive control. Psychological Review, 108 (3), 624652.
Comalli, P.E., Wapner, S., & Werner, H. (1962).
Interference effects of Stroop color-word test in
childhood, adulthood, and aging. The Journal of Genetic
Psychology, 100, 47-53.
Connelly, S.L., & Hasher, L. (1993). Aging and inhibition
of spatial location. Journal of Expermental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 19, 1238-1250.
Dahan, D., Magnusson, J.S., and Tanenhaus, M.K. (2001).
Time course of frequency effects in spoken-word
recognition: Evidence from eye movements. Cognitive
Psychology, 42, 317-367.
Egner, T., & Hirsch, J. (2005). Cognitive control
mechanisms
resolve
conflict
through
cortical
amplification of task-relevant information. Nature
Neuroscience, 12, 1784-1790.
Gernsbacher, M.A. (1990). Language Comprehension as
Structure Building. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Green, D.W. (1998). Mental control of the bilingual lexicosemantic system. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition,
1, 67-81.
Hasher, L. & Zacks, R.T. (1988). Working memory,
comprehension and aging: A review and a new view. In

272

