UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interaction, External Representation and Sense Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9rg717jz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Kirsh, David

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interaction, External Representation and Sense Making
David Kirsh (kirsh@ucsd.edu)
Dept of Cognitive Science, UCSD
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515
ABSTRACT

the property. Why? If the sentence were “The soup is
boiling over” or “A square measuring 4 inches by 4 inches
is larger than one measuring 3 inches by 3 inches” virtually
no on would bother.

Why do people create extra representations to help them make
sense of situations, diagrams, illustrations, instructions and
problems?
The obvious explanation – external
representations save internal memory and computation – is
only part of the story. I discuss eight ways external
representations enhance cognitive power: they provide a
structure that can serve as a shareable object of thought; they
create persistent referents; they change the cost structure of
the inferential landscape; they facilitate re-representation;
they are often a more natural representation of structure than
mental representations; they facilitate the computation of
more explicit encoding of information; they enable the
construction of arbitrarily complex structure; and they lower
the cost of controlling thought – they help coordinate thought.

Figure 1. By drawing an example of a right angle
triangle and median it is easier to understand the
claim ‘in a right-angled triangle the median of the
hypotenuse is equal in length to half the
hypotenuse’. The illustration does not carry the
generality of the linguistic claim but it is easier to
convince ourselves of its truth. In 1b the equalities
are explicitly marked and the claim is even easier
to read and helps hint at problem solving
approaches.

Keywords
External representations, interactivity, sense making, cost
structure.

Introduction
Here is a basic puzzle about sense making. In a closed
world, consisting of a person and a representation – a
diagram, illustration, spoken instruction or written problem
statement – why do people so often perform actions to help
them understand? If we assume there is no one to ask, no
tool to generate new results, no clock to provide
chronometric input, no process to run and then observe the
outcome, then nothing changes in the environment other
than what that person changes. If all the information needed
for full understanding is logically present in mind and initial
representation, then in principle, the environment contains
no additional information after a person’s actions than
before. Yet people make marks, they gesture, point, mutter,
manipulate the inert representation, they write notes,
annotate, rearrange things and so on. Why not just ‘think’?
Why interact?
Figure 1a illustrates a simple case where interaction is
almost inevitable. A subject is given the sentence “A basic
property of right-angled triangles is that the length of a
median extending from the right angle to the hypotenuse is
itself one half the length of the hypotenuse”. What do
people do to make sure they understand? After re-reading
the sentence a few times, if they have an excellent
imagination and some knowledge of geometry, they just
think about the sentence and come to believe they know
what it means. They know how to make sense of it without
interacting with anything external. Most of us, though,
reach for pencil and paper, and sketch a simple diagram,
such as in figure 1a or 1b, to better understand the truth of

This essay is an inquiry into why we interact with the
world when we try to make sense of things. There are, I
believe, two major types of interaction concerned with
external representations. The first, and most familiar type –
the only one I will examine in this article – concerns our
reliance on tools, representations and techniques for solving
problems and externalizing thought. In the right-angled
triangle case, for example, we make an illustration to
facilitate understanding. We then perform a variety of
operations, mental or physical, on that external
representation. My discussion of this resource-oriented sort
of interaction focuses on the power of physical sorts of
operations – ways sense makers interact to change the
terrain of cognition.
The second, and less well-documented type of interaction
concerns those things we do to prepare ourselves to use
external representations, things we do to help us project
cognitive structure. They are activities that help us tie
external representations to their referents. For example,
before we use a map to wayfind, we typically orient or
‘register’ the map with our surroundings to put it into a
usable correspondence with the world. Many of us also
gesture, point, talk aloud, and so on. These sorts of ‘extra’
actions are pervasive when people try to understand and
follow instructions. They are not incidental and quite often
vitally important to sense making, though rarely studied.
The theme unifying both the first and second types of
interaction is their connection with our ability to project
structure onto things and then modify the world to
materialize or reify our projection. This core interactive
process – project then materialize – underlies much of our

1
1103

epistemic and pragmatic engagement of the world. I briefly
discuss this dynamic at the end of this article.

Coupling with External Representations
The most natural way to externally represent two and threedimensional spatial structures in a persistent re-usable
manner is by drawing them using lines or by making
physical models. The drawing in figure 1a is a canonical
way of representing 2-D things; it is flat and uses thin clear
lines and shapes.
A linguistic statement of the same
geometric property, by contrast, is more general but also
less ‘natural’. It is harder to make sense of.
The view many of us embrace is that people interact and
create external structure when thinking because:
Through interaction it is easier to process more
efficiently (i.e. with better speed-accuracy), more
deeply, more precisely, and often more broadly
than by working inside the head alone. [Kirsh &
Maglio 94, Kirsh 95, Clark 08.]
Operating with external material, with pen, paper, ruler,
and then working to meet one’s goal or subgoals – make the
angle 90°, cut the hypotenuse in half – is a process that
provides constraint and hints that usually help cognition.
Just by grappling with external material – rulers, making
lines intersect – our understanding of the properties and
possibilities of forms are excited.
The intuitive reason, I suggest, that making the drawing in
figure 1a is a cognitively more efficient mechanism for
sense making than just thinking about its linguistic
statement is that during the constructive process, most
people find it easier to translate and conceptualize the
sentence in terms of physical lines than in terms of the
mental counterparts of lines. In both internal and external
cases, sense making is a process. But it is easier to perform
the process of sense making externally, by constructing a
physical drawing and looking at it than it is to construct a
geometric form in one’s mind’s eye. Drawing is likewise
easier than mentally computing a conceptual whole from the
semantics of linguistic parts. To be sure, performance varies
among individuals. People must have learned to draw. And
clearly some people can do things in their heads that others
cannot. But there is always a point where cognitive powers
are overwhelmed and physical realization is advantageous.
[Kirsh 09]. Thus, although from a purely logical point of
view a closed system of world and person contains no
additional information after drawing or writing down
sentences than before, there are important changes wrought
by interaction that alter the cognitive terrain. Specifically,
these interactive changes concern:
•

What’s active inside the person’s head – what’s being
attended to, what’s stored in visual memory, what’s
primed;

•

What’s persistent outside, and in the visual or tangible
field; and

•

How information is encoded, both inside and outside:
internal and external representational form.

The upshot is that, often, humans are able to improve
their comprehension by creating and using external
representations and structures. This may be obvious, yet it
is sufficiently foundational to deserve analytic and empirical
exploration.
Let me press this idea further with another spatial
example. In figure 2, a geometric form has been added to
the body position of a dancer. Points on the body were first
identified, then, line segments such as the line between
elbow and hand were superimposed, and then finally the
segments were joined in a three dimensional trapezoid and
the effect of movement visualized in terms of deformations
of this trapezoid.
The commentator, in this case the
choreographer himself, Bill Forsythe, presupposed listeners
could index into the visible annotation, the trapezoidal
structure. In his discourse the choreographer referred to
these properties to explain such concepts as torsion, sheer
and body axes. [Forsythe 08].

Figure 2. Bill Forsythe, a noted contemporary
choreographer, has begun documenting certain
concepts and principles of choreography in film.
Here he explains torsion.
What sort of aid to understanding do these types of
external visualizations provide? They again concern
geometric forms but they are here used in the service of
sense making in dance and choreography.
Shareable and identifiable objects of Thought: One
virtue of this particular annotation is that by having defined
the structure to be discussed and then visibly locating it on a
body, the choreographer and anyone looking at the video,
knows they can refer to various parts of the trapezoid and
anyone present will understand their reference. Everyone
can rely on shared knowledge of the visible properties of the
shape and ask, in a rather specific way, how they figure in
what the speaker is saying or how they figure in some
abstract idea. For instance, once there are external lines and
planes anyone can ask the speaker, or themselves, which
body positions keep the volume of the shape constant, or
ensure the top plane remains parallel to the bottom plane.
Choreographers find such questions helpful when thinking
about body dynamics and when they want to communicate
ideas of shearing and torsion to their dancers.
Physically reifying a shape through annotation adds
something more than just providing a shared reference; it
provides a persistent element that can be measured and
reliably identified and re-identified. Measurement is

2
1104

something one does after a line or structure has been
identified. Even though annotation is not necessary for
everyone – some people can grasp the structure of a
superimposed trapezoid by imagining or projecting an
invisible structure onto the body just by listening to the
speaker and watching his gestures – nonetheless
materializing a projection through annotation supplies
unambiguous affordances that are not literally present if
merely projected.
For instance, when the lines of a form are externalized we
can ask about the length of the segments and their angles of
intersection. We know how to measure these elements using
ruler and protractor. Granted, it is still possible, though not
easy, to measure the length of mentally projected lines,
provided they are appropriately anchored to visible points: a
choreographer can refer to the length of someone’s forearm
through language or gesture without annotation. But can he
or she refer to the length of lines connecting the top and
bottom planes without having those planes visibly present?
Those lines have to be anchored on the body. So a complex
structure like a truncated pyramid must be constructed in an
orderly manner, much as Forsythe did in his annotated
video. This doesn’t definitively prove that such structures
cannot be identified and marked out by gesture and posture
without visible annotation. But the complexity of mental
imagery and mental projection goes way up as the number
of anchors increases, or when the target body moves, and
especially if invisible anchors are required. Once the form is
made manifest in visible lines, however, all such elements
can be explicitly referred to; they can be measured or
intentionally distorted, and the nature of their deformation
over time can be considered. They become shared objects
of thought.
To say that something is or could be an object of thought
implies the thinker can mentally refer to it – in some sense
the thinker can grasp the referent. A shared object of
thought means that different thinkers share mechanisms for
agreeing on attributes of the referent. For instance, Quine,
following Strawson, argued that objects must have identity
conditions, as in his motto “No entity without identity”.
Entities have to be identifiable, re-identifiable and
individuatable from close cousins. Would the structures and
annotations in figure 2 meet those criteria if imagined or
projected mentally? It depends on how well they are
anchored to physical attributes. Certainly there are some
people – choreographers, dancers, and people with
wonderful imaging abilities – who can often hold clear ideas
of projected structure, and use them to think with. As long
as there is enough stability in the ‘material anchors’
[Hutchins 05] to ensure a robust projection, the lines and
shapes these experts project onto the visible environment
meet most criteria of ‘entification’, though, of course this is
a purely empirical claim. But most of us find that reifying
structure by adding visible or tangible elements to the
environment makes those ideas more vivid, more robust,
clearer and easier to work with. Most of us need to see the
lines and shapes to see subtle geometric relations between

them. By materializing our initial projections, by creating
traces of them through action, most of us find we have
created something that can serve as a stepping-stone for our
next thoughts. This is why the interactive strategy of project
then materialize is so powerful. It applies to all humans, but
exactly how complex things must get before it is necessary
surely varies with imaging capacities and expertise.
All too often the extraordinary value of externalization
and interaction is reduced to a claim about external memory.
“Isn’t all this just about offloading memory?” This hugely
downplays what is going on. Everyone knows it is useful to
get things out of the head and put where they can be
accessed easily any time. It is well known that by writing
down inferences or interim thoughts we are relieved of the
need to keep everything we generate active in memory. As
long as the same information can be observed and retrieved
outside, then externalizing thought and structure does
indeed save us from tying up working memory and active
referential memory.
But memory and perception are not the same thing.
Something quasi-symbolic that comes in visually enters
some sort of memory system (visuospatial store) but it need
not be the same memory system, or encoded in the same
way as the information stored in whatever type of working
memory is used during problem solving. [Logie 95]. So it
cannot be assumed that the costs are always lower in
perceptually retrieving information than ‘internally’
retrieving information.
Much will depend on visual
complexity, the form information is encoded in, how easy it
is to perceive the structure when it is wanted, and so on.
Objects of thought that are perceived must still be gestalted,
grasped and conceptualized. External referents are often
more costly to grasp than internal ones.
More importantly, the biggest bang from externalizing
thought and structure usually flows from differences in the
form and properties of internal and external representations.
External computation is a far more interesting source of
cognitive power than the simple fact that useful information
can be stored externally. For example, outer forms can be
manually duplicated and rearranged. They are extended in
space, not just in time, and can be operated on in different
ways. This is an extraordinary gift. By reordering physical
tokens of statements, for instance, it is possible to discover
aspects of meaning and significance that were hard to detect
from an original statement viewed in isolation. This is a
big deal. It is one of the next sources of interactive power
that I turn to now.
Rearrangement. The power of physical rearrangement is
that it lets us visually compare statements written later with
those written earlier and it let’s us manipulate spatial
relations to improve perception of semantically relevant
relations. For instance, we can take lemmas that are nonlocal in inference space – inferences that are logically
downstream from the givens – and by writing them near the
givens, or by juxtaposing them with statements written
previously in our proof process, we can make them local in
physical space. If we then introduce abbreviations or

3
1105

definitions to stand in for clusters of statements, we can
increase still further the range of statements we can visually
relate. This process of inferring, duplicating, substituting,
reformulating, rearranging and redefining, is the rationale
behind proofs, levels of abstraction, the lisp programming
language, and indeed symbolic computation more generally.
The power of rearrangement is shown in figure 3 where
the problem is to determine whether the six pieces on the
left are sufficient to build the image on the right. Since the
problem is well posed and self contained, the question
again, is why do people not just work in their mind? The
answer: because it is easier to do it in the world!
As with proofs, reorganizing pieces in physical space
makes it possible to examine relations that before were
distal. By re-assembling the pieces, the decision is simply a
matter of determining whether the pieces fit perfectly
together. That is a question resolvable by looking. Thus,
interaction has converted the world from a place where
internal computation was required to solve the problem to
one where the relevant property can be perceived. Action
and vision have been substituted for imagery, projection and
memory.
Physical movement has replaced mental
computation. Instead of imagining transformations we
execute them externally.

Figure 3. Can the jigsaw images on the left be
perfectly assembled into the picture on the right?
Answer: no. Can you see why without moving
them? Perhaps. There is at least one simple test
that does not require constructing the answer.
What if the answer were ‘yes’. Could you know
without constructing the complete image?
Rearrangement of statements, like rearrangement
of puzzle pieces, serves to make it easier to notice
key attributes.
Needless to say the power of rearrangement can be
increased dramatically by digital means. By automating the
operations of ordering, sorting and filtering, the cost
structure of external operations can be significantly altered.
When a workplace has been augmented with tools such as
wizards, agents and the like, it is possible to multiply the
potency of basic strategies of interaction to the point where
such increases qualitatively change what humans can do,
what they can make sense of, and so on. I resist discussion
of these tools here, however, because, in my opinion, all
these qualitative changes can be shown equally well through
simple everyday examples.
Persistence and Independence. Rearrangement would be
impossible if the pieces to be arranged were not
! is
simultaneously present. In figure 2 the ‘3D’ trapezoid
shown in stop action. Measurements can be made because
the structure can be frozen for as long as it takes to perform

the measurements. Architects exploit the power of
persistence when they build models. Scale models are
tangible representations of an intended design that let an
architect and client explore the structure at will. A model is
independent enough from its author that it can serve as a
shared object of thought. It can be manipulated, probed, and
observed independently of its originator’s conception. The
same idea also applies to simulations that can be run back
and forth under a user’s control. Such simulations provide
persistence and author independence because they can be
run forward, slowed down, stopped, or compared snapshot
by snapshot. Without the stability of reproducibility and
persistence it would be virtually impossible to reason about
certain temporal dynamics of a structure and explore some
of the complexities of its 3D form.

Figure 4. A 3D model permits architects to view a
form from arbitrary angles. It allows them to
measure, compare, and look for violation of
constraints.
Persistence is presupposed in most external operations,
though not all. Among experts and in certain everyday
contexts, gesture and linguistic
reference can be sufficient for
listeners or viewers to project a
structure
that
is
mentally
persistent and specific enough for
speaker and hearer to share
reference and a range of
Figure 5. Spatially
operations on that structure. An
literate people can
architect can talk of the curve
project the arc swept
swept out by a door. See figure 5.
out by opening a
Ever after, when in the company
door without having
of her fellow architects, she can
to mark the external
assume
her
audience
will
environment.
understand reference to that arc,
without gesture, and without explicit markings on the floor
or plans. There are, however, always limits to this capacity
to augment the external world with mentally projected
structure that one can assumed is shared.
Reformulation. A third source of the power of interaction
relies on our ability to restate ideas. Representations encode
information. Some forms encode their information more
explicitly than others [Kirsh 90]. For example, the numerals
‘ 2209 ’ and ‘47’ both refer to the number 47 but the
numeral ‘47’ is a more explicit encoding of 47. Much
external activity can be interpreted as converting
expressions into more explicit formulations, which in turn
makes it easier to ‘grasp’ the content they encode. This is a
major method for solving problems. For instance, the
4
problem x= 28,561 + 2209 is trivial to solve once the

4
1106

!

!

4

28,561 and 2209 have been
appropriate values for
substituted, as in x= 13 + 47.1
Much cognition can be understood as a type of external
epistemic activity.
! If this seems to grant the theory of
extended mind [Clark 08] too!much support add the word
‘managing’ as in ‘much cognition involves managing
external epistemic activity’. We reformulate and substitute
representations in an effort to make content more explicit.
We work on problems until their answer becomes apparent.
The activity of reformulating external representations
until they encode content more transparently, more
explicitly, is one of the more useful things we do outside our
heads. But why bother? Why not do all the reformulation
internally? A reason to compute outside the head is that
outside there are public algorithms and special artifacts
available for encoding and computing. The cost structure of
computation is very different outside than inside. Try
calculating
2209 in your head without relying on a
calculator or an algorithm. Even savants who do this ‘by
just thinking’ find there is a limit on size. Eventually,
whoever you are, problems are too big or too hard to do in
!
the head. External algorithms provide a mechanism for
manipulating external symbols that makes the process
manageable. Indeed were we to display the computational
cost profiles (measured in terms of speed accuracy) for
performing a calculation such as adding numbers in the head
vs. using algorithms or tools in the world, it would be clear
why most young people can no longer do much arithmetic
in their heads. Tools reshape the cost structure of task
performance, and people adapt by becoming dependent on
those tools.
A second reason we compute outside rather than inside
has to do with a different sort of complexity. One of the
techniques of reformulation involves substitution and
rewriting. For instance, if asked to find the values of x given
that x2 + 6x = 7, it is easiest if we substitute (x + 3)2 - 9 for
x2 + 6x. This is a clever trick requiring insight. Someone
had to notice that (x + 3)2 = x2 + 6x + 9, which is awfully
close to x2 + 6x = 7. By substituting we get (x + 3)2 = 16,
which yields x = 1 or -7. Could such substitutions be done
in memory? Not likely. Again, there are probably some
people who can do them. But again, there always comes a
point, where the requisite substitutions are too complex to
anticipate the outcome ‘just by thinking’ in one’s head. The
new expressions have to be plugged in externally, much like
when we swap a new part for an old one in a car engine and
then run the engine to see if everything works. Without
actually testing things in the physical world it’s too hard and
error prone to predict downstream effects. Interactions and
side effects are always possible. The same holds when the

rules governing reformulation are based on rewrite rules.
The revisions and interactions soon become too complex to
expect anyone to detect or remember them.
Natural
Encoding.
Persistence,
reordering
and
reformulation largely explain why externalizing information
and representation may increase the efficiency, precision,
complexity and depth of cognition. To see why external
processes may also increase the breadth of cognition
consider again why we prefer one modality to another for
certain types of thinking.
Every representational system or modality has its
strengths and weaknesses. An inference or attribute that is
obvious in one system may be non-obvious in another.
Consider figure 6 – a musical notation. The referent of the
notation is a piece of music. Music is sound with a specific
pitch or harmony, volume, timber and temporal dynamics.
The ‘home’ domain of music, therefore, is sound. Visual
notation for music is parasitic on the structure of sound.
Prima facie, the best representation to make sense of
musical structure is music itself; we go to the source to
understand its structure2.

Figure 6. Imagine hearing 10 seconds of music.
Now look at the musical notation shown here.
Notation has the value of showing in space a
structure that one hears. But there is much more in
the heard sound than is represented in the notation.
Sound is the natural representation of music.
A further reason it is sometimes advantageous to
externalize content and manipulate it outside, then, is that
the natural representation of that content only exists outside.
Arguably, no one – or at best only a few people – can hear
music in their head the way it sounds outside. Mental
images of sounds have different properties than actual
sounds. Even if it is possible for the experience of the
mental image of music to be as vivid and detailed as
perception of the real thing, few people – other than the
musically gifted, the professional musician or composer,
[Sacks 08] – can accurately control musical images in their
heads. It is far easier to manifest music externally than it is
to do so internally. So, for most people, to make sense of
music the first thing to do is to play it or listen to it.
Using multiple representations. Despite the value of
listening to music there are times when notation does reveal
more than the music one has listened to – instances where a
non-natural representation can be more revealing and

1

Reformulation is not limited to formal problem solving. The
statement “Police police police police police” is easier to
understand when restated at “Police who are policed by police,
also police other police”. Most people would not break out their
pens to make sense of that statement, but few of us can make sense
of it without saying the sentence out loud several times.

2
To
(terrain
hearing
terrain;
sound.

see why music can be both referent and representation
and also map) ask whether there is a difference between
sound and hearing sound as music. The sound is the
the music the conceptualizing structure that maps the

5
1107

intuitive than the original representation.
Because a
notational representation uses persistent, space consuming
representations, early and later structures can be compared,
superimposed and transformed using notation specific
operators. As with logic and jigsaw puzzles it is useful to
have tangible representatives that can be manipulated. In
these cases, a subject who moves from one representation to
the other may extend cognition. By moving between
listening to music, and writing it down in a notation, or
listening and then reading the notation, or sometimes vice
versa, a composer or listener may be able to explore certain
elements of musical structure that are otherwise
inaccessible. The more complicated the structure of the
music the more this seems to be true. Without interacting
with multiple representations certain discoveries would
simply be out of reach.
Visual designers who move
between pen and paper, 3D mockups and rapid prototypes
are familiar with the same type of process.
Construction. The penultimate virtue of external interaction
I will discuss is, in some ways, the summation of
persistence, rearrangement and reformulation. It may be
called the power of construction. In making a construction
– whether it be the visual annotation of the dancer shown in
figure 2, a geometric construction to figure 1, the layovers
in figure 4, or building a prototype of a design – there is
magic in actually making something in the world. Unlike
reformulation, a construction is not logically contained in
the deductive closure of the representation it extends. When
a geometer adds a new line to a triangle the new line is
permitted by the logic of shapes but it is not logically
implied. It is consistent but not entailed. This opens up a
new realm of possibility. A problem solver can add things
to the situation in the hope that this extra structure will
facilitate discovering the target property or theorem. But
like Wittgenstein’s ladder, once the new structure has been
used it can be thrown away. This is a remarkable idea. By
assuming something we know is not false but also is not
something derived from our givens, we are able to discover
a truth constructively.
Construction is the closest thing in the deductive world to
experimentation. It is also the most tough minded. In the
foundations of mathematics there is a dispute whether any
mathematical truth can be genuinely proved unless it is
reached step by step through a constructive proof. To be
constructive a proof must actually display the thing to be
proved. It is not enough to prove there exists a solution or
an entity, e.g., that the set has a largest element, you must
actually show what the element is.
Construction is mechanical and concrete and as such
relies on rules of allowable construction. If the construction
is defined over a representational system the rules are
formal, but if the construction is defined over a more
tangible structure the rules are determined by physical
principle. In a children’s game of connect the dots the
implicit pattern is invisible until the dots have been
connected. Augmenting the stimulus with straight lines

reveals significant elements
meaningless or invisible.

that

were

otherwise

Simplifying control. I close with a virtue of external
representations lying at the heart of distributed cognition –
offloading control, process management. Starting with the
obvious: a list of to do’s relieves a person from
remembering what to do next. But so does a table of rows
and columns if it is 90% complete and requires values for
the remaining cells. A user of the table knows what has to
be done to make the table usable. Representations often
contain an implicit control structure that behaves like a set
of implicit instructions
Mean weight Americans
telling us what has to be
20-29 yrs 40-49
done. This is part of the
183 lbs
196
Male
support system that external
168
Female
representations provide.

Conclusion
In order to extract meaning, draw conclusions, and deepen
our understanding of representations we often mark,
annotate and create representations; we rearrange them,
build on them, recast them; we compare them and perform
sundry other manipulations. Why bother? Minds are
powerful devices for projecting structure on the world and
imagining structure when it is not present. Can’t we just
think in our heads? Because nothing comes without a cost, a
useful approach to understanding epistemic interaction is to
see it as a means of reducing the cost of projecting and
imagining by creating external structure that can support
more complex projection, more efficient computation,
deeper and broader sense making, and more shareable
thought.
I have presented a few of the powerful
consequences of interaction. It is part of a more general
strategy that humans have evolved to project and materialize
meaningful structure.

References
Clark, Andy. Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action,
and Cognitive Extension. OUP. 2008
Hutchins, E. Material anchors for conceptual blends. by:
Edwin Hutchins. Journal of Pragmatics, Vol. 37, No. 10.
(October 2005), pp. 1555-1577
Forsythe W. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0P_4D8c2oGs&feature=related
Kirsh, D. When is Information Explicitly Represented? The
Vancouver Studies in Cognitive Science. (1990) pp. 340365. Re-issued Oxford University Press. 1992.
Kirsh, D. The Intelligent Use of Space. Artificial
Intelligence, Vol. 73, Number 1-2, pp. 31-68, (1995).
Kirsh, D. and P. Maglio. On Distinguishing Epistemic from
Pragmatic Actions. Cognitive Science. Vol. 18, No. 4:
pages 513-549. (1994).
Kirsh, D, How Interaction Improves Sense Making. Draft.
2009.
Logie, R.H.(1995). Visuo-spatial working memory, Hove,
UK: Lawrence Eribaum Associates.
Sacks, O, Musicophilia : tales of music and the brain. New
York : Alfred A. Knopf, 2008.

6
1108

