UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Integrating Episodic and Semantic Information in Memory for Natural Scenes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/22c512rb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hemmer, Pernille
Steyvers, Mark

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Integrating Episodic and Semantic Information in Memory for Natural Scenes
Pernille Hemmer (phemmer@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, 92697-5100

Mark Steyvers (mark.steyvers@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, 92697-5100

Abstract
Recall of objects in natural scenes can be influenced not only
by episodic but also by semantic memory. To model the
statistical regularities that might be encoded in semantic
memory, we applied a topic model to a large database of
labeled images. We then incorporated the learned topics in a
dual route topic model for recall that explains how and why
episodic memories are combined with semantic memories.
The dual route model was applied to an empirical study in
which people recall objects from scenes under varying
amounts of study time. The dual route model explains how
the trade-off between episodic and semantic memory is
affected by study time, output position, and also congruity of
the object with the scene context.
Keywords: Episodic Memory; Semantic Memory; Natural
Scenes; Bayesian models; Reconstructive memory

Introduction
Semantic knowledge can exert strong influences on
episodic recall. In the verbal domain, the use of highly
related words on a study list can lead to intrusions of related
words in free recall (Roediger & McDermott, 1995).
Similarly, expectations about objects in scenes can lead to
recall of objects that were not present in the scene. For
example, people can recall seeing books in an office where
there were no books present (Brewer & Treyens, 1981).
These intrusions demonstrate the influence of semantic
knowledge on recall. Some researchers have viewed such
intrusions as demonstrations of shortcomings of the memory
system. However, semantic knowledge can also serve as an
aid to episodic memory and lead to improvements in recall
performance (e.g. Hemmer & Steyvers, 2009; Konkle &
Oliva, 2007; Huttenlocher et al. 1991).
Dual retrieval accounts of memory propose that
reconstruction from memory requires accessing either the
verbatim memory trace or semantic information relevant to
the event (Brainerd et al., 2002). The verbatim – or episodic
memory – trace is a representation close to the original
event, while the semantic information is an abstraction of
the event, often referred to as ‘gist’ or ‘schema’. Previous
dual route models have not explained in detail how the
semantic information is represented (or extracted from the
environment) and have not fully described the detailed
mechanisms for the interaction between episodic and
semantic information.

In this research, we build on the framework of rational
memory models that assume that the memory system is
exploiting environmental regularities when recalling
information about past events (Anderson, 1990; Steyvers &
Griffiths, 2008). We develop a dual route memory model
and apply it to the problem of recalling objects from natural
scenes. We assume that an observer is presented with a
scene during study and is instructed to retrieve from
memory objects that occurred in the scene. The goal for the
observer is to reconstruct the objects from the scene
optimally combining the available information. We assume
that the available information is based on noisy episodic
memories and also on encoding based on the semantic
context. Previous research has shown that people are
sensitive to the contextual information in scenes and can
quickly extract a high-level semantic representation of a
scene (Potter et al., 2002).
In this paper, we will first present an empirical study on
scene recall and investigate how recall accuracy varies as a
function of study time and what the accuracy is if there is no
episodic information at all and recall is based on semantic
information only. The experimental data allow us to assess
how people trade off between episodic and semantic
memory. We then present a topic modeling analysis
(Griffiths & Steyvers, 2004; Griffiths, Steyvers &
Tenenbaum, 2007) for a large database of labeled images.
The extracted topics serve as approximations to the kinds of
statistical regularities that people might have encoded in
semantic memory. Lastly, we will show how a dual route
topic model (Steyvers & Griffiths, 2008) that mixes
episodic and semantic information during encoding can
account for the empirical findings. We also show how the
model can explain the Von Restorff effect, where people
have better memory for objects that are incongruous with
the scene context.

Empirical Study on Scene Recall
We conducted a series of behavioral experiments using
natural scenes such as kitchens and offices to quantify the
relative contribution of semantic knowledge on recall. In a
memory experiment, we showed images of natural scenes
for varying amount of study time. We expected that by
decreasing the amount of study time, recall would be based
more on semantic memory and would lead to a larger
number of errors. To assess the prior knowledge people

1557

response instructions and a response box were presented on
the right screen. Participants were asked to list the objects
present in each image and were required to make responses
for a minimum of 6o seconds. They received feedback
based on matching their responses to those of previous
participants. Images were presented in random order
Memory Experiment. For the memory experiment,
participants studied an image for either 2 or 10 seconds.
After completing a short distracter task, participants were
asked to list all the objects they recalled seeing in the
presented image. Study images were presented in random
order. Each participant only saw 5 images, one from each
scene type, to avoid carryover effects where the memory
from one scene type affects recall of another image of the
same type.
Response Normalization. Responses for all experiments
were corrected for spelling, plurals, and qualifiers (e.g.,
numbers, color, size and location). For example, “chair” and
“chairs” were mapped to the single entry “chair”, and
“silver car” was mapped as “car”.

1

Cumulative Accuracy

0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8

Time = 10secs
Time = 2secs
Scene
Cue
prior knowledge

0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Output Position
Figure 1. Cumulative accuracy as a function of study time and
output position. The figure also shows the simulated
performance when one treats the responses from the prior
knowledge experiment as responses in the memory experiment

Results and Discussion

have about certain types of scenes, we also conducted a
norming study where we asked participants to name the
objects they expected to appear in certain types of natural
scenes, without actually showing them any image. Finally,
we ran a perception experiment, using the same images as
used in the memory experiment, where participants were
asked to name all the objects that they perceived in the
image. This perception experiment allowed us to assess the
ground truth of which objects were perceived to be present
in each image, which can be used to score the accuracy of
responses in the memory experiment.

Methods
Participants were undergraduate students at the University
of California, Irvine. There were 22 participants in the prior
knowledge experiment, 25 participants in the perception
experiment, and 49 participants in the memory experiment.
Materials. We sampled 10 images from the LabelMe
database (Russel & Torralba, 2008) where we chose 2
images each of 5 different scene types. The scene types
correspond to kitchen, dining, office, hotel room, and urban
scenes.
Prior Knowledge Experiment. To assess prior (semantic)
knowledge about specific scenes, we asked participants to
list objects that they would expect to occur in a given scene
type (which was described by the verbal label). Participants
entered their responses on a computer screen and were
required to make responses for a minimum of 60 seconds
before continuing to the next question.
Perception Experiment. In this experiment, we assessed
the ground truth for the occurrence of objects in each of the
10 images. Materials were presented on two computer
screens. The image was presented on the left screen while

To measure performance in the memory experiment, we
checked whether a given recalled object was part of any of
the responses that were given by participants in the
perception experiment. If it was, it was scored as a correct
response. If it was not, we manually checked whether the
recalled object could still be considered as a description of
an object that was part of the image. Only if it was not, the
response was scored as incorrect. We calculated cumulative
accuracy in the memory experiment as a function of the
output position. In other words, we calculated the mean
accuracy for the first item recalled, first two items recalled,
etc. Figure 1 shows the cumulative accuracy as a function
of output position and study time. Overall, cumulative
accuracy decreases as a function of output position.
Therefore, more intrusions are made later in recall, a finding
compatible with results from the verbal memory domain
(Roediger & McDermott, 1995). Cumulative accuracy was
highest for the short study time condition for the first five
output positions. After the sixth output position, the
cumulative accuracy was best for the long study time
conditions. Therefore, the somewhat counterintuitive
finding here is that shorter study times do not necessarily
lead to worse performance – the first few items remembered
are more likely to be correct compared to a condition with
longer study times (however, the total number of correct
responses is greater with longer study times; for 2 and 10
second conditions, there were an average of 7 and 9 correct
responses respectively per subjects per image).
We can explain this finding as an effect of the trade-off
between episodic memory and semantic knowledge. For
short study times, only a few objects might have been
observed. Some of these objects can be encoded
episodically without running into interference or capacity
constraints. These few objects can subsequently be output
with fairly high accuracy. On the other hand, if a scene is

1558

θ

θ

λ

β

z

z

x

φ

o

φS
Ns

T

βE
ψE

o
Ns

S

Figure 2. The graphical model representation for A) the standard
topic model and B) the dual route topic model.

of the LabelMe database (Russel & Torralba, 2008). These
images were annotated by volunteers resulting in a total of
87,152 labels and 3782 unique types. The subset contains
images of natural scenes, such as urban street scenes and
indoor scenes of kitchens and offices.
We treat each scene from the database as a mixture of topics
and each topic as a distribution over image objects. This
specifies a generative model in which objects in a scene are
selected by first sampling a topic from the topic distribution
associated with the scene and then sampling an object from
the topic. Specifically, the conditional distribution of an
object o in a scene s is given by,
T

P (o | s ) = ∑ P (o | z = t )P (z = t | s )

(1)

t =1

where p(o| z=t) is the multinomial distribution over objects
given topic t and indicates which objects are important to a
topic, and p(z=t| s) is the multinomial distribution over
topics given scene s and indicates which topics are
important to a particular scene.

0.25
0.35

0.25

12

0.3

48

0.2

27

0.2

0.15

0.15
0.2

0.15

26

34

0.25

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0

0

15

0.1

0.05

0

Topic 12
cabinet
stove
table
sink
fridge
wall
floor
faucet
dishwasher
coffeemachine

A Topic Model for Scenes
Probabilistic topic models have been developed as a
method to automatically learn semantic representations for
documents by analyzing the statistical relationships between
words and the documents they occur in (e.g. Griffiths &
Steyvers, 2004; Griffiths, Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2007). In
the topic model, each document is expressed as a mixture of
topics that can be thought of as the gist of a document, and
each topic represents a probability distribution over words.
Here, we apply the topic model to a subset of 13,572 images

γ

Topic

One conclusion from our empirical study is that semantic
knowledge can lead to good baseline performance in scene
memory. When recalling objects from a kitchen that has
never been seen before, recall can be reasonably good if the
guesses are based on general knowledge of kitchen scenes
(e.g., guesses such as “refrigerator”, and “sink”). Of course,
performance improves when actual episodic memories of
the particular image can be retrieved. This raises the
question of how the interaction between episodic and
semantic memory can be modeled. We will first discuss a
topic model for scenes that approximates the semantic
knowledge people might have about objects in scenes and
then develop a dual route topic model that integrates both
episodic as well as semantic memory information.

α

B

Topic

A Model for Object Recall in Natural Scenes

α

A

Topic

studied for a longer period, more objects overall are noticed
and will need to be encoded. This longer list might not be
encoded entirely by episodic means and part of the encoding
might be based on generalized semantic knowledge. This
will lead to lower accuracy for the first few items recalled
but to higher accuracy at later output positions because of
the enhanced semantic encoding.
Figure 1 also shows the performance one can expect from
prior knowledge in the absence of any episodic information.
This is the case where the image was not studied at all
(corresponding to zero second study time). Even though we
did not actually run this in the memory experiment, we can
consider the responses from the prior knowledge experiment
as reasonable guesses to the objects of an image in a
particular scene. We ran an analysis where we treated the
prior knowledge responses for each scene type as memory
responses for the image (for the same type), preserving the
order of the responses. Figure 1 shows that the performance
of this condition is fairly high. The first item guessed in the
prior knowledge experiment leads to 85% accuracy in the
memory experiment, even though the response is not
associated with any episodic knowledge of the task. For
later responses, accuracy does decrease but cumulative
accuracy is still higher than 55% even after guessing 16
items. The difference between the performance from prior
knowledge and actual recall reveals the contribution of
episodic memory, which might be smaller than one might
expect. These results demonstrate that general knowledge of
scenes can greatly contribute to the accuracy of recalling
objects from natural scenes.

Topic 48
chair
box
book
plant
picture
lamp
basket
bookshelf
painting
cabinet

Topic 27
screen
keyboard
mouse
table
mug
mousepad
cpu
speaker
phone
chair

Topic 34
lamp
wall
bed
table
floor
phone
curtain
pillow
chair
painting

Topic 26
person
building
sign
car
streetlight
window
road
sky
flag
sidewalk

Topic 15
tree
grass
sky
bench
plant
person
path
building
curb
streetlight

Figure 3. Model predictions for three scene types: kitchen,
office and urban. The bar graphs show the distribution over 50
topics for a scene with topic indices for the two most likely
topics. The rank-ordered object distributions corresponding to
these topics are shown below. Objects labeled in bold were
part of the original image annotations.

1559

Figure 2, panel A shows a graphical model representation
of the topic model. Shaded nodes represent observed
variables while nodes without shading represent unobserved
variables. The arrows indicate the conditional dependencies
between the variables, and the plates show the replications
of sampling steps. There are S scenes and each scene has Ns
objects. The variable θ is the scene-topic multinomial and φ
is the topic-object multinomial. The priors on the
multinomials are Dirichlet distributed with hyperparameters
α and β. We treat α and β as constants in the model (we set
α = 0.1 and β = 0.01).
We applied the topic model with T=50 topics to the
LabelMe image database and used Gibbs sampling to infer
both p(o| z=t) and p(z=t| s). Several examples of topic
distributions are illustrated in figure 3. The figure shows
images from three different scene types: kitchen, office, and
urban with the inferred topic distribution for that image. For
example, topic 12 is the most likely topic for the particular
kitchen image and topic 27 is the most likely topic for the
particular office image. Some of the likely topics are
illustrated in at the bottom of figure 3. This shows the list of
most likely objects associated with each topic. Overall, the
model shows that the topics for each image qualitatively
capture the semantic context of the image. The likely
objects in the topics associated with scenes are objects that
can reasonably be found in the respective scenes, and seem
to describe the ‘gist’ of the scene.

A Dual Route Model for Object Recall
The topic model itself cannot be a complete model for
reconstructive memory. The topic distribution for a scene
provides a generalized representation for the occurrence of
objects in scenes (e.g., offices), which is useful to
characterize the “gist” of a scene. However, the distribution
over topics is insufficient to represent the exact set of
objects present in an image. In human memory, recall can
be quite accurate, if given enough study time. Therefore, to
give a more complete account of human memory, we need
to expand the topic model with an additional component that
allows the model to reconstruct the specific objects present
in a scene.
We will now describe an extension to the standard topic
model called the dual route topic model introduced by
Steyvers and Griffith (2008). We will apply the model to the
problem of scene recall. In the model, recall of objects in a
scene is a result of two processes: episodic recall and recall
based on the semantic context. The semantic information is
an abstraction based on the statistical regularities of the
collection of scenes. For each image, the semantic context is
encoded by a probability distribution over topics. The
episodic information is based on a noisy encoding of the
actual list of objects present in the image to be remembered.
In the model, we will implement episodic noise by a simple
sampling process. We assume that the episodic sampling
process is based on a multinomial distribution over objects
with a symmetric Dirichlet prior,

o |ψ ~ Mult(ψ )

(2)

(3)
ψ ~ Dirichlet( β )
where βE is the hyperparameter that controls the amount of
smoothing. Note that this process is not just defined over the
observed objects in the image, but over all object types (i.e.,
the object vocabulary). In this process, it is possible to give
high probability to a variety of objects, making them likely
to be retrieved from the episodic route. However, with the
Dirichlet prior, a capacity constraint can be built in. With
small values of βE, it is unlikely, a priori, that the probability
over objects is distributed over a large number of objects,
therefore encouraging a sparse representation of objects.
Therefore, the smoothing parameter determines how much
of the retrieval process focuses on the observed objects
versus other objects in the vocabulary.
If recall is based strictly on this episodic component,
performance should be accurate, at least for a subset of
items on the list, but it could potentially fail to fully retrieve
the whole list. If recall is based strictly on semantic
information performance might not be as accurate but the
topic distribution allows retrieval of a larger number of
items. The dual route topic model allows recall to be a
mixture of these two extremes. The weighting is such that
recall is neither too specific nor too general. In the model a
mixing process determines if an object is generated using
the episodic route or using semantic information. An
indicator variable x, acts as a switch such that if x=1, the
object is sampled from the semantic route, and if x=0, the
object is sampled from the episodic route. We assume that
the probability of a route assignment is distributed Bernoulli
with a symmetric Beta prior:
(4)
x | λ ~ Bernoulli(λ )
E

(5)
λ ~ Beta(γ )
Therefore, the conditional distribution of an object o
given a scene s, is given by:
T

p (o | s ) = p( x = 1 | s )∑ p(o | z = t )p( z = t | s ) + p( x = 0 | s ) p' (o | s ) (6)
t =1

where the first term is the distribution over objects predicted
by the topic model weighted by the probability of a route
assignment in favor of a semantic encoding. The second
term is the object distribution p’(o| s), predicted by the
episodic route weighted by the probability of a route
assignment in favor of an episodic encoding.
Note that this model specifies a generative procedure for
producing objects in a given scene. Figure 2B shows a
graphical representation of the complete model. Note that
we assume that the distribution over objects in each topic,
φS, is observed and estimated by the topic model in a prior
learning phase.
The main use of the model is as an encoding model where
the goal is to infer the encoding parameters conditional on
the observed set of objects in an image. In other words, the
goal is to find an encoding such that during retrieval, the
model is likely to reconstruct the observed set of objects in
an image, taking into account the probabilistic constraints of
the model – the built in capacity constraint for the episodic

1560

route and the overgeneralization of the semantic route.
Because the model assumes that each object originates from
a single memory route, the goal of encoding is to infer
which objects can be encoded via the episodic route and
which objects can be reconstructed by a probability
distribution over topics (specific for the image studied).
The latent variables z and x can be inferred using Gibbs
sampling (the remaining latent variables can be integrated
out). The topic and route assignment for the i-th object can
be jointly determined conditional on all other assignments:
p ( xi = r, zi = j | z−i , x−i , o,ϕ S ) ∝
⎧ φ jS,o ( n j ,−i + α ) ( n1,−i + γ )
r =1
i
⎪
⎨ noi ,−i + β E
n + α ) ( n0,−i + γ ) r = 0
⎪ V
E ( j ,− i
⎩ n−i + M β

80% w ords set
20% w ord s et

Cummula tive Precis ion

1

cya
r
u
cc
A
e
vi
ta
lu
m
u
C

0. 8

0. 6

0. 4

0. 2

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Output Position

Figure 4: Model predictions: cumulative accuracy by output
position when 80% and 20% of the objects have been
perceptually encoded. The two conditions simulate the effect of
long and short study times respectively.

(7)

where M is the number of unique objects labels in the
LabelMe database, n0,-i is the number of time the episodic
route is assigned, n1,-i is the number of times the semantic
route is assigned, and no,-i is the number of times a specific
object o is assigned to the episodic route. The subscript –i
indicates that the assignment for the i-th object is not
included in the counts. We treated the hyperparameters α,
βE and γ as constants in the model (we set α= 0.1, βE=
0.000001, and γ=0.3).
We applied the dual route topic model to a small number
of images from the LabelMe image set. We selected a set of
10 images to correspond with the 10 images used in the
memory experiment. The images used in the simulation
were selected based on having a relatively large number of
annotations (30-60).
Up to this point, the model specifies a retrieval
probability piretrieve = p(oi | s) for each object i. Ideally, one
would recall objects from this distribution strictly in order
of decreasing probability. However, we assume that people
cannot determine the strict order of probabilities. Therefore,
we incorporate noise in the recall sampling process by
letting the actual recall probability be based on a soft-max
sampling process:
1
1
(8)
pirecall = exp( piretrieve ) ∑ j exp( p retrieve
)
τ
τ j
where τ is the parameter that controls the sampling noise.
We set τ =0.008. In the experiment, participants were not
allowed to repeat previous answers. To simulate this with
the model, we sampled objects without replacement from
the recall distribution.
To simulate the effect of study time we selected two
subsets of the annotation word list for the images: a set of
80% of the annotations and a set of 20 % of the annotations.
This corresponds to the idea that when studying an image
for a restricted period of time not all the objects in the image
are noticed. Subsets were created by drawing a random
sample of objects from the full object set. Figure 4 shows
the model predictions plotted in the same way as the results
of our empirical study. The results show a qualitative fit to
the experimental data. Objects from the smaller subset,
corresponding to short study times, have initial higher

accuracy, while a larger subset has initial lower accuracy
followed by a cross-over. This models the somewhat
counter-intuitive finding of our empirical study that the first
few objects recalled for short study times are more likely to
be correct than for longer study times. The model explains
this finding because of different weightings of the two
encoding routes, episodic and semantic. If a scene is
studied for a longer period of time more objects are noticed
and encoded, but it is more difficult to accurately store the
longer list of object in memory because of the sparsity
constraint in the episodic memory route. This leads to a
greater number of objects encoded by the semantic route.
While this route cannot fully reconstruct the objects present
in the image, it is able to “guess” a larger number of objects,
leading to relatively higher cumulative accuracy for later
output positions. In contrast, seeing a scene for a shorter
period of time, leads one to notice fewer objects but these
objects can be encoded more effectively by the episodic
route. However, the semantic context is not as well encoded
in this case, leading to poorer performance for later output
positions. Figure 5 show the probabilities of route
assignments for three conditions: full set of objects, and the
80% and 20% subset conditions corresponding to long and
short study times. Smaller word sets lead to greater episodic
contributions, while larger word sets lead to almost equal
contributions of episodic and semantic encoding routes.
The relative contribution of episodic and semantic
information in recall can also account for other standard

1561

Route Probability
Full word set

80%
80% subset
subset

Full list

20%
20%subset
subset

Semantic
Episodic
0

0.5

1.0 0

0.5

1.0

0

0.5

1.0

Figure 5: Model predictions for the full response set and for
two sub sets of 80% and 20% of responses respectively.

study times lead to an initially lower performance followed
by a cross-over in accuracy. Given a dual route topic model
account of reconstructive memory, where recall probability
is given by the ability of an encoding route – episodic or
semantic - to explain the occurrence of an object in a scene,
this is to be expected. The model can also account for
semantic isolation effects by favoring episodic encoding for
objects that are not consistent with the semantic context of a
scene.

0.1
target
background

0.09

Retrieval probability

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0

Outlier list (Tree in kitchen)

Pure list (Tree in urban)

References

Figure 6: Model predictions an object that is either
incongruent (a tree in a kitchen) or congruent (a tree in an
urban scene).

memory phenomena, such as the semantic isolation effect
(von Restorff, 1933). An object is more likely to be recalled
when it is part of a list where it violates the semantic context
than when it is presented in a list where it is congruent with
the semantic context. This finding can be explained by the
dual route model because the route assignment to episodic
and semantic memory routes is dependent on the context.
Objects consistent with a scene (e.g., typical kitchen objects
in a kitchen) can be explained by the semantic route,
whereas an object that is not part of the semantic context of
the scene (e.g., a ‘tree’ in a kitchen) can be explained by the
episodic route assignment.
To simulate the semantic isolation effect we created an
artificial image where we manually determined the presence
of objects. We selected an object that had an average recall
probability within its semantic context – a tree in an urban
scene (these are the same 10 scenes used in the previous two
simulations). Figure 6 shows that ‘a tree in an urban scene’
is recalled with a slightly lower probability than the mean
recall probability of all other objects in the scene. We then
placed the ‘tree’ into a semantic context where it did not fit
(e.g., a kitchen) by randomly removing an annotation in
each of 10 kitchen scenes and replacing that annotation with
‘tree’. The urban and kitchen scenes were equated for the
number of annotations. We set α= 0.1, βV= 0.01, and γ=0.3
Figure 6 shows the recall probability for the target object
‘tree’ and mean recall for all other objects on the list. Recall
was higher for the target word than for the other objects.
This is consistent with the finding for semantic isolation
effects, as well as the idea that objects incongruent with the
semantic context of a scene are recalled using episodic
information.

Conclusion
We have given an account of reconstructive memory,
where reconstruction of objects in a scene is based on a mix
of episodic memory traces and semantic context. Short
study times lead to recall guided by episodic memory,
whereas recall after longer study times is more influenced
by semantic information. This counter-intuitive notion that
longer study times lead to less reliance on episodic memory,
is consistent with our empirical data showing that longer

Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brainerd, C. J., Wright, R., & Reyna, V. F. (2002). Dualretrieval processes in free and associative recall. Journal
of Memory and Language, 46, 120–152.
Brewer, W. F., & Treyens, J. C. (1981) Role of schemata in
memory for places. Cognitive Psychology, 13, 207-230.
Griffiths, T. L., Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007).
Topics in semantic representation. Psychological Review,
114, 211-244.
Griffiths, T. L., & Steyvers, M. (2004). Finding scientific
topics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,
101, 5228-5235.
Hemmer, P., & Steyvers, M. (2009). Integrating episodic
memories and prior knowledge at multiple levels of
abstraction. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 80-87.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in
establishing spatial location. Psychological Review, 98,
352-376.
Konkle, T., & Oliva, A. (2007). Normative representation of
objects: Evidence for an ecological bias in perception and
memory. In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.),
Proc.s of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science Society, (pp.
407-413), Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Potter, M. C., Staub, A., Rado, J., & O’Connor, D. H.
(2002). Recognition memory for briefly presented
pictures: The time course of rapid forgetting. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 28, 1163-1175.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not present in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Russel, B. C., & Torralba, A. (2008). LabelMe: a database
and web-based tool for image annotation. International
Journal of Computer Vision, 77, 157-173.
Steyvers, M., & Griffiths, T. (2008). Rational analysis as a
link between human and information retrieval. In: N.
carter and M. Oaksford (eds.) The Probabilistic Mind:
Prospects from Rational Models of Cognition. Oxford
University Press.
von Restorff, H. (1933). Uber die Wirkung von
Bereichsbildungen im Spurenfeld [the effects of field
formation in the trace field], Psychologische Forschung,
18, 299–342.

1562

