UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investigating the Difference between Surprise and Probability Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0xz0s3v1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Meguire, Phil
Maguire, Rebecca

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investigating the Difference between Surprise and Probability Judgments
Phil Maguire (pmaguire@cs.nuim.ie)
Department of Computer Science, NUI Maynooth
Co.Kildare, Ireland

Rebecca Maguire (rebecca.maguire@dbs.ie)
Department of Psychology, Dublin Business School
34/35 South William Street, Dublin 2, Ireland

In spite of the considerable research that has been
conducted on the subjective and behavioural ramifications
of surprise and the important role it plays in difference
contexts, it is not clear how and when a person becomes
surprised. In this article, we attempt to shed light on this
issue by investigating the factors which cause an event to be
perceived as surprising. In particular, we seek to explain the
difference between probability and surprise judgments. Why
do some unlikely events elicit surprise, while others do not?

Abstract
Surprise is often defined in terms of disconfirmed
expectations, whereby the surprisingness of an event is
thought to be dependent on the degree to which that event
contrasts with a more likely, or expected, outcome. We
propose that surprise is more accurately modelled as a
manifestation of an ongoing sense-making process.
Specifically, the level of surprise experienced depends on the
extent to which an event necessitates representational
updating. This sense-making view predicts that differences in
subjective probability and surprise arise because of
differences in representational specificity rather than
differences between an expectation and an outcome. We
describe two experiments which support this hypothesis. The
results of Experiment 1 demonstrate that generalised
representations can allow subjectively low probability
outcomes to be integrated without eliciting high levels of
surprise, thus providing an explanation for the difference
between the two measures. The results of Experiment 2 reveal
that the level of contrast between expectation and outcome is
not correlated with the difference between probability and
surprise. The implications for models of surprise are
discussed.

Surprise as Probability

Keywords: Surprise, probability, likelihood judgments,
expectation, representation, reasoning.

Introduction
Surprise is a familiar experience to us all, whether induced
by a noise in the dark, or by an unexpected twist in a murder
mystery. Due to its pervasiveness, surprise has been a topic
of interest for researchers in psychology and its cognate
disciplines for quite some time (e.g. Darwin, 1872). This
research has shown that, as well as being one of the most
basic and universal of human emotions, surprise has many
important cognitive ramifications (Fisk, 2002; Meyer,
Reisenzein & Schützwohl, 1997; Ortony & Partridge, 1987;
Schützwohl, 1998; Teigen & Keren, 2003). For example, a
surprising event, as well as giving rise to a ‘feeling of
surprise’ at a subjective and physiological level, usually
results in an interruption to ongoing activities and an
increased focusing of attention on the event in question (e.g.
Schützwohl & Reisenzein, 1999). As such, one hypothesis
is that surprise plays a key role in learning and prediction: it
interrupts activity to focus one’s attention on why the
surprising event occurred in the first place, so that a similar
event may be predicted and avoided in the future (Darwin,
1872; Meyer et al. 1997).

A review of the literature reveals that the prevailing
definition of surprise relates it directly to expectation (e.g.
Meyer et al, 1997; Ortony & Partridge, 1987; Teigen &
Keren, 2003). Indeed, this view corresponds to people’s
own naïve understanding of the phenomenon (e.g. Bartsch
& Estes, 1997, found that both children and adults
conceptualise surprise in terms of expectation).
Theoretically, expectation is formalised in terms of
probabilities, where an unexpected outcome is considered to
be a low probability event, and vice-versa (Teigen & Keren,
2003). If we relate this to surprise, then low probability
events should lead to a feeling of surprise, while high
probability events should not.
While there has been some empirical support for this
view (e.g. Fisk, 2002; Itti & Baldi, 2006; Reisenzein, 2000),
the intuitive relationship between probability and surprise
does not always hold. Most of the events that occur in
everyday life are quite unlikely based on prior knowledge,
yet their occurrence does not always lead to surprise. Teigen
and Keren (2003) carried out a number of experiments
which illustrated a divergence between probability and
surprise. Participants rated both the probability of a certain
event and also how surprised they would be if the event
were to occur. In one study, for instance, participants were
presented with a scenario that described Erik, an athlete who
was competing in a 5,000m race. One set of participants
were told that, with two laps to go, all the athletes in the
race – including Erik – were running together in a large
group (multiple alternatives condition). Another set of
participants were told that Erik was in second place, lagging
behind a lead athlete with the rest of the athletes far behind
(single alternative condition). Both groups were then asked
to rate the probability of Erik winning the race, and how
surprised they would be if he won. While participants in the
single alternative condition (where Erik was in second

2359

place) correctly rated the probability of Erik winning the
race as higher than those in the multiple alternative
condition (where all the athletes were in one group), they
also rated this possibility as being more surprising.
To explain this effect, Teigen and Keren (2003)
proposed the contrast hypothesis of surprise. This theory
holds that surprise is governed by the relative probabilities
of alternative events, rather than by the absolute probability
of the observed outcome. When there are multiple
alternatives to an outcome (i.e. when any of the athletes,
including Erik, has a chance of winning the race),
participants should be less surprised at Erik winning than if
there is just one likely alternative outcome (i.e. when only
one other athlete – the lead runner – is likely to win).
According to Teigen and Keren (2003), this is because the
‘contrast’ between the observed and the expected outcome
is greater in the latter version of the scenario.
Teigen and Keren’s (2003) contrast hypothesis has
greater scope than the probability-based view, since it
explains why many events, which have a low probability of
occurring, do not lead to surprise. However, the theory only
applies to situations in which explicit expectations are
formed. This is a significant limitation as, intuitively, most
surprise reactions do not contradict prior expectations (e.g. a
brick coming through the window). In order to subsume
these alternative forms of surprises into a single
comprehensive theory, a more general explanation is
required.

Surprise as Sense-making
Kahneman and Miller (1986) originally proposed that
surprise reflects a person’s success, or more appropriately
their failure, to make sense of an event. In line with this
view, Maguire, Maguire and Keane (2007) proposed that the
experience of surprise reflects a representation updating
process. Maintaining a current and valid representation of
the environment is of utmost importance to any organism in
order to allow it to act appropriately; allowing it to diverge
from reality can have serious consequences. Maguire et al.’s
integration hypothesis proposes that surprise occurs when a
coherent representation ‘breaks down’ in light of a
discrepant stimulus. In such cases it makes sense to focus
attention immediately on the event so that appropriate action
can be taken as soon as possible
People are constantly updating their representations in
very minor ways. For example, a person’s attention tends to
be directed towards information which is least congruent
with their representation: Itti and Baldi (2006) found that
84% of gaze shifts were directed towards locations that were
more surprising when participants were shown television
and video games. The best strategy for incorporating a
discrepant event is to direct additional cognitive resources
towards it and to sample additional information from the
environment. For that reason, the emotional state of surprise
is generally accompanied by physiological arousal, as well
as distinctive changes in facial expression, such as eyewidening and the opening of the mouth. Darwin (1872)

originally proposed that these changes prepare an organism
to react. Susskind et al. (2008) suggested that the facial
expression associated with surprise has evolved to enhance
the intake of sensory information. They found that
participants with wide-open eyes detected peripheral objects
more quickly and performed side-to-side eye movements
faster. The nasal cavity was also enlarged, enhancing the
absorption of odours and allowing participants to take in
more air with each breath without exerting any extra effort.
Once the physiological surprise response has subsided,
the urge to understand a discrepant event persists. Imagine
finding a gorilla in your car. At first you would be taken
aback, experiencing the physiological changes associated
with a surprise reaction. After calling the zoo to have the
gorilla removed, this initial emotional response would
subside, yet the urge to reconcile this bizarre event with
your representation of reality would persist nonetheless
(how on earth did the gorilla get into the car?) We maintain
that this form of ‘cognitive surprise’ is driven by the same
conditions which give rise to the more visceral form of
surprise, namely the need to maintain a valid representation
of reality. If both forms of surprise are manifestations of the
same underlying phenomenon, then they should be
explained by a single unified theory.
In this article we argue that the integration hypothesis
encompasses the predictions of Teigen and Keren’s contrast
hypothesis as well as accounting for other forms of surprise
that do not involve explicit expectations. Importantly, the
integration hypothesis also provides a strong theoretical
motivation for the phenomenon of surprise, as opposed to
explaining it in terms of other measures such as probability.

Experiment 1
If people insisted on understanding the causal factors giving
rise to all events in their environment, then every
subjectively low probability event would elicit surprise.
However, representations involving this level of detail are
not required. Some events will be inconsequential to the
interests of the individual and thus can be ignored. Other
events are simply not amenable to explanation because the
causal factors are extremely convoluted. Consequently,
much of the information in a representation may be
generalised in terms of frequencies rather than in terms of
precise explanatory factors. For example, rather than
scrupulously monitoring and modelling the atmospheric
conditions which give rise to precipitation, most people will
simply accept that it rains sporadically. Similarly, in a
lottery draw, people will accept that a set of unpredictable
random numbers will be drawn, rather than for example,
furiously trying to explain why the number 36 happened to
emerge. As a result of these generalisations, events can
occur which, while recognised as having been relatively
unlikely, do not require representational updating. The
integration hypothesis therefore predicts that differences in
surprise and probability judgments arise because of
differences in representational specificity.

2360

In the following experiment we investigated the validity
of this premise. Participants were asked to provide
judgments for four different representations of a weather
system. The descriptions were varied according to
specificity and also according to the extent to which they
supported the outcome. The aim of the experiment was to
investigate whether the specificity of a representation affects
the level of surprise experienced for subjectively low
probability events.

Method
Participants 84 undergraduate students from NUI
Maynooth participated voluntarily in this experiment. All
were native English speakers.
Materials The four weather representations generated were
general-supportive (‘it rains five days a week’), generalunsupportive (‘it rains one day a week’), specific-supportive
(‘a cold front approaching from the west will lead to
overcast, unsettled weather over the next few days’) and
specific-unsupportive (‘an approaching area of high
pressure will bring clear, sunny conditions over the next few
days’).
Design We used a two-way repeated-measures model. The
independent variables of specificity and support were
repeated by participant, with probability and surprise
judgments as the dependent variables.
Procedure For all scenarios, participants were asked to
provide both surprise and probability judgments for the
possibility of rain the following day. Surprise ratings were
provided on a 7-point scale (7 being the most surprising),
while probability was rated in terms of a percentage (100%
reflecting certainty). The order of presentation of the
scenarios was randomised between participants, as was the
order in which they rated surprise and probability.

Results and Discussion
Some of the participants failed to reason probabilistically.
For example, in the scenario “it rains one day a week”, the
probability of rain on a given day must be 14%. However,
some participants provided much higher probability ratings,
indicating that they were relying on sense-making rather
than on frequency information for their judgments. In other
words, they were confusing mathematical probability with
surprise. Given that the aim of the experiment was to

elucidate the difference between probability and surprise,
these participants could not be included in the study.
Accordingly, we eliminated the responses of any participant
who rated the probability for the abstract-unsupportive
scenario as higher than 20%. This removed a total of 23
participants, 12 of whom had rated surprise first and 11 of
whom had rated probability first. The average probability
rating provided by these participants for the abstractunsupportive condition was 61%, varying from 30% (4
participants) up to 90% (3 participants). The extent of this
logical error indicates that people are prone to relying on
representation-fit for making likelihood judgments, even
when explicit frequency information is available.
The average probability ratings are provided in Table 1.
Both the general-unsupportive and the specific-unsupportive
scenarios were rated as similarly improbable (15% and 16%
respectively), yet the specific-unsupportive scenario was
rated as twice as surprising as the general-unsupportive
scenario (5.2 and 2.6 respectively). We conducted repeated
measures ANOVAs examining the relationship between
specificity, probability and surprise. Probability ratings were
not affected by representational specificity: The specificity
X supportiveness interaction was not significant, F(1,58) =
.241, p = .626, MSe = 179.621. As expected, there was a
significant main effect of supportiveness, F(1,58) =
2360.673, p < .001, MSe = 97.946, though no significant
effect of specificity, F(1,58) = .1.019, p = .317, MSe =
174.693. The surprise ratings displayed a different pattern of
results. In this case, there was a strong interaction between
specificity and supportiveness, F(1,58) = 70.188, p < .001,
MSe = 1.235. There was a significant main effect of
supportiveness, F(1,58) = 186.47, p < .001, MSe = 1.744, as
well as a significant main effect of specificity, F(1,58) =
100.97, p < .001, MSe = 1.115, with the generalunsupportive scenario being rated as far less surprising than
the specific-unsupportive scenario.
In order to better analyse the effect of specificity on the
difference between surprise and probability ratings, we
converted both to a single scale and subtracted one from the
other, yielding a total difference score. As shown in Table 1,
surprise and probability ratings diverged markedly for the
general-unsupportive scenario (59%) but were relatively
consistent for the other three scenarios (16%, 11% and
15%). We computed a two-way repeated measures ANOVA
on the difference values. Again, there was a significant
interaction between specificity and supportiveness, F(1,58)
= 83.669, p < .001, MSe = 392.886, with a significant main

Table 1
Mean probability and surprise ratings for Experiment 1
Order of ratings
Probability first
Surprise first
Mean
Difference

General-Supportive
Probability
Surprise
77%
1.3
76%
1.6
77%
1.5
15.9%

General-Unsupportive
Probability
Surprise
15%
2.6
14%
2.6
15%
2.6
58.7%

2361

Specific-Supportive
Probability
Surprise
83%
1.6
76%
1.6
79%
1.6
10.5%

Specific-Unsupportive
Probability
Surprise
17%
5.1
15%
5.2
16%
5.2
14.6%

effect of supportiveness, F(1,58) = 54.000, p < .001, MSe =
514.823, as well as a significant main effect of specificity,
F(1,58) = 44.111, p < .001, MSe = 406.838. Pairwise
comparisons using Bonferroni adjustments revealed that
there was a significant difference between the generalunsupportive condition and the other three conditions (all ps
< .0083) but no other significant differences within these
three.
These results illustrate clearly that generalised
representations can lead to lower levels of surprise for
subjectively low probability outcomes. Although
participants acknowledged that it was unlikely to rain the
following day in the general-unsupportive scenario (15%),
they would not have been very surprised if it did rain (2.6
out of 7). This observation is in line with the integration
hypothesis, which predicts that surprise should be lower
when low probability events can be easily integrated
without requiring representational updating. For example,
the occurrence of rain on a particular day does not
undermine the representation that it rains one day each
week.
The observed pattern of results suggests that differences
in surprise and probability can be linked to the specificity of
the representations on which such judgments are based. The
more specific a representation, the less likely it is to be
compatible with low probability events, causing surprise
and probability ratings to converge. In idiosyncratic
situations which are not amenable to generalisation,
people’s representations are likely to be over-fitted and less
able to accommodate subjectively low probability
outcomes. In this case, anything that deviates from
expectation will require a fundamental re-evaluation of the
representation. For example, Reisenzein (2000) asked
participants to rate confidence and surprise for answers on a
multiple-choice test and found a very strong correlation
between these measures (r = -0.78). The likelihood of being
correct about a particular multiple-choice question is
difficult to generalise. If you are confident that you know
the answer to a particular question and are subsequently
shown to be incorrect (a subjectively low probability event),
then there is a need to update to your beliefs in order to
prevent subsequent errors of judgment. Unlike the situation
involving the weather, a generalisation in this case is
unacceptable.

Integration or Anticipation?
The pattern of results observed in Experiment 1 could
potentially be accommodated by the contrast hypothesis.
For example, it could feasibly be claimed that the generalunsupportive representation did not contradict any
expectation, while the specific-supportive representation
contradicted the expectation that there would be clear, sunny
weather. Because expectations and anticipatory processes
are by definition based on one’s current representation of
reality, events which contrast with an explicit expectation
will necessarily be events which are difficult to
accommodate. Typically, the greater the contrast, the more

difficult the integration process. As a result, the contrast and
integration hypotheses make similar predictions for
representations which are specific enough to set up an
expectation.
A significant limitation of Teigen and Keren’s (2003)
contrast hypothesis is that the range of potential outcome
events in a given situation can rarely be divided up in terms
of a discrete number of competing alternatives. As a result,
most instances of surprise cannot be explained in terms of
contrast. For example, if you are sitting on the couch
watching television and a brick comes through the window,
it is difficult to construe this event as being in contrast with
the expectation that a brick would not come through the
window. People do not usually sit in their living room
thinking about bricks, yet they would certainly be surprised
if they saw one coming towards them. According to the
integration hypothesis, the range of possible outcomes is so
great that events are typically evaluated after they have
occurred, as part of a sense-making process, rather than
being predicted beforehand. The potential for events to be
judged as surprising or unsurprising is usually implicit to a
representation. In other words, people do not always have
well-formed expectations about what is going to happen
next. What they do have is a representation which can be
used to make sense of the events that happen to unfold. In
other words, reality does the hard work of figuring out what
happens next and people do the easier work of trying to
make sense of it.
If the integration hypothesis is correct, then it should be
possible for events to simultaneously violate expectations
and be judged as unsurprising, provided some effective way
of rationalising those events is established. For example,
although it might be surprising to find that a trailing runner
wins a race (as in Teigen and Keren’s example), it should
seem less surprising when a convincing explanation is
provided (e.g. the leader stumbles). Maguire and Keane
(2006) investigated this possibility, creating 16 scenarios
which instantiated an explicit expectation and then
analysing surprise ratings provided for a set of different
outcomes. In the Confirm condition the outcome confirmed
the expectation set up by the representation while in the
Disconfirm condition the outcome disconfirmed that
expectation. In the Disconfirm-Enable condition, the
disconfirming outcome was paired with another enabling
event which facilitated the overall integration of the
conjunctive outcome with the representation. For example,
one of the scenarios described Anna setting her radio alarm
clock for 7am in preparation for an important job interview
the next morning. In the Disconfirm condition, participants
were asked to rate surprise for the outcome that the alarm
clock failed to ring. In the Disconfirm-Enable condition,
they were asked to rate surprise for the outcome that there
was a power-cut during the night and the alarm clock failed
to ring.
Maguire and Keane (2006) found that the DisconfirmEnable outcomes were rated as significantly less surprising
than those in the Disconfirm condition. In other words,

2362

when participants were provided with a reason for why an
unexpected event might occur, their surprise was lower than
when the disconfirming event was presented on its own.
These findings undermine the contrast hypothesis, as they
demonstrate that the same unexpected event is not always
judged as equally surprising in different contexts. Instead,
surprise for an unexpected event is mitigated when a means
for rationalising that event is made available.
Maguire and Keane’s (2006) findings could potentially
be reconciled with the contrast hypothesis. One could make
the case that having an explanation for a disconfirming
event lowers the perceived level of contrast between that
event and the expected outcome because the outcome seems
more likely. Tverksy and Kahneman (1983) demonstrated
that a conjunction of associated propositions are often rated
as more probable than either proposition in isolation. Thus,
knowing that an alarm clock failed to ring because of a
power failure may reduce the level of contrast with the
expectation that it should have rung at the appropriate time.
The key difference between the contrast hypothesis and the
integration hypothesis centres on whether or not people
develop expectations against which subsequent outcomes
are contrasted. While the contrast hypothesis posits that
expectations are a key factor in the experience of surprise,
the integration hypothesis claims that surprise can be
modelled based on the outcome event alone. In the
following experiment we investigated whether or not
surprise ratings are associated with differences in contrast.

Experiment 2
One limitation of Teigen and Keren’s (2003) study was that
they did not provide any specific measurements of contrast.
In each experiment, a single scenario was presented to
participants involving a pair of conditions which were
assumed to reflect high and low levels of contrast. Although
Teigen and Keren reported significant differences, no
measure was provided of the overall correlation between
contrast and surprise. We addressed this lacuna by deriving
levels of contrast for Maguire and Keane’s 16 scenarios and
comparing them against the corresponding surprise ratings.
Teigen and Keren stated that the “surprise associated with
an outcome is determined by the relative, rather than
absolute probabilities involved” (p. 58). Accordingly,
contrast was calculated by obtaining probability ratings for
the confirming and disconfirming outcomes and subtracting
them.
The contrast hypothesis predicts that the level of contrast
should be closely correlated with surprise ratings. On the
other hand, the integration hypothesis maintains that
surprise is based solely on the ease with which an event can
be integrated. As demonstrated in Experiment 1,
subjectively low probability outcomes are less easily
integrated with representations which are specific enough to
instantiate an explicit expectation. In such situations,
probability and surprise ratings tend to converge.
Accordingly, the integration hypothesis suggests that
probability and surprise ratings should be closely matched

for the scenarios under investigation.

Method
Participants 120 undergraduate students from NUI
Maynooth voluntarily took part in the experiment. All were
native English speakers.
Materials The 16 event sequences generated by Maguire et
al. (2006) were used, with the three conditions Confirm,
Disconfirm and Disconfirm-Enable.
Design The three conditions were counterbalanced across
three lists of scenarios. Each participant was given one of
these lists which contained the 16 scenarios paired with one
of the three endings.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to judge
either probability or surprise. In the probability condition,
the scenario body was followed by the question “What is
the probability that: X ?”, where X referred to the event, or
series of events, corresponding to one of the three possible
outcomes. In the surprise condition, the question was “How
surprised would you be if: X ?”. As before, surprise ratings
were provided on a 7-point scale, while probability was
rated in terms of a percentage. The scenarios were presented
in a different random order to each participant.

Results and Discussion
The average probability ratings were 75.8%, 14.6% and
20.5% for the Confirm, Disconfirm and Disconfirm-Enable
conditions respectively and the average surprise ratings
were 1.9, 4.9 and 4.5. The Disconfirm-Enable condition was
rated as more probable than the Disconfirm condition for 13
of the 16 scenarios. There was a significant difference
between these conditions, indicating a robust conjunction
fallacy effect, F1(1,15) = 5.980, p = .027, MSe = 47.165, (see
Tversky & Kahneman, 1983). The average level of contrast
for the Disconfirm scenarios (61.2%) was significantly
greater than the average level of contrast for the DisconfirmEnable condition (55.3%), F1(1,15) = 5.872, p = .029, MSe
= 48.031. This observation lends support to the idea that
Maguire and Keane’s (2006) findings can be explained in
terms of contrast.
We computed the degree of contrast for both conditions
by subtracting the probability ratings from those of the
corresponding confirming scenarios. There was no
significant correlation between contrast and the surprise
ratings, r = .113, p = .537. However, as predicted by the
integration hypothesis, there was a significant correlation
between the probability and surprise ratings, r = -.418, p =
.017. All but one of the 16 scenarios displayed the same
direction of difference between the Disconfirm and
Disconfirm-Enable conditions for both surprise and
probability ratings, indicating a close relationship.
These results indicate that differences in contrast are not
associated with differences in surprise: low probability
events can be just as surprising when a scenario does not

2363

support a clear expectation. For example, the lowest
probability ratings for any confirming outcome were
provided for the scenario where Sarah calls to her parents’
house and knocks on the front door. Because either one of
her parents must open the door, the probability of the most
likely outcome cannot exceed 50% (assuming no bias
towards either parent). Although this substantially lowers
the potential contrast with any alternative outcome, it does
not necessarily lower the surprise for a low probability
event: a stranger opening the door is just as surprising,
regardless of the probability of the most likely possible
alternative.
One might claim that the expectation in this case is that
either one of Sarah’s parents will answer the door and that
the level of contrast should be computed on this basis. In
order to make this argument, one would have to concede
that an expectation can maintain some degree of ambiguity.
However, this is exactly what our proposal of a generalised
representation is intended to reflect: people allow a certain
level of flexibility in their representations of the world so
that a broad range of potential outcomes can be
accommodated. Because they do not seek to model every
last detail, people’s representations are primarily used for
making sense of rather than for predicting events.

Conclusion
Experiment 1 demonstrated that differences in
representational specificity lead to differences between
surprise and probability judgments. Experiment 2
demonstrated that the level of contrast between an
expectation and an outcome is not correlated with the
difference between surprise and probability ratings. These
results provide converging evidence in support of the
integration hypothesis while undermining the contrast
hypothesis. Because expectation-supporting representations
tend to be specific, Teigen and Keren’s experimental
conditions varied considerably in specificity. Thus, it seems
likely that the effect observed by Teigen and Keren (2003)
was most likely due to differences in representational
specificity rather than differences in contrast per se.
The fact that surprise is a relatively infrequent
phenomenon demonstrates that people maintain extremely
accurate representations that adapt readily to unfolding
events. However, the assumption of the contrast hypothesis
that events are continuously predicted by these
representations trivialises the complexity of the environment
and overstates the level of detail that can be represented.
Because real world events are often so unpredictable,
generating explicit expectations is seldom practical or even
feasible. An unfortunate individual adopting the
expectation-making strategy would live their life in a state
of perpetual surprise.
Accordingly, we have proposed that people maintain
representations which, although not sufficiently detailed to
make explicit predictions, can be relied on to make sense of
events. A generalised representation allows much of the
environment’s variability to be captured in a succinct

manner, while ignoring irrelevant details. Because low
probability events can be congruent with a generalised
representation, they do not necessarily require
representational updating and hence do not always elicit
surprise. In conclusion, we have provided converging
evidence that differences between probability and surprise
arise not because of contrasts between outcomes and
expectations, but because representations can be generalised
to facilitate the integration of subjectively low probability
events.

References
Bartsch, K. & Estes, D. (1997). Children’s and adults’
everyday talk about surprise, British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 15, 461-475.
Darwin, C. (1872). The Expression of Emotion in Man and
Animals. London: J. Murray.
Fisk, J. E. (2002). Judgments under uncertainty:
Representativeness or potential surprise? British Journal
of Psychology, 93, 431-449.
Itti, L. & Baldi, P. (2006). Bayesian surprise attracts human
attention. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 19, 1-8.
Kahneman D, & Miller DT. (1986). Norm theory:
Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological
Review, 93, 136-53.
Maguire, R. & Keane, M.T. (2006). Surprise: disconfirmed
expectations or representation-fit? Proceedings of the
Twenty-Eight Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Maguire, R., Maguire, P. & Keane, M. T. (2007).
Understanding surprise: Can less likely events be less
surprising? Proceedings of the Second European
Cognitive Science Conference.
Meyer, W.U., Reisenzein, R. & Schützwohl, A. (1997).
Towards a process analysis of emotions: The case of
surprise. Motivation and Emotion, 21(3), 251-274.
Ortony, A., & Partridge, D. (1987). Surprisingness and
expectation failure: What’s the difference? In
Proceedings of the tenth international joint conference
on artificial intelligence. Milan, Italy.
Reisenzein, R. (2000). Exploring the strength of association
between components of emotion syndromes: the case of
surprise. Cognition and Emotion, 10, 241-277.
Schützwohl, A. & Reisenzein, R. (1999). Children’s and
adults’ reactions to a schema-discrepant event: A
developmental analysis of surprise. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 23, 37-62.
Susskind, M. J., Lee, D. H., Cusi, A., Feiman, R., Grabski,
W. & Anderson, A. (2008). Expressing fear enhances
sensory acquisition. Nature Neuroscience, 11, 843-850.
Teigen, K.H., & Keren, G. (2003). Surprises: Low
probabilities or high contrasts? Cognition, 87, 55-71.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional vs.
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in
probability judgment. Psychological Review, 293-3l5.

2364

