UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language Comprehension: The Interplay Between Form and Content

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/86d0r44g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Folia, Vasiliki
Forkstam, Christian
Hagoort, Peter
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language Comprehension: The Interplay between Form and Content
Vasiliki Foliaa,b,c (vasiliki.folia@fcdonders.ru.nl)
Christian Forkstama,b,c (christian.forkstam@ki.se)
Peter Hagoorta,c (peter.hagoort@fcdonders.ru.nl)
Karl Magnus Peterssona,b,c,d (karl-magnus.petersson@mpi.nl)
a Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
b Stockholm Brain Institute, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
c Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands
d Cognitive Neuroscience Research Group, Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal

Abstract
In a 2x2 event-related FMRI study we find support for the
idea that the inferior frontal cortex, centered on Broca’s
region and its homologue, is involved in constructive
unification operations during the structure-building process in
parsing for comprehension. Tentatively, we provide evidence
for a role of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex centered on BA
9/46 in the control component of the language system.
Finally, the left temporo-parietal cortex, in the vicinity of
Wernicke’s region, supports the interaction between the
syntax of gender agreement and sentence-level semantics.
Keywords:
FMRI;
syntax;
semantics;
language
comprehension; Broca’s region; Wernicke’s region; inferior
parietal region

Introduction
Humans encounter many new and unexpected sentences in
everyday life and typically interpret them without cognitive
effort. This ability is grounded in a peculiar biological
system, part of the human brain, called the faculty of
language. Most current models of language processing agree
that different types of constraints are rapidly utilized in online sentence processing (Hagoort, 2005). Constraints on
how words can be structurally combined operate
interactively and in parallel with qualitatively distinct
constraints on the combination of word meanings, the
grouping of words into phonological phrases, and their
referential binding in discourse models (Jackendoff, 2007).
Most models make a distinction between retrieval and
combinatorial/compositional processes, implying that
sentences have internal structure. Retrieval entails lexical
selection from the mental lexicon, a specific long-term
memory store. Lexical representations include knowledge
about lexical form, syntactic properties (e.g., constituent
class, syntactic gender etc.), and lexical meaning. The
creative aspect of language is in part captured by its
generative structure-building processes which create
sentence-internal structure that represents for example who
did what to whom and how.
A recent trend in theoretical linguistics suggests that the
separation between lexical items and traditional rules of
grammar is fading and increasing support for these so-called
lexicalized models have accumulated. In lexicalized models

of parsing, the properties of words needed for sentence level
integration are retrieved from the mental lexicon in the form
of structured primitive representations (e.g., treelet) and
only relatively generic structure building operations like
unification (Vosse & Kempen, 2000), unify-pieces
(Culicover & Jackendoff, 2005), or merge (Chomsky, 2005)
are necessary to complete the on-line combinatorial
integration process. Vosse and Kempen (2000) proposed a
computationally explicit lexicalist unification space model
that accounts for a large range of empirical findings in the
parsing- and neuropsychological aphasia literature.
According to this unification space model, every incoming
word retrieves lexical frames (elementary syntactic trees)
that specify possible structural environments for input
words. When retrieved, these lexical frames enter the
unification space in a sequential fashion and are integrated
interactively and in parallel in a unification process in which
lexical frames are dynamically linked and various
constraints, like agreement and linear order constraints, are
applied (Kempen & Harbusch, 2002).
A key question in our understanding of language is
whether and where in the human brain the different levels
are localized and processed as well as whether and where
they interact. Understanding where, how, and when the
linguistic subcomponents are interacting in order to provide
a coherent interpretation is a fundamental challenge in the
neurobiological study of the language faculty (Chomsky,
2005). It is well-accepted that large regions within the
frontal, temporal, and temporo-parietal cortices are involved
in language processing. The temporal and temporo-parietal
cortices play a central role in both short-term verbal
memory (e.g., Petersson et al., 2009), storage and retrieval
of lexical information, that has been encoded during
language acquisition (Indefrey & Cutler, 2005). Based on a
meta-analysis of syntactic processing (Indefrey, 2004),
Hagoort (2005) suggested that the left posterior temporal
cortex is involved in the retrieval of lexical frames that form
the building blocks for syntactic unification, which he
argued, is supported by the left inferior frontal cortex
(LIFC). Functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI)
evidence support the role of the LIFC in the unification
operations that are performed at the structural/syntactic
(Petersson et al., 2004; Snijders et al., 2008) and

1686

conceptual/semantic levels (Hagoort et al, 2004; Menenti et
al., 2008; Tesink et al., 2008). While these studies tackle the
unification operations within each linguistic component, in
the current study we investigated the interplay between
sentence-level semantics and syntax.
In the present event-related FMRI study we adapted a well
characterized language comprehension paradigm used in a
previous EEG study (Hagoort, 2003). The experimental
design constituted a 2x2 factorial experiment including the
factors syntax and semantics. Each factor included two
levels, correct/anomalous, yielding 4 conditions: correct
(CR), syntactic (SY), semantic (SE), and combined (CB)
anomalies. The ERP results reported by Hagoort (2003)
showed typical P600 and N400 effects related to syntactic
and semantic anomalies, while their combined effect
revealed an interaction expressed in the N400 component
([CB-SE] - [SY-CR] > 0). Although the N400 component
was similar in the correct and syntactic conditions (SY ~
CR), the combined effect was significantly larger than the
effect of semantic anomaly alone (CB > SE). In contrast, the
size of the P600 effect was not affected by an additional
semantic violation, suggesting an asymmetry between
semantic and syntactic processing. Our primary objective in
the current FMRI study was to characterize this asymmetry
as well as the neural correlates of sentence-level syntactic
and semantic interaction.

Methods
Participants
Thirty two right-handed (16 females, mean age±SD = 22±3
years; mean years of education±SD = 16±2), healthy Dutch
university students volunteered to participate in the study.
They were all pre-screened and none of the subjects used
any medication, had a history of drug abuse, head trauma,
neurological or psychiatric illness, or a family history of
neurological or psychiatric illness. All subjects had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision. Written informed consent
was obtained from all participants according to the
Declaration of Helsinki and the local medical ethics
committee approved the study. One subject was excluded
from further analysis because he did not indicate that any of
the sentences including a semantic anomaly were
unacceptable.

Stimulus Material
The stimulus material consisted of 160 sentences from
Hagoort (2003). The material consisted of sentence frames
with a critical word position. There were four versions of
sentence, one for each factor level combination (Table 1):
(1) syntactically and semantically well-formed, correct
sentences (CR); (2) semantically correct sentences with a
gender agreement violation between the definite article and
the noun (SY); (3) syntactically correct sentences including
a lexical semantic anomaly that consisted of a semantically
unacceptable combination of the adjective and the following
noun (SE); and (4) a combination of the syntactic and
semantic anomalies (CB) described in (2) and (3). In the
semantically correct and anomalous conditions, different

adjectives preceded the nouns in the critical word (CW)
position. These adjectives were matched in length and
frequency. Critically, the violation of the gender agreement
and the violation of the semantic constraint became clear at
the same noun in critical word position. Thus, lexical
differences do not interfere with the experimentally
manipulated factors.
Table 1. Example sentences. The critical noun is italicized,
incorrect articles and anomalous adjectives are in bold.
De kapotte paraplu staat in de garage.
Het kapotte paraplu staat in de garage.
De eerlijke paraplu staat in de garage.
Het eerlijke paraplu staat in de garage.

(CR)
(SY)
(SE)
(CB)

Thecom/Theneut broken/honest umbrellacom is in the garage.

The sentence materials were constructed so that 50% of
the sentences contained a syntactic and 50% a semantic
anomaly. To make sure that the violations of gender
agreement did occur with equal probability after a common
and neuter gender article, 160 filler sentences were added.
In this way, violations of gender agreement could not be
predicted on the basis of probability or sentence context.
The materials were distributed among four versions of the
experiment such that no subject saw more than one version
of a sentence quartet, but across subjects, the critical items
were distributed equally over conditions. In addition to
experimental and filler items, the materials included 20
practice items and 15 start up items. The sentences had a
mean length of 8 words (SD = 1 word). Words were never
longer than 12 letters, with nouns in the CW position having
a maximal length of 10 letters. All sentences were simple
active or passive sentences. In the semantically
correct/anomalous conditions, different adjectives preceded
the nouns in the critical word position. These adjectives
were matched in length and frequency.

Experimental Procedure
The subjects were informed that they were to participate in a
natural language experiment. They were instructed to read
the sentences carefully and attentively for full
comprehension and to indicate for each sentence whether or
not it was acceptable. FMRI data were acquired during
sentence comprehension. All items in the experiment were
presented visually in Presentation (nbs.neuro-bs.com). The
stimulus items were presented via an LCD-projector outside
the scanner room, projecting the computer display onto a
semi-transparent screen that the subject comfortably viewed
through a mirror device mounted on the head-coil.
Sentences were presented word by word at the centre of a
computer screen. Each word was presented for 300ms,
followed by a blank screen for another 300ms, after which
the next word of the sentence appeared. The final sentence
word ended with a period. After a variable delay (1-2s) from
sentence offset, an asterisk appeared on the screen signaling
to the subjects that they had to push one of two response
buttons indicating whether the sentence was acceptable or
not. The asterisk remained on the screen for a period of 2s,
followed by a blank screen for a period of 2-5s preceding

1687

the next sentence. Before the FMRI experiment started, each
subject practiced on practice sentences to familiarize with
the experimental procedure. The experimental sentences
were presented in 4 blocks of approximately 10 minutes
each, with a short break between each block. Each block
started with 2 start-up filler sentences. The response hand
was balanced over subjects and over experimental blocks.

Data Procedures
Behavioral data analysis
Repeated measures ANOVAs were used for the analysis of
the data, unless otherwise stated (SPSS 15). A significance
level of P < .05 was used through out.

MR data acquisition
Whole head T2*-weighted functional echo planar blood
oxygenation level dependent (EPI-BOLD) FMRI data were
acquired with a SIEMENS Avanto 1.5T scanner using an
ascending slice acquisition sequence (volume TR = 2.6s, TE
= 40 ms, 90 degree flip-angle, 33 axial slices, slice-matrix
size = 64x64, slice thickness = 3 mm, slice gap = 0.5 mm,
FOV = 224 mm, isotropic voxel size = 3.5x3.5x3.5 mm3) in
a randomized event related fashion. For the structural MR
image volume a high-resolution T1-weighted magnetization
prepared rapid gradient-echo pulse sequence was used (MPRAGE; volume TR = 2250 ms, TE = 3.93 ms, 15 degree
flip-angle, 176 axial slices, slice-matrix size = 256x256,
slice thickness = 1 mm, field of view = 256 mm, isotropic
voxel-size = 1.0x1.0x1.0 mm3).

MR image preprocessing and statistical analysis

temporally convolved the explanatory variables with the
canonical hemodynamic response function provided by
SPM5. We included the realignment parameters for
movement artifact correction and a temporal high-pass filter
(cycle cut-off = 128s) to account for various low-frequency
effects. For the second-level analysis, we generated singlesubject contrast images for the correctly classified CR, SY,
SE, and CB sentences from the critical word onset until the
sentence final word relative the pre-critical sentence part in
a one-way subject-separated random effects repeated
measures ANOVA with unequal variance between
conditions and non-sphericity correction. Because of the
high behavioral performance we did not further analyze the
few incorrectly classified sentences. Statistical inference
was based on the suprathreshold cluster-size statistic from
the relevant second-level SPM[F] and SPM[T] (thresholded
at P = .001 uncorrected). Only clusters significant at P <
0.05 family-wise error (FWE) corrected (for multiple nonindependent comparisons based on smooth 3D random field
theory; Friston et al., 2007) are described. In the following,
we use the terms activation and deactivation as synonyms
for a relative increase and decrease in BOLD signal,
respectively.

Results
Acceptability judgments
Participants classified 94% of the correct sentences as
acceptable and for the sentences that contained syntactic or
semantic anomalies the results were as follows: For
sentences with a syntactic violation, 98% was rated as
unacceptable, for semantic anomalous sentences, 81% was
rated as unacceptable, and the sentences with combined
violations, 99% were rated as unacceptable. One sample ttests, comparing classification performance to 100% for
each sentence type were all non-significant.

We used the SPM5 software (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm)
for image preprocessing and statistical analysis. The critical
word position was manipulated independently in a 2x2
factorial design and the FMRI data analysis was time-locked
on the onset of the critical word position. The EPI-BOLD
contrast volumes were realigned to correct for individual
subject movement and acquisition-time corrected. The
subject-mean EPI-BOLD images were subsequently
spatially normalized to the functional EPI template provided
by SPM5. The normalization transformations thus generated
were applied to the corresponding functional volumes and
transformed into an approximate Talairach space (Talairach
and Tournoux 1988) defined by the SPM5 template. Finally,
the anatomically normalized image volumes were spatially
filtered with an isotropic 3D Gaussian filter kernel (FWHM
Figure 1. Sentence comprehension versus visual fixation.
= 10mm). The FMRI data were analyzed statistically using
the general linear model framework and statistical
MRI Results
parametric mapping (Friston et al., 2007) in a two-step
Comparing sentence processing (Figure 1) to the low-level
mixed-effects summary-statistics procedure (Friston et al.,
visual fixation baseline revealed a highly significant (P <
2007). At the first-level, single-subject fixed effect analyses
.001, FWE), bilaterally symmetric patterna of typical
were conducted. The linear model included explanatory
language related activations, including most of the inferior
regressors modeling the string presentation period from the
frontal, anterior cingulate, middle and superior temporal,
critical word onset for the CR, SY, SE, and CB conditions
inferior parietal, and lateral occipital and occipito temporal
separated on correct and incorrect responses. The initial part
regions, as well as the basal ganglia (thalamus, caudate and
of the sentences was modeled separately as were the filler
lentiform nuclei). Descriptively, the left hemispheric
items and the inter-sentence interval. Effects related to
activations were more prominent compared to the right; in
sentence endings were modeled by a separate regressor. We
1688

particular, in the angular/supramarginal region of the left
inferior parietal region.

Figure 2. The main effect of semantic anomaly.
Consistent with several previous studies (Hagoort et al.,
2004; Menenti et al., 2008; Tesink et al., 2008), the main
effect of semantic anomaly ([CB+SE] > [SY+CR]; Figure 2)
yielded significantly greater activation in the anterior left
inferior frontal region (BA 45/47; P < .038, FWE).The
opposite contrast revealed a deactivation pattern sharing
significant overlap with the typical default mode network
(Raichle et al., 2001).

superior temporal poles (BA 22/38). In addition, significant
effects were observed in medial prefrontal/anterior cingulate
cortex (BA 6/8/32; P < .001, FWE), posterior middle and
superior temporal regions (BA 21/22; P < .001, FWE), and
the basal ganglia (caudate and lentiform nuclei). In the
reverse contrast (Figure 4) we observed significant
activations in the middle frontal region bilaterally (BA 9/46;
P < .001, FWE), the right inferior parietal region (BA 39/40;
P < .001, FWE), precuneus bilaterally (BA 7; P = .001,
FWE) and the left posterior cingulate region (BA 23/31; P =
.001, FWE).
The only region that showed a significant interaction
([CB−SE] − [SY−CR] > 0; Figure 5) between the factors
semantics and syntax was the left temporo-parietal region
(BA 22/40; P = .003, FWE). This interaction was mainly
due to the fact that CB > SE (P = .025, FWE), while there
was no significant difference between SY and CR (P =
1.00).

Figure 5. The interaction between semantics and syntax.

Discussion
The present study investigated the neural correlates of
sentence level syntactic and semantic processing using a
well-characterized stimulus material from a previous EEG
study (Hagoort, 2003). So far, the only functional
neuroimaging studies that have investigated whether
Figure 3. The main effect of syntactically correct sentences.
semantic parameters have an influence on the structure
building process (and vice versa) are ERP studies; (Hagoort,
2003; Friederici, Steinhauer, & Frisch, 1999; Osterhout &
Nicol, 1999) with the exception of the FMRI study of
Kuperberg et al. (2003).
The sentence processing vs. low-level baseline and the
main effect of semantic anomalies are in line with previous
findings (Hagoort et al., 2004; Kuperberg et al., 2003;
Menenti et al., 2008; Tesink et al., 2008). The effect of
syntactically correct sentences (Figure 3) included
significant activation of the inferior frontal region,
extending into the mid-anterior insula, as well as the
posterior middle and superior temporal regions, in general
agreement with the findings of Snijders et al. (2008). The
gender agreement violations yielded significant activation of
Figure 4. The main effect of syntactic anomaly.
the middle frontal region bilaterally (Figure 4).
This set of syntax related results is interesting for several
The main effect of syntactically correct sentences ([SE+CR]
reasons. First, they show that the inferior frontal cortex
> [CB+SY]; Figure 3), showed significant activation in the
(IFC), centered on Broca’s region, is not only responding to
inferior frontal cortex (BA 6/44/45/47; P < .001, FWE; left
syntactic violations per se. On the contrary, the memory,
> right), including the mid-anterior insula extending into the
unification, and control model proposed by Hagoort (2005)
1689

hemodynamic response is the source of the cognitive
predicts that a complete unification failure, as is the case of
operation or the site where it has its effect. However, the
gender agreement violations, should engage the LIFC less
observation of an interaction between syntax and semantics
than when unification is possible and succeeds. Here we
suggests that the language parsing processes that feed into
note that the syntactic processing seems unaffected by the
the generator ensembles of the N400 and P600 components
semantic context when the incremental build-up of structure
are interacting at some level. The FMRI results suggest that
on the basis of the incoming word input is deterministic.
the left temporo-parietal region is one region where this
This is different from the case of structural ambiguity,
interaction takes place.
where at specific moments in the structural assignment
Although, intuitively, the semantic interpretation of the
process more than one syntactic structure can be assigned
sentences are not particularly affected by the gender
(cf., Hagoort, 2003). Second, the right Broca’s homologue
mismatch between the definite article and the noun, both the
was also significantly engaged by syntactically correct
acceptability judgments and the brain responses showed a
compared to anomalous sentences, although the left sided
significant sensitivity of the language processing system to
activation was more pronounced. Third, gender agreement
violations of gender agreement. Interestingly, the behavioral
violations, which induce complete unification failure,
control study of Hagoort (2003) showed that subjects took
activated the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA 9/46)
longer to evaluate semantic acceptability compared to the
bilaterally. The cortex centered on BA 9/46 has been related
syntactic acceptability of sentences. Taken together, these
to attention control processes and other, albeit ill-defined,
results suggested an asymmetry between semantic and
control aspects of working memory (e.g., Hagoort, 2005;
syntactic processing: syntactic processing was unaffected by
Petersson et al., 2006). Several researchers have raised the
semantic integration problems. Intuitively, the assigning
issue of working memory in the context of sentence
structure to a Jabberwocky sentence is as easy as assigning
processing (e.g., Cooke et al., 2006; MacLeod et al., 1998).
structure to a meaningful sentence; semantic integration is,
Activation of BA 9/46 has also been observed in verbal
however, harder in the presence of a syntactic processing
fluency tasks (e.g., Abrahams et al., 2003). Hagoort (2005)
problem. On this account, the processing consequences of
argued that the control component accounts for the fact that
complicated unification process might influence semantic
the language system operates in the context of
integration before the unification process comes to a halt
communicative intentions (and actions). Language control
(Hagoort, 2003). There is clear evidence from both
has for example been investigated in the context of Stroop
behavioral and EEG data that lexical context and discourse
tasks, suggesting an involvement of the dorsolateral
context immediately influence the assignment of structure
prefrontal (BA 9/46) and the anterior cingulate cortices
when there are different structural options. Thus, Hagoort
(Hagoort, 2005). In the study by Kuperberg et al. (2003),
(2003) argued that syntactic constraints conspire with
syntactic violations elicited an increased response in the
semantic constraints if the latter are necessary for
medial and lateral parietal regions bilaterally and also in the
determining structure, but semantics is ignored by syntax if
right middle frontal gyrus (BA 9/46). Several FMRI studies
its contribution is not needed.
have investigated syntactic gender processing (for a review
see Heim 2008) in metalinguistic (Longoni et al., 2005) and
automatic on-line processing tasks (Hammer et al., 2006).
Conclusion
Hammer et al. (2006) found activation of Broca’s region
In this study we show that the brain honors the distinction
and also an involvement of the supramarginal gyrus. In
between syntax and semantics, not only in terms of ERP
comparison, the semantic anomalies did not evoke an
components, but also in terms of brain regions. The results
activation of the control region. Semantic integration is a
show that the IFC (BA 6/44/45/47) is involved in
more graded process and there is no clear boundary between
constructive unification operations during the structurewhat can be, is difficult or impossible to semantically
building process in parsing for comprehension. The effect of
integrate (Hagoort, 2003).
semantic anomaly and its implied unification load engages
Finally, the only region that showed a significant
the anterior IFC (BA 45/47) while the effect of syntactic
interaction between the semantic and syntactic factor was
anomaly and its implied unification failure engages MFC
the left temporo-parietal region (BA 22/40; Figure 5). At a
(BA 9/46). Tentatively, we provide evidence that the
general level, this interaction effect patterned with the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex centered on BA 9/46
corresponding EEG findings of Hagoort (2003). More
subserves aspects of the control component of the language
specifically, the ERP results showed classical P600 and
system, albeit ill-defined. In addition, the FMRI results
N400 effects related to syntactic and semantic anomalies,
suggest that the syntax of gender agreement interacts with
respectively, while their combined effect revealed an
sentence-level semantics in the left temporo-parietal region.
interaction expressed in the N400 component ([CB-SE] [SY-CR] > 0). More specifically, the N400 component was
Acknowledgments
similar in the correct and syntactic conditions (SY ~ CR),
This work was supported by Max Planck Institute for
while the combined effect was significantly larger than the
Psycholinguistics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition
effect of semantic anomaly alone (CB > SE). It is worth
and Behaviour, Vetenskapsrådet, Hedlunds Stiftelse and
noting that we do not know whether the different language
Stockholm County Council (ALF, FoUU).
processing events are directly or only indirectly reflected to
the ERP effects. This complication has its parallel in FMRI
where it is unknown whether a region of an increased
1690

References
Abrahams, S., Goldstein, L. H., Simmons, A., Brammer,
M.J., Williams, S.C., Giampietro, V.P., Andrew, C.M.,
Leigh, P.N. (2003). Functional magnetic resonance
imaging of verbal fluency and confrontation naming
using compressed image acquisition to permit overt
responses. Human Brain Mapping, 20, 29-40.
Chomsky, N. (2005). Three factors in language design.
Linguistic Inquiry, 36, 1-22.
Cooke, A., Grossman, M., DeVita, C., Gonzalez-Atavales,
J., Moore, P., Chen, W., Gee, J., Detre, J. (2006). Largescale neural network for sentence processing. Brain
Language, 96, 14-36.
Culicover, P. W., Jackendoff, R. (2005). Simpler Syntax.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Friederici, A.D., Steinhauer, K., & Frisch, S. (1999).
Lexical integration: Sequential effects of syntactic and
semantic information. Memory and Cognition, 27, 438453.
Friston, K. J., Ashburner, J. T., Kiebel, S. J., Nichols, T. E.,
Penny, W. D. (2007). Statistical Parametric Mapping:
The Analysis of Functionl Brain Images. Academic
Press, San Diego (CA).
Hagoort, P. (2003). Interplay between syntax and semantics
during sentence comprehension: ERP effects of
combining syntactic and semantic violations. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 15, 883-899.
Hagoort, P., Hald, L., Baastiansen, M., Petersson, K.M.
(2004). Integration of word meaning and world
knowledge in language comprehension. Science 304,
438-441.
Hagoort, P. (2005). On Broca, brain, and binding: A new
framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 416-423.
Hammer, A., Goebel, R., Schwarzbach, J., Münte, T.F.,
Jansma, B.M. (2007). When sex meets syntactic gender
on a neural basis during pronoun processing. Brain
Research, 1146, 185-98.
Heim, S. (2008). Syntactic gender processing in the human
brain: A review and a model. Brain and Language, 106,
55-64.
Indefrey, P. (2004). Hirnaktivierungen bei syntaktischer
Sprachverarbeitung: Eine Meta-Analyse. In: Müller,
H.M, Rickheit, G., Eds. Neurokognition der Sprache,
Band 1. Tubingen: Stauffenburg Verlag.
Indefrey, P., Cutler, A. (2005). Prelexical and lexical
processing in listening. In: Gazzaniga MS, editor. The
cognitive neurosciences, 3rd ed. Cambridge (MA): MIT
Press.
Jackendoff, R. (2007). A parallel architecture perspective on
language processing. Brain Research, 1146, 2-22.
Kempen, G., Harbusch, K. (2002). Performance grammar:
A declarative definition. In: Theune, M., Nijholt, A.,
Hondorp, H., (Eds). Computational Linguistics in the
Netherlands. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Kuperberg, G.R., Holcomb, P.J., Sitnikova, T., Greve, D.,
Dale, A.M., Caplan, D. (2003). Distinct patterns of
neural modulation during the processing of conceptual
and syntactic anomalies. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 15, 272-93.

Longoni, F., Grande, M., Hendrich, V., Kastrau, F., Huber,
W. (2005). An fMRI study on conceptual, grammatical,
and morpho-phonological processing. Brain and
Cognition, 57, 131-4.
MacLeod, A. K., Buckner, R. L., Miezin, F. M., Petersen, S.
E., Raichle, M. E. (1998). Right anterior prefrontal
cortex activation during semantic monitoring and
working memory. Neuroimage,7, 41-8.
Menenti, L., Petersson, K. M., Scheeringa, R., Hagoort, P.
(2008). When elephants fly: Differential sensitivity of
right and left inferior frontal gyri to discourse and world
knowledge. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, online.
Osterhout, L., & Nicol, J. (1999). On the distinctiveness,
independence, and time course of the brain responses to
syntactic and semantic anomalies. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 14, 283-317.
Petersson, K. M., Forkstam, C., Ingvar, M. (2004). Artificial
syntactic violations activates Broca’s region. Cognitive
Science, 28, 383-407.
Petersson, K. M., Gisselgård, J., Gretzer, M.. Ingvar, M.
(2006). Interaction between a verbal working memory
network and the medial temporal lobe. NeuroImage, 33,
1207-1217.
Petersson, K. M., Ingvar, M., Reis, A. (2009). Language
and literacy from a cognitive neuroscience perspective.
In Cambridge Handbook of Literacy, D. Olson & N.
Torrance (Eds.). Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W.
J., Gusnard, D. A., Shulman, G. L.(2001). A default
mode of brain function. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences USA, 98, 676-682.
Snijders, T. M., Vosse, T., Kempen, G., Van Berkum, J. J.
A., Petersson, K. M., Hagoort, P. (2008). Retrieval and
unification of syntactic structure in sentence
comprehension: An fMRI study using word-category
ambiguity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, available
online.
Talairach, J., & Tournoux, P. (1988). Co-planar Stereotaxic
Atlas of the Human Brain. New York: Thieme
Tesink, C. M., Petersson, K. M., Van Berkum, J. J., van den
Brink, D., Buitelaar, J. K, Hagoort, P. (2008).
Unification of speaker and meaning in language
comprehension: An fMRI study. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, available online.
Vosse, T., Kempen, G. (2000). Syntactic structure assembly
in human parsing: A computational model based on
competitive inhibition and a lexicalist grammar.
Cognition, 75, 105-143.

1691

