UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learn Diffusion of Innovation as Complex Phenomena - A report from pilot study
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/02r6s24s
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Huang, Jun-Song
Kapur, Manu
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

 Learn Diffusion of Innovation as Complex Phenomena - A report from
                                                    pilot study
                                                  Jun-Song Huang
                                             National Institute of Education
                                                    Manu Kapur
                                             National Institute of Education
Abstract: How people learn complex phenomenon is a relatively new but growing field in the learning and cognitive
sciences. In this paper, we report on a 12-week workplace learning case study where two innovation diffusion
decision makers at a university (in charge of educational technology innovation diffusion strategies at the university)
collaboratively build and simulate agent-based innovation diffusion models based on their embodied experience with
diffusion phenomenon.
   Past research largely took knowledge transfer paradigm and aimed to change learners conceptual understanding of
complex systems. In such research, learners usually do not have sufficient embodied experience with the complex phe-
nomenon that they learn. In our research design, learners collaboratively participate in a set of iterative agent-based
modeling activities that were coupled with their everyday interaction with the actual diffusion phenomenon. Informed
by the philosophical foundation of Complexity Theory, we regard knowledge as knowing, and our research aims to
help learners improve their performative capacity in acting as decision makers in complex diffusion phenomena.
   The preliminary analysis of the baseline interview and the discourse of the modeling activities demonstrate the
following performative development: (1) learners started to take diffusion systems initial condition into consideration;
(2) learners started to intentionally leverage on subject group peer social interactions; (3) learners started to synergize
their diffusion strategies, rather than treating different diffusion strategies as isolated approaches which only have
linear add-on effects. (4) learners self reported to be more resourceful and capable in performing their decision
making role in innovation diffusion.
   A critique to our research design is our developmental and relativism stance. Since Complexity Theory suggests
that knowledge is descriptive, interpretative and iterative, we argue that the stance taken in this research is justifiable
for learning of complex phenomena.
                                                           1996

