UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning on the fly. Computational modelling of an unsupervised online-learning effect
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/06f386wh
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Author
Rohrmeier, Martin
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

      Learning on the fly. Computational modelling of an unsupervised
                                           online-learning effect
                                                Martin Rohrmeier
                                 Centre for Music & Science, University of Cambridge
Abstract: Humans rapidly learn complex structures in many domains. Some findings of above-chance performance of
untrained control groups in artificial grammar learning (AGL) studies raise the question to which extent learning can
occur in an untrained, unsupervised testing situation with partially correct and incorrect structures. Computational
modelling simulations explore whether an unsupervised online learning effect is theoretically plausible in AGL.
Symbolic n-gram models and simple recurrent network models were evaluated using a large free parameter space
and applying a novel evaluation framework, which models the human experimental situation through alternating
evaluation (in terms of forced binary grammaticality judgments) and subsequent learning of the same stimulus.
Results indicate a strong online learning effect for n-gram models and a weaker effect for SRN models. Model
performance improves slightly once the window of accessible past responses for the grammaticality decision process
is limited. Results suggest that online learning is possible when ungrammatical structures share grammatical chunks
to a large extent. Associative chunk strength for grammatical and ungrammatical sequences is found to predict both,
chance and above-chance performance for human and computational data.
                                                           2019

