UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning and failing to learn in immediate memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/08k132fh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Beaman, Philip
Roeer, Jan

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning and failing to learn in immediate memory
C. Philip Beaman (c.p.beaman@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AL, UK

Jan P. Röer (Jan.Roeer@uni-duesseldorf.de)
Department of Experimental Psychology, Heinrich-Heine-Universität
Düsseldorf, Germany

is reduced or reversed if participants are asked to think of
semantic links between words prior to presentation of the
words (Campoy & Baddeley, 2008) and, similarly, the
effect of irrelevant sound is eliminated when instructions are
given to recall by category membership rather than in serial
order (Perham, Banbury & Jones, 2007). The two effects are
also related in the disputed claim that irrelevant speech
eliminates the word-length effect (Neath, Surprenant &
LeCompte, 1998; Tremblay, Macken & Jones, 2000).
It is not clear, however, whether individuals can
spontaneously, or as a result of learning, avoid the
detrimental effects associated with short-term storage (such
as those of word-length or irrelevant sound) by shifting
away from a phonological loop-type structure onto some
other form of memory. This question is of particular interest
because failure to find such effects under particularly
exacting memory loads has been taken as an indication that
the encoding of those memory loads has been strategicallyshifted away from phonological storage onto other forms of
memory and hence the results of these experiments have
been taken as not applicable to the phonological loop
construct (Baddeley, 2000; Baddeley & Larsen, 2003, 2007;
Campoy & Baddeley, 2008; Larsen & Baddeley, 2003). If
there is no evidence for learned strategies that bypass
irrelevant sound/word-length effects then the results of these
experiments will need to be reinterpreted and their
implications reconsidered.
It is also not clear in what ways the basic pattern of
performance might be affected by repeated practice and
learning. A general improvement due to practice might be
anticipated but it is not obvious what is learned and how this
might manifest itself (e.g., will the improvement be centered
on the earlier items and hence reflect some kind of
improvement in rehearsal/ consolidation?) Nor, finally, is it
clear how the word-length and irrelevant sound effects
might interact with each other and with learning and
practice. The account of irrelevant sound disruption
provided by the feature model for example (Neath, 2000),
involves two separate processes. Firstly, it suggests that the
effect of changes-in-state should be considered as a dualtask cost incurred by dividing attention between relevant
and irrelevant streams. As such, one would also expect a
reduction in the size of the effect if, but only if, opportunity
is given to learn to dual-task effectively. To date,
appropriate studies have not been carried out to test the
dual-task cost explanation. Passive listening to the speech in

Abstract
Two experiments examine the effect of regular feedback on
the appearance of the word-length and the irrelevant sound
effects in immediate memory. A reliable effect of learning
was observed but both effects persisted across multiple
learning trials, contrary to suggestions that they could be
diminished either by feedback-inspired strategy change or by
dual-task learning. Learning improved performance most
noticeably at the end of the serial position curve but there was
no sign that the irrelevant speech eliminated the word-length
effect at any stage of learning, consistent with Tremblay et al.
(2000) but inconsistent with Neath et al. (1998). Implications
for immediate memory effects, and for models of intraindividual variation in immediate memory, are considered.
Keywords: Immediate (“working”) memory; irrelevant
speech; word-length.

Introduction
The relationship between immediate recall and long-term
learning is of long-standing interest in cognitive psychology
(Thorn & Page, 2009). The structure of immediate memory
(sometimes known as “working memory”), at least in the
verbal domain, is defined by a number of well-documented
effects which are presumed to uniquely identify the
involvement of particular mechanisms such as the
phonological loop (Baddeley, 1986) in any immediate or
working memory task. Two such effects are the word-length
effect and the irrelevant sound effect.
The word-length effect (Baddeley, Thomson & Buchanan,
1975) refers to the finding that immediate recall of longer
words is worse than immediate recall of similarly sized lists
of shorter words. The dominant explanation of the effect is
that immediate memory is restricted by the time it takes to
rehearse by articulation a to-be-recalled list (Baddeley et al.,
1975). The irrelevant sound effect (Beaman & Jones, 1997)
refers to the finding that, in the presence of noise (usually
speech), immediate memory performance is reduced. To
produce this result, the speech or sound usually has to
change-in-state or, in other words, abruptly alter in pitch or
other characteristics. One account states that changes in
state within the irrelevant sound perturb episodic rehearsal
of the to-be-recalled material (Jones & Macken, 1993)
whilst other widely-held theories suggest an involuntary
division of attentional resources between to-be-recalled and
irrelevant material. Both effects can be mediated by
instruction in strategy. For example, the word-length effect

395

the absence of an immediate memory task (Banbury &
Berry, 1998; Jones, Macken & Mosdell, 1997) is
inappropriate to test for the ability to dual-task. Some
studies have combined the speech with a memory task in a
manner more conducive to improving dual-task capabilities
(e.g., Hellbrück, Kuwano & Namba, 1996) but none have
provided participants with feedback on their performance
under irrelevant sound conditions. Since many individuals
do not realize that they are performing poorly in the
presence of distracting sound (Beaman, 2005; Ellermeier &
Zimmer, 1997) there is limited opportunity to learn dualtasking skills, or change in strategy, that might protect
against the irrelevant sound effect.
Running irrelevant sound and word-length manipulations
simultaneously also gives the opportunity to examine the
second process invoked by the feature model in accounting
for the irrelevant speech effect. In four experiments, Neath
et al (1998) found that irrelevant speech, but not irrelevant
sound, eliminated or masked the word-length effect. This is
predicted by the feature model because, within that model,
the attentional effects of changing-state irrelevant sound
already outlined are accompanied by the adoption of
elements of the speech into the representations of to-berecalled items, a process known as feature adoption,
masking the word-length effect (Neath et al., 1998, Neath,
2000). Against this, Tremblay et al. (2000) found no
evidence that the word-length effect was masked in the
manner suggested and hence rejected the feature model
account. Whilst there is no suggestion that any wordlength/irrelevant speech interaction should necessarily be
affected by learning, a repeated measures experiment in
which word-length and irrelevant sound are tested on
multiple occasions should provide strong evidence to
support one view or another.

be-remembered words per trial. Different sets of 24 words
were used for each block. There were 40 trials per block, 10
in each condition, and 5 blocks in total. Word length was
blocked and alternated between participants, irrelevant
sound was randomized separately for each participant. One
trial consisted of six words presented in the centre of the
screen in 24 point Arial font. The words were presented
consecutively at a rate of 1/ s, 400ms on, 600 ms off. After
the final word, there was a 2s pause before the presentation
of a 4 x 6 matrix of words, presenting the participant with
the six target words together with eighteen lures, arranged in
alphabetical order from left to right within the matrix. A
series of six numbered “responses boxes” were also
presented at the right-hand side of the screen. All words,
targets and lures, were presented in 24 point Arial font. The
irrelevant sound stimuli consisted of six square wave tones,
of frequency 440, 880, 1240, 620, 1080 and 360 KHz. Each
tone lasted for 400ms and was presented concurrently with
visual presentation of a to-be remembered word. The first
two tones of the sequence were then played once more
during the 2s retention pause at the same presentation rate.
The presentation order of the tones was identical for each
participant and did not alter over the experiment. All testing
was carried out in a sound-attenuated cubicle.
Procedure. Participants were informed that we were
interested in how accurately they could remember the order
in which a series of words were presented, and how well
they could learn to remember the order and ignore any
extraneous background sound. Each participant completed 5
blocks of 40 trials, with blocks being completed on
consecutive weekdays. Participants were told that, following
presentation of each trial, they should “drag and drop” the
words they saw, in the order in which they saw them, into
the correct response box. For example, if they thought the
word break was the first word they saw, they should click
on this word and drag it to the response box 1 (the top-most
box) and then release. Null responses, recording a failure to
recall, were made by leaving a response box blank.
Following each trial participants’ performance was fed back
to them by coloring the boxes containing correct responses
in green, and those containing incorrect responses in red.
There were 3 breaks, one after every 10 trials to allow
participants to rest. Breaks were self-terminated by the
participant and lasted up to 1 minute. Each testing session
lasted approximately 60 minutes.

Experiment One
The first experiment examines the long-term effect of
word length and irrelevant non-speech sounds over multiple
testing sessions. No word-length by irrelevant sound
interaction is predicted for this experiment, rather we hope
simply to document any changes in either or both effects,
together with the overall patterns of improvement expected
as a result of learning and feedback.

Method
Participants. Eighteen undergraduate students of the
University of Reading, (one male seventeen female),
participated in return for course credit. All reported normal
hearing and normal, or corrected to normal, vision.

Results.
Two participants were dropped from the analysis for failure
to complete the five blocks. Repeated measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) on number correct shows a main effect
of word-length, F(1, 15) = 184.02, p < .001, and a main
effect of learning, F(4, 60) = 9.85, p < .001, but no effects
of irrelevant sound, F < 1. None of the interactions reached
significance (all ps > .05). The effect of learning on
performance in both word-length conditions is shown in
Figure 1.

Materials and Design. Stimuli were presented using EPrime experiment generation software. The to-beremembered stimuli were 120 long (three- to five-syllable)
and 120 short (single-syllable) words taken from LaPointe
and Engle (1990). For each block 24 words were used per
word-length condition, randomly sampled to provide six to-

396

also of interest as it suggests a possible means of accounting
for the learning effect within the feature model.
As noted by Beaman, Neath and Surprenant (2008), there
are limited ways in which performance can be varied within
the feature model without assuming some variation in the
stimuli themselves. When variations in the stimuli are ruled
out, only two free parameters in the basic model (Nairne,
1990) affect overall performance. Restrictions on space
preclude more detail explication here, but Beaman et al.
(2008) explored the possibility that variation in one of these
parameters might provide an appropriate basis for modeling
inter-individual differences in immediate memory using the
feature model. This left the basis of intra-individual
differences unspecified, relying upon noise in the system to
provide trial-by-trial differences in performance (Beaman et
al., 2008). By a process of elimination, however, if intraindividual variation is in any way systematic and not subject
only to random noise only one free parameter in the feature
model can possibly be employed to reflect this. The effect of
manipulating the remaining free parameter, r, which models
the number of retrieval attempts, is to flatten the end of the
serial position curve whilst leaving the word-length effect
intact (see Figure 3). This is similar in action to the learning
effect observed in Experiment 1. Tentatively, therefore, it
seems as though an appropriate learning parameter might be
available in this model. Figure 3 therefore represents the
feature model’s prediction for the general shape of the serial
position curves following learning. As previously
established by Neath et al. (2000), the model also predicts
that the word length effect preserved under learning with
feedback will be abolished by the presence of irrelevant
speech and Experiment 2 examines this prediction.

6

Mean Number Recalled

5

4
Quiet Short
Quiet Long

3

Tones Short
Tones Long

2

1

0
1

2

3

4

5

Day

Figure 1: The effects of learning on recall in two wordlength conditions (long, short) and two noise conditions
(tones, quiet)
Serial position functions were also compared between the
first and final day. As shown in Figure 2, these display an
upward shift in performance over time restricted to the final
four serial positions.
1
0.8
0.7

Short Day 1

0.6

Short Day 5

0.5

Long Day 1

0.4

Long Day 5

0.3

0.8
Probability Correct

Probability Correct

0.9

0.2
0.1
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

Serial Position

0.7
r=2 short

0.6

r=10short

0.5

r=2long

0.4

r=10 long

0.3
0.2

Figure 2: Serial position curve for first and final testing
blocks in short and long word conditions.

1

2

3

4

5

6

Serial Position

Figure 3: Learning in the feature model as a function of
increased retrieval attempts. Variation in the retrieval
parameter r reflects the extent of learning on recall of shortand long-word lists.

Discussion
The lack of an irrelevant sound effect with the tone stimuli
limits the conclusions that can be drawn regarding this
effect. Tones are known to be quantitatively less disruptive
than speech whilst showing qualitatively similar
performance (Jones & Macken, 1993), so the null effect
here is uninformative as it most likely the result of a weak
experimental manipulation (e.g., low “dose” of relatively
unchanging stimuli). Of interest, however, is the finding that
the appearance of the word-length effect is spared across
learning trials. The upward shift in performance across the
final four serial positions as a consequence of learning is

Experiment Two
Experiment 1 provided useful evidence regarding the
word-length and learning effects but failed to show an
irrelevant sound effect, and is therefore uninformative
regarding one of the major reasons for running the study.
Experiment 2 rectifies this by examining the more potent
irrelevant speech effect under similar circumstances. This

397

will provide a further check on the main findings of
Experiment 1 and will also allow for examination of
whether the effect is, wholly or in part, reduced by dual-task
learning and whether the word-length effect is affected by
the presence of irrelevant speech at any point. This latter
investigation will provide confirmatory evidence either for
Neath et al. (1998) or Tremblay et al. (2000).

6

Mean Number Correct

5

Method
Participants. Eighteen undergraduate students of the
University of Reading, (three male, fifteen female),
participated in return for course credit. None had taken part
in Experiment 1. All reported normal hearing and normal, or
corrected to normal, vision.

4
Quiet Short
Quiet Long

3

Speech Short
Speech Long

2

1

0
1

2

3

4

Day

Materials and Design. To-be-remembered stimuli were as
in Experiment 1. Design was also as in that experiment with
the exception that, for logistic reasons, only four
consecutive testing sessions were possible. The irrelevant
speech stimuli consisted of the words London, Purple,
Swindon, Yellow, Cardiff, Crimson spoken in a male voice
recorded at 22.05KHz and played back at the same rate as in
the previous experiment. As previously, the first two items
of the sequence (London, Purple) were played once more
during the 2s retention pause. The presentation order of the
words was identical for each participant and did not alter
over the experiment.

Figure 4: The effects of learning on recall in two wordlength conditions (long, short) and two noise conditions
(speech, quiet).
The serial position functions on days 1 and 4 are given in
Figures 5a and 5b. These figures show detrimental effects of
word-length and irrelevant speech on performance at all
serial positions during the first (Figure 5a) and final day
(Figure 5b), and the effects of learning on the serial position
curve. As in the previous experiment, the effect of learning
is to flatten the bow-shape of the serial position curve
(Figure 5b) from its initial form in block 1 (Figure 5a).

Procedure. Procedure was as Experiment 1.

Results

Day 1

Three participants were dropped from the analysis for
failure to complete the four blocks. Repeated measure
ANOVA on the remainder revealed a main effect of wordlength on accurate recall, F(1,14) = 52.34, p < .001, a main
effect of speech, F(1, 14) = 38.79, p < .001, and a main
effect of learning, F(3, 42) = 4.3, p = .024 (Huynh-Feldt
corrected for non-sphericity). There was no interaction
between word-length and speech, F < 1, consistent with
Tremblay et al. (2000), and no significant interactions
involving word-length and learning, F(3, 42) = 1.82, p =
.16, speech and learning F(3,42) = 1.67, p =.2 (Huynh-Feldt
corrected for non-sphericity), or word-length, speech and
learning F(3, 42) = 1.42, p = .25. The effect of learning on
all four conditions is shown in Figure 4. This figure shows
an upward trend for performance over time in all conditions.

1
0.9

Probability Correct

0.8
0.7
Quiet Short

0.6

Quiet Long

0.5

Speech Short

0.4

Speech Long

0.3

0.2
0.1
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

Serial Position

Figure 5a: Serial position curve for the first testing block
(day 1) in short and long word conditions.

398

openness to instructed strategy shifts (e.g., towards
semantic-based strategies; Campoy & Baddeley, 2008;
Perham et al., 2007), suggesting both that feedback-driven
learning need not involve any change in strategy to be
effective, and that information on performance levels is
insufficient by itself to bring about strategy change. This
latter point casts doubt on suggestions that changes in the
the appearance of immediate memory phenomena result
from switching to semantic memory when performance
levels are perceived to be inadequate using phonological
encoding (Baddeley & Larsen, 2007). In the current
experiments, participants were made aware, by means of
direct and immediate feedback, that lists of long words and
lists accompanied by irrelevant speech result in relatively
poor performance. Despite this, there is no sign that the
participants spontaneously shifted strategy to improve
performance in these conditions even though, as already
documented, instructions to use particular strategies can
change the appearance of both these effects. Although no
strategy shift was evident in these experiments, performance
did generally improve, however.
As regards the irrelevant speech effect, results show
preserved levels of irrelevant speech interference across
multiple learning trials with feedback. This lends no support
to the idea that divided attention contributes to the size of
the effect since one would expect that practice in dividing
attention, coupled with feedback indicating the extent to
which irrelevant speech is affecting performance on the
primary task, would reduce any dual-task cost and hence the
interference observed. Similarly, the persistence across
multiple learning episodes of the word-length effect in the
presence of irrelevant speech casts further doubt on the
feature adoption explanation of the irrelevant speech effect.
In sum, these experiments provide no support for either part
of the feature model’s account of irrelevant speech effects.
The absence of a word-length by speech interaction is also
inconsistent with suggestions that changing-state speech and
changing-state concurrent articulation (“articulatory
suppression”) are functionally equivalent (Macken & Jones,
1995), as the latter is reliably seen to mask the word-length
effect (e.g., Baddeley, Lewis & Vallar, 1984).
One aspect of the feature model that receives more
support from the current findings is the suggestion that a
single parameter, r, could reflect learning rate within the
model. This would allow for a source of intra-individual
differences other than random noise. At present, most
models of immediate memory lack a principled account of
either inter-individual or intra-individual differences. It
would be no small achievement to unambiguously identify
such individual difference factors and care must be taken
not to overstate the present case.
In the first instance, it could be argued that the serial
position curve flattens with learning simply because the
primacy portion of the curve (the first two serial positions)
is already at ceiling. Against this, it is obvious from Figures
2 and 4 that performance at these two serial positions is not
at ceiling in any of the long word or irrelevant speech

Day 4
1
0.9

Probability Correct

0.8
0.7
Quiet Short

0.6

Quiet Long

0.5

Speech Short

0.4

Speech Long

0.3

0.2
0.1
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

Serial Position

Figure 5b: Serial position curve for the final testing block
(day 4) in short and long word conditions.

Discussion
Experiment 2 replicates the main finding of Experiment 1
that the word-length effect is robust over multiple learning
episodes when feedback is given. Additionally, Experiment
2 establishes that the effects of irrelevant speech are
likewise robust. Multiple learning episodes, even when
direct and immediate feedback is given, do not eliminate the
impact of irrelevant speech on immediate memory. It seems
unlikely, therefore, that the irrelevant speech effect is,
wholly or in part, the result of dividing attention where the
participant is unaware that divided attention results in
poorer performance on the main (immediate memory) task.
This is contrary to the predictions of the feature model
(Neath, 2000). A third observation from Experiment 2 is
that the word-length effect also remained robust across
multiple learning trials in the presence of irrelevant speech.
This result is consistent with the report by Tremblay et al.
(2000) that irrelevant speech does not eliminate the wordlength effect. It is, however, inconsistent with the original
report of such an observation by Neath et al. (1998) and
casts doubt upon the feature model’s account of the
irrelevant speech effect. Finally, the experiment shows that
– with the exception of the long words plus speech
condition, where performance was surprisingly poor at
primacy in Block 1 – the effect of learning is largely
restricted to the final four serial positions, as in Experiment
1. This latter result is consistent with the account
summarized in Figure 3, in which learning within the
feature model was linked to increases in a retrieval
parameter.

General Discussion
The two experiments reported here have shown an effect of
learning-to-learn that preserves two key phenomena across
learning trials – the word-length and irrelevant speech
effects. These phenomena are preserved despite their

399

conditions. In 4 of the 8 serial positions concerned in
Experiment 2 performance was numerically worse after
learning than before, as it was for 3 of the 4 serial positions
considered in Experiment 1. A second and more substantial
point is that merely identifying a parameter in the model
which can be varied to alter performance in the appropriate
way does not necessarily provide a satisfactory explanation
of the learning effect. The r parameter might plausibly be
regarded as measure of motivation rather than retrieval per
se but, given that participants received direct feedback on
their performance in the current experiments, the two are to
some extent conflated in the present study.
Regardless of the merits of these arguments, the current
study demonstrates both strengths and weaknesses of the
feature model when opportunity for learning is given.
Importantly, the study also demonstrates that word-length
and irrelevant speech effects are stable over both time and
feedback and, as such, neither effect seems open to
spontaneous strategy-shift although both are affected by
instruction (Campoy & Baddeley, 2008; Perham et al.,
2007). Finally, the study reinforces the conclusions of
Tremblay et al. (2000) in finding no masking of the wordlength effect by irrelevant speech suggesting that, in this
regard at least, irrelevant speech and concurrent articulation
are functionally distinct

Beaman, C. P. & Jones, D. M. (1997). The role of serial
order in the irrelevant speech effect: Tests of the changing
state hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 23, 459-471.
Beaman, C. P., Neath, I., & Surprenant, A. M. (2008).
Modeling distributions of immediate memory effects: No
strategies needed? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 34, 219-229.
Campoy, G., & Baddeley, A. (2008). Phonological and
semantic strategies in immediate serial recall. Memory,
16, 329-340.
Ellermeier, W. & Zimmer, K. (1997). Individual differences
in susceptibility to the “irrelevant speech effect”. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 102, 2191-2199.
Hellbrück, J., Kuwano, S., & Namba, S. (1996), Irrelevant
background speech and human performance: Is there
long-term habituation? Journal of the Acoustical Society
of Japan (E), 17, 239-247.
Jones, D. M., & Macken, W. J. (1993). Irrelevant tones
produce an irrelevant speech effect: Implications for
phonological encoding in working memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 21, 103-115.
Jones, D. M., Macken, W. J., & Mosdell, N. A. (1997). The
role of habituation in the disruption of recall performance
by irrelevant sound. British Journal of Psychology, 88,
549-564.
LaPointe, L. B., & Engle, R. W. (1990). Simple and
complex word spans as measures of working memory
capacity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory & Cognition, 16, 1118-1133
Larsen, J. D., & Baddeley, A. D. (2003). Disruption of
verbal STM by irrelevant speech, articulatory suppression
and manual tapping: Do they have a common source?
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56A,
1249-1268.
Macken, W. J., & Jones, D. M. (1995). Functional
characteristics of the inner voice and the inner ear: Single
or double agency? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 21, 436-448.
Nairne, J. S. (1990). A feature model of immediate memory.
Memory & Cognition, 18, 251-269.
Neath, I. (2000). Modeling the effects of irrelevant speech
on memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 403-423.
Neath, I., Surprenant, A. M., & LeCompte, D. C. (1998).
Irrelevant speech eliminates the word length effect.
Memory & Cognition, 26, 343-354.
Perham, N., Banbury, S. P., & Jones, D. M. (2007).
Reduction in auditory distraction by retrieval strategy.
Memory, 15, 465-473.
Thorn, A., & Page, M. P. A. (2009). Interactions between
short-term and long-term memory in the verbal domain.
Hove: Psychology Press.
Tremblay, S., Macken, W. J., & Jones, D. M. (2000).
Elimination of the word-length effect by irrelevant sound
revisited. Memory & Cognition, 28, 841-846.

Acknowledgments
This research was carried out whilst Jan Röer was visiting
the University of Reading, supported by an ERASMUS
scholarship. Thanks to Caren Frosch for help with
programming the experiments.

References
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Baddeley, A. D. (2000). The phonological loop and the
irrelevant speech effect: Some comments on Neath
(2000). Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 544-549.
Baddeley, A. D., & Larsen, J. D. (2003). The disruption of
STM: A response to our commentators. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 56A, 1301-1306.
Baddeley, A. D., & Larsen, J. D. (2007). The phonological
loop unmasked? A comment on the evidence for a
“perceptual-gestural” alternative. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 60, 497-504.
Baddeley, A. D., Thomson, N., & Buchanan, M. (1975).
Word length and the structure of short-term memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 14, 575589.
Banbury, S. & Berry, D. C. (1998). Habituation and
dishabituation to speech and office noise. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 3, 1-16.
Beaman, C. P. (2005). Irrelevant sound effects amongst
younger and older adults: Objective findings and
subjective insights. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 17, 241-265.

400

