UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linguistic Processes in Visuospatial Representation: Clarifying Verbal Interference Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/79n369sx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bek, Judith
Blades, Mark
Siegal, Michael
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linguistic Processes in Visuospatial Representation:
Clarifying Verbal Interference Effects
Judith Bek (j.bek@sheffield.ac.uk)
Department of Human Communication Sciences, University of Sheffield, UK

Mark Blades (m.blades@sheffield.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, UK

Michael Siegal (m.siegal@sheffield.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, UK, and University of Trieste, Italy

Rosemary Varley (r.a.varley@sheffield.ac.uk)
Department of Human Communication Sciences, University of Sheffield, UK

Abstract
Verbal interference in visuospatial information processing has
been interpreted as showing either that verbal coding
supplements visuospatial representation (Meilinger, Knauff,
& Bulthoff, 2008; Walker & Cuthbert, 1998), or that language
mechanisms are necessary for integrating featural and spatial
information (Hermer-Vazquez, Spelke, & Katsnelson, 1999).
However, previous studies have used verbal interference tasks
varying in linguistic demands, making it difficult to identify
which linguistic processes are involved in visuospatial
representation. We compared the effects of verbal shadowing
tasks with and without lexical and syntactic demands on
performance of visuospatial construction and memory tasks
and a reorientation task. The shadowing task with lexical and
syntactic content did not selectively disrupt performance on
any of the tasks, suggesting that core language mechanisms
are not required for visuospatial representation.
Keywords: Reorientation;
representation.

Verbal

shadowing;

Spatial

Introduction
Verbal coding processes have been implicated in the
representation and maintenance of featural visual
information, but there is less evidence that language is
involved in spatial representation (Postle, D’Esposito, &
Corkin, 2005; Simons, 1996; Vuontela et al., 1999). These
findings are consistent with the proposed dissociation
between the cognitive mechanisms supporting processing of
featural and spatial visual information (Baddeley & Hitch,
1994).
Although verbal interference has typically not been found
for spatial information, there is some evidence to suggest
that language aids the integration of featural information
with location or shape-based information. Walker and
Cuthbert (1998) reported effects of verbal interference
(articulatory suppression) and nameability on memory for
conjunctions of shape and colour from separate objects.
Similarly, Postma and de Haan (1996) reported that
articulatory suppression interfered with memory for objectlocation conjunctions, though Dent and Smyth (2005) failed

to replicate this result, finding the effect to be restricted to
memory for object identity. Also, Postma and de Haan used
stimuli thought to be low in nameability, suggesting that
interference was not due to language-specific mechanisms.
Navigation tasks requiring encoding of featural and
location information have shown different effects of verbal
interference. Garden, Cornoldi, and Logie (2002) found
equivalent performance on a physical navigation task
whether participants were engaged in a concurrent verbal
(syllable repetition) task or a spatial (tapping) task, while a
map-based navigation task was disrupted more by the
spatial than the verbal task. Meilinger, Knauff, and Bulthoff
(2008) found both spatial (sound localisation) and verbal
(lexical decision) secondary tasks to impair adults’ ability to
learn a new route in a virtual environment containing
landmarks, while a visual imagery task had no effect.
Meilinger et al. proposed that dual spatial and verbal
representations exist for location information. HermerVazquez, Spelke, and Katsnelson (1999) found concurrent
prose shadowing to interfere with spatial reorientation. The
reorientation task required participants to relocate a hidden
object within a room after being disoriented, success at
which relied on the use of geometric (room shape) and
featural (wall colour) cues. Participants had no difficulty
with this task on its own. However, during verbal
shadowing they appeared only to use geometric information
to reorient, similar to how young children have been
reported to perform in such tasks (Hermer & Spelke, 1996).
Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999) proposed that lexical and
syntactic properties of language enable the integration of
featural and geometric cues. According to this proposal,
language is the medium of representation for featurelocation conjunctions. This is different from the suggestion
that dual-coding of visuospatial stimuli involves both verbal
and visual representations, either of which may be sufficient
on its own (Meilinger et al., 2008; Paivio, 1991).
The variation in verbal interference findings might be
attributable to the nature of the verbal tasks used in the
above studies. Meilinger et al.’s (2008) verbal task required
lexical processing, and Hermer-Vazquez et al.’s verbal

2723

shadowing task involved repeating meaningful prose,
whereas other researchers (e.g., Garden et al., 2002) used
articulatory suppression tasks, which involve repeating a
single letter or syllable, or a series of meaningless verbal
tokens. While articulatory suppression likely engages
phonological resources, thus potentially preventing covert
verbal naming or rehearsal, it does not necessarily involve
any syntactic or lexical processing. If lexical and syntactic
properties of language are involved in forming integrated
representations of feature-location conjunctions, it is
possible that the absence of verbal interference in several
studies may be due to the use of verbal tasks that did not
disrupt deep linguistic processes.
Although Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999) found
meaningful prose shadowing to impair reorientation,
subsequent studies have shown weaker or insignificant
effects of prose shadowing on the use of spatial cues to
reorient (Hupbach et al., 2007; Ratliff & Newcombe, 2008),
suggesting that rather than being necessary for integrating
featural and geometric information, language may have a
more minor role in supporting spatial representation,
providing a supplementary level of coding. Rhythm
shadowing (Hermer-Vazquez et al., 1999) and spatial tasks
(Hupbach et al., 2007; Ratliff & Newcombe, 2008) have
also been shown to disrupt reorientation, so it also seems
possible that general cognitive demands were responsible
for interference in these dual-task studies.
By comparing the effects of a verbal task involving core
linguistic components with one that engages phonological,
but not syntactic and lexical resources, it might be possible
to determine whether interference in visuospatial
representation is due to the prevention of supplementary
verbal coding or due to the occupation of core language
resources needed for integrating featural and spatial
information.
To investigate the two proposals – that language provides
an optional supplementary code for visuospatial information
or provides a medium for integrating featural and spatial
information – we compared the effects of two verbal
interference tasks, differing in linguistic demands, on three
visuospatial tasks. The verbal tasks required participants to
shadow either continuous prose, expected to engage lexical
and syntactic resources, or a series of non-word syllables,
minimising lexical and syntactic demands. In Experiment 1
we examined the effects of prose and syllable shadowing on
visuospatial construction and memory, using a block design
task and a complex figure task. In Experiment 2 we
compared performance on a reorientation task based on
Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999) during concurrent shadowing
of prose or syllables. The reorientation task, as described
above, requires the use of featural and geometric cues to
retrieve the location of a hidden object after disorientation.
If core linguistic mechanisms are involved in visuospatial
construction or memory, accuracy in the complex figure
(construction, memory) and block design (construction)
tasks should be reduced more by prose than by syllable
shadowing; otherwise the two shadowing tasks should have
similar effects. Similarly, if lexical and syntactic resources
are required for representing feature-location conjunctions,

performance in the reorientation task should be reduced
during prose shadowing relative to syllable shadowing. If
language has only a supplementary role in supporting
feature and location representations (e.g., subvocal naming
or rehearsal), both verbal tasks should disrupt reorientation
performance.

Experiment 1
Participants Ninety-one healthy adults (64 female, 27
male) aged 18 to 33 years (M = 21 years) participated in
exchange for course credit or payment.
Materials The visuospatial tasks were the Rey-Osterreith
Complex Figure Test (Rey, 1941; Osterreith, 1944), and the
block design subtest of the Weschler Adult Intelligence
Scale (WAIS-R; Weschler, 1981). The complex figure test
involves visuospatial construction and memory, and
contains potentially nameable elements (Ropar & Mitchell,
2001). Participants are required to copy the figure using
pencil and paper and then draw it again from memory
following a time delay. The full test includes both
immediate and delayed recall, but for this experiment only
copy and delayed recall were tested. The block design task
is a test of online visuospatial construction that requires
participants to reconstruct two-dimensional designs using
red and white plastic blocks. Nine designs (5 small, 4 large)
are presented in order of increasing difficulty.
The material for the prose shadowing task, based on those
reported by Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999) and Ratliff and
Newcombe (2008), was a recording of political news
articles read at a rate of 2.7 syllables per second. The
syllable shadowing material was a recording of randomised
sequences of 8 non-word syllables (4 with long vowel
sounds, 4 with short vowel sounds) at a rate of
approximately 1 per second. Shadowing stimuli were played
through headphones and participants’ responses were
recorded. Performance on the two shadowing tasks was
found to be equivalent in a pilot study, in which 10
participants shadowed each of the two recordings in
counterbalanced order, without any concurrent task.
Accuracy rates were 98.6% for prose shadowing and 97.8%
for syllable shadowing.
Design Participants completed the block design and
complex figure tests during prose shadowing, syllable
shadowing or without shadowing (control group). Half of
the participants in each shadowing group shadowed during
copying of the complex figure and the other half shadowed
during the recall stage, to compare effects on encoding and
retrieval. This resulted in five conditions: prose-copy, proserecall, syllable-copy, syllable-recall and control. There were
15 participants in each shadowing condition (except proserecall in which there were 16), and 30 control participants.
Procedure Participants first copied the complex figure,
while continuously shadowing (prose-copy and syllablecopy conditions) or as a single task (prose-recall, syllablerecall and control conditions). The block design task was

2724

introduced next, and the first two small designs were given
as practice items without shadowing. Participants (excluding
controls) then began shadowing again and completed the
rest of the block design task. Finally, complex figure recall
was tested, either with concurrent shadowing (prose-recall
and syllable-recall conditions) or without (prose-copy,
syllable-copy and control conditions). The delay interval
between copy and recall was approximately 10 minutes and
participants were not pre-warned about the recall task.

Mean score (max=36)

Copy accuracy

Scoring and Analysis Verbal shadowing accuracy was
calculated as the percentage of stimulus items (syllables or
words) correctly repeated. Participants with shadowing
scores exceeding 2 standard deviations below the mean for
each task were excluded from further analyses (N = 3 for
the complex figure, N = 4 for block design). Mean
completion times in the block design task were calculated
for small and large designs. Complex figure copy and recall
drawings were scored out of 36 in accordance with the
manual guidelines, and completion times were recorded.
Response times greater than two standard deviations from
the mean for complex figure copy and recall stages, and for
block design small and large means, were replaced with the
next longest completion time plus one (as per Dancey &
Reidy, 2004), resulting in four replacements for each of
these measures.
Performance on each of the shadowing tasks (prose vs.
syllables) was compared for each visuospatial task using
independent t-tests. For the complex figure test, a
multivariate analysis of covariance was run to examine the
effects of shadowing type (prose/syllables/none), shadowing
stage (copy/recall/none) and sex on each of the response
measures, with time delay between copy and recall entered
as a covariate (having been found to correlate with recall
accuracy). For the block design, the effects of shadowing
type and sex on mean completion times for small and large
designs were examined by multivariate analysis of variance.

36
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
20

Mean completion time (s)

Control

Mean score (max=36)

Control

30

Copy

Recall

Recall accuracy

25
20
15
10
5
0
Control

Verbal Shadowing Verbal shadowing scores were not
obtained for 6 participants due to recording error.
Participants shadowing prose had a mean accuracy rate of
93.1% for the complex figure and 91.1% for block design,
and the mean syllable shadowing rates were 92.8% for the
complex figure and 88.3% for block design. Accuracy in
the two shadowing tasks did not differ for the block design
(t(52) = 0.811; p > 0.4) or the complex figure (t(52) = 0.113;
p > 0.9).

Recall

Copy time

180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Results

Copy

Recall

Recall time
Mean completion time (s)

Block Design There was no effect of shadowing type on
mean response times for small (F(2,90) = 0.25; p > 0.7) or
large (F(2,90) = 0.745; p > 0.4) designs, and no interaction
of shadowing type with sex for small (F(2,90) = 0.841; p >
0.4) or large designs (F(2,90) = 1.06; p > 0.3). There was
an effect of sex on mean completion time for large designs
(F(1, 90) = 6.03; p = 0.016) and a marginal effect of sex on

Copy

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Control

.

2725

Copy

Recall

Figure 1. Complex Figure Test performance by shadowing
stage (control/during copy/during recall). Error bars show
standard errors.

small design completion times (F(1, 90) = 3.35; p = 0.071),
with males being quicker at completing designs of both
sizes.
Complex Figure Test Shadowing type affected recall time
(F(1,89) = 4.08; p < 0.05), with syllable shadowing
associated with quicker recall than either the control
condition (p < 0.05) or prose shadowing (p < 0.05). There
were no other effects of shadowing type (all ps > 0.2).
Shadowing stage affected copy accuracy (F(1,89) = 15.1;
p < 0.001), recall accuracy (F(1,89) = 12.3; p < 0.001) and
recall time (F(1,89) = 13.7; p < 0.001), with a marginally
significant effect on copy time (F(1,89)=3.39; p = 0.069).
As illustrated in Figure 1, shadowing during the copy stage
resulted in less accurate copy and recall, and shorter recall
times, relative to shadowing during recall or not shadowing.
Copy times were shorter for participants shadowing during
the copy phase than the control group.
There were no main effects of sex (all ps > 0.1), but a
marginally significant interactive effect of sex and
shadowing type on recall time (F(1,89) = 3.51; p = 0.065),
with males completing the recall task more quickly in the
syllable shadowing condition than the other conditions.
There were no other significant interactions between
shadowing type, stage and sex (all ps > 0.1).

Discussion
Verbal shadowing did not affect performance on the block
design task, which does not require retention of visuospatial
information and does not contain highly nameable features.
Males were quicker at completing designs, in line with
previous reports of sex differences in this task (Ilai &
Willerman, 1989). Participants who shadowed while
copying the complex figure showed reduced copy and recall
accuracy relative to those shadowing during the recall stage,
whose performance did not differ from controls. This
suggests that verbal interference affected encoding of the
figure but not retrieval (if encoding had occurred in the
absence of shadowing).
The interference with visuospatial construction in the
complex figure test, but not the block design, may have
been due to the nameability of complex figure elements
(e.g., ‘cross’, ‘triangle’). Shadowing may have prevented
access to subvocal naming mechanisms that might otherwise
have supported task performance. The lack of interaction
with shadowing type shows that syllable and prose
shadowing affected performance to a similar extent, though
syllable shadowing was associated with quicker complex
figure recall. Although previous research has shown a male
advantage for the complex figure test (Gallagher & Burke,
2007) we found no main effect of sex on complex figure
performance.

Experiment 2
Participants Twenty-six healthy adults (24 female, 2 male)
aged between 18 and 23 years (M = 19.4 years) participated
for payment or course credit.

Materials The room used for the experiment was a
rectangular enclosure measuring 164 x 255cm; 190cm high.
Black curtains enclosed the space, which had a black ceiling
and dark grey carpet. Four 25w lights and a video camera
were located in the centre of the ceiling. Four identical
silver-grey coloured cylindrical tins (diameter 12.5cm,
height 15cm) with lids were placed in the corners of the
room and served as hiding locations for the target object (a
pocket watch). A wheelchair was used for the disorientation
procedure, during which participants wore a blindfold.
Participants wore headphones in all conditions, through
which the verbal shadowing recordings (syllable shadowing
and prose shadowing conditions) or white noise (baseline
condition) were played. In the two shadowing conditions, a
sheet of glossy white poster paper, measuring 91 x 142cm,
was attached to the short wall opposite the entrance to the
enclosure, serving as a directional landmark.
Design and Procedure The design and procedure were
similar to that of Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999), except that
conditions were completed in a counterbalanced order. A
within-participants design was used, with each participant
completing four trials in each of three conditions: prose
shadowing, syllable shadowing and geometric baseline. In
all conditions, geometric information was provided by the
rectangular shape of the room. In the two shadowing
conditions, featural information was also provided by the
white paper landmark. In the geometric baseline condition,
no featural information was available and participants had to
rely on the geometric cues to reorient. The purpose of the
geometric baseline condition was to check that
disorientation was effective; disoriented participants would
be expected to reorient equally to the two corners providing
the same geometrically correct information. In the two
conditions containing the featural cue, participants should
be able to integrate this with geometric information to
reorient correctly.
At the beginning of a trial, the participant was seated in
the wheelchair and placed in a predetermined starting
position. They were then shown the object, watched the
experimenter hide it, and were asked to put on the blindfold.
The wheelchair was pushed around in four rotations,
incorporating two direction changes, and was then stopped
in a predetermined position. The experimenter then removed
the blindfold, and asked the participant “where did I hide the
watch?”, and the participant indicated their choice of corner
by pointing. The object was then retrieved and the
participant repositioned to begin the next trial. Between
conditions, participants waited outside the room briefly
while it was prepared for the next condition. The object was
hidden in a different corner in each of the four trials of each
condition, and the participant’s position at the start and end
of each trial was randomised.
Scoring and Analysis Verbal shadowing accuracy was
scored as the percentage of stimulus items (syllables or
words) correctly repeated. Two participants scored more
than two standard deviations below the mean on both
shadowing types and their data were excluded from further

2726

analyses. Reorientation accuracy was scored out of four for
each condition, and performance in the two shadowing
conditions was compared against a chance level of 25%.
For the geometric baseline condition, paired t-tests were
used to compare responses to the two geometrically
equivalent corners (to check that orientation had not been
maintained), and to compare responses to geometrically
correct versus incorrect corners. An analysis of variance was
then run for the two shadowing conditions, with shadowing
type (prose/syllables) as the within-participants factor and
condition order as the between-participants factor.

Results
Mean shadowing accuracy was 91.8% for prose and 92.4%
for syllables. In the geometric baseline condition, responses
to the two geometrically correct corners were more frequent
than to the incorrect corners (t(23) = 12.1; p < 0.001), and
responses to the two geometrically corners did not differ
from each other (t(23) = 1.04; p > 0.3), indicating that
disorientation was effective. Accuracy in both shadowing
conditions exceeded the 25% chance level (syllables, t(23) =
8.67; p < 0.001; prose, t(23) = 12.4; p < 0.001). Shadowing
type had a marginally significant effect on reorientation
accuracy (F(1,21) = 3.48; p = 0.076), with lower accuracy in
the syllable shadowing condition (see Figure 2). There was
no main effect of order (F(2,21) = 1.76; p > 0.1), and no
interaction of order with shadowing condition (F(2,21) =
1.41; p > 0.2)).

Discussion
Neither shadowing task reduced reorientation accuracy to
chance levels, though there was a tendency towards poorer
performance on the reorientation task with syllable
shadowing than with prose shadowing. This suggests that
participants may have found syllable shadowing more
demanding than prose shadowing, despite it having fewer
lexical and syntactic demands than the prose task. We did
not include a condition in which both featural and geometric
cues were included and without a secondary task, as
previous experiments have consistently demonstrated high
accuracy rates in such conditions. Single-task accuracy was
81 and 93% in Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999) and Ratliff and
Newcombe (2008) respectively. In Experiment 2, accuracy

Geometric baseline

during prose shadowing was similar to levels in previous
studies (82.3%), while syllable shadowing was associated
with poorer accuracy (68.8%).

General Discussion
We investigated verbal interference in visuospatial tasks
in relation to two theories about the role of language in
visuospatial representation. One proposal is that language
provides a supplementary or secondary code to support
visuospatial memory (Meilinger et al., 2008; Paivio, 1991).
Our results are consistent with this theory to some extent in
that both shadowing tasks (prose and syllables) likely
reduced the availability of phonological resources for
subvocal naming and rehearsal, and both reduced encoding
of visuospatial information in the complex figure task. It
was suggested that the lack of shadowing interference in the
block design task may have been due to the low nameability
of test items, such that supplementary verbal coding is not
normally engaged by this task.
The second proposal, that lexical and syntactic
mechanisms are required for the integration of feature and
location information, was not supported. Prose shadowing
did not selectively interfere with visuospatial task
performance; in fact the opposite pattern was observed in
Experiment 2, with reorientation accuracy lower during
syllable shadowing than with prose shadowing.
A further possible explanation for the results presented
here is that language is not involved at all in the visuospatial
tasks we investigated, and that the interference observed is
due to the increase in general attentional demands conferred
by dual-tasking (e.g., Pashler, 1994). Nonverbal tasks used
in previous studies (Hermer-Vazquez et al., 1999; Ratliff &
Newcombe, 2008) also disrupted reorientation. However,
neither rhythm shadowing nor spatial tasks fully match the
non-linguistic demands of the verbal task. While we
attempted to match non-linguistic demands of the prose and
syllable shadowing tasks, the tendency for greater
interference in reorientation by the syllable task indicates
that it may be more attentionally demanding, and although
the prose task was more linguistically demanding it involves
a greater degree of predictability than non-word repetition.
Previous research (e.g., Salter, 1973) has suggested that
processing of other linguistic information can occur during

Syllable shadowing

Prose shadowing

1.92
(0.83)

0.21
(0.41)

2.75
(0.99)

0.33
(0.48)

3.29
(0.91)

0.17
(0.38)

0.33
(0.56)

1.54
(1.02)

0.63
(0.88)

0.29
(0.55)

0.17
(0.38)

0.38
(0.65)

Figure 2. Reorientation task performance: mean response rates (and standard deviations) for each corner
in the three conditions of Experiment 2. The correct corner (different on each trial) is shown in bold.
Geometrically equivalent corners (sharing the same geometric properties) are shaded.

2727

shadowing, and it is possible that, contrary to assumptions
made in previous studies (e.g., Hermer-Vazquez et al.,
1999), prose shadowing does not fully occupy core
language resources. This is an important consideration due
to the number of claims about the role of language in
cognitive processes that have been based on verbal
interference experiments. Claims of the involvement or
absence of language in visuospatial cognition have been
based on verbal interference tasks with different levels of
linguistic demands (e.g., Garden et al., 2002; Meilinger et
al., 2007; Walker & Cuthbert, 1998). However, little is
known about which linguistic resources different verbal
tasks occupy, and to what extent. Further research should
therefore examine the extent to which different shadowing
tasks disrupt online processing of syntactic and lexical
information.

Acknowledgments
This research was conducted with the support of an ESRC
Fellowship.

References
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G.J. (1994). Developments in the
concept of working memory. Neuropsychology, 8, 485493.
Dancey, C.P. & Reidy (2004). Statistics without maths for
psychology. Essex, UK: Pearson
Dent, K., & Smyth, M. M. (2005). Verbal coding and the
storage of form-position associations in visual-spatial
short-term memory. Acta Psychologica, 120, 113-140.
Gallagher, C., & Burke, T. (2007). Age, gender and iq
effects on the rey-osterrieth complex figure test. British
Journal Of Clinical Psychology, 46, 35-45.
Garden, S., Cornoldi, C., & Logie, R. H. (2002). Visuospatial working memory in navigation. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 16, 35-50.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1996). Modularity and
development: The case of spatial reorientation. Cognition,
61, 195-232.
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Spelke, E.S. & Katsnelson, A.S.
(1999). Sources of flexibility in human cognition: Dualtask studies of space and language. Cognitive Psychology,
39, 3-36.
Hupbach, A., Hardt, O., Nadel, L., & Bohbot, V.D. (2007).
Spatial reorientation: Effects of verbal and spatial
shadowing. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 7, 213226.
Ilai, D., & Willerman, L. (1989). Sex-differences in wais-r
item performance. Intelligence, 13, 225-234.
Meilinger, T., Knauff, M., & Bulthoff, H. H. (2008).
Working memory in wayfinding - a dual task experiment
in a virtual city. Cognitive Science, 32, 755-770.
Osterrieth, P. A. (1944). Le test de copie d’une figure
complexe. Contribution a` l’e´tude de la
perception et de la me´moire. Archives de Psychologie,
30, 206–353.

Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory - retrospect and
current status. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 45, 255287.
Pashler, H. (1994). Dual-task interference in simple tasks data and theory. Psychological Bulletin, 116, 220-244.
Postma, A., & De Haan, E. H. F. 1996. What was where?
Memory for object locations. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 49A, 178–199.
Postle, B. R., D'Esposito, M., & Corkin, S. (2005). Effects
of verbal and nonverbal interference on spatial and object
visual working memory. Memory & Cognition, 33, 203212.
Ratliff, K. R., & Newcombe, N. S. (2008). Is language
necessary for human spatial reorientation? Reconsidering
evidence from dual task paradigms. Cognitive
Psychology, 56, 142-163.
Rey, A. (1941). L’examen psychologique dans les cas
d’ence´phalopathie traumatique. Archives de
Psychologie, 28, 286–340
Ropar, D., & Mitchell, P. (2001). Susceptibility to illusions
and performance on visuospatial tasks in individuals with
autism. Journal Of Child Psychology And Psychiatry And
Allied Disciplines, 42, 539-549.
Salter, D. (1973). Shadowing at one and at 2 ears. Quarterly
Journal Of Experimental Psychology, 25, 549-556.
Simons, D. J. (1996). In sight, out of mind: When object
representations fail. Psychological Science, 7, 301-305.
Vuontela, V., Rama, P., Raninen, A., Aronen, H. J., &
Carlson, S. (1999). Selective interference reveals
dissociation between memory for location and colour.
Neuroreport, 10, 2235-2240.
Walker, P., & Cuthbert, L. (1998). Remembering visual
feature conjunctions: Visual memory for shape-colour
associations is object-based. Visual Cognition, 5, 409455.
Wechsler, D. ( 1981). Wechsler Adult Intelligence ScaleRevised (WAIS-R). New York: The Psychological
Corporation.

2728

