UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Local syntactic coherence interpretation. Evidence from a visual world study.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vj5z38d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hachmann, Wibke
Konieczny, Lars
Muller, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Local syntactic coherence interpretation. Evidence from a visual world study.
Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Daniel Müller (daniel@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Wibke Hachmann (wibke@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Sarah Schwarzkopf (sarah.schwarzkopf@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Sascha Wolfer (sascha@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50
D-79098 Freiburg i. Br., Germany
Abstract
This paper addresses the question whether locally coherent
word sequences in spoken sentences interfere with the global
interpretation. We present a visual world experiment where
three depicted events were presented simultaneously while a
sentence was spoken. The results suggest that local syntactic
coherences are not only processed at a syntactic level, but they
are interpreted on-line.
Keywords: local coherence; sentence processing; parsing
complexity; visual world, dynamical systems; simple
recurrent networks.

Introduction
Sentences sometimes contain sequences that form partial or
even whole sentences on their own when viewed in
isolation. For example, the sentence
i. The coach smiled at the player tossed a Frisbee by the
opposing team.
contains the grammatically correct main clause the player
tossed a Frisbee. Similar constructions exist in German:
ii. Die Tatsache, dass die Astronautin überrascht den
Außerirdischen entdeckte, erregte Aufsehen.
The fact, that the astronaut[fem] surprisedly/surprises the
alien discovered, caused a sensation.
“The fact that the astronaut suprisedly discovered the
alien, caused a sensation.”
Sentence (ii) contains the well-formed main clause die
Astronautin überrascht den Außerirdischen. (The astronaut
surprises the alien.). In both cases the meaning of the
embedded clause diverges from the global content of the
sentence and should not be considered a possible
interpretation because it is ruled out by the context of the
preceding words. Do locally well-formed sequences, or local
syntactic coherences (LSCs) nevertheless affect human
sentence processing? This question has attracted a growing
amount of attention recently because a measurable influence
of LSCs would challenge the global consistency assumption
(GCA) underlying most current theories of language
processing: syntactic integrations of incoming material are
always consistent with the preceding input.
In recent years, several researchers reported evidence that
LSCs indeed influence sentence processing and have to be

considered a potential source of linguistic complexity.
Tabor, Galantucci and Richardson (2004) found higher
reading times in sentences like (i) on the morphologically
ambiguous (past participle or a past tensed main verb)
tossed than in the control conditions where the LSC was
destroyed either by replacing tossed with the unambiguous
thrown and/or by using the unreduced relative clause (…the
player (who was) tossed/thrown…).
Further evidence was provided by Konieczny (2005) from
an online anomaly detection experiment, showing that the
detection of errors took longer when they were locally
coherent. Blicknell, Demberg and Levy (2008) report local
coherence effects (local coherence effects) in an analysis of
the Dundee Corpus of eyetracking data from reading of
newspaper texts, and Cai, Pickering and Sturt (2008) report
similar results from a self-paced-reading study.
The human sentence processing mechanism (HSPM) is
generally conceived of as an incremental parser whose
strategy combines top-down strategies with a varying degree
of bottom-up processing, depending on the particular model.
Common to virtually all models, and naturally emerging
from this view, is that sentence processing is maximally
integrated at any given point in time, i.e. that each new word
is integrated into a partial parse representation that includes
all words of the sentence processed so far. Such an
algorithm is parsimonious because only potentially viable
structures are computed so that no memory and processing
energy is wasted for unnecessary computations. Various
complexity metrics based on this idea have since been
proposed with considerable success in accounting for
processing difficulties (e.g. Gibson 1998; Hawkins 1994).
However, local coherence effects pose problems for these
accounts because for LSCs to have an effect, the parser
would have to compute a virtually infinite amount of
analyses which could have been ruled out if the sentence
context had been considered right away.

Attempts to explain local coherence effects
Several attempts have been made to explain local coherence
effects. Tabor, Galantucci and Richardson (2004) interpret
the effects as an interference of local and global analysis,
based on a self-organized parser (SOPARSE, Tabor &
Hutchins, 2004; see also Vosse & Kempen, 2000): Local
lexical fragments – sometimes spanning several words –

1133

compete with one another for being linked to form a
coherent parse tree. Gibson (2006), on the other hand,
explained Tabor, Galantucci and Richardson’s (2004)
effects by a combination of lexical unigram bottom-up
statistics and global syntactic top-down predictions,
eliminating the need for local coherence processing of
multiple adjacent words. Finally, the cue-based parsing
approach (Lewis & Vasishth, 2005; van Dyke, 2007;
Gordon, Hendrick & Johnson, 2001) tries to relate sentence
processing to general properties of human memory and
claims that local coherence effects may stem from
interference of multiple similar NPs during retrieval (van
Dyke, 2007). While both bottom-up statistics and memory
retrieval models operate merely on a single-word, lexical
basis, only Tabor’s account attributes local coherence
effects to sequences of several adjacent words.
All models have in common that they operate on discrete
symbolic representations of syntactic elements. A radically
different view stems from eliminative connectionist models,
such as Simple Recurrent Networks (SRNs, Elman 1990).
SRNs implicitly acquire grammatical knowledge by
developing expectations about, and being corrected by each
next incoming item. The only source of information is hence
contained in the sequence of items the network is trained
with. In this framework, the crucial factors of processing
complexity appear to be word-order regularity and
frequency of exposure (MacDonald & Christiansen, 2002).
Although SRNs overcome the limitations of pure n-gram
predictions (Christiansen & Chater, 1999), their
performance has been demonstrated to be affected by LSCs
(Konieczny, Müller and Ruh, submitted). Since local
sequential information is an important source of information
in the process of grammar acquisition (Elman, 1993)
influencing the way language is processed later, local
coherence effects can be viewed as an epiphenomenon of
the underlying mechanisms of acquisition and processing
which SRNs are based on.
Local coherence effects are hence an important window to
the fundamental properties of the HSPM and its underlying
representations, and a cornerstone in the discussion and
evaluation of the theories of human language processing.
However, empirical evidence for LSC processing thus far
is exclusively based on reading data, and is mainly based on
evidence from English – with the exception of Konieczny
(2005). As a consequence of the latter, reduced relative
clauses have almost exclusively been tested. Besides the
questionable implications of being restricted to just one
class of constructions in only one language, a more direct
consequence is that only LSCs crossing clause boundaries
have been looked at, which might have obscured the real
impact LSCs may have on processing. Furthermore, and
most importantly, current data provide no conclusion about
how LSCs influence processing beyond the syntactic level.
To address these questions, we have conducted a visual world
experiment with German complement clauses.

Visual world experiment
With our experiment, we addressed three issues of local
coherence processing:
1. Do local coherence effects also show up in spoken
language processing?
2. Can local coherence effects be demonstrated within
clause-boundaries of globally correct sentences?
3. Do local coherences affect language processing beyond
the syntactic level? Are locally coherent structures
being interpreted to some degree?
Spoken target sentences with (1) and without (2) an
embedded local coherence were played while participants
were presented with three depicted events on a computer
screen. Only one of these depicted events corresponded to
the global meaning, while a second event corresponded to
the local meaning. The third corresponded to neither the
global or local meaning.
If the existence of a local coherence in the spoken target
sentence increases the proportion of fixations on pictures
depicting their content, the LSC must have been computed
and interpreted to some degree.

Materials and Design
We constructed forty-eight German complement clauses
embedded in simple matrix clauses. Each complement
clause contained a local syntactic coherence that resulted
from the use of ambiguous participial adverbs (überrascht
in (1)) in between the subject and the object of the
complement clause. In the control condition, the participial
adverb is replaced by a synonymous unambiguous form
(ungläubig in (2)), with the effect of destroying the local
syntactic coherence.
1) Die Tatsache, dass die Astronautin überrascht den
Außerirdischen vom Mars entdeckte, erregte Aufsehen.
The fact, that the astronaut[fem] astonished the alien from
Mars discovered, caused quite a stir.
“The fact that the astronaut suprisedly discovered the
alien from mars, caused quite a stir.”
2) Die Tatsache, dass die Astronautin ungläubig den
Außerirdischen vom Mars entdeckte, erregte Aufsehen.
The fact, that the astronaut[fem] surprisedly the alien
from Mars discovered, caused quite a stir.
“The fact that the astronaut surprisedly discovered the
alien from mars, caused quite a stir.”
The word überrascht (astonished) is lexically ambiguous, as
it can be a participle or a full verb. Globally, überrascht in
(1) must be analyzed as a participle-adverb (surprisedly) of
the clause-final verb entdeckte (discovered). Locally
however, it can also form a local syntactically coherent
clause die Astronautin überrascht den Außerirdischen vom
Mars (the astronaut surprises the alien from Mars) as a full
verb. In the control condition without a local coherence, the
ambiguous adverb (überrascht, surprisedly) was replaced
with an unambiguous one (ungläubig), as in (2)).

1134

We crossed this factor with the introduction of another
potentially LSC-destroying item, a temporal adverb (gerade,
just)
placed
between
the
subject
and
the
ambiguous/unambiguous participle (see 3,4). While this
eliminates the possibility to form a complete locally
coherent main clause within the complement clause, it
introduces another locally coherent construction starting
with a topicalized temporal adverb (Gerade überrascht den
Außerirdischen …). Note, however, that this LSC lacks a
Subject-NP and is never actually completed because right
after the Object-NP (the alien) the finite verb (discovers)
finishes the complement clause.
3) Die Tatsache, dass die Astronautin gerade überrascht
den Außerirdischen vom Mars entdeckte, erregte
Aufsehen.
The fact, that the astronaut[fem] just surprisedly
/surprises the alien from Mars discovered, caused quite
a stir.
“The fact that the astronaut just suprisedly discovered
the alien from mars, caused quite a stir.”

clauses – and spliced into the spoken matrix sentences. The
result still sounded very natural, partly because LSCs did
not cross clause-boundaries. Naturalness was established in
a pre-test with 5 naïve native speakers who did not notice
any splicing and claimed that the sentences sounded wellformed.
To minimize prosodic differences between conditions,
control conditions were produced by splicing the critical
words (unambiguous adverb, “gerade”) into the target
sentence (1):
Die Tatsache, dass die { Astronautin ( gerade )
überrascht ( ungläubig ) den Außerirdischen }
vom Mars entdeckte, erregte Aufsehen.
Materials were constructed according to a 2x2 design,
comprising the factors adverb-type (ambiguous vs.
unambiguous) and coherency-interruption (with “gerade”
vs. without “gerade”).

4) Die Tatsache, dass die Astronautin gerade ungläubig
den Außerirdischen vom Mars entdeckte, erregte
Aufsehen.
The fact, that the astronaut[fem] just perplexedly the alien
from Mars discovered, caused quite a stir.
“The fact that the astronaut just perplexedly discovered
the alien from mars, caused quite a stir.”
We added this factor to address two potential problems:
First, differential fixation proportions on the depicted events
corresponding to the global and the local event might
simply reflect the quality of the match between the visual
properties of the depicted events and the two adverbs. If the
additions of gerade (just) alters or even destroys the effect,
this possibility can be ruled out. Secondly, a similar logic
holds for the evaluation of the unigram statistics model
(Gibson, 2006), where any effect would have to be
attributed to the lexical properties of the adverb, regardless
of the existence or absence of a local coherence.

Figure 1: A visual stimulus with three depicted
events: a. global event (top), b. local event (left), c.
unrelated event (right).

Procedure

Visual materials. Each visual stimulus was composed of
three different depicted events with the same pair of actors.
One depicted event represented the globally correct content
of the subordinate clause (here: the astronout surprisedly
discovers the alien, Figure 1a), the second picture depicted
the content of the local coherence (here: the astronout
surprises the alien, Figure 1b), and the third picture showed
the two actors in a unrelated interaction (such as both not
taking notice of each other) neither matching the global nor
the local content (Figure 1c).
The placement of the events on the screen was controlled,
such that each event occurred equally often in each position.

Before the experiment started, participants were read a
description of the following procedure and were told that
they had to judge the overall match of the pictures and the
text used in the study in a questionnaire after the
experiment.
Each trial started with the presentation of the visual
stimulus, followed by a short description of the depicted
agents:

Auditory materials. In aural perception we have to deal
with the problem that prosodic cues might weaken local
coherence processing. To minimize the probability, locally
coherent sequences were recorded separately – as main

After a pause of eight seconds the auditory stimulus was
presented in its natural speech rate. During the trials,
participants had no explicit task but to listen to the sentences
and look at the pictures.

5) Hier sieht man eine Astronautin und einen
Außerirdischen in drei verschiedenen Szenen.
Here you see an astronaut and an alien in three
different scenes.

1135

24 participants were presented 48 stimuli each (twelve in
each condition), as well as 24 filler items.
Fixations on each of the three depicted events were
recorded while the spoken sentences were played to the
participants. Data was collected with an SR Research
Eyelink II head-mounted eyetracker sampling pupil position
at 500 Hz.

Hypotheses

event even in the absence of a trial by trial task. With
respect to the hypotheses, we found a reliable difference in
fixation proportions on the LSC-scene between (1) and (2),
starting at about 100 ms and lasting until 1700 ms after the
offset of PP/adverb (marked in grey, figure 2). There were
more looks at the local event when participants listened to
the sentence containing a local coherence than when there
was no local coherence in the auditory stimulus (Figure 2).

If locally coherent sequences are mentally processed and
interpreted, fixation proportions should be higher on the
local event in (1), where sentences actually contain a local
coherence, than in (2), where they don’t. This difference
was expected to show up shortly after the participle/adverb,
which is required for the LSC interpretation.
In (3-4), where the subject-NP was additionally separated
from the adverb by an inserted temporal adverb, we
expected to see fewer fixations on the local event at, or
shortly after, the ambiguous adverb, as a potential locally
coherent event schema still lacks an actor (Gerade
überrascht …). So if local coherence interpretation can be
established between (3) and (4), we expected to see the
effect only later in the sentence.

Results
To account for length differences of each segment in the
auditory stimuli, trial data were synchronized at the offset of
the PP/adverb. Each fixation was assigned to time bins each
50 ms in size, ranging from 1500 ms before, and 4000 ms
after the synchronization point. Fixation proportions on the
three scenes were calculated for each time bin. Aggregated
data are plotted in Figure 2 and 3.

Figure 3: time course of fixation proportions on local, global
and neutral scenes, condition 3 (ambiguous adverb, with
gerade) vs. condition 4 (unambiguous adverb, with gerade).
Whiskers represent standard errors.
Between (3) and (4) we also found higher fixation
probabilites on the LSC-scene in the ambiguous condition,
however starting and ending substantially later in the
sentence (between 1500ms and 2500ms after offset
PP/adverb, see Figure 3, marked in grey), while in the time
frame of the local coherence effect between (1) and (2), the
fixation proportions on the local event were decreased
(Figure 3).

Discussion

Figure 2: time course of fixation proportions on local,
global and neutral scenes, condition 1 (ambiguous adverb,
without gerade) vs. condition 2 (unambiguous adverb,
without gerade). Whiskers represent standard errors.
Figure 2 illustrates that when the sentence unfolds and the
meaning becomes clearer, fixations on the global event
increase to about 80%, indicating that participants grasp the
meaning of the sentence and its corresponding depicted

The results provide further evidence for the psychological
reality of local syntactic coherence processing in sentence
processing. Furthermore, they suggest that LSCs not only
affect processing at the syntactic level, but that sequences
are interpreted to some degree even if they are incompatible
with the global content of the sentence they are embedded
in. We take the results as strongly supporting language
processing accounts that are not based on the globalconsistency assumption.
Since most of the theories that account for local
coherence effects don’t make explicit predictions about
interpretational processes, our experiment cannot readily be
taken as distinguishing between the particular theories.
However, the results allow at least some claims about the
theories in question.
Concerning the cue-based-retrieval/similarity-basedinterference account, it is unclear how the effects could be

1136

explained. Firstly, these models are to the best of our
knowledge underspecified with respect to whether or not the
verb-form of the ambiguous participle is considered at all
during parsing. Interference stems from multiple and
potentially ungrammatical retrieval candidates (mostly
NPs), and not from ungrammatical cues. Hence, if only
grammatical retrieval cues are generated throughout
processing, then whether or not the verb interpretation of the
participle is retrieved depends on the representations build
so far and on the grammatical constraints used for
generating cues. If the finite verb interpretation would be
considered though, it might have an effect on the looks on
the scenes.
Regarding the bottom-up/top-down statistics account
(Gibson 2006), it may well be that the difference in
type/token probability between the ambiguous and
unambiguous adverb elicits processing difficulty in the
former case. But in this case the difference should elicit
comparable effects in the gerade conditions (3-4). However,
the local coherence effect shows up only late, about one and
a half second after the offset of the ambiguous participle.
This renders a lexical unigram effect highly unlikely.
In our view, the data are best accounted for by dynamical
self-organizing systems, like Tabor and Hutchins
SOPARSE (2004), as well as SRN-based connectionist
models, because local coherence effects are a natural byproduct of these models. Furthermore, even if no explicit
claims are made about the linkage between syntactic and
interpretational processes, these frameworks assume no
strictly separated syntactic and semantic mechanisms or
processes, but rather interactive constraints guiding
comprehension. SOPARSE however, due to its
hybrid/symbolic nature, must assume a competition between
discrete analyses, such that a local coherence should
generally increase processing load. In SRNs, on the other
hand, LSCs should elicit both competition and facilitation,
depending upon the position. At the beginning and
throughout the LSC, word predictions of the global and
local analysis are in line, so that its quality should actually
be increased. At the end of the LSC however, predictions
begin to diverge, so that competition should show up in an
increased prediction error.
While Tabor, Galantucci and Richardson’s (2004) data
are compatible with the competition assumption, the
elevated reading times might as well have been produced by
the reanalysis from the incorrect local to the correct global
parse, so that no parallelism is required.
It remains to be seen whether competition effects do also
show up in much more straight forward sentences like those
used in the present study, where the correct global
interpretation does not require a rare construction. Such
reading studies are currently under way in our lab, and
preliminary results suggest that there is no competition
effect before the end of a LSC.

Rationality
In theories dicussed thus far local coherence effects appear
more or less unfortunate, regardless of whether they
naturally emerge from the system, as for SRNs, or not,
because they indicate distraction of attention and thus point
to a deficiency of the system. In other words, local
coherence effects are seen as reflecting “irrational”
properties of the HSPM that allows or even forces it to
process irrelevant information while at the same time
available contextual information that could have been used
for constraining the search must be ignored.
The Good Enough approach (Ferreira & Patson, 2007)
provides a potential loophole. In everyday communicational
contexts, reaching complete accuracy and consistency is not
always required and often too wasteful or demanding.
Comprehenders therefore use rather fast and frugal
heuristics often leading to incomplete or multiple
representations. However, these “errors” do not outweigh
processing speed, as long as representations are computed
that are “good enough” to follow the conversation. So, local
coherence effects may reflect the interference of the
heuristics-generated meaning of the LSC eventually
clashing with the global meaning (reminiscent of the
sausage machine, Frazier & Fodor, 1978).
In contrast to this bounded rationality approach, Levy
(2008) accounts for local coherence effects without
abandoning rationality. While he also takes into account the
circumstances of realworld communication, he focuses on
the nature of linguistic input as noisy and potentially
erroneous.
In Levy’s account, what appears to be a local coherence
might be a valid analysis within a “syntactic neighbour”
arising from the repair of previously read words to form an
analysis consistent with the “local” coherence. For example,
if the word at had been read as as, the “locally” coherent
main-verb reading of tossed in “The coach smiled at/as the
player tossed the Frisbee …” makes perfect sense. In other
words, in the attempt to arrive at a consistent analysis the
parser not only has to integrate the incoming material in the
actual interpretation consistent with the already processed
input, but also considers potential errors made in the past
input. Very regular and frequent local sequences may thus
lead the parser to reconsider the accuracy of the already
processed input – were there any words missing,
misunderstood, misspelled or left out? While the idea seems
generally very tempting, it remains to be seen whether the
assumptions can be supported empirically, for instance by
showing that the likelihood of errors in the previously
processed material has an effect on LSC processing.
Rationality and SRNs
SRNs, as an instance for distributed processing accounts,
are generally quite robust when confronted with erroneous
and noisy input. It is possible that SRNs implement a
mechanism for dealing with errors in previously processed
material inherently. Further research along these lines is
necessary to answer this question.

1137

More importantly however, SRNs are not only models for
adult sentence processing but first and foremost for
language acquisition. As Elman (1993) has argued, in an
early stage of language acquisition it is useful to focus on
smaller constructions, so that fundamental dependencies can
be acquired at all. So the property of SRNs that local
syntactic coherences are processed in a particular way could
be viewed as relict of the underlying functional language
acquisition mechanism.
At the same time, the computation of multiple predictions
in SRNs does not require additional resources for multiple
computations and storage, as in most symbolic/algorithmic
models. Making local predictions is therefore not
necessarily costly, while it provides easily accessible and, in
the majority of cases, valid information about the remainder
of the sentence. SRNs are thus a good implementation of a
“good enough” approach (Ferreira & Patson, 2007).

Conclusion
The local coherence effect is an important phenomenon
providing insights into the fundamental mechanisms and
representations in human language processing. Our results
demonstrate the psychological reality of local coherence
processing, and show that local coherences can even trigger
interpretational processes incompatible with the global
context. We take the results as supporting self-organizing
dynamical systems, and in particular SRNs, where local
coherence effects emerge as a natural consequence of
central principles of language acquisition and processing.

Acknowledgements
This work was granted by the German Research Foundation
(DFG, grant KO 1932/3-1).

References
Blicknell, K., Demberg, V. & Levy, R. (2008). Local
coherences in the wild: An eye-tracking corpus study.
Poster presented at the 21th CUNY Conference On
Human Sentence Processing. Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
March 13-15, 2008.
Cai, Z., Pickering, M. J., & Sturt, P. (2008). The filler may
be a gentleman: Local coherence effect in long-distance
dependency processing. Poster presented at AMLaP
2008, Cambridge, UK, 4-6 September 2008.
Christiansen, M. H. & Chater, N. (1999). Toward a
connectionist model of recursion in human linguistic
performance. Cognitive Science, 23 (2), 157-205.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-211.
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and development in neural
networks: the importance of starting small. Cognition, 48
(1), 71-99.
Ferreira, F. & Patson, N. D. (2007). The ‘good enough’
approach to language comprehension. Language and
Linguistics Compass 1/1–2, 71–83.

Frazier, L. & Fodor, J.D. (1978). The sausage machine: A
new two-stage parsing model. Cognition, 6 (4), 291-325.
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: locality of
syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68 (1), 1-76.
Gibson, E. (2006). The interaction of top-down and bottomup statistics in the resolution of syntactic category
ambiguity. Journal of Memory and Language, 54, 363388.
Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., & Johnson, M. (2001).
Memory interference during language processing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 27, 1411–1423.
Hawkins, J. A. (1994). A performance theory of order and
constituency.
Cambridge/New
York:
Cambridge
University Press.
Konieczny, L. & Müller, D. (2004). Does word order
account for the advantage of subject-extracted over
object-extracted relative clauses? Poster presented at
AMLaP 2004, Aix en Provence, France, September 16-18
2004.
Konieczny, L. (2005). The psychological reality of local
coherences in sentence processing. Proceedings of the
27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Stresa, Italy, August 2005.
Konieczny, L., Müller, D. & Ruh, N. (submitted). Prozesse
des sprachlichen Arbeitsgedächtnisses.
Lewis, R. L. & Vasishth, S. (2005). An activation-based
model of sentence processing as skilled memory retrieval.
Cognitive Science, 29, 375-419.
Levy, R. (2008). A noisy-channel model of rational human
sentence comprehension under uncertain input. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Waikiki,
Honululu, Hawai, October 25-27, 2008.
MacDonald, M. C. & Christiansen, M. H. (2002).
Reassessing working memory: A comment on Just &
Carpenter (1992) and Waters & Caplan (1996).
Psychological Review, 109, 35-54.
Tabor, W., Galantucci, B., & Richardson, D. (2004). Effects
of Merely Local Syntactic Coherence on Sentence
Processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 50 (4),
355-370.
Tabor, W. & Hutchins, S. (2004): Evidence for selforganized sentence processing: digging-In effects.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30 (2), 431– 450.
Van Dyke, J. A. (2007). Interference effects from
grammatically unavailable constituents during sentence
processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33 (2), 407– 430.
Vosse, T. & Kempen, G. (2000). Syntactic structure
assembly in human parsing: a computational model based
on competitive inhibition and a lexicalist grammar.
Cognition, 75 (2), 105-43.

1138

