UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Long term implicit and explicit memory for briefly studied words

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/42q32214

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Averell, Lee
Heathcote, Andrew

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

1

Long term implicit and explicit memory for briefly studied words
Lee Averell (Lee.Averell@newcastle.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Newcastle.

Andrew Heathcote (Andrew.Heathcote@newcastle.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Newcastle.

Abstract
Memories fade over time, but do they disappear altogether?
The persistence of overlearned material has been regarded as
evidence for permanent memories (Bahrick, 1984). However
there seems a general consensus in the cognitive literature that
briefly studied stimuli disappear from memory altogether
(Wixted, 2004ab). We present evidence from implicit (stem
completion) and explicit (stem cued recall) memory tasks
showing well above chance performance 28 days after only
one brief study event. Retention measured by both the
implicit and explicit tasks was stable at the same level from
seven days to 28 days. Our results question the consensus
about the fate of memories for briefly studied stimuli.
Keywords: Forgetting; long term memory; recall; context.

The Persistence of Long Term Memory
Whether or not stored memories are permanent is a
subject of debate in both the cognitive and neuroscience
communities. Here we investigate the issue of memory
permanence and the way in which forgetting progresses
over time in both explicit and implicit memory paradigms
(Jacoby, Toth & Yonelinas, 1993; Squire, 1994). We first
review previous pertinent findings and then report data from
a stem-cued recall (explicit) and a stem completion
(implicit) task testing memory at delays ranging from one
minute to one month. The results are discussed with
reference to novel context reinstatement techniques used in
our experiment and their effects on mnemonic interference.
A number of studies have reported accurate explicit recall
of information memorized years and even decades ago.
Bahrick’s (1984) seminal study showed that people could
remember Spanish language words learned in a classroom
for up to 50 years despite not using Spanish since the end of
their high school education. He concluded that some
memories are relatively permanent, fading only because of
the detrimental effects of aging. More recently Squire
(1989) found a similar pattern to Bahrick with memory for
television programs from over 15 years prior to testing.
Schmidt, Peck, Paas and van Breukelen (2000) showed that
people could remember street names from suburbs they
lived in as a child. Noice and Noice (2002) showed that
actors could recall aspects of a Shakespearean script up to
28 years after playing the role. Results such as these support
Checlie’s (2006) statement that: “the inability … to account
for permanent retention is a serious failing” (p.36).
However, these studies of long term retention may be
criticized on a number of grounds. They employed a cross
sectional design that precludes investigation of the way in

which individual memory traces are forgotten. Further,
given the meaningful nature of the material remembered in
these studies it is possible that participants were reminded of
and rehearsed the material in the study-test lag. It would,
therefore, be desirable to examine retention in a longitudinal
design of material that is less likely to be rehearsed.
The stimuli used in these studies were also initially very
well learned. Hence, even if these studies demonstrate very
long term retention, memory permanence may be restricted
to such “overlearned” material. Bahrick (1984) suggested
that participation in multiple spaced Spanish language
courses in high school was a strong contributing factor to
his results. Also, the effect of overlearning was evident in
the differences in long term retention between higher
achieving (A) students and less accomplished (B) students,
with (A) students showing stronger retention in both the
short and long term.
Evidence for very long term retention of stimuli studied
only once has been reported in the implicit memory
literature. Slomon, Hayman, Ohta, Law and Tulving (1988,
exp 2) found word fragment completion was primed at
above chance levels by study of a list of words 16 months
previously. However, while the study list was only
presented once, study instructions encouraged a very
thorough encoding; participants were asked to copy the
study list words onto a piece of paper, rate the familiarity of
each word and prepare for a memory test on the words. In a
cued recall test of explicit memory Runquist (1983, 1986,
1987) showed that participants could recall words up to two
weeks after an initial brief exposure to words when
associative cues are given. However, in these experiments
some study words were presented in multiple testing
sessions to assess the effects of retesting on recall of
untested items. This may have aided recall of the items
tested only once, leading to inflated estimates of long term
retention.
Some studies of shorter term retention for briefly
studied words have provided evidence of stable memory
after an initial period of forgetting (i.e., an asymptote in the
retention function). McBride and Dosher (1997) tested
implicit and explicit memory with a stem completion task
using study-test lags from one minute to one hour. They
found that both types of memory declined over the first 15
minutes before stabilizing above chance with implicit
performance below explicit performance. However, even
though their analysis assumed an asymptote, they doubted
their results supported memory permanence, saying “further
decline would be visible in hours or days” (p.380). This

1276

2

concern is reinforced by their acknowledgement of a failure
to equate the average position of the different lag
conditions. As a result lag conditions occurring later in the
experiment might have produced poorer performance due to
greater effects from fatigue or proactive interference.
However, this concern does not apply to Rubin Hinton
and Wenzel’s (1999), which is often cited as the best
existing study of the forgetting function, as it tested 300
participants at a larger number of lags than previous studies.
They reported that the best quantitative account of their data
was given by a function assuming an above chance
asymptote, although the longest lag tested was only several
minutes. Nevertheless, Rubin et al. shared McBride and
Dosher’s cautious interpretation, saying “we believe that the
asymptote … represents a decline too small to detect in our
experiments or even in experiments with considerably
longer delays” (p.1173). Wixted (2004a) summarizes the
pervasiveness of this cautious stance, saying that an
asymptote at chance performance “seems to be the view of
almost everyone who has ever investigated the mathematical
form of forgetting” (p.871).

Experiment
Our experiment attempts to overcome the limitations of
previous studies with the aim of determining whether there
is permanent retention or gradual but eventually complete
loss of memories for briefly studied stimuli. We tested
retention over four separate experimental sessions with
study-test lags of 1 minute to 1 hour (session one), 1 day, 1
week and 1 month (sessions two to four). Following
McBride and Dosher (1997) both explicit memory (stemcued recall) and implicit priming (stem completion) were
tested in a between-subjects design. These tasks have the
advantage of equating tests of the two types of memory in
every way except the intention to remember.
Context reinstatement (i.e., restoration of the study context
during later testing) has been shown to greatly aid explicit
recall (Smith & Vella, 2001). Clearly some aspects of
context, both external (e.g., subjects attire) and internal
(e.g., subject’s mood), will change across sessions. Indeed,
one of the reasons that performance may decline across
sessions yet not decline within a session at longer lags is
that the within session asymptote represents “a constant
residual of recall until the experimental context changes”
(Rubin et al., 1999, p.1173). If this is the case, even if some
memories from the first session are permanent measured
retention will decline because they are not retrievable due a
lack of appropriate context cues during later test sessions.
Although it is practically impossible to reinstate context
perfectly we took two measures to promote reinstatement in
later sessions. First, prior to the first session, participants’
video taped their walk (first person view) from the foyer of
the building where the experiment was conducted into the
experimental room. The experimenter also made a quick
video of the participant sitting at the chair preparing to start
the experiment in order to capture aspects such as attire.
Second, participants answered questions about the weather,

their surrounds and mood as well as daily activities just
prior to commencement of the first session. The answers to
these questions were reviewed, and the video tape replayed,
prior to later testing sessions.

Method
Participants (n=32) completed four experimental sessions
spaced over 28 days under either explicit or implicit
completion instructions. All participants were told that the
object of the study was to test lexical skill development over
time, specifically their ability to rate the frequency with
which words occur and their ability to complete stems. The
initial experimental session lasted around 2.1 hours and was
divided into two sections separated by an 8.6 minute break.
Retention in session one was measured at seven roughly
exponentially spaced lags (see Table 1). Sessions two, three
and four lasted 35 minutes; session two was held 24 hours
later, session three was seven days later and the last session
occurred 28 days later. The procedure was identical for
participants in both implicit and explicit groups except for
the stem completion instructions.
Experimental materials were 905 critical and 505 filler
stems and 1170 study words. Critical stems had four or
more possible completions, one of which corresponded to a
study word. Study words corresponding to the critical stems
were chosen because they had the lowest completion rate in
a pilot study. The pilot study entailed 20 participants
completing all 905 critical stems with the first 4-6 letter
word that came to mind and without any prior word study. If
two words had the same completion rate the word with the
lowest frequency was used. The mean study word
completion rate in the pilot, which estimated the chance
completion rate in the main experiment, was 11.6%.
After the video tape and questionnaire were completed
experimental testing, consisting of thirty 4.3 minute studytest cycles, commenced. These cycles comprised 17 trials in
which participants chose which of two words occurred more
frequently in their linguistic experience. Each pair appeared
on the screen for four seconds. The pair ratings task was
used to insure consistency of encoding both within and
between groups. Next participants performed 26 stem
completion trials. On each trial three letters and three
trailing underscores were presented and the participants
were asked to complete the stem using 1-3 letters to form
either a) a word previously seen (explicit, n=16) or b) the
first word that came to mind (implicit, n=16). The stems
were on screen for seven seconds.
Table 1: Study-test lag (minutes), number of items tested at
each lag and the mean position within the experiment
(minutes from commencement) of the mid-points of lags in
each lag condition in Session 1.
Lag
Tests
Position

1.2
86
69.8

2.4
84
70.4

5.5
84
70.2

9.5
85
70.4

17.3
85
70.2

33.1
84
70.1

64.2
84
70.1

Table one shows the number of study words tested per lag
as well as the mean position for each lag condition in

1277

3

Figure one shows posterior mean estimates and 95%
credible intervals on the study-completion-probability scale
for the seven lags in the first session. The 95% credible
intervals were estimated by the range between the 2.5% and
97.5% quantiles of the posterior mean samples. Explicit
performance was generally higher than implicit performance
and both declined monotonically for the first five lags
before becoming relatively stable at a level well above the
chance completion rate. The advantage for explicit
performance was much larger up to the third lag and then
was relatively constant for the remaining lags.
Figure two shows implicit and explicit performance for the
last lag of the first session and the three remaining sessions.
Performance was lower in session two relative to the end of
session one, with the drop being larger for the explicit
condition (0.071) than the implicit condition (0.031). As a
result there was little difference in explicit and implicit
performance at one day. Both implicit and explicit
performance dropped by a similar amount (0.033) from one
day to one week. There was little change in performance
from one week to one month, with explicit performance
rising very slightly (by 0.004) and implicit performance
declining very slightly (by 0.005).
0.7

Explicit
Implicit

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1

5

10

25

50

60

Study-Test Lag (Minutes)

0.40

Figure 1: Hierarchical Bayesian estimates of the population
proportion of study completions for each of the first session
lags with 95% credible intervals. The solid horizontal line is
the chance completion level.

0.25
0.15

0.20

p(Correct)

0.30

0.35

Explicit
Implicit

0.10

Bayesian
Hierarchical
analysis
(Shiffrin,
Lee
Wagenmakers & Kim, 2008) was used to obtain estimates
of the population probability of implicit and explicit
completion with the studied stem. This analysis assumed a
binomial distribution for study completion frequencies and
treated subjects as a random effect. The logit of the binomial
probability was assumed to have a multivariate normal
distribution over subjects that allowed for correlations
among the 10 study-test lags (seven in the first session and
one for each of the three additional sessions).
The multivariate normal population distribution means
were given vague normal priors (precision = 0.001) and its
variance-covariance matrix was given a Wishart prior (main
diagonal=1, off diagonal=0; Rouder, Lu, Sun, Speckman,
Morey & Naveh-Benjamin, 2007). WinBUGS (Lunn,
Thomas, Best & Spiegelhalter, 2000) was used to obtain a
single chain of 300,000 independent samples from the
posterior using a burn in period of 50,000 iterations and
thinning that accepted a sample every 50th iteration. Visual
inspection of the samples confirmed convergence and
independence was confirmed by an examination of the
autocorrelation function of the samples. Note that similar
results were obtained from the Bayesian analysis and from
standard maximum likelihood analysis of each participant.
The advantage of the Bayesian approach is that it enabled
hierarchical estimation of population distributions.
Population retention distributions at the longest lag are of
particular interest as they address the issue of whether
performance remains generally above chance.

p(Correct)

Results

0.5

0.6

session one. Critical stems were tested only once and their
test positions were interspersed amongst tests of filler items
in order to equate the average position of different lag
conditions within the experiment. The two shortest lags
were within-cycle, whereas all other lags were between
cycles. Tests of between-cycle lags were arranged to
minimize testing of items from nearby study positions
together in order to minimize the degree to which recall of
one item could assist recall following tests of items from
nearby study positions (Howard & Kahana, 2002). Critical
study words and test stems were randomly allocated to
within-subject conditions for each participant.
Later sessions began with a review of the video tape and
the experimenter reading back both the questions from the
context reinstatement questionnaire and the answers given
by the participant. All later sessions consisted of five studytest cycles similar to the first session, except that only 13
pairs, consisting of only filler words which were never
tested, were used in the frequency rating trials. The first
study test cycle in each session was used to reacquaint
participants with the task and used only filler items. The
stem completion trials in the remaining cycles used stems
corresponding to words studied but not tested in the first
session. Hence there were 104 critical-stem tests in each of
the later sessions. The study positions of these critical stems
were distributed evenly across the first session.

50

10000

40500
Study-Test Lag (Minutes)

Figure 2: Hierarchical Bayesian estimates of the population
proportion of study completions for lags 7 (end of session
one) to 10 (28 days post study) with 95% credible intervals.
The solid horizontal line is the chance completion rate.

1278

4

Figure three shows the mean difference in posterior
samples between each lag and the lag immediately
following it for both the explicit and implicit conditions.
The error bars represent a 95% credible interval on the
difference distribution. A reliable difference in performance
between two adjacent lags is indicated by error bars not
crossing the horizontal line marking a zero difference. There
are clear differences in performance between the first and
second and the second and third lag in both conditions (i.e.,
the first and second difference points). Beyond that
differences are small and for the last two differences in
session one are almost exactly zero on average. There is a
clear drop in performance in the explicit condition between
the end of session one and session two which is not evident
in the implicit condition. The decrease from one day to one
week (eighth difference point) is close to reliable in both the
explicit (2.5th percentile= -.0057) and implicit (2.5th
percentile = -.0028) condition but from one week to 28 days
performance is clearly stable for both implicit and explicit
tasks.
Implicit

0.1
0.0

Probability Difference

-0.1

0.0
-0.2

-0.2

-0.1

Probability Difference

0.1

0.2

0.2

Explicit

1

3

5

7

9

1

Lag comparison (n)

3

5

7

9

Lag comparison (n)

Figure 3: Mean difference between posterior mean samples
for lag (n+1)-lag (n). Bars represent 95% credible intervals.

25
20
0

5

10

15

Density

15
0

5

10

Density

20

25

30

Implicit posterior density

30

Explicit posterior density

0.05

0.15

0.25

0.35

0.05

0.15

0.25

0.35

Figure 4: Posterior distributions for mean population study
completion probability at 28 days for explicit (left) and
implicit (right) tasks. The vertical line represents the chance
completion rate.

Figure four shows the posterior distribution for
performance at 28 days in both the explicit and implicit
conditions. The chance completion rate falls at the 3×10-5
quantile of the explicit distribution and the 2.5×10-5
quantile of the implicit distribution, indicating that
performance was well above chance levels at 28 days.
Difference sample t-tests were conducted on the binomial
probability of completion at 28 days for both the explicit
and implicit conditions. Differences were found in both
conditions, explicit t (15) = 5.69, p<.001; implicit t (15) =
10.54, p<.001 confirming the results from the posterior
distribution (figure 4).
Discussion
The results of the experiment clearly show that memory in
both stem completion and stem-cued recall tasks is stable, at
above chance rates, from one week to 28 days. Performance
at 28 days for both tasks was well above chance levels.
Although performance on the explicit task was greater than
on the implicit task at all lags in the first session, replicating
McBride and Dosher’s (1997) findings, there were no
differences in the latter sessions. Given that the study trial
instructions and timing of study presentations (2 seconds per
word) allowed only a cursory encoding, the clearly above
chance performance at 28 days is a remarkable result. The
almost identical performance between explicit and implicit
conditions at later lags implies that conscious attempts at
recall are not necessary for successful recall, although
conscious recall does benefit performance at shorter lags. It
also suggests that rehearsal during the study-test lag is
unlikely to explain retention performance, as might have
been the case in previous studies of long-term retention.
It is possible that the implicit condition may have been
contaminated by conscious recall. We examined this
possibility by running a further “speeded-implicit” condition
which was the same as the implicit condition except that
participants were asked to respond to respond as quickly as
possible during stem completion. If the first key press took
longer than 1.5 seconds a visual “TOO SLOW” warning
was given (c.f. Ratcliff & Rouder, 1998) and participants
were generally compliant in responding quickly. It has been
previously argued that speeded responses limit the use of
conscious processes and are therefore a measure of implicit
processes (Wilson & Horton, 2002). Although full results
for the speeded-implicit condition cannot be reported here
due to lack of space, they were very similar to the implicit
condition, suggesting that the results reported here are fairly
process-pure.
Wixted (2004ab) concluded that memories eventually
degrade completely. This degradation is driven largely by a
non-specific retroactive interference process that disrupts
memory consolidation in continuous fashion as storage time
increases. The negligible decreases in performance from
about 15 minutes to 1 hour and between seven days and 28
days are not consistent with a continuous degradation
process. This conclusion is graphically illustrated in Figure
5, which plots the data from all sessions on one graph using
logarithmic scale on the abscissa.

1279

5

0.5
0.4
0.1

0.2

0.3

p(Correct)

0.6

0.7

Explicit
Implicit

1

2.5

10

25

1100

10000

Study-Test Lag (log 10 Minutes)

Figure 5: Results for all sessions.
Our data also suggests that there was no further forgetting
after seven days. This finding, and the above chance
retention at 28 days in both conditions, support Chechile’s
(2006) suggestion that forgetting functions should permit an
asymptote parameter that allows for some memories to
treated as permanent. A strong interpretation of these
findings is that they support at least some memories being
permanently stored. However, permanence is almost
impossible to prove in practice, as the possibility remains
open that memory performance could fade when measured
over a period longer than the 28 day maximum used here or
indeed even any longer period used in another study. One
potential approach to this issue, which we are pursuing in
on-going work, is to model the data with quantitative
forgetting functions and examine the degree of deviation
from functions that assume a chance asymptote.
A potential theoretical explanation for above chance
asymptotes in long term retention is that some if not all
memories, once encoded, are permanent. In this view much
of forgetting occurs because memories cannot be retrieved
due to lack of effective cues at test. Such retrieval cues have
been suggested to mainly consist of aspects of the study
context that were encoded with the to-be-retrieved memory
(Tulving & Thomson, 1973).
In our experiment the stem is obviously one very powerful
cue that co-occurred with the to-be-retrieved memory,
perhaps explaining in part the remarkable retention which
we observed. Some further aspects of the test environment
were also identical between study and test, such as the
experimental room, but other aspects, such as participants’
mood, had likely changed. Replaying the video tape made at
the start of the first session and rehearsing the questions and
answers in the questionnaire might have further facilitated
retrieval by reinstating these cues, although as we did not
manipulate this factor the degree to which it was effective in
our experiment remains in question.
While not tested the reinstatement of study session
environmental context as a means of improving explicit
recall is a robust phenomenon reported in many

experimental paradigms (e.g., Cousins & Hanley, 1996;
Gordon & Baddely 1975, 1980, Murnane, Phelps, &
Malmberg, 1999). Smith and Vella’s (2001) meta-analysis
of the context dependent memory literature strongly
suggested that both physical and mental reinstatement of
study context improves explicit performance. Moreover, and
of particular importance to the current study, the analysis
indicated that reintroducing context after longer delay
periods (>24 hours) leads to a larger effects then at short
delay periods ( ≤ 24 hours). Taken together, this evidence
suggests that context reinstatement will aid explicit
performance at longer delays.
Implicit memory, however, is defined as increased
performance without reference to any learning episode and,
therefore, is presumably less reliant on contextual cues.
Given this, the context reinstatement account might be
thought not to explain retention performance in the implicit
condition. However, researchers examining the relationship
between putative implicit and explicit memory systems have
suggested that they may share some processes and
influences. For example, Jacoby and Dallas (1981) proposed
that perceptual priming and recognition rely, to differing
degrees, on perceptual fluency. Zeelenberg, Pecher, Shiffrin,
and Raaijmakers (2003) showed that priming is influenced
by cue and target similarity in a manner not dissimilar to
explicit memory. Sloman et al. (1988) suggested of their
long term priming data that “Reinstatement of the study
context at the time of the test…should facilitate
performance” (p.238).
Hence, it is possible that implicit performance can be
aided by reinstatement of study session context at least to
some degree. Alternatively the similarities in our results for
implicit and explicit tasks might be taken as evidence for the
single system view, where performance differences between
explicit and implicit memory tasks are attributed to the tasks
rather than the underlying memory system (e.g., Kinder &
Shanks, 2001).
In summary, the data presented here suggest that with
sufficient retrieval cues memory performance is stable and
potentially very long lasting, even if encoding is cursory.
Our results are based on a design that has overcome the
limitations of previous studies. In short, the design allowed
testing of more critical stems per lag, over longer time
frames, and with more control over interference levels
between lags then has previously been studied. We are
currently extending the analyses presented here to examine
the implications of our data for quantitative models of the
retention function. Rubin et al. (1999) found evidence not
only for an asymptote but also for two time scales of
forgetting within a session, which they identified with short
and long term memory. The results presented in Figure 5
seem to indicate that a third time scale and second
asymptote might be needed to accommodate betweensession forgetting.

1280

6

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by funding from the John and
Daphne Research Endowment Fund.

References
Bahrick, H. P. (1984). Semantic memory content in
permastore: Fifty years of memory for Spanish learned in
school. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
113, 1-26.
Chechile, R.A.(2006) Memory Hazard Functions: A vehicle
for theory development and test. Psychological Review,
113,31-56.
Cousins, R. & Hanley, H. (1996). The Effect of
Environmental Context on Recall and Category
Clustering Scores Following Relational and Individual
Item Processing: A Test of the Outshining Hypothesis.
Memory, 4, 79-90.
Gorden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1980). When does
context influence recognition memory? British Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 71, 99-104.
Gorden, D. R. & Baddeley, A. D. (1975). Context
dependent memory in two natural environments: Land
and underwater. British Journal of Psychology, 66, 325331.
Howard, M.W. & Kahana, M. J. (2002a). A distributed
representation of temporal context. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 46, 269-299.
Jacoby, L.L. & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship
between autobiographical memory and perceptual
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
110, 306-340.
Jacoby, L. L., Toth, J. P., & Yonelinas, A. P. (1993).
Separating conscious and unconscious influences of
memory: Measuring recollection. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 139–154.
Kinder, A., & Shanks, D.R. (2001). Amnesia and the
declarative/non-declarative distinction: A recurrent
network model of classification recognition and repetition
priming. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13, 648-669.
Lunn, D., Thomas, A., Best, N., & Spiegelhalter, D. (2000).
WinBUGS a Bayesian modeling framework: concepts,
structure, and extensibility. Statistics and Computing, 10,
325-337.
McBride, D. M., & Dosher, B. A. (1997) A comparison of
forgetting in an implicit and explicit memory task.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 126, 371392.
Murnane, K., Phelps, M. P., & Malmberg, K. (1999).
Context dependent recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 403-415.
Noice, T., & Noice, H. (2002). Very long term recognition
and recall of well learned material. Applied cognitive
psychology,16, 259-272.
Ratcliff, R. & Rouder, J. N. (1998). Modeling response
times for two-choice decisions. Psychological Science,
9, 347-356.

Rouder, J.N., Lu, J., Sun,D., Specman,P.L., Morey, R.D., &
Naveh-Benjamin (2007). Signal detection models with
random participants and item effects. Psychmetrika, 72,
621-642.
Rubin, D.C., Hinton, S., & Wenzel, A.E. (1999). The
precise time course of forgetting Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 25, 1161-1176.
Runquist, W. (1983). Some effects of remembering on
forgetting. Memory and Cognition, 11, 641-650.
Runquist, W. (1986). The effect of testing on the forgetting
of related and unrelated associates. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 40, 65-76.
Runquist, W. (1987) Retrieval Specificity and the
attenuation of forgetting by testing. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 41, 84-90.
Schmidt, H. G., Peck, V. H., Paas, F., & van Breukelen, G.
J. P. (2000). Remembering the street names of ones
childhood neighborhood: A study of very long term
retention. Memory, 8, 37-49.
Sloman, S.A., Hayman,C.A.G. ,Ohta, N., Law, J., &
Tulving, E. (1988). Forgetting in Primed Fragment
Completion. Journal of Experimental Psychology;
Learning Memory and Cognition, 14, 223-239.
Shiffrin, R. M., Lee, M. D., Kim, W., & Wagenmakers, E.J. (2008). A survey of model evaluation approaches with
a tutorial on hierarchical Bayesian methods. Cognitive
Science, 32, 1248-1284.
Smith, S. M., & Vella, E. (2001). Environmental contextdependent memory: A review and meta-analysis.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 203-220.
Squire, L. R. (1994). Declarative and nondeclarative
memory: Multiple brain systems supporting learning
and memory. In D. L. Schacter & E. Tulving (Eds.),
Memory Systems 1994 (pp. 203–231). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Squire, L. R. (1989). On the course of forgetting in very
long term retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory and Cognition, 15, 241-245.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D.M. (1973). Encoding specificity
and retrieval processes in episodic memory.
Psychological Review, 80, 352-373.
Wilson, D. E. & Horton, K. D. (2002). Comparing
techniques for estimating automatic retrieval: Effects of
retention interval. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
566-574.
Wixted, J. T. (2004 a). On common ground: Jost’s (1897)
law of forgetting and Ribots’s (1881) law of retrograde
amnesia. Psychological Review, 111, 864-879.
Wixted, J. T. (2004 b) The psychology and neuroscience of
forgetting. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 235-269.
Zeelenberg, R., Pecher, D., Shiffrin, R.M., & Raaijmakers,
J.G.W. (2003). Semantic context effects and priming in
word association. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 10,
653-660.

1281

