UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mental States Inside Out.
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/28b9585v
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Fischer, Agneta
Oosterwijk, Suzanne
Pecher, Diane
et al.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                                      Mental States Inside Out.
                                              Suzanne Oosterwijk
                                              University of Amsterdam
                                               Piotr Winkielman
                                         University of California, San Diego
                                                  Diane Pecher
                                                 Erasmus University
                                                René Zeelenberg
                                                 Erasmus University
                                                 Mark Rotteveel
                                              University of Amsterdam
                                                 Agneta Fischer
                                              University of Amsterdam
Abstract: Mental states, such as thinking and remembering or feeling angry, happy, or dizzy, have a clear internal
component. Barsalou (1999) proposes that introspective experiences are simulated when people understand concep-
tual references to these mental states. However, mental states can also be described from an external perspective,
in which not an inner experience, but an external expression or action may be simulated. In a paradigm based on
the property verification task, we presented sentences describing mental states (i.e. emotional, visceral and cognitive
states) and contrasted sentences with an internal or external focus. Results show that switching costs occur when
participants shift between sentences with an internal and external focus, suggesting that different forms of simula-
tion underlie understanding these sentences. In addition, these findings also imply that references to very different
categories of mental states are grounded in a similar way; through the process of simulation.
                                                         2028

