UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Cued Recall and Memory Illusions as a Result of Structure Mapping

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7wj6x04h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kokinov, Boicho
Petkov, Georgi

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Cued Recall and Memory Illusions as a Result of Structure Mapping
Georgi Petkov (gpetkov@cogs.nbu.bg)
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology
New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo Str., Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
A model of cued recall is proposed. Its basic assumption is
that processes of structural mapping and analogical transfer
lie at the core of human cognition. Recall is viewed as a result
of construction of a new episode, analogical to the old
episode. The response items emerge from dynamic creation
and competition of various hypotheses about what has
happened. Thus, some psychological data about constructive
nature of human memory are explained as resulting from
constraints that are natural for the process of analogical
mapping. Several simulations tested the model from different
aspects. Finally, the role of connectedness of the episodes for
the quality of their recall is explored in more details.
Keywords: Constructive memory; Analogy-making; Memory
illusions; Cognitive modeling.

Introduction
During the last several decades experimental data have been
accumulated in support of the phenomena of false, illusory
memories (Bartlett, 1932, Deese, 1959, Loftus 1977, 1979,
2003, Roediger & McDermott, 1995, Schacter, 1995, 1999,
Kokinov & Hirst, 2003). Ulrich Neisser (1967) proposed the
constructive approach to human memory by analogy with
the constructive approach to perception which was based on
the phenomena of visual illusions. According to Neisser,
recall is an active process of interpreting old memory traces,
just as vision is viewed as an active process of interpreting
visual information. Thus, recall includes a process of
constructing and testing hypotheses about past events on the
basis of various constraints and contextual information.
The problem is that there are very few computational
models that account for illusory memories. The CHARM
model (Metcalfe, 1990), the TODAM2 model (Murdock,
1995), and the Complementary Learning Systems (CLS)
model (McClelland et al. 1995) are able to simulate the
phenomena of blending of two similar episodes. However,
all these models use in one way or another feature vector
representations and are not sensitive to the structure of the
episode. That is why they cannot account for the
psychological data on blending of dissimilar episodes
(Kokinov & Zareva, 2001) based on their structural
similarity with a third episode.
Tulving (Tulving, & Watkins, 1973, Tulving, 1982)
suggested that recall and recognition are processes of
memory construction combining information from the
encoded traces and the current environment (cues,
questions, etc.). Kintsch (1988) working on text

comprehension suggested similarly that information from
memory and inferred elements are combined with the input
while building the internal representation of the text.
Following these traditions we have developed a model that
postulates that the specific mechanism for the constructive
process of memory is analogy-making (Kokinov, 1998;
Kokinov & Petrov, 2001).
People usually think of analogy-making (Gentner, 1983,
Falkenhainer et al., 1989, Hummel & Holyoak, 1997) as a
slow, deliberated process of comparing structures from two
domains. However, we assume that the basic mechanisms of
analogy-making (such as structural mapping and transfer)
may be very fast, unconscious, and parallel. Hofstadter and
his colleges (Hofstadter, 1984, 1995, 2001) assume that
analogical thinking lies at the core of human cognition and
proposed several models of high-level vision, based on
analogy-making. The DUAL architecture (Kokinov, 1994a)
and the AMBR model (Kokinov, 1994b, Kokinov & Petrov,
2001) propose fast, parallel mechanisms of retrieval and
mapping. Thus, analogy-making seems a promising basis
for modeling various cognitive processes. The current
model of memory recall is based on the DUAL architecture,
inherits its mechanisms and provides few new ones, and is
integrated with the other DUAL-based models like the
AMBR model for high-level analogy making (Kokinov, &
Petrov, 2001), the JUDGEMAP model for judgment on a
scale (Petkov, 2006), and the RecMap model for visual
recognition (Petkov, Shahbazyan, 2007).
This paper describes an attempt to further extend a model
of memory that was capable of question answering and
which simulated and predicted the dissimilar episode
blending phenomenon (Grinberg & Kokinov, 2003). The
problem with this model was that it required a detailed
structural description of a specific question (e.g. “Where did
the coffee cup break down”) and thus could not be used
directly in simulation of a typical memory task such as
“Please, recall the elements of the list of words that you
studied two days ago in the lab”. This more general type of
recall is less structured and we do not know in advance how
many and what kind of elements we are looking for. We are
trying to overcome this limitation in the current paper. We
first briefly describe the mechanisms of the model and the
results of several simulations and then compare them with
psychological data obtained earlier (Kokinov, Petkov,
Petrova, 2007).

863

The Model of Cued Recall
According to the current model the process of recall is a
process of constructing a new ‘episode’ (the ‘episode’ of the
current situation of recall), which is as similar as possible to
a past episode that is referred to in the request for recall.
Since recall is “constructing a new episode” the result could
well be an episode that never happened. Thus the
constructive nature of memory naturally falls out of this
main assumption. In addition, since episodes are represented
in DUAL as decentralized coalitions of agents and the
agents are the building blocks of construction, it becomes
quite natural and possible to use the “wrong blocks” and
thus construct an episode with elements originating from
various old episodes and thus blend them. However, the
model is sensitive to the structure of the episodes, thus there
are relatively small number of wrong recalls.
The main assumption of the model is that the process of
constructing of this new episode can be basically viewed as
a process of analogy-making. The representation of the
question is a ‘target’; some mappings between the target and
various distributed memory traces emerge; these mappings
cause some transfers; and some of the transferred elements
are hypothesized as possible recalls. Various structural
constraints serve as justification for excitatory or inhibitory
links among hypotheses and a constraint satisfaction
network emerges. In this way the initially generate elements
based on activation and the associations with the target, are
then organized into a coherent structure by the structural
constraints of analogy-making. Thus the model combines
associative and structural constraints in modeling recall by
constructing and testing hypotheses about past events.

Representation of the Target
Following the principles of the DUAL architecture memory
is distributed and various pieces of information are
interconnected into coalitions. Long-term memory (LTM)
consists of a huge number of interconnected DUAL-agents
without clear boundaries between episodes and between
semantic and episodic knowledge. Each agent stands for
very small piece of information (object, concept, relation,
hypothesis, or a binding-node) and even relatively simple
events are represented with large coalitions of agents.

empty-node
situation-t
link-of-interest: subc
(binding-node)
item-of-interest: ‘fish’

fish-t

Figure 1. Representation of the target “List fish examples”.
Consider the following instruction “Recall as much as
possible different types of fishes”. The target representation
(Figure 1) involves a special “empty-node” together with a
single new exemplar of a fish (fish-t), and a binding node
for the current situation (situation-t). The role of the emptynode is to be mapped to various candidates for possible
answers. All these mappings will be considered as

hypotheses but only the winner hypotheses will be actually
reported by the model. The empty-node keeps two
additional pieces of information. The first one is the type of
the important link – ‘sub-class’. This means that the
question is for subclasses of fishes, not for parts or
properties of fishes1. The second additional piece of
information is, of course, the concept ‘fish’.
The exemplar of a fish, represented in a target serves an
implementational purpose, not a conceptual one. The
analogy should start from somewhere. The agent ‘fish-t’
will launch the first mappings, which in turn will be
followed with transfers and more mappings.
Another agent in the representation of the target is the
binding node, which brings together the elements of the
current situation and makes it possible the system to recall
later this situation “I recalled fishes”. There are links from
the other agents to it, but there are only few opposite links.
The knowledge base is organized following the predicate
structures of the items. For example, if the knowledge
“fishes have gills” should be represented, the nodes for
“fishes” and “gills” should be connected with a node for
“have”. All predefined links – links between relations and
their arguments, links from sub-classes to their superclasses, etc – have constant weights.

Spreading of activation
The relevance of each agent to the current context is
represented with a real number - its activation level. The
activation originates from the representations of the
environment ant the goals of the system. It spreads among
the network and the pattern of activation continuously
reflects the changes of the context. The agents, which
activation level exceeds a certain threshold, form the
Working Memory (WM) (Cowan, 1999). Only the agents
from the WM can perform some work and in addition, the
more relevant a certain agent is, the faster it works.
Thus, the representation of the target is attached to a
source of activation that spreads to some related concepts
like animal, mammal, bird; also many concrete instances of
animals; some concrete old situations with animals (for
example, a zoo that my daughter and I visited last week).
Together with the new situations some items very different
from fishes can also be activated (for example, the icecream we eat with my daughter). However, because of a
decay parameter in spreading activation mechanism, the
volume of WM will stay relatively small.

Mapping and transfer
Each instance-agent that enters the WM emits a marker that
spreads upwards to the class hierarchy with a speed,
proportional to its activation level. When a marker from the
target situation crosses a marker from the LTM, a
1
In the simulations the model was tested with questions of the
type “Recall as much as possible objects from the picture we
showed you yesterday”. Here the model looks for a concrete
episode and the important link type is ‘element-of’.

864

hypothesis for correspondence between the two marker
origins emerges. Then the transfer mechanism starts to copy
the relations, in which the corresponding elements are
involved. For example, suppose that the first memorized
fish is one from the zoo that we have visited last week. The
relations of this fish, together with their arguments, like the
fishes from the neighbor aquarium; the next animals we
have seen, etc, will be transferred to the current situation.
(Note, most of these transferred elements will live a short
time, but some of them possibly can become permanent and
even after a week, I can remember something like this:
“When I called to my mind the zoo from the previous day, I
remembered for the ice-cream we eat”. The situation of
visiting the zoo and the situation of remembering it are
related but different).
Thus, a huge number of various related to each other
memory traces become transferred in the current situation.
Note, however, that this transfer is not un-limited. The main
constraints for the transfer are two: a threshold for the
activation level of the candidate (higher than the threshold
for entering in the WM), and the structural connections of
the candidate with the already mapped and transferred
elements. Most of the isolated elements, which are not
related with any relevant items, would be not transferred.

Hypotheses for recognition
For each transferred element, it should be considered
whether this element is a reasonable candidate for an
answer. If the system decides that the candidate can pass
this filter, a hypothesis for recognition2 between the
candidate and the empty-node is created.
Following the principle for maximal flexibility the model
assumes that rejections, instead of confirmations should be
proved. For example, suppose that a certain ‘dolphin’ has
been transferred to the target for recalling fishes. Instead of
searching a direct sub-class link from the dolphin to ‘fish’,
the system searches for direct reasons to reject the
candidate. Such a reason can be a path between ‘dolphin’
and ‘fish’ through the class hierarchy, which path involves
more abstract concepts. For example, ‘dolphin’ is
‘mammal’; ‘mammal’ is ‘animal’; ‘fish’ is also ‘animal’.
This means that ‘dolphin’ cannot be a ‘fish’! However,
sometimes it may happen that some elements from this path
do not enter the WM, or enter it too late. Suppose that the
link from ‘dolphin’ to ‘mammal’ is too weak. In this case it
is possible ‘dolphin’ to pass the filter for creation of
hypotheses for recognition. However, this happens rarely.
Actually, it is a trade-off between the constraints enforced
by the various mechanisms. If the link from ‘dolphin’ to
‘mammal’ is too weak, then why was the dolphin
transferred? One possible answer is: because there are many
relations, which are relevant to the fishes, and that involve
dolphin – it swims, it lives in the ocean, it has fins, etc. Only
2

The name ‘hypothesis for recognition’ is inherited from the
RecMap model for visual recognition (Petkov, Shahbazyan, 2007).
The two models share the same basic principles and mechanisms.

the united pressure of many such relations can become
sufficient to pass the filter of mapping and transfer.

Constraint satisfaction
So, various transferred items become hypothesized as
reasonable answers. It is time the next filter – the filter for
enough support and time – to play its role via the constraint
satisfaction mechanism.
Two hypotheses support each other if their respective
arguments are instances (or, respectively, parts) of one and
the same agent. If there is a direct relation between two
hypothesis’s arguments, then an excitatory link between the
respective two hypotheses is created. An inhibitory link
between two hypotheses is created when their respective
elements are mapped to one and the same item.
In this way, dynamically, many excitatory and inhibitory
connections between hypotheses emerge. The hypotheses
compete with each other and when a certain one wins
against its competitors, the following happen: (1) the model
reports the respective item as an answer; (2) the hypothesis
for recognition is replaced by a direct inst-of or part-of link
from the respective item to the empty-node; (3) the
respective hypothesis is excluded from competition. Thus,
further on the hypothesis for the next promising item would
win and so on. The system has a fixed time for its work.
When the time is over, the collection of all winners is
interpreted as an answer of the system.

Experimental Simulations
Three series of simulations were performed in order to test
various aspects of the model. The first series tested whether
the model is scalable. Both the volume of the episode of
interest and the volume of the irrelevant part of the LTM are
varied. The second simulation concentrates on the
associative constraints, whereas the third one explores the
structural ones. In fact, the third series of simulations
explores the role of connectedness of the episodes for their
recall and is a replication of a particular psychological
experiment. Kokinov, Petkov, and Petrova (2007) presented
the participants with series of pictures for memorizing the
objects on them. Each of the series involved 12 pictures, and
each of the pictures involved 3 objects. However, each
object participated in three pictures and thus, the overall
number of objects for each series was also 12. The first
picture consisted of objects 1, 2, and 3. The second picture
involved objects 2, 3, and 4, and so on. Finally, everything
was turned as a circle – the 11th one involved objects 11, 12,
and 1; the 12th picture involved objects 12, 1, and 2. Two
different groups of people participated in two different
conditions. In the ‘weakly connected’ condition, there were
simply three unrelated objects on each picture, whereas in
the ‘strongly related’ condition the objects were related in a
meaningful but non-prototypical way3. After some time the
3

For example, a fire causes a cork of a bottle to launch out (first
picture); the bottle is opened and the cork falls down on a chef’s
hat (second picture), and so on.

865

authors gave to the participants a task for cued recall and
found out that in the ‘strongly related’ condition people
recall more correct items and produce less false memories.
All of the simulations were organized around a particular
one (called ‘connected 12’ simulation). It was a
representation of the ‘strongly connected’ task, given by
Kokinov et al. to the participants. The knowledge base
consisted of DUAL-agents that represented two series of 12
pictures and 12 objects in each series, organized in the same
manner as in the psychological experiment. The LTM
involved also separate concepts for each object. Assuming
that the objects were very different, there was no single
taxonomy among concepts but there were randomly chosen
associative links. The knowledge base involved also some
other examples of the concepts, related or not to some other
elements (instances of other concepts), which potentially
can be falsely reported by the system. Associative links
were placed randomly among all instances.
The target was represented by an empty-node, the ‘cue’, a
binding-node, and two more agents (‘computer’ and
‘experiment’) that represented the context of psychological
experiment.
Thus, the first version of the knowledge base was the
following one:
(1) ‘Connected 12’ base: The agents from each
picture are connected to each other with explicitly
represented relations. Thus additional relations are created
that connect respectively object 1 with object 2; object 2
with object 3, and so on; object 12 with object 1. All
relations are instances of different concepts that are linked
associatively but not taxonomically to each other.
The simulation was run 25 times, varying randomly the
associative links and the opposite links (from concepts to
some of their instances), thus simulating 25 different
participants. The aggregated results from all simulations,
together with the results from the psychological experiment
are summarized in Table 1.

Simulation 1: Small and Large Memories
Two variants of the main base (1) were created to test the
scalability of the model.
(2)
‘Single connected 12’ base: There was only one
single picture with 12 interconnected objects. Actually, this
base can be seen as a representation of the simplest memory
task of memorizing list of words.
(3)
‘Large 12 connected’ base: The (1) base is
enlarged by adding three times more elements – for each
instance in base (1), which is not a part of any picture (i.e.,
its reporting will be considered as a memory intrusion), two
more examples of the same concept are added.

Simulation 2: Far and Close Episodes
The base episode was modified in the following way:
(4) ‘Zoo park’ base: The first base is replicated but
some of the objects are replaced with instances of animals.
Each series again consists of 12 pictures; each picture again
consists of 3 objects; and each object again participates in

three pictures, following the schema from (1). The
difference is that six objects from the first series and six
objects from the second series are replaced with animals.
The animals participate in taxonomy and thus more
activation would flow among them and more hypotheses for
correspondence among different animals would emerge. In
addition, some of the possible intruders (other instances of
animals) are organized as a single episode – visiting a zoo.
The purpose of this simulation was to test the pure
associative mechanisms, as well the role of various
additional hypotheses for correspondence that emerge on the
basis of the taxonomy of the animals.

Simulation 3: Connectedness of Episodes
A replication of the ‘weak’ condition of the experiment of
Kokinov et al. (2007) was designed.
(5) ‘Non connected 12’ base: It is the same as the first
one (1), without the relations among the items.

Results and Discussion
The results of all simulations, together with the results from
the psychological experiment were summarized in Table 1.
Table 1: Mean number of the real, blended, and
constructed elements (up to 12) from the simulations,
together with the experimental data (Kokinov, et al., 2007).
real blend constr.
6.56
0.18
PsyExp strong connected
4.65
0.49
PsyExp weak connected
6.47 3.26
0.53
(1) Connected 12
7.68
1.32
(2) Single connected 12
6.12 3.94
0.65
(3) Large 12 connected
0.506
6.704 4.455
(4) Episode Zoo park
2.24 0.96
1.06
(5) Non connected 12
Some of the simulations confirmed our expectations;
some failed; and some provoked additional questions.
Comparing the results from simulation (1) to the results
from simulations (2) and (3), we can conclude that the
model produces false memories (like people do) and their
relative number is not unrealistic huge; often blends two
episodes; and is scalable (the performance do not degrade
significantly with larger knowledge bases and larger
episodes). When either of the episodes to recall or the
irrelevant part of LTM increases, the percentage of the
correct responses decreases and the amount of the
constructed or blended items increases. However, these
changes stay within reasonable limits because of the natural
constraints on spreading activation mechanism which do not
allow for drastic increase in the volume of WM.
Independently of the number of the possible intruders the
number of correct responses was about 6-7 items, whereas

4

Respectively 3.30 animals and 3.10 other elements.
Respectively 2.50 animals and 1.95 other elements.
6
Respectively 0.10 animals and 0.40 other elements.
5

866

the number of intruders never exceeded 5 items. Of course,
the scalability of the model should be additionally tested.
The main result from the second simulation is also not
surprising. If there are two similar bases both the correct and
blended items increase a bit. This is because of the stronger
associations between the episodes.
When we look closer into the details, however, something
strange appears. We compared the number of real, blended,
and constructed elements that were animals versus the
respective real, blended, and constructed non-animals (see
the footnotes bellow the table). The difference between the
correctly responded animals and non-animals was smaller
than we expected; whereas the same difference about
constructed (but not blended) items was in a direction,
opposite to our expectation. The reason was the following.
In the model there are two forces that sometimes work in
opposite directions. On one hand, the spreading of
activation makes the close associations of items for recall
more plausible candidates for memory intruders. On the
other hand, the natural for analogy-making constraint for
one-to-one mapping causes the hypotheses for recognition,
which involve mapped elements, to inhibit each other. For
example, if a transferred ‘rabbit’ and a transferred ‘elephant’
are hypothesized as possible answers, it is highly probable
that the two hypotheses will inhibit each other because the
respective ‘rabbit’ and ‘elephant’ would be mapped to
certain single mammal from the base.
It is difficult to distinguish the strength of an association
between two items from the strength of their structural
relatedness because they usually correlate. However, the
property of the model to combine associative spreading of
activation with the structurally constrained hypotheses
creation can potentially produce novel predictions and can
be used for further testing of the model.
The final, third simulation compared the results from
strongly connected and weakly connected episodes. It
successfully accounted for one part of the psychological
data and failed to account for another part.
Just like the pattern of the psychological data, the model
responded more correct items in the strongly connected
episode case and produced more intruders in the weakly
connected episode case. Thus, the model can be used for a
possible explanation of the psychological data - both the
associative and the structural mechanisms predict this result.
The relations among the items increase the activation level
of the correct elements and give them an advantage. On the
other hand, these relations cause creation of direct excitatory
links among the hypotheses for recognition that involve
elements from the same base, and inhibitory with the rest.
The model, however, failed about the blended memories,
i.e. the ones that come from the episode that shared the same
context to the episode of interest. The reasons for this
failure, from our point of view, are two. First, the
representation of the episodes in the model is very poor.
Actually, the episode that we call ‘weakly connected’ was
represented as not connected at all. Probably people encode
some spatial and semantic relations among items from the

same picture. The second possible reason for the failure of
the model was the implausible representation of the target.
The ‘cue’, represented as the target, actually served
associative purposes only and launched the first mappings
only. As a result, the model produced an unrealistically high
number of blended responses, more than people do.
From a certain point of view the two reasons are
equivalent (or at least analogical). Both they are related to
the poor representation of the relations among items either
in the bases or in the target.

Conclusions
A new approach to modeling memory retrieval and illusory
memories is proposed, namely, it is a result of the
mechanisms that are basic for analogy-making. Thus, the
process of cued recall is viewed as a process of active
creation and competition of hypotheses about the past.
The associative mechanisms, typically used for modeling
memory recall are integrated with structural ones. The role
of the relations among the elements is emphasized.
The computational model is developed on the basis of this
approach. The model does not exist in isolation but is
integrated with models of seeming very different cognitive
processes like analogy-making, judgment, and visual
recognition and the same basic mechanisms underlie all
models and thus some results emerge from mechanisms,
designed for completely different purposes.
The ability of the model to recall episodic information
was tested from different points of view via series of
simulations. The scalability of the model was demonstrated.
The results from semantically close or far bases are
compared and analyzed. In this way novel questions emerge
and new issues for investigation are opened.
The integration of associative and structural mechanisms
makes the model capable of simulating the empirical data
on blending of structurally similar but superficially
dissimilar episodes. These results cannot be accounted for
by pure associative models (Murdock, 1995, McClelland,
McNaughton, & O’Reilly, 1995).
The role of connectedness of the episodes was explored in
more details. The pattern of simulation results was
compared to empirical data and in this way the model
proposed possible explanations of the data from the
psychological experiments.
We view the model as a first step in a large project for
modeling various memory processes. Thus, some failures
and weaknesses of the model were found in the simulations
and were analyzed. In particular, the poor representation of
the relations among elements from a certain episode
produced extremely high number of blended items. This is
going to be fixed by introducing more detailed
representations of the episodes.
However, the approach, proposed seems promising and its
further development may contribute to the understanding of
the process of cued recall, as well as some seemingly
different and unrelated cognitive processes.

867

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Project ANALOGY: Humans
– the Analogy-Making Species, funded by the FP6 NEST
Programme of the EC (Contr. No 029088).

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1932) Remembering: A Study in
Experimental and Social Psychology. Cambridge
University Press
Cowan, N. (1999). An embedded-processes model of
working memory. In A. Miyake & P. Shah (Eds.): Models
of working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance
and executive control. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press., 62-101
Deese, J. (1959) On the prediction of occurrence of
particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 58: 17–22.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. & Gentner, D. (1989). The
Structure-Mapping Engine. Artif. Intelligence, 41, 1-63
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure–mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Grinberg, M., Kokinov, B. (2003). Simulation of Episode
Blending in the AMBR Model. In: Proceedings of the 4th
European Cognitive Science Conference. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ.
Hofstadter, D. R. (1984). The Copycat project: An
experiment in nondeterminism and creative analogies. AI
Memo 755, Cambridge, MA: MIT Artif. Intelligence Lab.
Hofstadter, D. & the FARG (1995). Fluid concepts and
creative analogies. New York: Basic Books
Hofstadter, D. (2001). Analogy as the Core of Cognition. In:
Holyoak, at al. (eds.) The Analogical Mind: Perspectives
from Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hummel, J., & Holyoak, K. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427–466.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: A construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95(2), pp. 163-182
Kokinov, B. (1994a). The DUAL cognitive architecture: A
hybrid multi-agent approach. In A. Cohn (Ed.),
Proceedings of the Eleventh European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. London: John Wiley & Sons
Kokinov, B. (1994b). A Hybrid Model of Reasoning by
Analogy. In: K. Holyoak & J. Barnden (eds.) Analogical
Connections, Advances in Connectionist and Neural
Computation Theory, vol.2, Ablex Publ. Corp.
Kokinov, B. (1998). Analogy is like Cognition: Dynamic,
Emergent, and Context-Sensitive. In: Holyoak, K.,
Gentner, D., Kokinov, B. (eds.) – Advances in Analogy
Research. Sofia: NBU Press, pp. 96-105
Kokinov, B., & Petrov, A. (2001). Integration of Memory
and Reasoning in Analogy-Making: The AMBR Model.
In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Kokinov, B., Zareva, N. (2001). Episode Blending as Result
of Analogical Problem Solving. In: Proceedings of the
23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Kokinov, B., Petkov, G., Petrova, N. (2007) ContextSensitivity of Human Memory: Episode Connectivity and
its Influence on Memory Reconstruction. In Kokinov, B.,
Richardson, D, Roth-Berghofer, Th., Vieu, L. (Eds):
CONTEXT 2007, LNAI 4635, Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg, pp. 317 – 329
Kokinov, B., Hirst, W., eds. (2003). Constructive Memory.
Sofia: NBU Press.
Loftus, E. (1977). Shifting human color memory. Memory
and Cognition, 5, 696-699.
Loftus, E. (1979). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Loftus, E. (2003) Our changeable memories: Legal and
practical implications. Nature Rev Neuroscience 4(3).
McClelland, J.L., McNaughton, B.L., & O’Reilly, R. C.
(1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in
the hyppocampus and neocortex. Psych. Review, 102.
Metcalfe, J. (1990). Composite holographic associative
recall model (CHARM) and blended memories in
eyewitness testimony. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 119, 145-160.
Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1995). Developing TODAM: three
models for serial-order information. Memory &
Cognition, 23, 631-645.
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. New York:
Appleton Century Crofts.
Petkov, G. (2006). JUDGEMAP – Integration of AnalogyMaking, Judgment, and Choice. In Proceedings of the 28
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Vancouver, 2006, pp. 1950-1955.
Petkov, G, Shahbazyan, L. (2007) Modeling Active
Recognition as a Result of Analogical Mapping and
Transfer. In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.):
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science
Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, p. 1837
Roediger & McDermott (1995) Creating false memories:
Remembering words not presented in lists. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition 21(4): 803–814.
Schacter, Daniel L. (ed.) (1995). Memory distortion: how
minds, brains, and societies reconstruct the past.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schacter, Daniel L. (1999). The seven sins of memory:
insights from psychology and cognitive neuroscience.
American Psychologist 54, 182-203.
Tulving, E. & Watkins, M. (1973). Continuity between
Recall and Recognition. The American Journal of
Psychology, Vol. 86, No. 4, pp. 739-748
Tulving, E. (1982). Synergistic Ecphory in Recall and
Recognition. Canadian J. of Psych., 36(2), pp. 130-147

868

