UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Models and Analogies in Conceptual Restructuring

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2zv5j5x2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Arabatzis, Theodore
Clement, John
Gentner, Dedre
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Models and Analogies in Conceptual Restructuring
Moderator: Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University, Department of Psychology
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208

Participants:
Theodore Arabatzis (tarabatz@phs.uoa.gr) and Despina Ioannidou
Department of Philosophy and History of Science
University of Athens

Nancy J. Nersessian (nancyn@cc.gatech.edu)
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0280

Stella Vosniadou (svosniad@phs.uoa.gr) and Irini Skopeliti (eskopel@phs.uoa.gr)
Department of Philosophy and History of Science
University of Athens

John J. Clement (clement@educ.umass.edu)
School of Education and Scientific Reasoning Research Institute
University of Massachusetts at Amherst
The purpose of this symposium is to bring together recent work
on the role of analogies and models in conceptual restructuring from
cognitive scientists representing different disciplines and examining
similar phenomena from diverse perspectives. Theodore Arabatzis
and Despina Ioannidou approach the topic from a philosophy and
history of science perspective. Their contribution focuses on the
analysis of the ways in which the planetary model mediated the
conceptual transformation of J. J. Thomson’s ‘plum-pudding’ model
of the atom and transformed the concept of the electron. Cognitive
analyses of conceptual changes in the history of science are rare but
particularly important from a cognitive science point of view
because they provide an opportunity to understand very complex
kinds of conceptual processes over long periods of time that are
difficult if not impossible to study in the laboratory. Nancy
Nersessian is using cognitive-historical ethnographic methods to
study how engineering scientists create in vitro models of the
phenomena they want to study and manipulate them in order to
understand them. As she explains, engineering science is
fundamentally analogical practice since simulation models are
analogue representations of the entities and processes under study.
Stella Vosniadou and Irini Skopeliti approach the topic from a
cognitive developmental point of view. They are interested in
finding out whether elementary school children can understand
analogies and models and can use them to restructure existing
knowledge in the process of learning science. John Clement
approaches the topic mostly from a science education point of view.
He has studied the role of models and analogies in promoting the
understanding of science concepts for a very long period of time and
has developed an integrating framework that identifies several roles
for analogies and explicates the kinds of conceptual changes they
promote. The moderator of this symposium is Dedre Gentner who is
internationally known for her pioneering work on analogy.

Theodore Arabatzis and Despina Ioannidou
The mediating role of models in conceptual transitions:
how the electron became a quantum entity
The extensive philosophical literature on models has focused on their
role as mediators between theories and their empirical domains.
With a few notable exceptions (e.g. Morgan & Morrison, 1999;
Nersessian, 2008), their role in effecting conceptual change has not
been explored. In this paper we discuss this particular function of
models via a case study: the transition from a classical to a quantum
theory of atomic structure (or, equivalently, from a classical to a
quantum concept of the electron). In that transition the model of the
atom as a planetary system (or, equivalently, of the electron as a
planet) was rather crucial. In 1911 Ernest Rutherford abandoned the
"plum-pudding" model of the atom, which had been developed by
his mentor J. J. Thomson, in favor of a planetary model. The latter
was suggested by experiments on the scattering of alpha-particles,
which indicated that the mass of the atom is concentrated near its
center. Despite its empirical grounding, however, the planetary
model gave rise to severe conceptual and empirical difficulties. If the
atom were structured as a miniature planetary system, it would have
to be mechanically unstable. Furthermore, it would have to
continuously emit radiation, until its eventual collapse. In response to
those difficulties, Niels Bohr modified the planetary model,
incorporating assumptions from the fledgling quantum theory and
transforming in the process the concept of the electron. Thus, the
planetary model functioned as a mediator between two successive
versions of the concept of the electron. (Arabatzis, 2006). The focus
of our analysis will be the heuristic and constraining function of that
model in that conceptual transformation.

43

general, the children who were able to understand the analogies were
also able to use them to restructure their physical explanations.

Nancy J. Nersessian
Engineering Analogies

Acknowledgment
This work is supported by the project ANALOGY: Human-The
Analogy Making Species, financed by the FP6 NEST Program of
the European Commission. (STREP Contr. 029088).

Engineering scientists are a breed of engineer – often
interdisciplinary – whose research aims to make fundamental
contributions to basic science as well to create novel engineering
artifacts and technologies. Practical or ethical considerations require
that most often they investigate real-world phenomena through
simulation models – physical or computational. That is, rather than
devising ways of engaging the in vivo phenomena under
investigation, they “engineer” selective, surrogate in vitro models of
the phenomena and draw inferences about the phenomena by means
of manipulating these. Such engineering science is a fundamentally
analogical practice in that experimentation is by means of simulation
models that are analogue representations of entities and processes
under investigation. I draw on examples of such analogies as they
have led to conceptual innovation and change in two engineering
research laboratories – tissue engineering and neural engineering –
on which we have been conducting cognitive-historical ethnographic
research for several years. I investigate both dimensions of their
practices of engineering analogies that in some instances lead to
conceptual change: the nature of their analogies and how these are
used by the engineers and the processes of designing and
constructing their analogue models.

John J. Clement
Roles for Analogies in Model-Based Conceptual Change
How can individuals learn new concepts that are very different from
their present conceptual systems, especially in the face of persistent
misconceptions? I review different learning strategies aiming to
promote conceptual change in explanatory models in science, such
as those using discrepant events (anomalies) and those using
analogies. This can be seen as setting up a contrast between
dissonance producing and constructive strategies. Others have
argued that an approach combining these is often needed that also
uses multiple cycles of model evaluation and revision.
As one direction for extension of this work, we recently identified
four different roles for analogies used by experts solving explanation
problems, suggesting that analogies may have more varied purposes
than commonly recognized. Some of these appear to utilize imagery
(Clement, 2008a, 2008b). This work on examining the finer grained
level of strategies promoting “smaller” learning processes, such as
analogies, can be complemented by reviewing major types of
conceptual change identified in the literature--“larger” processes at a
more coarse grained level (Thagard, 1992). An integrating
framework is suggested by arguing that the several identified roles
for analogies can be mapped as learning strategies to the types of
large scale conceptual change they promote. This suggests that
mapping the relations between specific learning strategies and larger
conceptual change processes is an important future research agenda.

Stella Vosniadou and Irini Skopeliti
The role of analogies and models in children’s
comprehension of counter-intuitive science text
Learning science requires children to radically restructure their naïve
explanations of physical phenomena (Vosniadou, 2008). Are
children successful in engaging in such restructuring processes and
what role can models and analogies play? For sometime now we
have been investigating elementary school children’s
comprehension of counter-intuitive science text with and without the
use of verbal analogies and/or dynamic visual models. Our results
show that children fail to understand even the most fundamental
ideas in counter-intuitive science texts. In addition, they generate
erroneous inferences which reveal intrusions from prior knowledge
and are similar in many respects to misconceptions, or synthetic
conceptions, revealed in cross-sectional and longitudinal
developmental studies.
We hypothesized that analogies would have the potential to help
in the restructuring process because they draw upon children’s
existing knowledge from a different but familiar domain to facilitate
the understanding of a new and unfamiliar explanation. We also
hypothesized that the presence of a dynamic visual model would
facilitate the comprehension of the scientific explanation not because
it draws on familiar past knowledge but because it can make more
explicit the structure and function of the explanatory mechanism.
Results confirmed both hypotheses showing significant gains for the
analogies and dynamic models groups compared to the controls.
They also showed that the interventions were not equally successful
for all children but had the greatest effect on the children who were
in the transition to understanding the scientific explanation and had
rejected some of the presuppositions of their naïve theories that
constrained their understanding of the scientific explanations. In

References
Arabatzis, T. (2006). Representing Electrons: A Biographical
Approach to Theoretical Entities. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
Clement, J., (2008a) Creative model construction in scientists and
students: The role of imagery, analogy, and mental simulation.
Dordrect: Springer.
Clement, J. (2008b). The role of explanatory models in teaching for
conceptual change. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), International handbook
of research on conceptual change. Amsterdam, Routledge.
Morgan, M. S. and M. Morrison (eds.) (1999). Models as Mediators:
Perspectives on Natural and Social Science. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Nersessian, N. J. (2008). Creating Scientific Concepts. Cambridge,
MA.: The MIT Press.
Thagard, P. (1992). Conceptual revolutions. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton U. Press.
Vosniadou, S., (Ed.) (2008). International Handbook of Research on
Conceptual Change, New York: Routeledge/Taylor & Francis
Group.

44

