UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Participation within a Community

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7711g4rg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Alterman, Richard
Larusson, Johann

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Participation within a Community
Richard Alterman (alterman@cs.brandeis.edu)
Johann Ari Larusson (johann@cs.brandeis.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Center for Complex Systems
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02454 USA
Abstract
What does it mean to be a central participant? An actor can
participate in a single episode of an activity, and she can also
participate within a community. The degree of participation
can be greater or lesser depending on a number of factors. The
primary participants are those that make direct contributions to
an episode of activity. The secondary ones witness the action
but do not make direct contributions. To be a central participant within a community depends on the number, kind, and
ways in which the individual participates in the set of activities
performed by the community. It also depends on the participant’s knowledge of events and episodes that occur within the
community, whether the actor directly participated or not. The
study that is presented provides an analysis of the semesterlong work of students in a co-blogging community.
Keywords: Modeling participation; Discourse Community;
Co-blogging; Activity

Introduction
Within a long standing community, there is a sense that some
participants are more central than others. But what exactly
does that mean? Central participants within an organization
or community are likely to have more knowledge of the inner workings of that organization or community: they know
more of the intersubjective space in which the community operates. This kind of knowledge has value, and is predictive of
performance.
In many cases, learning depends on participation. Being
able to model and measure participation has practical value
for evaluating student work.
In apprenticeship systems, participation has been proposed
as a model of how expertise develops. Learning can be
viewed as a process of becoming a member of a sustained
community of practice (Lave, 1991; Lave & Wenger, 1991;
Hutchins, 1995). On each occasion of participation, there
is a horizon of observation, where one participant can observe another, more seasoned and experienced, participant,
and thereby, learning occurs (Hutchins, 1995). Overtime, by
means of an accumulation of experience through participation, the actor gradually undertakes a more central role, gradually becoming more adept and knowledgeable at participating, partaking, and sharing with others in the action. As the
actor’s level and kind of participation changes she becomes
more knowledgeable and skillful and her identity changes.
Within a classroom experience, participation also plays a
significant role in learning. Those who participate more in
the class learn more than they would otherwise. The various learning activities that the students perform during the

semester depend on participation. For example, reflection begins with experience (Dewey, 1916), which depends on participation. In professional schools, practicums and laboratories students are given the opportunity to participate in activities that are representative of the target community of practice
(Schön, 1987).
What does it mean to be a central participant? An actor
can participate in a single episode of an activity, and she can
also participate within a community. The degree of participation can be greater or lesser depending on a number of
factors. For a single episode of activity, central participation
depends on whether the actions of the individual are critical.
To be a central participant within a community depends on
factors like status, role, and expertise, in addition to the number, kind, and ways in which the individual participates in the
set of activities performed by the community. Being a regular participant makes one a more central participant, as does
having knowledge of events that occurred in which one did
not directly participate.
The study that is presented provides an analysis of the
semester-long co-blogging work of students in an undergraduate class on Internet & Society. We present a model of their
participation, develop some quantitative measures of evaluation, and use them to analyze the online activity of the students. The most active students were especially active, either
as primary or secondary participants, in the critical events in
the blog-o-sphere.

Participation
Participation is fundamentally social: actors participate in social situations.
An actor participates “in”, “with”. An actor participates
“in” an activity, a social situation, a practice, with another actor. The participants partake in the action. The participation
is embedded in a social situation, in a context, in a physical (or virtual) locale, in a community of practice. The participation is “with” other actors, in a cultural history of that
kind of action (Cole & Engeström, 1993; Vygotsky, 1980).
There is a sharing. The “with” is mediated by representations
(Hutchins, 1995). Within a ongoing community, a genre of
speaking, a code, a shorthand for communicating, a syntax,
and a semiotic, emerges (Blom & Gumperz, 1986; Halliday,
1978). The “thing” the participants share during the action
is an experience, an event, an episode, and an intersubjective
space. The participants have status, roles relative to one another, or relative to the situation (Ervin-Tripp, 1964). Within

1680

a social situation the co-participants can be homogeneous or
heterogeneous. The situation may have a “script” (Schank &
Abelson, 1975); it may be convention-based (Lewis, 1969).
Individual and common knowledge of the designs available
for certain kinds of social situations predisposes the actors
to partake in the activity in certain ways (Alterman & Garland, 2001). Acquiring knowledge of these designs depends
on participation.
An actor can participate in a single episode of activity.
Crossing the street at a busy intersection in Manhattan is a
social situation and the pedestrians, cyclists, and drivers are
participants. A public lecture is a social situation. Paying for
groceries at the checkout stand is a social situation. A conversation at the dinner table is a social situation. There are
actors who participate in each of these social situations, who
cooperatively perform and achieve an interdependent set of
tasks and goals.
Actors also participate in ongoing communities. The workplace, the students in a freshman dormitory, the family household, the crew aboard a ship, the regular patrons at the local
bar or coffee shop, are all communities that have actors who
regularly participate. Some of these are communities of practice but not all. To be a “regular” participant in a community
means you are familiar with the genre of communication, you
understand the ongoing narrative (Bruner, 2002), you are familiar with the recurrent activities and the common ways of
“structuring” the interaction, you are a participant in the cultural history of the community of which you are a member
(Wertsch, 1991).

Modeling participation within a community
Suppose there is a set of events and episodes within a community: e1, e2, e3, ... These episodes can overlap one another
in time. Episodes can be composed of other episodes. Any
single episode can be part of the composition of more than
one other episode. The episodes can be rated by their significance. A weekly lab meeting may be a significant episode
because it coordinates the research activities of all the members of the lab, but a division manager fighting with his boss
at the end of year holiday party is a remarkable episode for a
different sort of reason.
There is a relation between being a central participant in a
particular episode of activity, and being a central participant
within a community. The central participant(s) in a single
episode are the most active, their actions are the most critical. An actor’s participation will be central if she is doing
something on the critical path, or if her activity is not easily replaceable. The central actors for a particular episode are
also partially predetermined by factors like status, role, or domain expertise: at a professor’s lab meeting, the professor is
a central participant for all three of these reasons.
During a single episode of activity, there are primary and
secondary participants. The primary participants are those
that make direct contributions to the episode. The secondary
ones witness the action but do not make direct contributions.
At the holiday season party the division head and his boss

are direct participants in the fight, and other party goers who
witness the fight are secondary participants.
Those actors who regularly participate in the most critical
activities are central participants within a community, regardless of their status or role or domain expertise. Central participation also depends on knowledge about those activities regardless of whether one participated or not. Those people “in
the know” are more familiar with the events that occur within
the community. Events can be “known” because one directly
participated (primary), because one witnessed the event (secondary), or because one heard about it (hearsay). An employee, who was not at the end of year party, but heard about
the fight is more of a participant in the community than one
who misses the story entirely.

Co-Blogging
There exists ample evidence that students talking and arguing
about course content positively impacts their learning (Andriessen, 2006). Online co-blogging moves the discussion
outside the confines of the classroom. Students can collaborate asynchronously. They do not have to be in the same
place when they co-blog. In a co-blogging assignment, each
student has her own blog. The blog is composed of multiple
posts written by the blog owner. Blog posts can summarize
the key content of a text that was read for class, or develop
an argument on some issue that was discussed during lecture.
Students can read each other’s blog posts and comment on
them. A discussion emerges when a blog attracts a lot of commentary from other students. Blogging on course material is
a learning activity that invites reflection and self-explanation
and improves learning (Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu, & Lavancher,
1994; Chi & VanLehn, 1991). Reading and commenting on
each other’s blog posts provides students with other interpretations of the course material and the opportunity to discuss
and argue about the content of the readings, which also helps
learning (Andriessen, 2006).

Activity Analysis
For activity theory there are three levels to the analysis: the
activity level (the motive), the action level (a set of goals to
be achieved), and the operation level (how the actions are
achieved) (Engestrom, 2000; Kuutti, 1995). Table 1 shows
an activity analysis of the co-blogging work of the students.
Table 1: Activity analysis.
Level
Activity level
Action level
Operation level

Reflection and online discussion
Blogging, reading, and commenting
Interface actions

At the activity level there are two educational motives. The
blogging itself is a reflective activity. The students have the
opportunity to review, rethink, articulate, and explain in their
own words the course material. By making the reflections

1681

of each student publicly available to the rest of the class,
students have the opportunity to read each other’s thoughts,
interpretations, and explanations, which enables discussion.
Although the instructors can provide commentary on the student blogs, this is by-and-large a venue for the students to
develop their own narrative about the content of the course
and what it means.
At the action level, there are three kinds of actions in which
the students engage. Students can write a blog post, read another student’s blog, or comment on a blog post. During some
sessions of activity, the students are blogging, their explicit
purpose is to write one or more blog posts. During other sessions, students browse the blog-o-sphere, they do not write
a post, rather they read other students’ posts and make comments.
At the operation level, each student physically interacts
with the co-blogging environment. The operations they perform are composed of a set of interface actions.

Participating in the blog-o-sphere community
The students are “with” one another, “in” the blog-o-sphere.
The blog-o-sphere is an ongoing social situation. The students are participants in an online community. The style of
communication is composed of blogs and comments on blog
posts. The students share their reflections and their discussion of each other’s posts. The students can assume different
roles at different times: they can be a blogger, a discussant, or
a reader. There is a design to the activity among the students.
At the operational level their activity is structured by a set of
predefined interface actions.
Suppose Hector writes and blog post, and Alice, Beatrix, and Carli all contribute comments on Hector’s blog post.
Hector’s initial post in conjunction with the comments is an
online “conversation”: it is a single discussion. Hector is the
only primary participant in the initial blog post event. There
are four primary participants in the discussion: Alice, Beatrix, Cali, and Hector. Another student, Zack, reads Hector’s
blog post and the discussion of Hector’s post, but does not
make a contribution to the discussion. Zack is not a direct
participant, he does not make a contribution to the conversation, but by reading the online discussion he is a “witness”
to what was said: Zack is a secondary participant. Yet another student, Rebecca, reads about the conversation in an
email newsletter that is sent out every 24 hours. Rebecca is a
hearsay participant. She does not read the online discussion
triggered by Hector’s post, but she does read about one or
another contribution to the conversation in the short summarizes provided by the daily newsletters. Rebecca is a tertiary
participant in the online discussion.
To summarize:
1. Hector’s blog post is a contribution to the blog-o-sphere.
Hector is the primary participant in that event.
2. Alice, Beatrix, and Carli make comments on Hector’s blog
post. Alice, Beatrix, Carli, and Hector are all primary participants in the online discussion of Hector’s post.

3. Zack reads the online discussion but does not make a contribution. Zack is a secondary participant.
4. Rebecca hears about the discussion from the newsletter.
She is a tertiary participant.
Secondary and tertiary participation are more peripheral
kinds of participation.

Study
The students is an Internet & Society course taught in Fall
2008 collectively blogged during the entire semester. The
course was an introductory course.
Each student had her own blog. Each post to a blog was
tagged with a topic. As a student wrote her blog, she could
read another student’s post on the same topic with a click of
the mouse. At the “front entrance” to the blog-o-sphere, there
was a list of the ten most recent posts or comments on posts.
Each item in the list displayed the name of the author of the
post or comment and a short excerpt from the contribution.
Students could also access the blogs via a word cloud.
Students received daily email newsletters that summarized
the online co-blogging activity of the class in the previous 24
hours. The newsletter listed the title, author, and first line of
all the newly created blog posts, and a list of similar information for any new comments that were added to blog posts.
Students could use the links on the newsletter to directly navigate to any post or comment on the blog site that was of
interest.

Methods
All of the students’ online work was automatically recorded
in a transcript, which enabled both quantitative and qualitative analyses. It was also possible to track whether a student
opened a newsletter (tertiary participation), but it was not possible to determine which parts of the newsletter were read. If
a student used a newsletter to navigate to the blog-o-sphere,
it was possible to determine which conversation or post was
the destination.
At the end of the semester we distributed a survey, questions were on a 6-point Likert scale (from 1 not useful to 6
very useful).

Participants
There were 25 students in the class. Students in the class were
from a variety of disciplines. There were 8 females and 17
males. All of the students were undergraduates. There were
3 science majors and 1 science minor in the class. There were
12 students majoring in the social sciences and 8 minoring in
the social sciences. The remainder of the class was either in
the humanities or fine arts. The students roughly had the same
amount of expertise. The blogging activity did not pre-assign
roles or status.

Procedure
At the beginning of the semester an in-class tour and exercise introduced the students to the important features of the
blogging environment.

1682

The students were required to blog at the pace of one post
per lecture: there were two lectures per week. A typical post
was 1 or 2 paragraphs in length. The students were also
required to read and comment on other contributions to the
blog-o-sphere. The student’s co-blogging work counted for
35% of each student’s grade.
The focus of the analysis presented in this paper is on the
co-blogging work that the students did during the time the
class read three books that were on the syllabus. The students
wrote short papers on two of these books. There were nine
lectures on these three books, so if every student completed
his assigned work fully there would have been 9 × 25 blog
posts (totaling 225).

Metrics
A post or a comment becomes a contribution to the blog-osphere only after it is read by at least one other student. The
length of a conversation (discussion) depends on the number
of contributions. A conversation with two contributions is of
length 2, with three contributions is of length 3, et cetera.
The critical episodes are defined in terms of discussions.
Longer conversations (length ≥ 3) are treated as more significant. In these conversations, the initial post was sufficient
to generate some discussion and thus was likely to have produced more common ground (Clark, 1991).

Overview of Student Participation in Online
Discussion
There were a total of 246 online discussions of the three
books. 37 of the discussions were of length ≥ 3. There were
51 conversations of length 2, 16 of length 3, 12 of length 4,
8 of length 5, and 1 of length 6. The average conversation
length was 2.7. On average there were 4.2 online conversations (≥ 3) per lecture on the three books. On the whole there
appeared to be a healthy amount of online discussion.
For conversations of length ≥ 3, there was a significant
range of direct participation among the students. The most
active contributor contributed to 14 different discussions on
the three books, making a total of 25 contributions during the
online discussion. The least active contributor never directly
participated in any longer online discussion. The average
number of conversations in which each student contributed
was 5.2, the median was 4. 75% of the contributions were
produced while the students were blogging; 27% were produced while the students were browsing.
There was also a significant range of secondary participation among the students in the online discussion of the three
books. Of the 777 reading events for the three books, roughly
46% of them occurred while the students were blogging. The
most active reader read 29 different conversations of length
≥ 3. The least active secondary participant missed all of the
online discussion. On average, each student was a secondary
participant in 10.8 longer conversations. The median number
of longer conversations a student read without directly contributing was 9, and the standard deviation was 6.9.

Figure 1: Primary and secondary participation.
There were six non-native speakers in the class. The data
shows an interesting pattern of participation among these students. Early in the semester, their participation in the blogo-sphere tended to be more secondary (they were reading a
lot). As the semester progressed their participation became
increasingly primary, and by the end of the semester they
were amongst the most active participants.
When the students were asked in the survey to rate the
value of their online co-blogging work as a means of giving
them first-hand experience with online collaborative learning,
the average response was 5.6. In response to the question of
whether the students felt the knowledge community was useful, the average response was 5.3. When queried about the
usefulness of the blog-o-sphere for writing papers, the average response was 4.5. When asked as a yes/no question,
whether re-reading and reusing the blogging text helped the
students write their papers: 67% answered in the affirmative.

The most active participants
For each student in the class, we counted the number of conversations of length ≥ 3 in which they made a contribution
(primary participation), and also counted the number of conversations of length ≥ 3 that they read but did not directly
participate (secondary). For each student we then computed
the following:
contributions − reads
(1)
contributions + reads
Figure 1 shows these results as a scatterplot. A negative number on the x-axis means a student was more of a secondary
participant than a primary one; a positive number on the xaxis indicates a student was more of a primary participant.
The y-axis is a count of total number of primary or secondary
participations the student made; students with high values
were the most active. A larger size bubble indicates more
than one student at a data point. As can be seen in Figure 1,
there were fewer primary participants than secondary ones.
In order to show trends we removed the four students who
were within .5 of the average number of primary or secondary
participations, which was M=10.68 (see Figure 2). Throughout the rest of the paper, students above the mean are referred
to as the active students and those below the mean as the less

1683

Figure 2: Trends of primary and secondary participation.

Figure 4: Participation during paper deadlines.
The categories of active and less active students were based
on overall participation in the conversations, regardless of
whether the conversations were long or not. It is not necessarily the case that the active students’ participation in the
longer conversations was significantly greater than that of the
less active students. It could be that the active students read
and commented on everything, and the less active students
only read and commented on the longer discussions.
On average, each active student contributed to 25.7% of the
longer conversations and read 51.4% of them (see Table 2).
On average, each of the less active students contributed to
7.3% of the longer conversations and read 16.2% of them.
It was not possible to track what parts of the newsletter was
read, so there is no data to compare the two groups of students
tertiary participation in the longer conversations.

Figure 3: Contrasting batchers to regular contributors.
active students.

Batchers
Some students did their online work in batches. We computed
the ratio of blog posts to blog post sessions. The range was
from 1 to 2, the average ratio was 1.3; there were 2 students
at the average. Batchers were identified as those whose blog
ratio was above the average. Eight out of the 26 students
were batchers. As can be seen in Figure 3, batchers were less
active: they wrote fewer blog posts (y-axis) and tended much
more towards secondary participation (reading) than primary
participation (contributing).

Paper Deadlines
We analysed the reading and writing behavior of students on
the blog-o-sphere during a three day period before the paper
deadlines. Figure 4 shows the scatterplot of participation during this period. The data shows that the students spent the
bulk of their time during this period reading posts and conversations related to the topic of the paper.

Central Participation
Are the most active participants the central ones? That depends on whether they were significantly more likely to be
primary or secondary participants in the important events in
blog-o-sphere, i.e., the longer conversations. The longer conversations are where the students actually begin to engage in
a more meaningful discussion of the course material.

Participation
Active
Less active

N
8
13

Primary
25.7%
7.3%

Secondary
51.4%
16.2%

Table 2: Participation in longer conversations.
We used t-test for independent samples to compare the two
groups to see if the means of the active group’s primary and
secondary participation in the important events was significantly greater than that of the less active students. The t-tests
on the longer conversations showed that the active students
were significantly more active than the less active students
as both primary (t(21) = 5.9733, p < .0001) and secondary
participants (t(21) = 7.4151, p < .0001).
What was the source of the difference in participation in
the longer conversations by the two groups? It could be that
the active students performed as expected and the less active
ones performed worse than expected. Or that both outperformed expectations and the difference was still significant.
Or both underperformed expectations and the difference was
significant.
We performed a chi-square goodness of fit analysis to test
whether the observed primary or secondary participation of
the active students significantly exceeded expectations. For
the null hypothesis we assumed the commenting and read-

1684

ing activity of each student was evenly distributed among all
the discussions, whether they were longer or not. The difference between the observed and expected values for the active students’ primary participation was significant c2 (1, N =
21) =25.419, p < .0001. The difference between their observed and expected secondary participation was also significant, c2 (1, N = 21) =300.708, p < .0001.
A chi-square goodness of fit comparison of the online work
of less active students shows that their primary participation
in the longer conversations was significantly less than expected (c2 (1, N = 21) =22.361, p < .0001), but the difference between observed and expected reading behavior was
insignificant. In other words, the less active students’ participation in critical events was more peripheral than was expected.

Concluding Remarks
There is a relation between being a central participant in a
particular episode of activity, and being a central participant
within a community. The central participant(s) in a single
episode are the most active, their actions are the most critical. During a single episode of activity, there are primary and
secondary participants. The primary participants are those
that make direct contributions to an episode of activity. The
secondary ones witness the action but do not make direct contributions.
Those actors who regularly participate in the most critical
activities are the central participants within the community.
Central participation within a community or organization or
an ongoing social situation also depends on knowledge about
the activities of the community. Events can be “known” because one directly participated (primary), because one witnessed the event (secondary), or because one heard about it
(hearsay).
The study presented in this paper shows that in the class
blog-o-sphere the active students were especially active in
the critical discussions, either as primary or secondary participants. In contrast, the less active students had a more peripheral role in the longer conversations: they read as much
as expected, but their direct primary participation was significantly less than expected.

References
Alterman, R., & Garland, A. (2001). Convention in joint
activity. Cognitive Science, 25(4), 611–657.
Andriessen, J. (2006). Arguing to learn. In R. Sawyer (Ed.),
The cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Blom, J.-P., & Gumperz, J. (1986). Social Meaning
in Linguistic Structure: Code-Switching in Norway. In
J. Gumperz & D. Hymes (Eds.), Directions in Sociolinguistics: The Ethnography of Communication. New York, NY:
Basil Blackwell.
Bruner, J. (2002). Making Stories: Law, Literature, Life.
Harvard University Press.

Chi, M., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & Lavancher, C. (1994).
Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439–477.
Chi, M., & VanLehn, K. (1991). The Content of Physics
Self-Explanations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1),
69–105.
Clark, H. (1991). Using language. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Cole, M., & Engeström, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations. Cambridge: The Cambridge University Press.
Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and Education: An introduction to the Philosophy of Education. New York, NY: The
Free Press.
Engestrom, Y. (2000). Activity theory as a framework for
analyzing and redesigning work. Ergonomics, 43(7), 960–
974.
Ervin-Tripp, S. (1964). An Analysis of the Interaction of
Language, Topic, and Listener. American Anthropologist,
66(3), 86–102.
Halliday, M. (1978). Language as Social Semiotic: The
Social Interpretation of Language and Meaning. Hodder
Arnold.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Kuutti, K. (1995). Activity theory as a potential framework for human-computer interaction research. In B. Nardi
(Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human computer interaction. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Lave, J. (1991). Situating learning in communities of practice. In L. Resnick, J. Levine, & S. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate
Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, D. (1969). Convention. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Schank, R., & Abelson, R. (1975). Scripts, plans, goals and
understanding: an inquiry into human knowledge structures. Philadelphia, PA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schön, D. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San
Franscisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1980). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Wertsch, J. (1991). Voices of the Mind: A Sociocultural Approach to Mediated Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

1685

