UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Money Illusion in the human brain

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/04k032cq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gregorios-Pippas, Lucy
Miyapuram, Krishna
Schultz, Wolfram
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Money Illusion in the human brain
Krishna P. Miyapuram (krishna.miyapuram@unilever.com)
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, CB2 3DY, U.K.
Unilever R & D, 120, Olivier van Noortlan, Vlaardingen, 3133 AT, The Netherlands

Philippe N. Tobler (pnt21@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, U.K.

Lucy Gregorios-Pippas (lucygregpip@hotmail.com)
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, U.K.

Wolfram Schultz (ws234@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, U.K.

Abstract
Monetary rewards are uniquely human. Most fMRI studies
use monetary rewards due to the ease of presenting them
visually. We tested the efficacy of different forms of
monetary reward presentations -- alphanumeric display,
pictures of coins (pence) and money bills. For alphanumeric
and coin presentation, subjects received exactly the same
amount that was displayed whereas for money bills, the
amount received was equal to 1% of the amount displayed.
Money illusion is said to occur when participants’ responses
are driven by the nominal rather than the real value. The total
money accumulated was displayed throughout the experiment
at bottom of the screen. Money illusion related responses
were observed in lateral orbitofrontal cortex. Interestingly
visual saliency of displayed monetary rewards activated the
medial orbitofrontal cortex. It is expected that higher
subjective reward value can be achieved by the money
illusion technique.

gambles in experimental situations. Holt and Laury (2002)
found that in a lottery-choice experiment, the behaviour of
participants was largely unaffected by scaling up the
hypothetical rewards. Their results are contrary to
Kahneman and Tversky, suggesting that people cannot
imagine how they would actually behave in high-incentive
conditions. Johnson and Bickel (2002) found no difference
in delay-discounting for real and hypothetical rewards.
Using an Iowa gambling task, Bowman and Turnbull (2003)
did not find any difference between real and facsimile (real
values x 1000) reinforcers. However, Fernie and Tunney
(2006) report that the performance was affected by
reinforcer type (real or fascimile) when there was no hint
about the nature of decks. With inclusion of the hint, they
did not observe these differences.

Keywords: reward; orbitofrontal cortex; money illusion;
fMRI; hypothetical rewards; monetary incentives; saliency.

Introduction
The importance of money in everyday life makes it a strong
reinforcer. The incentives offered in economics experiments
are far smaller than real life. Gneezy and Rustichini (2000)
suggest that monetary incentives at low value can have a
detrimental effect on performance. The effect on monetary
compensation on performance was not monotonic. While
larger amount of money yielded higher performance,
smaller amounts yielded poorer performance than those
offered no compensation. Typical fMRI studies involve
hundreds of trials with each trial lasting around 10 seconds.
It has been shown that subjects work harder, more
persistently, and more effectively, if they earn more money
for better performance (Camerer & Hogarth, 1999). Due to
experimental constraints, monetary rewards are visually
presented to the subject, as they cannot be delivered inside
the fMRI scanner. Hence, the intrinsically arousing
properties of money are typically diminished due to the
visual presentation (Zink et al., 2004).
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) suggest that hypothetical
choices can be used to overcome the limitation of small

Figure -1: Money illusion cartoon (A) The more natural
3-dimensional view being perceived creating a visual
illusion that the farther coin is bigger in physical size. (B)
Money illusion occurs when the nominal values of
displayed rewards reinforce rather than real rewards.
In this paper, we use a technique called money illusion in
which subjects are shown large amount of money, but they
have been informed that they would be able to take home
only a specific percentage of the displayed money. A
previous study (Dreher et al., 2006) has used similar
strategy but not explicitly studied the effect of using
hypothetical rewards. In economics, money illusion refers to
the bias in assessment of the real value of an economic
transaction, induced by nominal evaluation. We often think
in terms of nominal values. However, it is known from the
framing effect that the same situation can be perceived

1657

differently when described in relative (e.g. gains and losses)
or absolute terms (e.g. total wealth). In our experiments, the
subject is said to undergo a ‘money illusion’ if the subject’s
behaviour is driven by the value of the displayed money and
ignores the real value of the money to be obtained.
A further caveat is that the brain regions involved in
reward processing have also been suggested to be
processing stimulus saliency. Salient events are arousing
(Horvitz, 2000) and to which attentional and behavioural
resources are allocated (Redgrave et al., 1999). Zink et al.
(2004) argued that monetary rewards gain saliency due to
the participant getting engaged with the paradigm rather
than the intrinsic arousing properties of money that have
been reduced due to their visual presentation. They
demonstrate striatal responses when receipt of money was
contingent on the subject’s response (i.e. salient) compared
with when money was received unrelated to the task. Other
dimensions of stimulus salience include novelty, being
unexpected, or causing emotional arousal (see Bunzeck and
Duzel, 2006). We address the issue of saliency by using the
intrinsic arousing properties of money. We use different
modes of presentation of monetary rewards such as
alphanumeric displays, pictures of coins and money bills. A
potential confound is that money bills and coins come in
various sizes and shapes that covaries with the value of the
money. Hence, visual saliency is also considered.

Materials and Methods
The aim of this study was to determine the effect of using
different modes of presentation of monetary reward on
behaviour and brain activations. We tested the influence of
visual saliency by presenting pictures of monetary rewards
in two physical dimensions – small (135x90 pixels) and
Large (270x180 pixels). Results are presented here from the
data of five subjects (2 female), who successfully completed
the fMRI scanning session. The results from this study must
be interpreted with caution due to the low statistical power.

Experimental procedures
We use a Pavlovian conditioning paradigm and train
subjects (up to a week before the scanning) to associate
abstract visual stimuli (conditioned stimuli, CSs) with visual
presentation of money (unconditional stimuli, USs). A
conditional motor task was overlaid onto the Pavlovian
paradigm to maintain subject’s attention throughout the
experiment. A ‘+’ symbol at the centre of the screen served
as a fixation cue. The CS (dimensions 100x100 pixels)
would appear after a Poisson distributed inter trial interval
(mean approx 5 sec) on either top half or bottom half of the
screen and the subjects responded by pressing one of the left
or right buttons. The allocation of top-left Vs top-right
associations were randomised across subjects. During
training sessions, subjects practiced using the left and right
buttons of a computer mouse and in the scanning sessions,
they used a MRI compatible button box. The CS would be
displayed for 2 sec and subjects were required to respond

within 1 sec. After a correct response, the US replaced the
CS and was displayed for 1 sec. Upon error, a red square
was shown at the centre of the screen. The cumulative sum
of actual money received was displayed throughout, and
was updated at the time of US presentation.

Figure – 2: Event-related design for training and scanning
procedure. Participants performed a conditional visuomotor
task at the onset of the CS depending on its spatial position
(top/bottom – counterbalanced across trials) by a keypress
(left/right – counterbalanced across subjects)
Six abstract stimuli served the purpose of CSs. We used
three forms of reward presentation – AlphaNumeric, picture
of 5 pence coin and picture of a money bill (UK £5 bill).
The money bill served the purpose of money illusion, i.e.
subjects receive 1% of the money displayed. The subjects
have been informed of this manipulation during the training
session. The three forms of rewards (USs) were presented in
two different physical sizes. The CS-US associations were
randomized across subjects.
Stimulus preference ratings for the abstract stimuli were
collected from the subjects before and after training and
scanning sessions. The CSs were rated on a scale of 1
(dislike very much) to 5 (like very much). We also recorded
the response times during the training as well as the
scanning sessions. The presentation of the stimuli and
recording of responses was controlled by Cogent 2000
software on Matlab. There were 40 repetitions for each of
the six trial types that were distributed across two sessions
of scanning.

Subjects
Participants were right handed and were pre-assessed to
exclude prior histories of neurological or psychiatric illness.
All participants gave informed written consent and were
paid for participation. The research protocol was approved
by the Cambridgeshire Local Research Ethics Committee,
U.K.

Data Acquisition
Functional imaging was performed on a MedSpec (Bruker,
Ettlingen, Germany) scanner at 3 Tesla. Two whole brain
acquisitions weighted by Gradient Echo and Spin Echo were
obtained within a TR (scan repetition time 2.4 sec). The
protocol was optimised to reduce inhomogeneity artefacts in
orbitofrontal cortex and amygdala. 21 horizontal slices with
in-plane resolution of 3.75mm x 3.75mm, slice thickness of
5 mm and slice gap of 1 mm. In order to ensure correct

1658

anatomical localization of the blood-oxygen-leveldependent (BOLD) activity, a high-resolution structural
image (1mm thick 256 slices in sagittal plane) was acquired
in addition to the series of functional images.

Data Analysis
Images were Slice-timing corrected, realigned, normalized
to a standard brain EPI template in the MNI (Montreal
Neurological Institute) space (Friston et al, 1995a) and
spatially smoothed with an isotropic Gaussian filter with
8mm full width at half maximum. Serial autocorrelations
within the functional data were estimated using a first order
auto-regressive model (AR-1). Statistical analysis was
performed using a general linear model (Friston et al
1995b). Stick functions at the onset of the abstract stimuli
were convolved with a canonical haemodynamic response
function (HRF) and its time and dispersion derivatives. The
parameter estimates for contrasts of interest were then
entered into a random effects analysis (Penny et al., 2003)
with correction for non-sphericity of the data.

Results
Behavioural Results
In the training session, subjects completed 20 repetitions of
each of the six trial types. The behavioural task was to
complete a conditional motor learning while CSs would be
associated in a Pavlovian way with display of monetary
rewards. The number of errors (incorrect button press or
timeout after 1 sec) across subjects had a mean±SEM of
11.8±3.6 and range of 2 to 24 out of a total of 120 trials. The
average response times had a range of 636.65±36.66 to
673.5±46.55 ms and were similar across six trial types
(F(5,24)=0.12, p=0.99).

All subjects learned the Pavlovian associations between the
CSs and the USs as revealed by a questionnaire sent
separately by email to participants to match the CSs and the
associated USs. Subjects completed two sessions of
scanning each with 20 repetitions of the six trial types. The
number of errors out of a total of 240 trials had a
mean±SEM of 14.22±10.99 and range between 0 and 58
across subjects. The average response times ranged between
632.58±32.09 and 647.67±34.77 and were similar across six
trial types (F(5,24)=0.03, p=0.99). These results indicate
that the performance of the conditional motor task was not
modulated by the mode of presentation of the monetary
reward.
Pleasantness ratings of the six abstract stimuli (CSs) can
be used as a behavioural measure for the Pavlovian CS-US
associations in this study. The six abstract stimuli had
significantly (F(5,24)=3.82, p<0.05) different pleasantness
ranging between 2.4±0.5 and 4.8±0.2. These differences did
not remain significant (F(5,24)=0.35, p=0.87) when the data
were rearranged according to the Pavlovian associations
with reward with a range between 3.2±0.6 and 4±0.6.
Hence, the pleasantness ratings for the CSs did not differ
across the six trial types before the training session. At the
end of training session, for the stimuli associated with large
display of USs, the pleasantness of CS associated with 5
pound money bill increased (from 3.4±0.2 to 4±0.3),
remained constant for the CS associated with picture of 5
pence coin (3.7±0.6 to 3.8±0.5) and that of the CS
associated with 5 pence alphanumeric decreased (from
3.2±0.7 to 2.8±0.7). The difference between pleasantness of
CSs corresponding to money bill and alphanumeric was
significant (p<0.05). Such a gradient in pleasantness ratings
was not observed for stimuli associated with small display
of the USs. The pleasantness ratings did not change before
and after the scanning session with most of the differences
close to zero. Therefore it can be assumed that there has not
been further Pavlovian learning during the scanning session.

Brain Imaging

Figure – 3: Change in pleasantness ratings
(A) from pre-training to the post-training stage (B) from
pre-scanning to post-scanning stage

A within-subject ANOVA with non-sphericity correction
was performed entering contrasts corresponding to the six
trial types. Given that the Pavlovian associations had
already been learnt by our participants, activations were
assessed at the onset of the CS. Money illusion related
responses were assessed by contrasting money bill (5
pounds) compared to alphanumeric presentation (you
receive 5 pence). The linear contrast in ANOVA forced the
weight for the parameter estimate corresponding to picture
of 5 pence coin to be zero. The money illusion responses
were assessed for both the large and small size of the
displayed monetary reward
Firstly, we observed differential responses within
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), with more lateral areas encoding
money illusion and relatively more medial areas encoding
visual saliency. Interestingly the ventromedial portion of
the prefrontal cortex (region including medial OFC and

1659

Figure - 4: Lateral orbitofrontal cortex responses to money illusion (Top and bottom panels) and
medially (middle panel) to visual saliency
anterior cingulate) showed responses to money illusion in
combination with visual saliency.
The dorsal striatum showed responses to visual saliency
but not money illusion. The parahippocampal gyrus showed
responses to money illusion in more ventral parts, while
visual saliency responses were observed in relatively dorsal
region.
These results suggest that money illusion related
responses can be observed in reward-related brain regions.

Discussion
Our results suggest that the money illusion technique could
be adapted as a generic technique for performing
neuroimaging studies using monetary reward. It overcomes
the criticism that the monetary rewards have their intrinsic
value diminished as they are delivered as pictures inside the
scanner (Zink et al., 2004). The money illusion technique
also overcomes the fact that the intrinsic value of monetary
rewards given every trial (e.g. 5p) is very small. It brings
together psychological theories that postulate a positive
reinforcement such as an OK signal is sufficient to drive
behaviour, and the economic theories that suggest monetary
reward is crucial to drive behaviour (Camerer and Hogarth,
1999), albeit the monetary reward is not to be too small
(Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000).
A limitation of this study is that we have covaried the
magnitude of displayed reward with money illusion. This is
inherent in our definition of money illusion. To circumvent
this potential magnitude confound, participants were
explicitly informed about the actual reward they would
receive in each trial. Further, we displayed the actual total

reward accumulated at the bottom of the screen throughout
our experiment. This strategy allowed us to make sure that a
higher display of reward does not imply higher magnitude
of the reward to be received as well as avoid participants
from counting the money received so far.
A confound of displaying the total amount at the bottom
of the screen is that the participants are accumulating
wealth. It is known that with increasing wealth, the
responses to the same amount of reward decreases
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). Participants performed two
sessions of scanning in our study and we reset the total
counter to zero at the beginning of the second session.
Participants were informed that they could keep the money
won so far, but we were resetting the counter. This strategy
reduced to some extent the effect of displaying the counter
at the bottom of the screen, while making sure that we do
not confound our results with magnitude related responses.
Money is a strong reinforcer and participants have been
exposed these type of stimuli extensively in their everyday
lives. Accordingly, pictures of money would have acquired
the properties of money and therefore serve as conditioned
stimuli in their own right. These conditioned stimuli are
known to enhance instrumental responding, an effect called
Pavlovian-to-instrumental transfer (see recent human study
by Talmi et al., 2008). In our task, subjects performed a
conditional motor task in every trial that was superimposed
on the Pavlovian contingencies between the abstract stimuli
and visually presented monetary rewards. We did not find
any differences in response times during the training, testing
or scanning phases for the different magnitudes or
presentations of the monetary reward. This could be due to
two factors. Firstly, participants were not trained on

1660

Figure - 5: Dorsal striatum (caudate) responses to visual saliency

Figure – 6: Hippocampal responses to money illusion and visual saliency

differential instrumental actions for different rewards.
Secondly, the participants received the same amount of
reward in every trial and can be insensitive to the displayed
reward. However, the main aim of the study was to
investigate the effect of displayed reward, rather than the
actual received reward. Hence, the similarity of response
times cannot be explained as such. One possibility is that
the intrinsic properties of money are so strong that when
tested under extinction (such as delivering 5pence when
displaying 5pounds, thus artificially decreasing the value of
displayed reward), the responses do not extinguish. Thus,
we observe the greater responses that seem to comply with
the displayed reward magnitude, instead of diminished
responses to the extinction procedure (that procedurally
forms part of the money illusion).
A criticism of monetary rewards for neuroimaging studies
is that they cannot be handed over to participants inside the
scanner. Previous studies have shown that pictures of
primary rewards, such as foods elicit activation in gustatory
cortex (Simmons et al., 2005). Representatives of reward
such as pictures and abstract stimuli that are previously
associated with rewards acquire similar behavioural
properties as the reward itself by the well-known classical
conditioning procedure. In day to day life, we experience
various denominations of money that have physical features
dependent on their value. The question is whether the
responses to a particular denomination of money (such as a
money bill or a coin) are dependent on its sensory qualities

or attached to its value. This pilot study demonstrated that
some of the task-specific responses could be due to the
visual saliency (Large Vs small display) of the monetary
rewards. We have controlled for these responses to be
separable from the magnitude of displayed reward by
adding the actual money to the total displayed at the bottom
of the screen. Hence, money illusion can be used in
neuroimaging studies and the responses are not related to
the real-life differences in the various denominations of
money, but to the actual value attached.
The technique of money illusion could be used as a
procedure for neuroimaging studies in order to detect
greater responses in reward-related regions. This technique
is particularly useful to show participants monetary rewards
with some buying power so that reward responses are
maintained and avoid disappointment or frustration by small
value of money otherwise given at single trial levels. When
using such a procedure, it is important to avoid prediction
error in participants by informing them before the
experiment and if possible in a training session prior to
scanning session.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Wellcome Trust and the
MRC-Wellcome Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience
Institute (BCNI). KPM is supported by Cambridge Nehru
Scholarship and Overseas Research Students Award
Scheme, UK.

1661

References
Bowman, C. and Turnbull, O. (2003). Real versus facsimile
reinforcers on the Iowa Gambling Task. Brain Cogn,
53:207–210.
Bunzeck, N. and D¨uzel, E. (2006). Absolute coding of
stimulus novelty in the human substantia nigra/VTA.
Neuron, 51:369–379.
Camerer, C.F., Hogarth, R.M. (1999). The Effects of
Financial Incentives in Experiments: A Review and
Capital-Labor-Production Framework. Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 19:7–42.
.Cromwell, H. C. and Schultz, W. (2003). Effects of
expectations for different reward magnitudes on neuronal
activity in primate striatum. J Neurophysiol, 89(5):2823–
2838.
Dreher, J., Kohn, P., and Berman, K. (2006). Neural coding
of distinct statistical properties of reward information in
humans. Cereb. Cortex, 16:561–573.
Elliott, R., Newman, J., Longe, O., and Deakin, J. (2003).
Differential response patterns in the striatum and
orbitofrontal cortex to financial reward in humans: a
parametric functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
J. Neurosci., 23:303–307.
Fernie, G. and Tunney, R. (2006). Some decks are better
than others: the effect of reinforcer type and task
instructions on learning in the Iowa Gambling Task. Brain
Cogn, 60:94–102.
Friston, K. J., Ashburner, J., Frith, C. D., Poline, J. B.,
Heather, J. D., and Frackowiak, R. S. J. (1995a). Spatial
registration and normalisation of images. Human Brain
Mapping, 2:165–189.
Friston, K. J., Holmes, A. P., Worsley, K. J., Poline, J. B.,
Frith, C. D., and Frackowiak, R. S. J. (1995b). Statistical
parametric maps in functional imaging: A general linear
approach. Human Brain Mapping, 2:189–210.
Gneezy, U., and Rustichini, A. (2000). Pay Enough or Don't
Pay at All. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115:791–
810.
Holt, C.A., and Laury, S.K. (2002). Risk Aversion and
Incentive Effects. The American Economic Review 92,
1644-1655.
Horvitz, J. (2000). Mesolimbocortical and nigrostriatal
dopamine responses to salient non-reward events.
Neuroscience, 96:651–656.

Johnson, M. and Bickel, W. (2002). Within-subject
comparison of real and hypothetical money rewards in
delay discounting. J Exp Anal Behav, 77:129–146.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: an
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263291.
Knutson, B., Taylor, J., Kaufman, M., Peterson, R., and
Glover, G. (2005). Distributed neural representation of
expected value. J Neurosci 25:4806-4812.
Lancaster, J., Woldorff, M., Parsons, L., Liotti, M., Freitas,
C., Rainey, L., Kochunov, P., Nickerson, D., Mikiten, S.,
and Fox, P. (2000). Automated Talairach atlas labels for
functional brain mapping. Hum Brain Mapp, 10:120–131.
Maldjian, J., Laurienti, P., Kraft, R., and Burdette, J. (2003).
An automated method for neuroanatomic and
cytoarchitectonic atlasbased interrogation of fMRI data
sets. Neuroimage, 19:1233–1239.
O’Doherty, J., Buchanan, T., Seymour, B., and Dolan, R.
(2006). Predictive neural coding of reward preference
involves dissociable responses in human ventral midbrain
and ventral striatum. Neuron, 49:157– 166.
Pavlov, I. P. (1927/1960). Conditional Reflexes. New York:
Dover Publications (the 1960 edition is an unaltered
republication of the 1927 translation by Oxford
University Press).
Penny, W.D., Holmes, A.P., and Friston, K.J. (2003).
Random effects analysis. In Human Brain Function 2nd
ed (Academic Press).
Redgrave, P., Prescott, T., and Gurney, K. (1999). Is the
short-latency dopamine response too short to signal
reward error? Trends Neurosci., 22:146–151.
Schultz, W. (1998). Predictive reward signal of dopamine
neurons. J. Neurophysiol., 80:1–27.
Simmons, W., Martin, A., and Barsalou, L. (2005). Pictures
of appetizing foods activate gustatory cortices for taste
and reward. Cereb. Cortex, 15:1602–1608.
Talmi, D., Seymour, B., Dayan, P., and Dolan, R. (2008).
Human pavlovian-instrumental transfer. J. Neurosci.,
28:360–368.
Tobler, P., Fletcher, P., Bullmore, E., and Schultz, W.
(2007a). Learning-related human brain activations
reflecting individual finances. Neuron, 54:167–175.
Zink, C., Pagnoni, G., Martin-Skurski, M., Chappelow, J.,
and Berns, G. (2004). Human striatal responses to
monetary reward depend on saliency. Neuron, 42:509–
517

1662

