UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Moral norms inform mental state ascriptions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8455j84m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Lombrozo, Tania
Uttich, Kevin

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Moral norms inform mental state ascriptions
Kevin Uttich (uttich@berkeley.edu)
Tania Lombrozo (lombrozo@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
Theory of mind, the capacity to understand and ascribe
mental states, has traditionally been conceptualized as
analogous to a scientific theory. However, recent work in
philosophy and psychology has documented a “side-effect
effect” suggesting that moral evaluations influence mental
state ascriptions, and in particular whether a behavior is
described as having been performed ‘intentionally.’ This
evidence challenges the idea that theory of mind is analogous
to scientific psychology in serving the function of predicting
and explaining, rather than evaluating, behavior. In three
experiments, we demonstrate that moral evaluations do
inform ascriptions of intentional action, but that this
relationship arises because behavior that conforms to norms
(moral or otherwise) is less informative about underlying
mental states than is behavior that violates norms. This
analysis preserves the traditional understanding of theory of
mind as a tool for predicting and explaining behavior, but also
suggests the importance of normative considerations in social
cognition.
Keywords: Social Cognition; Morality; Theory of mind.

on the basis of statistical norms. These observations suggest
that norms should inform mental state ascriptions if ToM is
to accomplish the function of predicting and explaining
behavior.
This paper explores the relationship between norms and
mental state ascriptions by considering the relationship
between moral norms and ascriptions of intentional action.
Previous work suggests that ascriptions of intention have an
impact on moral evaluations (Malle & Nelson, 2003). For
example, an intentional killing is typically judged a murder,
while an unintentional killing is considered manslaughter
(e.g. California Penal Code). But recent findings suggest
that the reverse may likewise hold – that moral evaluations
can influence ascriptions of intentional action (Knobe,
2006). Specifically, Joshua Knobe has uncovered an
intriguing asymmetry in judgments concerning intentional
action for morally good versus bad side effects, a
phenomenon known as the side-effect effect. Consider the
following vignette, which Knobe presented to participants in
his initial studies:

Introduction
Consider sitting at a commencement address and thinking,
“that speaker must love to wear billowy black gowns.” This
attribution is odd, because we know that academic norms
dictate commencement attire. But upon viewing someone
dressed in full regalia at a café, it might be appropriate to
infer an underlying mental state, such as a false belief that
it’s commencement or a desire to look scholarly, because
the norm does not apply. These examples illustrate that
norms inform mental state ascriptions. More precisely,
prescriptive norms provide “desire-independent reasons” for
action (Searle, 2001), with the consequence that normconforming behavior offers a weak basis for inferring
underlying mental states, while norm-violating behavior
offers a strong basis for inferring underlying mental states,
as the reason for action must be sufficiently strong to
outweigh the desire-independent reason to observe the
norm.
The capacity to understand and attribute mental states is
often characterized as a theory of mind (e.g. Gopnik, 1999).
Like a scientific theory, Theory of Mind (ToM) posits
unobserved entities (internal states) to support explanation
and prediction. Knowing that a man in a café desires to
appear scholarly, for example, can explain eccentric attire,
and supports predictions about whether he is more likely to
smoke a pipe or a cigar. But for the commencement speaker,
eccentric attire is better explained by appeal to a
conventional norm, and smoking habits are better predicted

The vice-president of a company went to the chairman
of the board and said, ‘We are thinking of starting a new
program. It will help us increase profits, but it will also
harm the environment.’
The chairman of the board answered, ‘I don’t care at all
about harming the environment. I just want to make as
much profit as I can. Let’s start the new program.’
They started the new program. Sure enough, the
environment was harmed.
When participants were asked if the chairman
intentionally harmed the environment, 82% said yes.
However, when the new program’s side effect was to help
the environment, only 23% of subjects said the chairman
intentionally helped the environment (Knobe, 2003a).
Because the harm and help vignettes seem to differ only in
the moral valence of the side effect, the results suggest that
moral considerations somehow influence ToM judgments.
Broadly speaking, responses to the side-effect effect have
fallen into two distinct camps (see Nado, 2008, for a similar
taxonomy). ‘Competence’ models take the effect as
evidence that ToM competencies are shaped by the role
ToM judgments play in assigning praise and blame: Knobe
writes, “…moral considerations are actually playing a role
in the fundamental competencies underlying our use of the
concept of intentional action” (Knobe, 2006). This
interpretation not only challenges the idea that the influence
of ToM judgments on moral judgments is one-way (see Fig.

1096

1a & 1b), but also the idea that the function of ToM is to
predict and explain behavior – instead, ToM may be a multipurpose tool partially shaped by its role in moral evaluation.
‘Performance’ models instead suggest that the effect
results from a bias in ToM judgments. On this view, moral
evaluations are not conceptually related to ToM judgments,
but do exert an extraneous influence. For example,
conversational pragmatics (Adams and Steadman, 2004a) or
the desire to blame an agent for a negative outcome may
lead participants to (mistakenly) describe the side-effect as
intentional (Malle & Nelson 2003; Mele, 2001; Nadelhoffer,
2004b). This view preserves the traditional function of
theory of mind, adding the claim that moral evaluations can
have a biasing effect (see Fig. 1c).
We propose a third way of explaining the side-effect
effect and understanding the relationship between ToM and
moral judgment. Perhaps moral judgments inform ToM, but
not because moral considerations partially constitute or bias
ToM concepts. Rather, as suggested in the introduction,
actions that violate norms (e.g. harming the environment)
may provide more information about an agent’s mental
states than do actions that conform to norms. We call this
the ‘inferential’ model to emphasize that actions that differ
in their relationship to norms (moral or otherwise) may
support different inferences about underlying mental states
(see Fig. 1d).

Figure 1: Schematic representations of proposed
relationships between ToM and Moral Evaluations
(modified and expanded from Knobe and Mendlow, 2004).
The inferential model differs from competence models in
preserving the traditional function of theory of mind:
prediction and explanation. The inferential model concedes
that moral judgments influence ToM, but this influence is
seen as evidential, not constitutive. The inferential model
also differs from performance models in regarding the
influence of moral judgment on ToM as a rational strategy

for achieving the function of ToM, and not as a bias or
extraneous pressure.
In this paper we test the inferential model as a hypothesis
about the relationship between moral evaluation and theory
of mind. Specifically, we examine the prediction that normviolating behavior provides stronger evidence than does
norm-conforming behavior concerning an agent’s mental
states, and this in turn informs predictions and impacts
judgments of intention (see Fig 1d). Experiment 1 considers
whether behavior with bad side effects provides more
predicatively useful information than behavior with good
side effects. Experiment 2 considers whether differences
between good and bad side effects stem from the moral
valence of the side effects themselves, or from the evidence
that moral valence provides about the nature of an agent’s
behavior. Finally, in Experiment 3 we examine whether
differences between good and bad side effects are the result
of goodness and badness per se, or of the relationship
between behavior and norms.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examines whether norm-violating (morally
bad) behavior has a greater impact on predictions than does
norm-conforming (morally good) behavior. Only the
inferential model (Fig 1) incorporates a causal path from
moral valence to future predictions. We test this causal path
by presenting participants with vignettes involving agents
who bring about good or bad side effects, but instead of
having participants judge whether the side effect is
intentional, they make two predictions about future
behavior. The specific prediction considers whether the
agent is more likely to repeat the same norm-conforming or
norm-violating behavior in the future. The general
prediction concerns broader adherence to norms, and thus
examines whether the inferred properties of the agent are
restricted to the specific outcome in the vignette (e.g.
harming the environment) or generalize more broadly (e.g.
harming in general). In addition to the vignette involving a
CEO introduced above, a new vignette with a doctor was
added in case negative preconceptions about CEOs play a
role in the side-effect effect.
The inferential view predicts that because norm-violating
behavior provides more information about underlying
mental states than does norm-conforming behavior,
participants who learn about the CEO or doctor who
generates a bad side-effect will make predictions about
future behavior that differ more from baseline predictions
than will participants who learn about the CEO or doctor
who generates a good side-effect. It’s important to consider
the magnitude of deviations from baseline predictions and
not absolute predictions, because all models might predict
that norm-violators are more likely to violate norms and
norm-conformers to conform to norms; the issue is whether
these behaviors provide an equivalent amount of
information concerning underlying mental states.

1097

Participants
Participants were 156 University of California-Berkeley
undergraduates (70% women; mean age = 20, s.d. = 3) who
participated for course credit.

Materials and Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: baseline, norm-conforming, or norm-violating.
Participants in the norm-conforming and norm-violating
conditions were presented with two short vignettes, the
CEO vignette (Knobe, 2003a) from the introduction as well
as the analogous DR vignette:
DR Vignette: A team of doctors is treating a patient. One
doctor on the team came to the senior doctor and said,
“We are thinking of starting a treatment. It will lower the
patient’s blood pressure but it will also help [hurt] the
patient’s stomach problems.”
The senior doctor answered, “Stomach problems are
not our concern. I just want to lower the patient’s blood
pressure as much as I can. Let’s start the treatment.”
They started the treatment. Sure enough the patient’s
stomach problems were helped [hurt].
After each vignette participants were asked to make two
ratings about the future actions of the agent in the story, a
specific prediction and a general prediction. These questions
are below, with the text for the CEO vignette in brackets:
Specific prediction: In the following month the doctor
[chairman] will make another decision that results in
either:
A. An action that has a positive consequence beyond what
the doctor is treating. [that helps the environment]
Or B. An action that has a negative consequence beyond
what the doctor is treating. [that harms the environment]
Which decision do you think the doctor [chairman] will
make?
General prediction: The next month the doctor
[chairman] will make another decision that results in
either:
A. Exceeding ethical standards.
Or B. Violating ethical standards.
Which decision do you think the doctor [chairman] will
make?
Subjects rated the likelihood of each event on a scale from
1 to 7, where 1 indicated “very likely to choose A,” 4
“equally likely to choose A or B,” and 7 “very likely to
choose B.”
Participants in the baseline condition were introduced to
the agents (e.g. “There is a chairman of the board who
makes the final decisions for his company”) and made all
four prediction judgments, but were given no information
about the agents’ past behavior.
The order of story presentation (CEO first or DR first) as
well as the direction of the 7-point scale (from conforming

to violating or vice versa) was counterbalanced across
participants.

Results and Discussion
To examine whether participants’ prediction ratings varied
across conditions, the data were analyzed in an ANOVA
with condition as a between-subjects variable (baseline,
norm-conforming, norm-violating), vignette as a withinsubjects variable (CEO, DR), and prediction question as a
within-subjects variable (specific, general). This revealed a
main effect of condition (F(2,153)=14.36, p<.001), as well
as a main effect of vignette (F(1,153)=83.43, p<.001).
Overall, participants rated negative actions more probable in
the norm-conforming condition than in the baseline
condition, and in the norm-violating condition than in the
norm-conforming condition (see Fig. 2). Ratings in the
norm-conforming condition may have been more negative
than in the baseline condition because failing to endorse a
fortuitous side effect (e.g. helping the environment) is itself
a norm violation (see Mele & Cushman, 2007). The main
effect of vignette resulted from the fact that predictions
concerning the CEO were generally more negative than
those concerning the doctor.
The key hypothesis that predictions in the norm-violating
condition should differ more from baseline than do those in
the norm-conforming condition can be examined by looking
for significant differences across these conditions, as both
yielded more negative ratings than baseline. An ANOVA
like that above but restricted to the norm-violating and
norm-conforming conditions reproduced the main effect of
vignette (F(1,102)=50.86, p<.001) and revealed a main
effect of condition (F(1,102)=8.75, p<.01) as well as a 3way interaction between vignette, prediction, and condition
(F(1,102)=4.80, p<.05). With post-hoc t-tests, the normconforming and norm-violating conditions differed
significantly on both CEO predictions (specific:
t(102)=3.43, p<.001; general: t(102)=2.18, p<.05), and were
suggestive for the DR predictions (specific: t(102)=1.11,
p=.271; general: t(102)=1.91, p=.059).1 These findings
confirm the prediction that norm-violating behavior
provides more information about an agent’s future behavior
than norm-conforming behavior.
According to the inferential view, participants use
behavior, including its relationship to norms, as a source of
evidence concerning the agent’s mental states. Mental state
1

To verify that the DR vignette generates a side-effect effect, a
different group of 72 participants was randomly assigned to either
the CEO or the DR vignette in a condition involving either a
helpful or a harmful side-effect. On a 7-point scale, participants
judged whether it was appropriate to say that the agent
intentionally brought about the side-effect. This experiment
revealed a main effect of condition (F(1, 68) = 121.5, p < .001) as
well as an interaction between condition and vignette (F(1, 68) =
9.82, p = .003). The help/harm asymmetry was smaller for the DR
(2.3 for help versus 4.5 for harm) than for the CEO (1.4 for help
versus 5.3 for harm), but even the DR vignette involved a
significant effect of condition (t(34) = 5.13, p < .001).

1098

ascriptions (e.g. “dislikes the environment”) in turn generate
different predictions. If this is the case, then participants in
Knobe’s original demonstration of the side-effect effect
(2003a) and in subsequent studies may not have generated
asymmetrical judgments about intentional action as a result
of the moral valence of the side-effect per se, but rather
because the moral valence of the side effect provided
evidence about the nature of the behavior leading to the side
effect, which in turn supports mental state ascriptions. This
is examined in Experiment 2.

crossed with 5% versus 95%. Unlike Experiment 1, the
chairman was told the probability of the environmental side
effect occurring before making a decision. This was
indicated in the first paragraph:
The vice-president of a company went to the chairman of
the board and said, “We are thinking of starting a new
program. It will help us increase profits, but there is a 5%
[95%] chance that it will also help [harm] the
environment.”
In all conditions the side effect, environmental help or
harm, occurred. Participants were then asked, “How
appropriate is it to say the CEO intentionally helped
[harmed] the environment?”, and provided a rating on a
scale from 1 to 7, where 1 indicates “not at all appropriate,”
4 “neither appropriate or inappropriate,” and 7 “Very
appropriate.”

Results and Discussion

Figure 2: Prediction scores from Experiment 1 on a scale
from 1 (good side effect likely in future) to 7 (bad side
effect likely in future).

Experiment 2
According to the inferential view, the moral valence of an
outcome (good or bad) can impact ascriptions of intentional
action because outcomes that differ in moral valence
provide different evidence concerning underlying mental
states (see Fig. 1d). Critically, the link between outcomes
and mental states must be mediated by inferences about the
agent’s behavior. Experiment 2 examines the role of an
agent’s behavior in generating the side-effect effect by
varying the nature of the agent’s behavior – in this case, a
decision to pursue a given plan – while holding constant the
outcome of that behavior – in this case, environmental help
or harm. This was achieved by adding probability
information to the CEO vignettes. A decision to pursue a
plan with a 95% chance of environmental harm is a greater
norm violation than a decision to pursue the same plan with
a 5% chance of harm, and should be correspondingly less
informative about the agent’s mental states, even if both
cases generate harm (see Nadelhoffer, 2006 for a related
manipulation).

Participants
There were 104 participants (58% women; mean age = 22,
s.d. = 4), 74 University of California-Berkeley
undergraduates participating for course credit and 30
individuals who participated online.

Materials and Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of four versions
of the CEO vignette: norm-conforming or norm-violating

A 2 (norm-conforming, norm-violating) X 2 (5%, 95%)
ANOVA revealed a significant effect of norm status
(F(1,100)=63.64, p<.001), a marginal effect of probability
(F(1,100)=2.78, p=.099), and a significant interaction
(F(1,100)=4.10, p<.05; see Fig. 3). Post-hoc tests comparing
the 5% and 95% groups revealed significant differences in
the norm-violating condition (5%-4.31, sd=1.9; 95%-5.5,
sd=1.42; t(50)=-2.53, p<.01) but not in the normconforming condition (5%-2.38, sd=1.49; 95%-2.27,
sd=1.68; t(50)=.26, p=.80).
These results suggest that participants’ ascriptions of
intentional action are not simply a function of the outcome
of an action, but rather of the behavior that generated that
outcome, which itself reflects mental states.

Figure 3: Experiment 2 and 3 ratings of how appropriate it
is to call an action intentional as a function of probability
and norm status. Ratings were made on a scale from 1 (not
appropriate to say outcome brought about intentionally) to 7
(appropriate to say outcome brought about intentionally)
with 4 (neither appropriate nor inappropriate) as a midpoint.

Experiment 3
Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that norm-violating behavior is
more informative than norm-conforming behavior, and that
this asymmetry derives from the moral valence of an agent’s
behavior, not only its outcome. However, these experiments

1099

do not provide direct evidence for the role of norms as
opposed to a specific asymmetry between moral goodness
and badness, and hence do not provide support for this
aspect of the inferential model (see Fig. 1). Experiment 3
investigates whether the asymmetry in the side-effect effect
indeed reflects the relationship between behavior and
norms. To accomplish this, the CEO vignette involving
harm was modified to incorporate a probability, as in
Experiment 2, and information about an industry norm for
acceptable risk. Specifically, participants read about a CEO
who pursued an action with a 25% chance of causing
environmental harm, but where the industry standard for
pursuing a plan with environmental risk was either 45% or
less (making the behavior norm-conforming) or 5% or less
(making the behavior norm-violating). As in Experiment 2,
the negative side effect always occurred, but in addition, the
probability of harm was constant across conditions. The
only difference across conditions was the status of the
chairman’s decision with respect to the norm. If the
inferential model is correct, participants should judge the
action more intentional in the norm-violating case than in
the norm-conforming case, no matter that both cases involve
the same morally bad side-effect.

Participants
Participants were 431 University of California-Berkeley
undergraduates (65% women; mean age = 20, s.d. = 3) who
received the questionnaire as part of a larger online packet
completed for course credit. There were 218 participants in
the norm-conforming condition and 213 participants in the
norm-violating condition.

Materials and Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to either a normconforming (45%) or a norm-violating condition (5%)
involving a modified CEO vignette. The vignettes always
involved a bad side effect with a 25% probability of
occurring, but involved different industry standards:
A regulatory agency for the Gizmo industry exists in
order to provide environmental standards even though it
does not have the authority to ensure compliance with
these standards. This regulatory agency has established an
environmental standard, which states that a company may
only start new programs if the chance of environmental
harm due to the program is under 5% [45%].
The vice-president of a company in the Gizmo industry
went to the chairman of the board and said, “We are
thinking of starting a new program. It will help us
increase profits, but there is a 25% chance that it will also
harm the environment. The industry standard is to only
start programs of this type when the chance for harm is
under 5% [45%].”
The environmental harm always occurred. Participants
were then asked, “How appropriate is it to say the CEO

intentionally harmed the environment?” and provided
ratings as in Experiment 2.

Results and Discussion
Subjects in the norm-violating (5%) condition generated
significantly higher ratings of intentional action (4.96,
sd=1.66) than did subjects in the norm-conforming (45%)
condition (4.42, sd=1.73; t(429)=-3.28, p<.01; see Fig. 3).
This suggests that in evaluating whether an action is
intentional, participants consider the relationship between
behavior and norms, and not merely the behavior. These
results are predicted by the inferential model, and make a
strong case for the claim that moral considerations
determine whether behavior is norm-conforming or normviolating, which in turn informs mental state ascriptions.

General Discussion
These studies demonstrate the predictive value of normviolating behavior (Experiment 1), and highlight the role of
an agent’s behavior (Experiment 2) and its relationship to
norms (Experiment 3) in mental state ascriptions.
Participants use norms as a point of reference to determine
what outcomes and actions reveal about an agent’s mental
states, which in turn inform ascriptions of intentional action.
So while there does seem to be an influence of moral
evaluation in ToM, the relationship may be best described
as evidential.
These studies also lend support to the inferential model
(see Fig. 1). While other models could be modified to
accommodate these findings, the inferential model has the
advantage of specifically predicting these results. Moreover,
the inferential model can accommodate several cases in the
literature that have proved difficult for other accounts of the
side-effect effect. Because the model allows for multiple
sources of predictive information and emphasizes the
relationship between an action and norms, it is equipped to
deal with cases involving unusually motivated (Mallon,
2008) or conflicted (Phelan and Sarkissian, 2006) agents.
The inferential model preserves the traditional functions
of ToM, though additional functions are certainly possible.
Importantly, the inferential model also emphasizes a role for
normative information in prediction and explanation.
Developmental research has suggested that for children
under the age of four, moral and conventional norms are a
primary basis for explaining and predicting behavior
(Kalish, 1998). For example, young children predict that an
agent will conform to a norm, even if the norm is unknown
to the agent or conflicts with the agent’s desires (Kalish and
Shiverick, 2004). Even in adults, not all ToM judgments are
automatic (Apperly, 2006); it’s possible that norms support
many everyday predictions and explanations, with mental
state inferences drawn only as needed.
Recognizing a role for norms in mental state ascriptions
raises a number of important questions. For example, is the
influence of norms on mental state ascriptions restricted to
prescriptive norms, such as the conventional and moral
norms considered here? We suspect a similar relationship

1100

holds for statistical norms. A behavior that violates a
statistical norm is not ‘expected’, and hence provides
information about the agent’s underlying mental states that
differs from the default. If most people conform to a norm
not to harm the environment, for example, observing
someone avoid environmental harm is relatively
uninformative: the behavior would have been predicted
from the statistical norm. On the other hand, observing an
agent violate this norm by harming the environment is
informative: rather than ascribing default mental states, we
ascribe an atypical (in this case negative) attitude towards
the environment (see Lucas et. al., in press, for a similar
argument with respect to preference attribution). As with
prescriptive norms, this makes sense if the function of ToM
is to track information that supports prediction and
explanation.
A related question concerns the interaction between
multiple norms. While many moral norms are also statistical
norms, there may be cases in which norm-conformance is
rare, placing a moral norm in conflict with a statistical
norm. How are mental state ascriptions made under such
conditions? These cases may be uncommon because a moral
norm would presumably be the statistical norm unless
conformance had a cost. But as an illustrative example,
consider the low-cost behavior of agreeing to donate one’s
organs in case of accidental death. Though it is generally
believed that organ donation is morally good (morally
norm-conforming), actual organ donor rates in the US are
not very high (statistically norm-violating). In this case, it
may be possible to see a reversal of the typical side-effect
effect, where the morally good behavior (organ donation) is
more informative and judged intentional.
While we’ve contested Knobe’s (2003, 2006)
interpretations of the side-effect effect as a challenge to the
traditional function of theory of mind, our findings support
the underlying claim that moral (and other) norms influence
mental state ascriptions. The key lesson from our arguments
and findings is that sensitivity to norms may improve rather
than imperil our ability to predict and explain behavior, and
accordingly deserves more attention in the study of social
cognition (see also ; Kalish 2006; Wellman & Miller, 2006).

Acknowledgments
We thank Joshua Knobe and Edouard Machery for
comments on an earlier draft, Lori Markson for relevant
conversations, and the Berkeley Moral Psychology group
and Child Cognition Lab for helpful feedback. Finally, we’d
like to thank Jesse van Fleet and the other members of the
Concepts and Cognition lab for feedback and help with data
collection.

References
Adams, F. and Steadman, A. (2004a). Intentional action in
ordinary language: Core concept or pragmatic
understanding? Analysis, 64, 173-181.
Apperly, I.A., Riggs, K.J., Simpson, A., Chiavarino, C. and

Samson, D. (2006). Is belief reasoning automatic?
Psychological Science, 17, 841-844.
Cal. Penal Code § 187
Gopnik, A. (1999). Theory of mind. In R. Wilson & F. Keil
(Eds). The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences
Cambridge, MA: M. I. T. Press.
Kalish, C.W. (1998). Reasons and causes: Children’s
understanding of conformity to social rules and physical
laws. Child Development, 69, 706-720.
Kalish, C.W. (2006). Integrating normative and
psychological knowledge: What should we be thinking
about? Journal of Cognition and Culture, 6, 191-208.
Kalish, C.W. & Shiverick, S.M. (2004). Children’s
reasoning about norms and traits as motives for behavior.
Cognitive Development, 19, 401-416.
Knobe, J. (2003a). Intentional action and side effects in
ordinary language. Analysis. 63, 190-193.
Knobe, J. (2006). The concept of intentional action: A case
study in the uses of folk psychology. Philosophical
Studies, 130, 203-231.
Knobe, J. & Mendlow, G. (2004). The good, the bad, and
the blameworthy: Understanding the role of evaluative
considerations in folk psychology. Journal of Theoretical
and Philosophical Psychology 24, 252-258.
Lucas, C., Griffiths, T. L., Xu, F., & Fawcett, C. (in press).
A rational model of preference learning and choice
prediction by children. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 21.
Malle, B. F., & Nelson, S. E. (2003). Judging Mens Rea:
The Tension Between Folk Concepts and Legal Concepts
of Intentionality. Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 21,
563-580.
Mallon, R. (2008). Knobe vs. Machery: Testing the tradeoff hypothesis. Mind & Language, 23, 247-255.
Mele, A. (2001). Acting intentionally: Probing folk notions.
In B. F., Malle, L. J. Moses, & D. Baldwin (Eds.),
Intentions and intentionality: Foundations of social
cognition. Cambridge, MA: M. I. T. Press.
Mele, A.R. & Cushman, F. (2007). “Intentional action, folk
judgments, and stories: Sorting things out.” Midwest
Studies in Philosophy, 31, 184-201.
Nadelhoffer, T. (2004b). Praise, side effects, and intentional
action. The Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology, 24, 196-213.
Nadelhoffer, T. (2006). Bad acts, blameworthy agents, and
intentional actions: Some problems for jury impartiality.
Philosophical Explorations, 9, 203-220.
Nado, J. (2008). Effects of moral cognition on judgments of
intentionality. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 59, 709-731.
Phelan, M. & Sarkissian, H. (2006). The folk strike back; or,
why you didn’t do it intentionally, though it was bad and
you knew it. Philosophical Studies, 138, 291-298.
Searle, J.R. (2001). Rationality in action. Cambridge, MA:
M. I. T. Press.
Wellman, H.M. and Miller, J.G. (2006) Developing
conceptions of responsive intentional agents. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 6, 27-55.

1101

