UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motivation and Transfer: The Role of Achievement Goals in Preparation for Future Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9mt6w2b8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Belenky, Daniel
Nokes, Timothy

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motivation and Transfer: The Role of Achievement Goals in Preparation for Future
Learning
Daniel M. Belenky (dmb83@pitt.edu)
Timothy J. Nokes (nokes@pitt.edu)
Learning Research and Development Center
University of Pittsburgh, 3939 O’Hara Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
Abstract

Motivation

Knowledge transfer is critical for solving novel problems and
performing new tasks. Recent work has shown that invention
activities can promote flexible learning, leading to better
transfer after instruction (Schwartz & Martin, 2004). The
current project examines the role of achievement goals in
promoting transfer. Results indicate that engaging in
invention activities before being shown the correct method is
beneficial for transfer, regardless of initial goal orientation
(mastery versus performance), while a mastery orientation
must be present for students to transfer from a direct
instruction activity. Implications of these results for theories
of learning and transfer are discussed.
Keywords: transfer; preparation for future learning;
motivation; achievement goals

Introduction
Motivation is a critical factor in human learning and
behavior. One realm in which motivation is frequently
discussed is in academic settings. Researchers have assessed
different goals students bring with them into the classroom,
and observed the impact initial motivations have on
subsequent learning (e.g., Wolters, 2004). Having goals
such as wanting to master concepts or to look good in
relation to peers have been correlated with measures of
learning. However, the measures of learning in such studies
are almost always coarse-grained, such as Grade-Point
Averages. Less is known about how motivation interacts
with underlying cognitive processes to mediate these
achievement gains.
Separate research has investigated many cognitive
processes involved in successful learning, such as selfexplanation and analogical reasoning (Nokes & Ross, 2007).
This work generally uses the ability to flexibly transfer
knowledge from one situation to another as the dependent
variable, a more sensitive measure of what has been learned
than term grades. The typical paradigm used to assess this
will compare two instructional interventions and measure
performance, but the ways in which the interventions
differentially interact with student motivation is almost
never investigated.
The study reported here aims to bridge the divide between
research on motivation, which leaves successful learning as
a black box, and laboratory studies of cognitive processing
for transfer, which do not take motivational variables into
account. Specifically, this work begins to explore how
motivation can influence what knowledge flexibly transfers
to new problems.

What motivates people is, of course, highly idiosyncratic
and multifaceted. Different frameworks have been proposed
for explaining various aspects of motivated behavior, such
as self-efficacy, value expectancy, intrinsic motivation, and
achievement goals (for a review of these constructs, see
Schunk, 2000). Because we are particularly interested in
how motivation affects learning in academic contexts, we
have chosen to focus on achievement goals, which have
been studied extensively in academic settings. Achievement
goals, broadly stated, are the reasons why a person engages
in a task. Two general goals have been differentiated,
mastery (or learning) and performance (Elliott & Dweck,
1988). Mastery goals are those that deal with one’s skill in
and understanding of a topic, while performance goals deal
with evaluation of ability. More recent work has included
the distinction between approach and avoidance goals,
within mastery and performance (Elliot & McGregor, 2001).
Approach goals deal with seeking out positive outcomes,
while avoidance goals deal with avoiding negative ones.
A number of assessments have been created to measure
these aspects of student motivation for engaging in
academics. In addition to measuring these constructs,
studies have also examined the effect of having a particular
orientation on different measures of learning and
achievement, both as a covariate (e.g., Wolters, 2004), and
experimentally (e.g., Elliott & Dweck, 1988). Generally,
mastery-approach goals have been found to lead to more
positive learning outcomes, such as increased interest in the
topic and a deeper understanding of the materials
(Somuncuoglu & Yildirim, 1999). The evidence is more
mixed for the effect of mastery-approach goals on measures
of achievement, such as grades; some studies show no
correlation (Elliot, McGregor & Gable, 1999), while others
find a positive relationship (Grant & Dweck, 2003).
Performance-approach goals have been found to correlate
with grades, but less well to beneficial strategies and deep
learning, and avoidance goals are generally found to be
harmful for learning (i.e., Elliot, McGregor & Gable, 1999).
Many studies have assessed motivation, and then
correlated it with academic achievement. However, even
among studies that have experimentally manipulated
achievement goals, the dependent measure has generally
been affective state, topic interest, strategy use, response to
difficulties or simple measures of learning, but rarely of the
transfer of knowledge (i.e., Elliott & Dweck, 1988).

1163

Transfer
A standard experiment on transfer consists of two groups
who receive some learning intervention (treatment versus
control) followed by a novel test (i.e., a new problem or
task). Any differences in test performance are attributed to
the effect of experimental manipulation; if participants are
able to solve the new problem or perform a new task,
transfer is said to have occurred. This experimental
paradigm has led to a body of results that show mixed
evidence for transfer (see Detterman, 1993 for a discussion).
Implicit within this paradigm is the assumption that
knowledge transfer should be defined as the applicative and
replicative use of the acquired knowledge (Bransford &
Schwartz, 1999). That is, knowledge is said to “transfer out”
if it can be used to solve new problems outside of the
original learning environment. However, this paradigm does
not capture other aspects of transfer, such as preparation for
future learning, or what one “transfers in” to a new learning
situation.
Recently, a new methodology was developed to better
understand transfer phenomena and to account for the
difficulty of finding transfer in the laboratory. Schwartz and
colleagues have called this paradigm “Preparation for Future
Learning” (Bransford & Schwartz, 1999; Schwartz &
Martin, 2004). This paradigm was constructed to capture the
transfer in / transfer out distinction. Specifically, it allows
researchers to test whether certain types of initial activities
allow better preparation for transfer by creating knowledge
that is more suitable to be “transferred in” to a subsequent
learning experience. Because we have adapted this
paradigm and materials in this study, we will briefly review
the original work and its experimental methodology
(Schwartz & Martin, 2004).
Preparation for Future Learning. To test how different
learning activities influence both what “transfers in” and
what “transfers out,” a double-transfer paradigm was
developed (as in Figure 1; Schwartz & Martin, 2004). In this
paradigm, the outside lines represent conditions that test
how an initial activity prepares one to transfer that
knowledge to solve a novel problem. These are equivalent
to “standard” transfer experiments, where what is being
tested is the ability to apply the acquired knowledge to solve
a novel problem. In contrast, the inside lines represent
conditions that test how the initial activity impacts learning
from a new instructional resource (i.e., a worked example)
and how those combined learning experiences impact
solving the same transfer problem.
Comparison between the four experimental conditions
allows one to separate the effect of the original learning on
transfer from the effect of learning from a resource. For
example, in one study, half of the students were instructed
to invent a method for calculating a way to standardize
scores (Schwartz & Martin, 2004). The other half was given
direct instruction and shown a graphical procedure to solve
such a problem (i.e., the tell-and-practice condition in
Figure 1). Then, all students took a test that included a
transfer question dealing with comparing individuals’

performance from two different samples. However, rather
than dealing with the raw data, this question dealt with
descriptive statistics. From each of those two groups, half
received a worked example in the test (i.e., the learning
resource), showing them how to compute a standardized
score.
The results revealed that the only students to show
improvement were those who completed invention activities
and received the worked example. All other conditions
showed almost no improvement, including those who had
received a worked example after being shown and
practicing a perfectly valid method for answering such a
question. This provided strong evidence that the invention
activities had better prepared students to learn from the
worked example, and notice when that knowledge applied to
a novel problem.
Invent a procedure

Tell-and-Practice
a graphical method

Transfer In
Transfer
Out

Worked Example in
Test

Transfer
Out

Transfer Out
Transfer problem

Figure 1. The PFL design tests whether the original
intervention is adequate preparation for the transfer
problem, and separates the effects of initial activities
from those of later ones.

This measure of transfer showed the utility of invention
activities to ‘transfer in’ for future learning, while more
traditional transfer paradigms would have missed this
distinction (i.e. the outside lines, which showed no
improvement).
The prediction that invention would better prepare
students for future learning was based on prior work that
hypothesized that contrasting cases would draw attention to
critical features of the concept to be learned. This would
create “differentiated” knowledge that could be integrated
with new information, such as a lecture. Although the
results of the experiment are consistent with this
interpretation, other possibilities remain. One possibility is
that the invention activities produced a mastery orientation
in students, causing them to actively seek out a deeper
understanding of the materials. This possibility was the
focus of the current study.

Transfer and Motivation
Both the double-transfer paradigm and the findings for a
benefit for invention activities have provided valuable
evidence, tools, and ideas with which to explore the effects
of motivation on transfer. In the current study we investigate
the following three hypotheses: 1) invention activities will

1164

best prepare students to learn from an embedded worked
example and to transfer that knowledge to a novel problem,
2) initial motivation orientation will interact with learning
activities and assessment items, such that those who
perform invention tasks would do better on the transfer
item, while only those already high in mastery would
transfer from direct instruction, and 3) invention activities
will produce a more mastery-oriented response, regardless
of initial orientation.

Methods
Our materials and procedure were modeled on the Schwartz
and Martin (2004) study, with three critical differences. One
is that participants in our study worked individually.
Another is that, in their study, all students invented first, and
then were split into experimental groups. In our study, the
invention group invented throughout, while the tell-andpractice group practiced methods they were shown
throughout. Finally, our study used college students, while
theirs had used high school students.

Participants
One hundred and four undergraduates from the University
of Pittsburgh participated in return for course credit.

Design and Materials
The present study used a 2 (learning activity: invention
versus tell-and-practice) X 2 (learning resource: present
versus not), between-subjects, pre-posttest design (see
Figure 1). Materials were presented as packets in binders.
These packets contained, in order, an initial questionnaire, a
pre-test, a learning activity, an activity questionnaire, space
to work on practice problems presented in a video, another
learning activity, a post-test, a final questionnaire, and a
demographics sheet. The pre-test included an item on the
critical transfer concept, standardization. Then, on post-test,
participants completed an isomorphic problem (the order of
problem presentation was counterbalanced). This way, we
could compute an adjusted score, which we used as our
critical dependent variable.
Learning activities. All participants completed a
problem-solving activity on variability, watched a video
explaining the mean deviation formula, and then completed
a problem-solving activity on standardization. The
variability problem asked students to calculate which
pitching machine was the most reliable, requiring students
to consider how variable the data sets were (see Figure 2).
The video introduced the mean deviation formula, and
demonstrated its use in a worked example. The video then
gave two simple practice problems students completed on
their own, each of which was followed by a walkthrough of
the solution steps. The standardization problem required
students to decide which of two world records was “more
shattered,” requiring students to compare individual scores
from two different samples. The experimental manipulation
was instantiated through different instructions and examples
provided with the variability and standardization problem,
which asked participants to complete the activities in

different ways, as will be described next. It is important to
note that the actual problems to be completed were identical
across the two conditions, and both groups watched the
same video.
The invention condition had instructions such as “Your
task is to invent a procedure for computing a quantity that
expresses the variability for each of the pitching machines
and decide which is most reliable. There is no single way to
do this, but you have to use the same procedure for each
machine, so it is a fair comparison.” They were given scrap
paper and a calculator, but no other resources. In the telland-practice condition, the two problems were preceded by
worked examples. For the variability problem, this example
described how to compute mean deviation. For the
standardization problem, the example illustrated how to
graphically arrive at a solution. In both activities, tell-andpractice instructions explicitly stated to “… use the
procedure shown before” in solving the problem.
Embedded Resource. The other factor, learning
resource, was manipulated by the presence or absence of a
worked example in the post-test. This was presented as a
problem to solve, and it demonstrated how to calculate a
standardized score. Participants were randomly assigned
packets, half of which included the resource and half of
which did not. In packets containing the embedded resource,
the transfer question always appeared at least two problems
after the worked example. If participants noticed the
applicability of the worked example to the transfer problem,
this was not due to simple temporal proximity, as at least 10
minutes had passed, during which other types of problems
had been considered.

Figure 2. Image of the data sets given in the learning activity
about variability.

Test Items. The test consisted of items designed to
measure procedural fluency, qualitative reasoning,
conceptual knowledge, adaptive use of knowledge, and
transfer. Procedural fluency was defined as successful use of
the mean deviation formula in a simple problem. The
qualitative reasoning problem asked participants to compare
two different data sets which differed in important
qualitative ways (i.e. consistency vs. higher values).
Conceptual knowledge was rated by asking participants to
describe why the mean deviation formula requires dividing
by “n.” The adaptive use item asked students to invent a

1165

method for calculating variability from bivariate data, which
was not covered in the instructional materials. The transfer
item gave participants two individual scores from different
distributions, and asked them to decide which was better,
with directions to “use math to back up your opinion.”
These problems were presented in a randomized order.
Three types of problems appeared on both the pre-test and
post-test (procedural fluency, qualitative reasoning, and
transfer); two isomorphic versions of these problems were
used and their order of presentation was counter-balanced
across subjects.
Motivational measures. Achievement goals were
assessed using a 12-item, validated measure (Elliott &
McGregor, 2001) which had three items for each of the four
constructs
(mastery-approach,
mastery-avoidance,
performance-approach, performance-avoidance; see Table 1
for examples of each). Each item consisted of a statement
about one’s goals in math classes, and asked the participant
to rate the degree to which they agree or disagree on a 7point Likert scale. This measure was adapted to be
specifically about goals in math classes, rather than a global
assessment about academics. Two forms were created with
all 12 items in a randomized order; one was administered at
the beginning of the experiment and one at the end. We also
developed a questionnaire to measure participants’
motivations and affective experiences during the initial
learning activity. Items on this questionnaire assessed both
mastery and performance orientations.
Table 1. Examples of items on the motivation questionnaires
(adapted from Elliot & McGregor, 2001).
Mastery-Approach
Performance-Approach
 In math class, I want to learn  In math class, it is important
as much as possible.
for me to do well compared
to others.
Mastery-Avoidance
Performance-Avoidance
 In math class, I worry that I  In math class, my goal is to
may not learn all that I
avoid performing poorly.
possibly could.

Procedure
The study was run in groups of 6 in a 2-hour laboratory
session. The study consisted of an initial questionnaire, a
pre-test, a learning activity, the activity questionnaire, a
video, another learning activity, a post-test, a final
questionnaire, and a demographics sheet. Participants took
as long as they needed to complete the questionnaires, with
no one taking longer than 3 minutes. The two learning
activities and the video took 15 minutes each. Participants
were given 5 minutes for each test item.

Results
Our analyses focus on measures of target knowledge,
transfer, and motivation. Target knowledge was assessed to
see if basic skills were acquired through our interventions.
Transfer performance allowed us to see if students were
prepared for future learning. Motivation was examined both
in terms of how our interventions affected motivation, and

whether initial motivation interacted with instructional
activities to produce different learning outcomes.
Target knowledge. We first assessed whether the
intervention produced learning gains on knowledge
necessary for transfer. Participants clearly learned the target
knowledge, as far as execution of the mean deviation
formula. Only 6 out of the 104 participants correctly
calculated mean deviation on the pre-test, while 73 could
compute it correctly at post-test. More participants in the
tell-and-practice condition were able to successfully
compute mean deviation on the post-test (41 correct out of
52) than in the invention condition (32 correct out of 52), Χ2
(1, N = 104) = 3.72, p = .05. This is not surprising, as they
learned it earlier and were practicing it while the invention
group was creating their own procedure. There was also a
marginal effect for the participants in the invention
condition to perform better than the tell-and-practice group
on the adaptive use problem t(102) = 1.967, p = .05. This
provides evidence that invention students had more flexible
knowledge, as it required adapting the concept of deviation
to apply to deviation from prediction (i.e., residuals).
However, it is possible that the invention students were just
more prepared to do such a task, as they had practiced
turning their ideas into mathematical procedures during their
invention-based learning activities. There were no
significant differences on the other test items, all Fs (1, 99)
≤ 1.58, ns.
Transfer Performance. To analyze whether invention
and tell-and-practice activities differentially prepare
students to learn from a worked example, we computed an
adjusted score for the transfer question (posttest – pre-test),
using the coding scheme described by Schwartz and Martin
(2004). Correct answers received a score of 2, qualitatively
correct answers received a score of 1, and all other
responses scored 0. Only 5 of the 104 (5%) participants had
a computationally correct answer on the pre-test, and only
22 (21%) had a qualitatively correct answer. Results
reported here include all participants, even those who
answered correctly on the pre-test. For all analyses, the
pattern of results is the same if we exclude those
participants who scored at ceiling on the pre-test.
A 2 X 2 ANOVA was used to evaluate the effects of
learning activity (invention or tell-and-practice) and
embedded resource (present or not) on adjusted transfer
score. There was a large effect for receiving a worked
example (M =.87, SD = .99 for worked example vs. M = .10,
SD = .50 for no worked example), F(1, 99) = 24.33, p <.05,
d = .98. There was no main effect for learning activity F(1,
99) = 1.01, ns, nor was there an interaction effect F(1, 99) =
.53, ns. Planned comparisons revealed no difference among
those who received the worked example after performing
invention activities (M = 1.00, SD = 1.02) or tell-andpractice activities (M = .73, SD = .96), t(101) = .957, ns.
This pattern of results shows that both of the learning
activities seemed to prepare students for future learning,
which is different than the findings in Schwartz & Martin

1166

everyone did poorly (all Ms < .17). However, among those
who received a worked example embedded in the test, an
interaction effect between motivation and activities
emerged, F(1, 48) = 5.463, p < .05, d = .67 (see Figure 3).
Invention activities prepared one to learn from the worked
example, regardless of initial mastery-approach motivation.
However, tell-and-practice activities only prepared those
who entered with a high mastery-approach orientation to
learn from the worked example. A post-hoc t-test showed a
large effect; among tell-and-practice participants who
received the embedded resource, those that entered the study
with a high mastery-approach orientation did much better
than those that did not, t (24) = 4.715, p < .05, d = 1.85.

High MA
Low MA

1.6

Mean Adjused Transfer Score (out of 2)

(2004). Potential reasons for this difference will be
discussed in relation to results on motivation and transfer.
Motivation. There were no significant differences
between invention and tell-and-practice groups on the initial
questionnaire items in terms of their achievement goals, all
Χ2 (6, N = 104) ≤ 10.10, ns. There were also no significant
changes on responses to items from the initial questionnaire
to the final questionnaire, all Χ2 (7, N =104) ≤ 12.08, ns. It is
perhaps not surprising that the intervention did not produce
large changes in patterns of response. One reason may be
due to memory effects, as participants might be able to
recall how they answered the first time. Another possible
interpretation is that the constructs being measured are
stable dispositions of the participants and not vulnerable to
large, immediate changes.
There were, however, differences in responses to items on
the activity questionnaire, administered immediately after
the first learning activity. Those in the invent condition were
more likely to agree with the statement “During this
activity, I was concerned with the quality of the procedure I
was using,” Χ2 (4, N =104) = 10.975, p < .05. Differences on
the item “During this activity, I was concerned with how
well I understood the procedure I was using” were
marginally significant, Χ2 (4, N = 104) = 8.870, p = .064.
This provides evidence that the manipulation of activities
produced a difference in achievement goals on the particular
tasks they were engaged in. Specifically, both of these items
were designed to test mastery orientations, and they were
both more highly reported by those who invented.
We had predicted an interaction of initial motivation
orientation and activity type, such that those high in
performance-approach who completed the tell-and-practice
activities would do better on simple measures of procedural
skill. We also predicted that those high in mastery-approach
who performed invention activities would do better on the
transfer item. To examine the effect of initial motivation on
subsequent performance, we created a high and low group
for each motivation construct based on a median split of the
data.
The most direct measure of procedural skill was the test
item which asked participants to compute a mean deviation.
Among those low in performance-approach, there were no
differences between those who invented or received telland-practice instruction Χ2 (1, N = 52), = .197, ns. However,
among those high in performance-approach, completing the
tell-and-practice packet led to a correct calculation of mean
deviation more frequently than inventing (24 tell-andpractice correct vs. 15 invention correct), Χ2 (1, N = 51) =
4.917, p < .05, d = .65; phi = .31.
Motivation and Transfer Interaction. The interaction
effect of mastery-approach orientation, activities, and the
embedded resource on transfer performance led to a more
complex pattern of results. As discussed earlier, there was a
large difference on the adjusted transfer score between
groups who received a worked example and those that did
not. There was no effect of activities or initial orientation
among those who did not receive a worked example;

1.38

1.4
1.2

1.07

1

0.92

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.08

0

+ / - 1 S.E.

Invent

Tell-and-Practice

Figure 3. Mean performance on transfer task for each learning
condition with a worked example as a function of
participants’ mastery orientation (high or low).

Discussion
We had hypothesized that only those students who invented
would be prepared to learn from the worked example,
resulting in increased transfer performance. Though
previous research had found that effect, this was not
supported in our study. Instead, we observed that students
who received the worked example did better than those that
did not. One potential reason for this difference comes from
the sample populations used, as our study included college
students, and previous work had been conducted with high
school students. However, we did see differences on
particular test items. Tell-and-practice led to better
procedural skill calculating mean deviation, while invention
led to more adaptive use of knowledge to solve a novel
problem dealing with bivariate data. This pattern is in line
with the idea that invention prepares students to use their
knowledge more innovatively, while tell-and-practice is an
efficient way to acquire skill in a domain.
The other hypotheses dealt with motivation, and these
were both supported by the results. We had predicted that
invention activities promoted more mastery-approach goals,

1167

and found evidence for this on a questionnaire administered
right after the activities. We had also predicted interactions
between initial motivation orientation, type of learning
activity, and problem type. Results from two test items
supported this view; those high in performance-approach
who completed tell-and-practice activities did better on
simple measures of procedural skill, and those high in
mastery approach performed better on the transfer item.
In addition, some interesting patterns emerged in relation
to initial motivation. While being high in mastery-approach
was beneficial for measures of conceptual knowledge and
transfer, as was expected, we did not see a difference
between tell-and-practice and invention for those who
entered our study high in mastery-approach. However, we
did see important differences among those low in masteryapproach – namely, those who invented did better than those
who were shown a method and practiced it. Impressively,
invention produced strong learning gains regardless of
initial mastery-approach orientation, while tell-and-practice
was only beneficial for those who entered with a highmastery approach orientation. Previous research suggests
that people with a mastery-approach orientation may have
shown more improvement because they used better
strategies and persisted through difficulties (Elliot,
McGregor, & Gable, 1999), or had more positive affective
responses, such as feeling interested in the topic (Hulleman,
Durik, Schweigert, & Harackiewicz, 2008).

Conclusions
Our study illustrated the utility of the “Preparation for
Future Learning,” double-transfer paradigm by enabling us
to examine the effect of motivation on transfer. The
interaction between initial motivation, learning activities
and preparation for future learning provided clear evidence
that motivation can influence what people notice, and how
they can transfer their knowledge. The results also provide
evidence for our hypothesis that invention activities are
beneficially motivating, as those who entered low in
mastery-approach ended up doing just as well as those who
had endorsed mastery-approach goals. A reasonable
alternative hypothesis is that invention activities are
beneficial regardless of initial motivation. Schwartz &
Martin (2004) grounded their work in the idea that the act of
contrasting cases creates a base of knowledge about
important, relevant features of the problem space, and this
knowledge is more easily integrated with future instruction.
Such an account is quite plausible, and more work is
necessary to unpack this cognitive account, such as whether
there are crucial pieces of knowledge necessary for students
to notice before being shown the correct procedure, or
whether some “critical mass” of features is sufficient.
However, the activity questionnaire provides converging
evidence for the view that invention actually changed
motivation, as it showed that people in the invent condition
were more concerned with the quality of the procedure they
were using, and how well they understood that procedure.

This study highlights the importance of integrating
cognitive theories with motivational analyses. Further
exploration of interactions between activities and motivation
such as the one we observed will be critical for expanding
theories of learning, as well as for understanding learning
outside of the laboratory. In classroom settings, learning
occurs at the intersection of social influences, active
interaction with different materials, cognitive processing,
affective responses, and personal motivations. This research
has illustrated that integration of motivation with learning
activities grounded in cognitive theories can produce both
practical and theoretically fruitful results.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation,
Grant Number SBE-0354420 to the Pittsburgh Science of Learning
Center (http://www.learnlab.org).

References
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking transfer: A
simple proposal with multiple implications. In A. Iran-Nejad &
P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of Research in Education, (vol. 24;
pp. 61-100). Washington, DC: American Educational Research
Association.
Detterman, D. K., (1993). The case for the prosecution: Transfer as
epiphenomenon. In D. K. Detterman & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.),
Transfer on Trial: Intelligence, Cognition, and Instruction
(pp.1-24 ). Norwood, NJ: Ablex
Elliot, A. J., McGregor, H. A., & Gable, S. (1999). Achievement
goals, study strategies, and exam performance: A meditational
analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91 (3), 549-563.
Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2 X 2 achievement goal
framework. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
80(3), 501-519.
Elliott, E. S., & Dweck, C. S. (1988). Goals: An approach to
motivation and achievement. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54(1), 5-12.
Grant, H. & Dweck, C. S. (2003). Clarifying achievement goals
and their impact. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
85 (3), 541-553.
Hulleman, C. S., Durik, A. M., Schweigert, S. A. & Harackiewicz,
J. M. (2008). Task values, achievement goals, and interest: An
integrative analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100
(2), 398-416.
Nokes. T. J., & Ross, B. H. (2007). Facilitating conceptual learning
through analogy and explanation. In L. Hsu, C. Henderson, and
L. McCullough (Eds.), 2007 Physics Education Conference (pp.
7-10). American Institute of Physics Conference Proceedings.
Schunk, D. H. (2000). Coming to terms with motivation constructs.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1), 116-119.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare for
future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouraging original
student production in statistics instruction. Cognition and
Instruction, 22(2), 129-184.
Somuncuoglu, Y. & Yildirim, A. (1999). Relationship between
achievement goal orientations and the use of learning strategies.
The Journal of Educational Research, 92 (5), 267-277.
Wolters, C. A. (2004). Advancing achievement goal theory: Using
goal structures and goal orientations to predict students’
motivation, cognition, and achievement. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 96(2), 236-250.

1168

