UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multi-Layered Model of Self: A Functional Neuroimaging Perspective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5ng512c7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Sugiura, Motoaki

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multi-Layered Model of Self: A Functional Neuroimaging Perspective
Motoaki Sugiura (motoaki@idac.tohoku.ac.jp)
Department of Functional Brain Imaging, IDAC, Tohoku University
Seiryo-machi 4-1, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan
Keywords: self; self-face; model; social cognition; functional
neuroimaging; fMRI; parietal; frontal; prefrontal

medial prefrontal cortex, which is implicated in social selfawareness (Kampe et al., 2003).

Multi-Layered Model of Self

iv) Conflict-Reconciliation Layer: Integrated Self

Recent functional neuroimaging findings suggest that the
self is not a unitary entity in the brain. Cortical areas
specifically activated during self-face recognition are
unlikely to comprise a single network associated with a
unitary process (Sugiura et al., 2006). These regions do not
respond to the self-name (Sugiura et al., 2008), and do not
overlap with the areas involved in social self-awareness
(Kampe, Frith, & Frith, 2003) or emotional self-regulation
(Beauregard, Lévesque, & Bourgouin, 2001).
We propose a model of self that is independently
implemented in multiple cognitive layers. Our brain must
evaluate and respond to any environmental signal that is
potentially critical to our survival. "Self" is assumed to
represent a system that suppresses signal processing when
the signal is predictable as a consequence of a self-generated
cognitive or motor act. This feedforward inhibitory system
allows efficient use of cognitive resources.
We
hypothesized four hierarchical layers relevant to social
cognitive development:

Since one establishes multiple social selves as appropriate
for various communities and occasions, conflict may arise
because the values (i.e., ideals) of these social selves differ.
One's resources (e.g., physical, economic) and innate
preferences may also limit pursuit of the ideal social self.
Successful reconciliation of these conflicts may represent
the "integrated self", which may be supported by the orbital
and/or dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, also implicated in
emotional self-regulation (Beauregard et al., 2001).

Future Direction of the Model
This model generates many hypotheses for each layer that
can be tested by examining the suppression of neural
activity in specific areas during relevant conditions. The
current model is intended only to begin a sequence in which
it is evaluated and revised by testing hypotheses. An
established model could serve as a biologically valid model
of the self and contribute to clinical research into psychiatric
diseases related to the self, such as schizophrenia.

i) Sensorimotor Layer: Physical Self
Sensory input is derived both from environmental change
and from one's own movement. Successful feedforward
suppression of the sensorimotor integration of the latter
represents "physical self". This suppression is likely to
occur in the frontoparietal network (Fink et al., 1999),
which also associates bodily expression with mental state.

ii) Social-Signal Layer: Personal Self
Signals of mental states mediated by bodily expressions and
representations (e.g., clothes, names) of others have prime
importance in social survival. Successful suppression of the
processing of such signals attributable to the self represents
the "personal self". This suppression occurs in the posterior
superior temporal sulcus (Sugiura et al., 2005, 2008), which
also integrates perceived mental states into identity-specific
representations (i.e., theory of mind).

iii) Social-Behavior Layer: Social Self
Animals having mature representations of others’ mental
states consequently recognize a self represented in the
minds of others, and try to improve this representation by
changing social behaviors. This effort is suppressed when
the representation is stable and satisfactory, which
represents the "social self." This process may involve the

References
Beauregard, M., Lévesque, J., Bourgouin, P. (2001). Neural
correlates of conscious self-regulation of emotion.
Journal of Neuroscience, 21, RC165.
Fink, G.R., Marshall, J.C., Halligan, P.W., Frith, C.D.,
Driver, J., Frackowiak, R.S.J., & Dolan, R.J. (1999). The
neural consequences of conflict between intention and the
scenes. Brain, 122, 497–512.
Kampe, K. K., Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (2003). "Hey John":
signals conveying communicative intention toward the
self activate brain regions associated with "mentalizing,"
regardless of modality. Journal of Neuroscience, 23,
5258-5263.
Sugiura, M., Watanabe, J., Maeda, Y., Matsue, Y., Fukuda,
H., & Kawashima, R. (2005). Cortical mechanisms of
visual self-recognition. NeuroImage, 24, 143–149.
Sugiura, M., Sassa, Y., Jeong, H., Miura, N., Akitsuki, Y.,
Horie, K., Sato, S., & Kawashima, R. (2006). Multiple
brain networks for visual self recognition with different
sensitivity for motion and body part. NeuroImage, 32,
1905–1917.
Sugiura, M., Sassa, Y., Jeong, H., Horie, K., Sato, S., &
Kawashima, R. (2008). Face-specific and domain-general
characteristics of cortical responses during selfrecognition. Neuroimage, 42, 414-422.

2600

