UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multimodal Abduction. External Semiotic Anchors and Hybrid Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2kt9v412

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Magnani, Lorenzo

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multimodal Abduction
External Semiotic Anchors and Hybrid Representations
Lorenzo Magnani (lmagnani@unipv.it)
Department of Philosophy and Computational Philosophy Laboratory, Piazza Botta 6
27100 Pavia, Italy, and Department of Philosophy, Sun Yat-sen University,
510275, Guangzhou, P. R. China,
Keywords: abduction; hybrid representations; multimodal cognition; discovery; cognitive and epistemic mediators; semiosis.

Our brains make up a series of signs and are engaged in making or manifesting or reacting to a series of signs: through this
semiotic activity they are at the same time engaged in “being
minds” and so in thinking intelligently. An important effect of
this semiotic activity of brains is a continuous process of “externalization of the mind” that exhibits a new cognitive perspective on the mechanisms underlying the emergence of abductive processes of meaning formation. To illustrate this process I have taken advantage of the analysis of some aspects of
the cognitive interplay between internal and external representations. I consider this interplay critical in analyzing the relation
between meaningful semiotic internal resources and devices
and their dynamical interactions with the externalized semiotic
materiality suitably stocked in the environment. Hence, minds
are material, “extended” and artificial in themselves. I have
recently provided concrete examples relating my philosophical
points to neuroanatomy and neuropsychology taking advantage
of an analysis of some aspects of animal cognition (Magnani,
2007b) and of the concept of direct and indirect affordance
(Magnani, 2007c).
A considerable part of human abductive thinking is occurring
through an activity consisting in a kind of reification in the
external environment (that originates what I call semiotic anchors) and a subsequent re–projection and reinterpretation
through new configurations of neural networks and chemical
processes. In my recent research I have illustrated how this
activity takes advantage of hybrid representations and how it
can nicely account for various processes of creative and selective abduction, bringing up the question of how “multimodal”
aspects involving a full range of sensory modalities are important in hypothetical reasoning.
I maintain that abduction is the process of “inferring” certain
facts and/or laws and hypotheses that render some sentences
plausible, that “explain” or “discover” some (eventually new)
phenomenon or observation; it is the process of reasoning in
which explanatory hypotheses are formed and evaluated. In
(Magnani, 2001) I have introduced the concept of theoretical
abduction, as a form of internal processing. There are two kinds
of theoretical abduction, “sentential”, related to logic and to
verbal/symbolic inferences, and “model-based”, related to the
exploitation of internalized models of diagrams, pictures, etc.
Theoretical abduction illustrates and cognitively integrates
much of what is important in creative reasoning in science, in
humans and in computational programs, but fails to account for
many cases of explanations (for example occurring in science)
when the exploitation of environment is crucial. The concept of

manipulative abduction (Magnani, 2001) aims at capturing a
large part of agent’s thinking where the role of action (and, in
science, of what I call epistemic mediators) is central, and
where the features of this action are implicit and hard to be
elicited: action can provide otherwise unavailable information
that enables the agent to solve problems by starting and by performing a suitable abductive process of generation or selection
of hypotheses. The role of manipulative abduction and mediators in moral reasoning is illustrated in the recent Magnani
(2007a).
Many commentators criticized the Peircian ambiguity in
treating abduction in the same time as inference and perception. It is important to clarify this problem – also considering some perspectives that derive from the field of animal
cognition – because perception and imagery are kinds of
that model-based cognition which we are exploiting to explain abduction: in (Magnani, 2006 and 2007b) I conclude
we can render consistent the two views, beyond Peirce, but
perhaps also within the Peircian texts, taking advantage of
the concept of multimodal abduction, which depicts hybrid
aspects of abductive reasoning. Abduction is fully multimodal, in that both data and hypotheses can have a full range of
verbal and sensory representations. In my recent research I
have illustrated some aspects of this constitutive hybrid nature of abduction – involving words, sights, images, smells,
etc. but also kinesthetic experiences and other feelings.

References
Magnani, L. (2007a), Morality in a Technological World: Knowledge as Duty, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
Magnani, L. (2007b), Animal abduction. From mindless organisms
to artifactual mediators. In L. Magnani and P. Li (eds.). ModelBased Reasoning in Science and Medicine. Berlin: Springer.
Magnani, L. and Bardone, E. (2007c). Sharing representations and
creating chances through cognitive niche construction. The role of
affordances and abduction, in: Iwata, S., Oshawa, Y., Tsumoto, S.,
Zhong, N., Shi, Y. and Magnani, L. (eds.). Communications and
Discoveries from Multidisciplinary Data, Series “Studies in Computational Intelligence”, Springer, Berlin/New York.
Magnani, L. (2006). Multimodal abduction. External semiotic anchors and hybrid representations. Logic Journal of the IGPS
14(1):107-136.
Magnani, L. (2001). Abduction, Reason, and Science. Processes of
Discovery and Explanation. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers. (Chinese version: [意] 洛伦佐·玛格纳尼 /

1102

著；李大超，任远
/
译，《溯因、理由与科学——
发现和解释的过程》，中国广州：广东人民出版社2006年. Trans-

lated by Dachao Li and Yuan Ren, Guangdong People’s Publishing House, Guangzhou, 2006).

