UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Neural Substrates of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Study Using Negative Priming Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5h75015j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Choi, Nam Hee
Lee, Byeong-Taek
Lee, Dong Hoon
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Neural Substrates of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study Using Negative Priming Task
jeong ryu
yonsei university seoul institute for narrative studies

Byeong-Taek Lee
Seoul National University

Myeong-Ho Sohn
George Washington University

Dong Hoon Lee
Indiana University

Nam Hee Choi
Seoul Women’s College of Nursing Seoul Institute for Narrative Studies
Abstract: associated with emotional problems. Recently, however, the impact of PTSD on cognitive processes has
interested a growing number of researchers. The current study is aimed at investigating the cognitive aspects of
PTSD at both behavioral and neurological levels.
Methods We recruited individuals with PTSD who survived the DAEGU subway explosion in 2003 as well as
non-PTSD individuals as a control group. To evaluate the inhibitory processes and the neural mechanisms, we had
these individuals perform the negative priming task simultaneously with functional MRI scanning.
participants PTSD group: DAEGU subway explosion right-handed survivors 13(male 8, female 5) with a mean
age of 26.0 years (range=23-30). Control group: right-handed male 10 and female 7 with a mean age 26.8 years
(range=23-33) task Shematic the visuospatial primng paradigm.
Trials were perfomed in pairs (S1 and S2). If the position of the distractor(X) in S1 was in the same position
than that of the target in S2, the trial was neutral. When the target was in the same position in S1 and S2, the
trial was facilitatory (positive pirme). The durations of S1, S2 and the interstimulus interval(ISI) are as indicated in
milliseconds(ms).
A Signa 1.5T Tesla imaging device (Siemens Medical Systems, Iselin, New Jersey, USA) with a three-axis gradient
head coil was used. TR 1500ms, TE 60ms, flip angle 90o, number of slices 18 without gap, slice thickness 6.0mm,
matrix size 64]64, field of view 240]240mm, in plane resolution 3.75]3.75 Gradient-echo functional images were collcted
in the same plane [AC-PC (anterior commissure - posterior ommissure) line, TR 500ms, TE12ms, matrix size 256]256
]
Results Behaviorally, the negative priming effect was intact in the control group but was not evident in the PTSD
group. In the imaging results, only the PTSD group showed the negative priming effect (i.e., increased activation
of the negative priming condition as opposed to the neutral condition) in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior
cingulated cortex, and inferior temporal gyrus. The PTSD group also showed increased activity for the positive
priming condition as opposed to the neutral condition in the claustrum. These results confirm and extend the
previous findings that the integrity of the ACC is compromised in the trauma survivors due to disrupted white
matter tract..
Behavior results Response time (msec) and accuracy(deviation in the parentheses, in the neutral positive, and
negative conditions of PTSD and control group.
Imaging results Local maxima in the activated regions by the PTSD group for the positive versus neutral conditions
and the negative vursus neutral conditions. The specific coordinates are presented in the MNI space; k represents
the cluster size of activated voxels, and BA represents Brodmann area. The activated regions were determined with
a threshold of p¡0.001(uncorrected for multiple comparisons) and a cluster size of at least 10 voxels.
Conclusions The current results suggest that deteriorated performance of the PTSD group may be due to the
functional problem as well as the structural abnormalities.

3244

