UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Neuroimaging Evidence on the Role of the Prefrontal Cortex in Dynamic Object
Categorization for Goal-Achievement
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8df8c6h9
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Chrysikou, Evangelia G.
Thompson-Schill, Sharon L.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

       Neuroimaging Evidence on the Role of the Prefrontal Cortex in
               Dynamic Object Categorization for Goal-Achievement
                                              Evangelia G. Chrysikou
                                                University of Pennsylvania
                                           Sharon L. Thompson-Schill
                                                University of Pennsylvania
Abstract: Work in neuroscience has revealed the role of the frontal lobes in higher-order, close-ended cognitive
tasks that require cognitive control (e.g., working memory, task switching, interference resolution). However, pre-
vious studies have not explored the involvement and function of the frontal lobes in open-ended, ecologically-valid,
goal-oriented tasks. In this study we combined a close-ended task (i.e., generating the common use for everyday
objects) and an open-ended task (i.e., generating an uncommon use for objects) in an event-related fMRI paradigm.
The results of subject-wise and item-wise analyses reveal a tradeoff between regions that specialize in rule-based
processing (i.e., the left lateral prefrontal cortex) and regions involved in high-level perceptual processing (i.e., the
lateral occipital complex) in open-ended tasks. Furthermore, the novelty and plausibility of participants responses
differentially predicted activity in these regions. We discuss possible implications of these findings for accounts of
semantic memory organization and prefrontal cortex function.
                                                           3239

