UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Novel Insights into Statistical Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0w4759v5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Arciuli, Joanne
Simpson, Ian

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Novel Insights into Statistical Learning
Ian Simpson (isim2083@usyd.edu.au)
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Sydney
Australia

Joanne Arciuli (jarciuli@usyd.edu.au)
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Sydney
Australia
Abstract

foundational study of adults’ ability to learn temporal
relationships amongst visually presented shapes indicated
significant SL after only 6 minutes of exposure (Fiser &
Aslin, 2002). Recently, it was shown that infants less that a
year old possess the capacity for VSL (Kirkham et al.,
2002). There has been demonstration of the learning of
position-dependent and position-independent statistical
regularities using visually presented shapes (e.g., Fiser &
Aslin, 2001) and the learning of real world scenes (Brady &
Oliva, 2008).
The claim that SL plays a key role in the acquisition of
language stands in contrast with the persuasive notion that
language is too complex and the language learner’s
environment too impoverished for language acquisition to
be subserved by a general learning mechanism. These
views, combined with an assumption that cognitive
functions are organized in a modular way, has led to the
suggestion that language acquisition might be subserved by
an innate mechanism (preprogrammed with information
about linguistic universals). Patterson and Plaut (2009) cited
Chomsksy: “…we take for granted that the organism does
not learn to grow arms or to reach puberty…. When we turn
to the mind and its products, the situation is not qualitatively
different from what we find in the case of the body”
(Chomsky, 1980, p. 2). The role of endowment versus
learning during language acquisition has led to high-level
and often feisty debate. Little attention has been given to a
third possibility that incorporates both viewpoints –
described as a kind of “innately guided learning” (Gould &
Marler, 1987, p. 62; Yang, 2004).
A lack of empirical evidence is preventing further
scientific advances in this area – “current conceptualizations
of these problems are driven more by theory than by data.”
(Gomez & Gerken, 2000, p. 180) In fact, it is premature to
claim that SL has a significant role to play in language
acquisition. There has been very little investigation of a link
between a capacity for SL and spoken language proficiency.
In a retrospective study, Newman et al. (2006) found that
speech segmentation ability in infants (often attributed to
SL) was linked to later proficiency with natural language at
age 2 and 4–6. To our knowledge, there has been no
examination of whether the capacity for SL is associated
with the acquisition of written language. This latter gap in
the research is surprising given the fact that children must
be guided into a prolonged (and often effortful) period of

The brain has a powerful capacity for statistical learning–an
ability to detect statistical regularities in the environment in
order to make predictions and guide behaviour–often without
conscious awareness. It has been claimed that statistical
learning plays a key role in a range of everyday perceptual
and cognitive processes including those associated with
language. There is demonstration that both spoken and written
forms of natural language contain a rich statistical structure
and there is demonstration that artificial languages are easier
to learn when they contain statistical regularities. And yet, to
date, there is very little empirical data showing a direct link
between a capacity for statistical learning and proficiency
with natural language. Here we report on a study of visual
statistical learning that provides two important insights in the
quest for such empirical evidence: this capacity follows a
developmental trajectory in typically developing children, and
it is correlated with reading ability.
Keywords: statistical learning; visual statistical learning;
reading.

Statistical Learning
The capacity for statistical learning (SL) can be assessed in
a number of ways, for example, by presenting a continuous
stream of evenly paced, individually presented items (be
they objects, shapes, scenes, syllables, tones – represented
here by letters) that contains embedded triplets such as …J–
K–L–D–E–F–J–K–L–A–S–C… After brief exposure,
participants are surprised with a forced-choice familiarity
task and are able to identify embedded triplets (such as JKL)
more reliably than foil triplets. This effect occurs even
though (1) all individual items have been presented an equal
number of times (2) there was no advance warning that
there would be embedded patterns in the stream and (3)
there was an absence of any kind of reinforcement.
Participants often do not have any conscious sense of
familiarity even when they exhibit significant levels of SL.
A seminal study demonstrated that 8-month-olds can
detect statistical patterns embedded in pseudospeech after
only 2 minutes of exposure (Saffran et al., 1996). There is
suggestion that SL might begin in utero (e.g., DeCasper et
al., 1994; DeCasper & Spence, 1986) and evidence that it
can operate on non-linguistic stimuli such as musical tones
(e.g., Creel et al., 2004). To date, the majority of
investigations of SL have examined the processing of
auditory stimuli (ASL) although the number of studies
examining visual stimuli (VSL) is steadily growing. A

189

learning how to read (i.e., reading, unlike speech, generally
does not appear spontaneously).
A first step in the quest for evidence directly linking SL
and acquisition of natural language is to consider the nature
of SL, in particular, whether it follows a developmental
trajectory (as linguistic proficiency does).

letters (e.g., ‘nn’ in ‘inn’) but don’t usually begin with
double letters. In fact, there is a substantial body of evidence
to suggest that there is rich statistical structure in written
language that can be used to guide children’s literacy
development (for some recent work in this area see Arciuli
& Cupples, 2006; 2007; Arciuli & Monaghan, 2009;
Deacon et al., 2008; Monaghan et al., 2008, Seva et al.,
2009; Treiman & Kessler, 2006).

Developmental Effects of Statistical Learning
There has been no purpose-designed study of the variability
of SL in the ‘normal’ population and, more specifically, of a
possible age-related trajectory of VSL. Kirkham et al.
(2002) examined VSL in 2-, 5- and 8-month-olds. The study
was ground breaking in its demonstration of VSL in young
infants (akin to the seminal study of ASL conducted by
Saffran et al., 1996). Results showed that infants learn the
embedded transitional probabilities present in sequences of
visually presented shapes after only a few minutes of
exposure and without any reinforcement. There appeared to
be no age-related effects.
It has been suggested that “Such findings of age
invariance stand in sharp contrast to most other phenomena
in developmental psychology, for which the most obvious
and gross generalisation is that performance improves with
age.” (Saffran et al., 1997, p. 101) An early maturing and
biologically pre-programmed capacity for statistical learning
may have an important adaptive function. It is our view that
age-related effects during VSL have not been thoroughly
investigated. The Kirkham et al. (2002) study examined
three groups of infants, all of them under one year of age.
Perhaps it is the case that there are no significant
developmental changes in VSL in the first year of life.
Alternatively, developmental changes associated with VSL
might be observed over larger increments of time (i.e., in
increasing years of age rather than increasing months). It
seems possible that the inclusion of a larger number of
children from a more varied range of ages might increase
sensitivity and be more likely to lead to the detection of
developmental differences in SL.

The Current Study
In the current study we focused on VSL. Brief, reliable,
child-friendly VSL tests are not widely available. Most tests
of SL are designed for either infants or adults and while
some of these might be appropriate for use with primary
aged children there did not appear to be any immediately
obvious examples of such tests. Thus, a key aim of this
study was the creation of a test of VSL suitable for children
aged 5-12 years. We speculated that an important step in the
quest for direct evidence of a link between SL and
proficiency with natural language is to ascertain whether SL
follows a developmental trajectory. We then sought to
determine whether there is a link between a capacity for
VSL and reading ability.

Experiment 1: Creating a Test of VSL and
Determining Age-Related Effects
Method
Participants Fifty-seven children (mean age of 9:6; range
6:1-12:4) with no known learning, language, hearing or
speech impairments took part. All were native monolingual
speakers of Australian English. Participants are summarized
by age in Table 1.
Table 1: Num. of Subjects Broken Down by Age in Years
Age
(years)
All
Retained

A Possible Relationship Between Visual Statistical
Learning and Reading Ability
SL has most often been discussed in relation to phoneme
discrimination (e.g., Maye et al., 2002), identification of
word boundaries (e.g., Finn & Kam, 2008), acquisition of
syntactic structure (e.g., Rowland & Pine, 2000) and
vocabulary growth (e.g., Yu, 2008) – generally in the
context of spoken language. Reading involves the ability to
successfully learn the significance of a variety of visual
patterns (as well as other skills such as those pertaining to
letter knowledge, phonological awareness, and vocabulary).
For example, when children are learning to read they need
to detect the co-occurrence of particular pairs of letters
within words such as ‘t’ + ‘h’, ‘p’ + ‘h’, ‘c’ + ‘h’ and ‘s’ +
‘h’ which need to be mapped onto entirely different
phonemes than either of their contributing singleton
consonants. They also learn about legal and illegal letter
combinations such as English words can end with double

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Total

6
5

7
6

5
5

14
14

11
11

8
8

6
6

57
55

Apparatus and Materials Twelve cartoon-like figures
were chosen as stimuli for the experiment. The 12 ‘aliens’
were divided into four groups of three (four base triplets)
referred to as ABC, DEF, GHI and JKL.
Design and Procedure Children were tested individually.
In the familiarization phase participants saw a continuous
stream of 312 individually presented aliens. Each alien was
visible for 800msec with a 200msec gap separating each
alien. Thus, the entire familiarization stream lasted
311.8sec. Although participants were told that the aliens
were presented in a random order, the aliens always
appeared as part of their base triplet (e.g. alien D always
immediately preceded alien E which in turn always

190

immediately preceded alien F). The order of the triplets,
however, was randomized. Occasionally, one of the alien
figures was repeated, and this provided a cover task – the
‘alien alert’ task, with participants required to press the
space bar whenever they saw a repeated alien. In total, there
were 24 repeated aliens with each of the 12 individual aliens
repeated on two occasions. Immediately following the
familiarization phase, the test phase commenced. For each
trial in the test phase participants saw two triplets (presented
one after the other), one which had been present in the
familiarization phase (e.g. GHI) and one which had not been
present (e.g. DHL). Within each test triplet, each alien was
presented individually, and was visible for 800msec with a
200msec gap separating each alien. Presentation of aliens
within a test triplet was therefore identical to how they were
presented in the familiarization phase. A 1000msec gap
separated the two triplets in each test trial. Participants were
required to identify which of the two triplets had previously
been present in the familiarization phase. Each participant
completed 64 trials in the test phase with no time restriction
placed on their responses. The mean time to complete the
test phase was 10.2 minutes (S.D. 1.2 minutes).

to provide empirical evidence that would speak directly to
this question of age invariance by investigating children
across a broader age range. Our results indicate that VSL is
affected by age. It could be suggested that our effects might
be accounted for by children’s ability to properly attend
during the tasks. However, we have reasons to believe this
is not the case. First, as described in our Results section, we
excluded participants who did not perform accurately during
familiarization; for example, one child aged 8 identified
only 37.5% of the repeated aliens and registered 20 false
positives. Second, we analyzed the retained group data to
see whether performance deteriorated over time and found
no significant differences in performance between the first
and second half of the Test Phase.

Experiment 2: VSL and Reading Ability
To date, the link between statistical learning ability and
language acquisition has most often been discussed in
relation to phoneme discrimination, identification of word
boundaries, acquisition of syntactic structure and vocabulary
growth – in the context of spoken language skills. Reading
and spelling processes involve the ability to successfully
learn visual patterns (as well as other skills). We sought to
determine if there is a direct link between VSL ability and
literacy skills.

Results
Data from the familiarization phase were inspected to
determine the number of repeated aliens successfully
identified by each subject. Subjects who failed to identify at
least half of the repeated aliens were excluded on the
grounds that they may not have been attending to the
familiarization stream. As a result of this screening two
participants were removed from further analysis (see Table
1). The average number of correct responses on the test
trials for the remaining 55 participants was 61.3%. This was
significantly above chance performance of 50%, t(54) =
4.747, p < .0005. A Pearson’s correlation was performed
between the participants’ performance in the test phase and
their age in years. This proved to be significant, r = .317, p
< .05. As age increased, the amount of VSL demonstrated
by the participant also increased.

Method
Participants A separate group of forty-two children (mean
age of 9:1; range 5:10-12:5) with no known learning,
language, hearing or speech impairments took part. All were
native monolingual speakers of Australian English.
Table 2: Num. of Subjects Broken Down by Age in Years
Age
(years)
All
Retained

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Total

1
0

8
6

7
6

6
6

4
4

6
6

6
6

4
4

42
38

Apparatus, Materials, Design and Procedure Children
were tested individually. The VSL test was identical to
Experiment 1 apart from one change. During familiarization
individual aliens were only visible for 400msec with a
200msec gap separating each alien. It was thought that
shortening the presentation time would strengthen our claim
that triplet recognition in the test phase was due to statistical
learning rather than being the result of some other,
consciously controlled cognitive process. After the VSL test
had been completed, participants were administered the
reading aloud subtest of the WRAT-4 (Wilkinson &
Robertson, 2006).

Discussion
To date, much of the research on SL has examined the
processing of stimuli presented in the auditory modality in
either infants or adults. As far as we are aware, there has not
yet been an investigation of VSL in primary aged children.
We are aware of only one previous study that has examined
the effects of age on VSL (Kirkham et al., 2002) – in
infants. That study found that age did not affect statistical
learning and so is not, at first glance, in line with the present
study which found that age was significantly correlated with
VSL performance in typically developing primary aged
children. Kirkham et al.’s study is invaluable in advancing
our understanding of VSL in infants; however, it might not
have been sensitive enough to detect age-related changes in
statistical learning as Kirkham et al. examined three groups
exhibiting very small differences in age (all participants
were under one year of age). In the current study we sought

Results
Four subjects were excluded due to poor performance in the
familiarization phase (see Table 2). Three subjects were
excluded because they failed to identify at least half of the
repeated aliens. In addition, one subject was found to have

191

an excessive number of false positives; that is, indicating
that they had detected a repeated alien when no repetition
was present on 64% of their responses. This subject was
excluded on the grounds that it was unlikely that they fully
understood what was required of them throughout the
experiment. The average number of correct responses for
the remaining 38 participants was 56.3%. This was
significantly above chance performance t(37) = 3.544, p <
.005. There was a trend for VSL performance to increase as
age in years increased but the Pearson’s correlation between
these two factors just failed to reach significance, r = .297, p
= 071. Scores on the reading subtest of the WRAT-4 ranged
from 24 correct to 56 correct (out of a total of 70). We
conducted a correlational analysis between the performance
on the WRAT-4 and performance on the VSL test,
partialling out age in years. Results showed a significant
correlation between the WRAT-4 and VSL, r = .327, p <
.05. We conducted a second correlational analysis, this time
partialling out grade rather than age. Once again there was a
significant correlation between the WRAT-4 and VSL, r =
.364, p < .05. Higher levels of VSL performance were
associated with better reading performance.

stimuli during the VSL test also demonstrated higher
reading ability. This relationship was shown to be
independent of age and also grade.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1 we demonstrated a relationship between
visual statistical learning and age. This indicates that the
capacity for VSL follows a developmental trajectory in
typically developing children. This is an important finding
because it establishes that VSL is not invariant and that it
can be affected by a participant-related factor, in this case,
age. While this result was not replicated in Experiment 2,
the same trend was present, and we believe that this
apparent discrepancy might be explained by the fact that
there were fewer participants in Experiment 2. In our second
Experiment, we found a correlation between VSL
performance and reading ability. This is an exciting finding
because, although it has often been suggested that SL may
play a role in natural language acquisition, for the first time,
a direct link can be made between statistical learning
performance and an aspect of literacy skill, specifically,
reading aloud.
Clearly, there are a number of factors at play during the
highly complex cognitive task of reading. For instance, we
know that phonological awareness (PA) is a key predictor
(if not the best predictor) of reading ability (see, for
example, Adams, 1990; Kirby, Parrila & Pfeiffer, 2003;
Lundberg, 1991; Stanovich, 1991; Torgesen et al., 1999).
PA is the ability to understand the sound structure of
language and, with regard to reading in English, the ability
to understand how this sound structure maps on to letters of
the alphabet. While VSL might play a role in reading
independently of PA, it seems to us that that the link
between VSL and reading might operate via PA. Being able
to detect co-occurring letter combination such as ‘th’,
‘ph’,’ch’ and ‘sh’ is one thing but there is also the
requirement of mapping these co-occurrences onto
phonology. It seems possible that PA could, in fact, reflect
statistical learning for both auditory input (ASL) and visual
input (VSL). PA might be related to the ability to combine
ASL and VSL in a meaningful way. Future research is
needed to explore this. A further possibility would be to
develop a VSL-based test that could be used to screen for
subjects who may be at risk of developing reading
problems. Certainly, VSL can be tested in young children
long before they start to read. In any case, we hypothesized
that VSL does play a role in reading and the results reported
here indicate this to be the case.
There are a number of other directions for future studies
to pursue. For instance, it would be valuable to compare
VSL performance across a greater range of ages (from preschoolers to older adults). In addition, as suggested by TurkBrowne et al. (2005), it would be interesting to attempt to
determine the absolute upper and lower limits of
performance concerning speed of presentation. Note also
that a capacity for rapid information processing (e.g., rapid
item identification and rapid serial processing of series of

Discussion
Replicating the results from Experiment 1, the children in
Experiment 2 exhibited VSL performance that was
significantly above chance levels. A key finding from
Experiment 1, that of a significant correlation between age
and VSL performance, just failed to reach significance in
Experiment 2 (p = .071). However, the number of retained
subjects for Experiment 2 was lower than for Experiment 1
(38 v 55). We feel that had the numbers been higher, this
result might have been replicated.
It has been argued that the ability to detect statistical
regularities in input or mental representations contributes in
a fundamental way to natural language acquisition. This
claim is hotly debated in the literature (e.g., see Gomez &
Gerken, 2000; Newport & Aslin, 2004; Pena et al., 2002;
Saffran et al., 2008; Seidenberg, 1994; 1997; Seidenberg et
al., 2002; Yang, 2004). However, empirical research
regarding direct links between the capacity for statistical
learning and proficiency with natural language is lacking.
Here, we investigated a possible link between VSL and
literacy in typically developing primary-aged children. We
administered our novel test to assess VSL and also
administered a well-accepted test of reading (WRAT-4).
Results revealed that our VSL test elicited statistical
learning in the form of a significant group effect. The
average degree of learning we obtained in Experiment 2
(56.3%) was smaller than we saw in Experiment 1;
however, speed of presentation was faster in Experiment 2
and the degree of learning was similar to that of other
published studies of VSL (e.g., 59% for fast presentation
speeds as reported by Turk-Browne et al., 2005).
Correlational analyses revealed a significant relationship
between VSL and reading ability. Children who learned
more of the transitional probabilities embedded in the

192

items) has been linked with increased reading ability
(predictors of reading ability are reviewed by Bowey, 2007
and Wolf, 2008 amongst others). While statistical learning
might be shown to be easier with longer stimulus
presentation times, perhaps the capacity for VSL at faster
speeds facilitates language learning (in combination with
age-related increases in the capacity for SL).
In showing that VSL is a variable capacity and is linked
to reading ability, our results help to explain individual
variation in perceptual and cognitive activities thought to
rely, at least in part, on VSL. We consider this to be one of
the most interesting avenues for future research - the direct
examination of the influence of VSL ability on a variety of
everyday mental activities.

DeCasper, A., J., Lecanuet, J., P., Busnel, M., C., &
Maugeais, R.(1994). Fetal reactions to recurrent maternal
speech. Infant Behavior and Development , 17, 159-164.
DeCasper, A. J., & Spence, M. J. (1986). Prenatal maternal
speech influences newborns' perception of speech sounds.
Infant Behavior and Development , 9, 133-150.
Finn, A., & Kam, C. (2008). The curse of knowledge: first
language knowledge impairs adult learners’ use of novel
statistics for word segmentation. Cognition, 108, 477-499.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12:6, 499-504.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2002). Statistical learning of
higher-order temporal structure from visual shape
sequences. Journal of Experimental psychology:
Learning, Memory and cognition, 28, 458-467.
Gomez, R., & Gerken, L. 2000. Infant artificial language
learning and language acquisition. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4:5, 178-186.
Gould, J., & Marler, P. (1987). Learning by Instinct.
Scientific American, pp. 74-85.
Kirby, J. R., Parrila, R. K., & Pfeiffer, S. L. (2003). Naming
Speed and Phonological Awareness as Predictors of
Reading Development. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 95:3, 453-464.
Kirkham, N., Slemmer, J., & Johnson, S. (2002). Visual
statistical learning in infancy: Evidence for a domain
general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83, B35-B42.
Lundberg, I. (1991). Phonemic awareness can be developed
without reading instruction. In S. A. Brady, & D. P.
Shankweiler (Eds.), Phonological processes in literacy: a
tribute to Isabelle Liberman. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Maye, J., Werker, J., & Gerken, L. (2002). Infant sensitivity
to distributional information can affect phonetic
discrimination. Cognition, 82, B101-B111.
Monaghan, P., Arciuli, J., & Seva, N. (2008). Constraints
for computational models of reading: Evidence from
learning lexical stress. In B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M.
Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 457462). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Newman, R., Ratner, N., Jusczyk, A., Jusczyk, P., & Dow,
K. (2006). Infants’ ability to segment the conversational
speech signal predicts later language development: A
retrospective analysis. Developmental Psychology, 42,
643-655.
Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Learning at a
distance I. Statistical learning of non-adjacent
dependencies. Cognitive Psychology, 48, 127-162.
Patterson, K., & Plaut, D. C. (2009). ‘‘Shallow Draughts
Intoxicate the Brain’’: Lessons from cognitive science for
cognitive neuropsychology. Topics in Cognitive Science,
1, 39-58.
Pena, M., Bonatti, L., Nespor, M., & Mehler, J. (2002).
Signal-driven computations in speech processing.
Science, 298, 604-607.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a grant from the Australian
Research Council (ARC) awarded to the second author.

References
Adams, M. J. (1990). Beginning to read: thinking and
learning about print. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Arciuli, J., & Cupples, L. (2006). The processing of lexical
stress during visual word recognition: Typicality effects
and orthographic correlates. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 59:5, 920-948.
Arciuli, J., & Cupples, L. (2007). Would you rather ‘embert
a cudsert’ or ‘cudsert an embert’? How spelling patterns
at the beginning of English disyllables can cue
grammatical category. In: Mental States: Language and
Cognitive Structure. Schalley, A. & Khlentzos, D. (Eds.).
John Benjamins Publishing.
Arciuli, J., & Monaghan, P. (2009). Probabilistic cues to
grammatical category in English orthography and their
influence during reading. Scientific Studies of Reading,
13:1, 73-93.
Bowey, J. (2007). Predicting individual differences in
learning to read. In M. J. Snowling & C. Hulme (Eds.),
The science of reading: A handbook (pp. 155-172).
Blackwell: Oxford.
Brady, T., & Oliva, A. (2008). Statistical learning using
real-world scenes: Extracting categorical regularities
without conscious intent. Psychological Science, 19:7,
678-685.
Chomsky, N. (1980). Rules and representations. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 3, 1-15.
Creel, S., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Distant
melodies:
Statistical
learning
of
nonadjacent
dependencies in tone sequences. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: learning, Memory and Cognition, 30, 11191130.
Deacon, H., Conrad, N., & Pacton, S. (2008). A statistical
learning perspective on children’s learning about
graphotactic and morphological regularities in spelling.
Canadian Psychology, 49:2, 118-124.

193

Rowland, C., & Pine, J. (2000). Subject-auxiliary inversion
errors and wh-question acquisition: ‘what children do
know?’ Journal of Child language, 27, 157-181.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Hauser, M. D., Seibel, R., Kapfhamer, J,
Tsao, F., & Cushman, F. (2008). Grammatical patter
learning by human infants and cotton-top tamarin
monkeys. Cognition, 107, 479-500.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., Aslin, R. N., Tunick, R., &
Barrueco, S. (1997). Incidental language learning:
Listening (and learning) out of the corner of your ear.
Psychological Science, 8:2, 101-105.
Seidenberg, M. S. (1994). Language and connectionism:
The developing interface. Cognition, 50, 385-401.
Seidenberg, M. S. (1997). Language acquisition and use:
Learning and applying probabilistic constraints. Science,
275:5306, 1599-1603.
Seidenberg, M. S., MacDonald, M. C., & Saffran, J. R.
(2002). Does grammar start where statistics stop? Science,
298, 553-554.
Seva, N., Monaghan, P., & Arciuli, J. (2009). Stressing what
is important: Orthographic cues and lexical stress
assignment. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 22, 237-249.
Stanovich, K. E. (1991). Cognitive science meets beginning
reading. Psychological Science, 2, 70–81.
Torgesen, J. K., Wagner, R. K., Rashotte, C. A., Rose, E.,
Lindamood, P., Conway, T., & Garvan, C. (1999).
Preventing reading failure in children with phonological
processing difficulties: group and individual responses to
instruction. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 579–
593.
Treiman, R., & Kessler, B. (2006). Spelling as statistical
learning: using consonantal context to spell vowels.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 98:3, 642-652.
Turk-Browne, N. B., Junge, J. A., Scholl, B. J. (2005). The
automaticity of visual statistical learning. Journal of
Experimental psychology: General, 134:4, 552-564.
Wilkinson, G. S., & Robertson, G. J. (2006). WRAT4: Wide
Range Achievement Test professional manual. Lutz, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Wolf, M. (2008). Proust and the squid: The story and
science of the reading brain. Icon Books: Cambridge.
Yang, C. (2004). Universal grammar, statistics or both?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8:10, 451-456.
Yu, C. (2008). A statistical associative account of
vocabulary growth in early word learning. Language
learning and Development, 4:1, 32-62.

194

