UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Number and Size Matter: Discrete versus continuous entities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09m4n00s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Cantrell, Lisa
SMassachusetts Institute of Technology h, Linda B.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Number and Size matter: Discrete versus continuous entities
Lisa M. Cantrell (cantrell@indiana.edu) and Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Indiana University, Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
1101 E Tenth St, Bloomington, IN, 47405
Abstract
The distinction between discrete and continuous entities
plays an important role in understanding of quantities as well
as in categorical knowledge. There is a robust literature both
in the domain of quantity perception and in noun learning
concerning the factors relevant to this distinction; however,
there has been little joint investigation of these issues. Here,
we investigated the effects of number and size of named
entities on the interpretation of a novel noun as an object or
continuous mass. We found that number and size matter and
may relate deeply to current distinctions between discrete and
continuous estimators of quantity.

Keywords: number; size; discrete; continuous; object
name learning.

Introduction
What determines whether some entity is conceptualized as
being discrete versus continuous?
Discrete entities are
conceptualized as bounded, cohesive and countable.
Continuous masses are noncohesive and are divisible only
into portions of their whole. This distinction is important for
issues of word learning as well as understanding of quantity;
discovering the factors that influence it may also shed light
on other processes related to perception.

Noun categories
Many languages, such as English, mandatorily mark the
distinction between discrete and continuous mass such that
count nouns label discrete items and mass nouns label
continuous ones. Count nouns use plural marking and
numeric quantifiers to indicate quantity (e.g., four cups,
three clouds), whereas mass nouns are preceded by
continuous quantifiers and no plural marking (e.g., much
dough). The distinction is conceptual and is used to mark
both concrete and abstract nouns; however, among the
common words learned by children prior to 3 years of age,
the vast majority of count nouns refer to solid entities (e.g.,
chair, cup, house) that are in categories well organized by
similarities in shape. In contrast, early common mass nouns
predominantly refer to nonsolid things (e.g., water, milk)
that are in categories well organized by material (see
Samuelson & Smith, 1999 for a relevant analysis of early
nouns). Conceptually, then, in the early word learning
environment discrete countable entities are those with
bounded and fixed forms, and for which shape is a defining
feature. Continuous masses have variable and nondefining
shapes, and material is the defining feature of such entities.

There is considerable research indicating that infants,
children and adults honor this distinction in nonlinguistic
tasks as well as word learning. When shown rigid cohesive
objects, eight month olds successfully track their movement
behind an occluder; however, they do not track noncohesive
or nonrigid entities (Chiang & Wynn, 2000; HuntleyFenner, Carey, & Solimando, 2002;). When collections of
dots move together in a cohesive manner, five month olds
track them as if they were a unified whole (Wynn, Bloom,
& Chiang, 2002). In word learning, cohesion of entities
affects object name generalizations. Studies investigating
word object mappings in children and adults frequently test
attention to shape versus material using a novel noun
generalization task. In this task, a novel entity is shown, it
is labeled with a novel name (e.g., Look at the dax), and
participants are then asked to judge whether other items are
also in the same category. If the named exemplar is a single
solid thing, children and adults judge category membership
based on shape. If the named exemplar is a nonsolid
substance, children and adults extend membership to entities
of the same material (Colunga & Smith, 2005; Imai &
Gentner, 1997; Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988; Soja, 1992;
Soja, Carey, & Spelke, 1991). Further, embedding the
novel name in a count noun frame (e.g., This is a wug)
increases generalizations by shape; embedding the novel
noun in a mass noun frame (e.g., This is some wug)
increases attention to material (Soja, 1992). In sum, count
nouns quantify over individuals whereas mass nouns
quantify over non individuals, and—importantly— shape
matters for categories of discrete countable things, whereas
material matters for categories of substances.

Estimators and counters
A large and robust literature suggests that humans directly
apprehend the number of discrete instances in a set when the
size is small (less than 4) (Feigenson & Carey, 2003, 2005;
Trick & Pylyshyn, 1994; Wynn, 1998; Xu & Spelke, 2000).
Recently, there has been a growing consensus that two
distinct perceptual systems exist for determining the number
of items in a set: a discrete number system that applies to
small set sizes and an analogue or estimator system for large
set sizes (Carey, 2001, 2004; Feigenson, Dehaene, &
Spelke, 2004; Xu, 2003; Xu & Spelke, 2000). By some
theoretical analyses, small sets of objects (≤3 or 4) are
encoded separately as object files (Scholl, 2001; Simon,
1997; Trick & Pylyshyn, 1994; Uller, Huntley-Fenner,
Carey, & Klatt, 1999); larger sets (≥4
or
5)
are
represented in an analogue magnitude system that

1336

seemingly does not encode individual items as separate but
rather approximates across them as whole masses (Xu &
Spelke, 2000). Studies with infants have shown different
patterns of discrimination among large and small sets,
supporting the hypothesis (see Feigenson, Dehaene, &
Spelke, 2004 for a review).
If the number of discrete items in small sets is directly
perceived, whereas the number of items in large sets is not,
are items in small sets apprehended as a collection of
discrete individuals and items in large sets as portions of a
continuous whole? If this is the case, then the name for a
single item should be understood as referring to its
particular shape whereas the name for a set of many things
should be a reference to its material. Moreover, if a shift
away from attention to shape occurs when one is perceiving
items of four or more, then it would suggest a link between
individuation and numerical processing.

number increases. The empirical question is thus whether
and at what number this occurs. All sets were structured as
in Figure 1; number levels varied across trials for the shape
match as illustrated in Figure 2.

Methods
Participants Forty undergraduate students from Indiana
University participated.
Stimuli Six sets of objects were used. Each set contained
an exemplar, a material match, and six shape match sets.
The exemplar and material match for each set were
approximately equal in size (8cm x 6cm). The material
match was the same color and texture as the exemplar but a
different shape. The six shape match levels were identical
in shape to the exemplar but varied in number of objects.
The six number levels were 1, 2, 4, 6, 15, and 25 (see Figure
2). The sizes of the shape matches decreased as number
increased such that overall mass of stuff in the collections
was kept approximately equal at each number level. The 1
level shape match was approximately 8cm x 6cm. The units
of the 25 objects level were approximately 1.5cm x 1.5cm
each.

Aggregates
Cups are discrete countable things. Dough is a continuous
quantity. Between these two are aggregates— sets of things
made up of bounded discrete individuals yet sometimes
experienced as a mass. Aggregates such as sand, gravel,
and rice, for example, are often thought of as continuous
quantities. Moreover, their names in English are mass
nouns, and they are often generalized by material
(Middleton, Wisniewski, Trindel, & Imai, 2003). Thus
aggregates present an interesting context in which to
examine how set size influences the conceptualization of
individuals as discrete entities versus continuous masses.
Number and size of aggregate units may play a role in their
perception. Accordingly, in our first two experiments in
this domain (reported here), we simultaneously manipulated
the number and size of the individual entities, keeping the
overall amount of stuff in the object collections constant
across levels.

Experiment 1
The task and its rational can be explained with respect to
Figure 1. Participants were first shown a single entity of a
particular shape and material (e.g, an inverted U-shaped
object made of wire mesh) and told its name. They were
then shown two choices of objects and asked which was in
the same category. One choice was a single item that
matched the exemplar in material but differed in shape; the
other was an array that contained 1 to 25 objects of the same
shape but of a different material. If participants attend to
both the shape and material of the individuals in the two
arrays, then there is a choice between a material matching
and a shape matching array. If however, sets with some
number of elements cause the shapes of the individual
elements not to matter, then the choice is between a material
matching array and a nonmatching array.
Thus, if
increasing the number of elements in a set decreases the
individuality and shape relevance, then we would expect a
shift from shape matching to material matching choices as

Figure 1. Structure of the task.
Procedure One open question for these experiments was
how to ask the question of which array belonged in the same
category as the exemplar. This is particularly difficult in

1337

English which demands that every noun be a count or mass
noun. Based on pilot work, in these first experiments we
named the exemplar with a novel noun using a neutral
syntactic frame (useable with either count or mass nouns)
(This is the tiso). When the choice items were presented, we
asked Can you help me find more? so as to avoid
determiners and the plural. Pilot work indicated that this
framing of the question works for informal queries with
both count and mass nouns. (Both “Look at this cup. Help
me find more…” and “Look at this sand. Help me find
more…” are grammatically acceptable). We are currently
replicating the findings in a non-naming task to ensure that
this framing of the question did not in some way create the
observed pattern.
Participants were tested in one of three conditions: Large
1-2, Medium 4-6, and Small 15-25. In each condition, two
shape match levels were presented. Participants completed
six trials, 3 in each of the two levels for their assigned
condition. The order in which the adults saw the six stimuli
sets was randomized as was the sequence of shape match
levels.

Figure 2. Example of the six number levels of the shape
matches for one of the six stimuli sets.

Results and Discussion
As Figure 3 shows, the number (and size) of the shape
matching objects mattered. Given a choice between a
material matching item or an array of one or two larger
objects, participants selected the shape match—suggesting
that objects at this level are seen as discrete. However, when
the number of objects increased to 4 or more, the adults
frequently selected the material matching object. These
results suggest that the shape of individual objects matters
more when there are fewer than when there are many.
Critically, the switch from selecting shape matches to
material matches occurred between two and four, suggesting
that rejection of the shape match was not simply a matter of
rejecting all sets that contained more than one object; rather,
there may be something defining in discrete and continuous
mass perception that involves the particular numerosity of 4.

Figure 3. Adult shape choices in each set condition
(Experiment 1).

Experiment 2
Past research suggests infants and young children also
possess a discrete quantity system that applies to small set
sizes, although there is some debate as to whether this
system is the same as in adults or if it develops over time
(see Carey, 2004). Research has also shown that young
children generalize names for objects by shape but by
material for substances. As a first step to understanding the
developmental relations between these two domains, we
examined 4 and 5 year olds’ performances in the same task
used in Experiment 1. We used a within-subjects design.
Participants Twelve children four to five years of age
(M=57.5 months) participated. Children were recruited in
Bloomington, Indiana. They were tested individually at
their daycare or in the laboratory and received a small gift
for participation.
Stimuli Stimuli were identical to Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure for Experiment 2 was similar to
Experiment 1; however, for Experiment 2 each level was a
condition, and each child was tested at all six levels.

Results and Discussion
Figure 4 shows the mean proportion of shape choices as a
function of the number of items in the shape matching
choice array. Choices towards the shape-matching array
declined with increasing number, and were reliably greater
than chance only for set size 1; choices towards the material
match were only reliably greater than chance for set size 25.
These results indicate a consistency between the adults and
children: one object was perceived as discrete; a set of 25
objects was viewed as a continuous mass.

1338

two-number-system
hypothesis
of
numerosity
discrimination.
Results here may also be deeply related to phenomena
outside the scope of quantity concepts and word learning.
Findings in sociology and group behavior, for example,
have shown that as the number of people increase in a
group, individuality and distinguishing identity decreases.
Our results are fascinating because they may very well
indicate a tie between larger sociological phenomena and
humans’ general perception of discrete and continuous
entities.

References

Figure 4. Children’s shape-match choices at each number
level (Experiment 2).
Interestingly, children’s shape responses dropped
dramatically at the two object level. This is in contrast to
adults who shifted at four. It is possible that the shifting
point differs from adults and actually occurs for children
between one and two. Another possibility is that the withinsubjects design and carry over effects from trial to trial with
different set sizes obscured a much sharper function.
Analyses of individual data suggests that this is possible,
with some children shifting to material at higher number
values than others, in ways that may be related to the
particular random order of trials. Ongoing experiments that
manipulate set size between subjects will answer this
question. Nonetheless, the main result from the child data is
like that of the adults: as the set size increases, the
individual shapes of elements appear to become less salient
and less defining.

General Discussion
Results from both children and adults in these experiments
show that number and size matter in perception of discrete
and continuous entities. Given one or two items, objects are
seen as individuals, and shape is important for their identity.
Although children appear to shift earlier in their perception
towards continuous mass, adults show a clear switch at four
for these experiments. Objects seen in sets of four or more
perceptually become continuous and units lose
individuality.
The fact that the present results indicate this shift at four
is also intriguing in light of current theories of quantity and
perception: four is suggested as the number at which a
switch occurs from a discrete object based perception
system to the estimator system (Xu, 2003). The present
results are new and require replication and exploration;
however, if the findings hold up upon further examination
using different experimental tasks, they would suggest an
important link between conceptualization of entities and the

Carey, S. (2004). Bootstrapping and the origins of concepts.
Daedalus, Winter, 59-68.
Carey, S. (2001). Evolutionary and ontogenetic foundations
of arithmetic. Mind and Language, 16, 37-55.
Chiang, W., & Wynn, K. (2000). Infants’ tracking of
objects and collections. Cognition, 77, 169-195.
Colunga, E., & Smith, L.B. (2005). From the lexicon to
expectations about kinds: a role for associative
learning. Psychological Review, 112, 347-382.
Feigenson, L., & Carey, S. (2005). On the limits of infants’
quantification of small object arrays. Cognition, 97,
295-313.
Feigenson, L., L., & Carey, S. (2003). Tracking individuals
via object-files: evidence from infants; manual search.
Developmental Science, 6, 568-584.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (2002). Infants’
discrimination of number vs. continuous extent.
Cognitive Psychology, 44, 33-66.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E.S. (2004). Core
systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8,
307-314.
Huntley-Fenner, G., Carey, S., Solimando, A. (2002).
Objects are individuals but stuff doesn’t count:
perceived rigidity and cohesiveness influence infants’
representations of small groups of discrete entities.
Cognition, 85, 203-221.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic study of
early word meaning: universal ontology and linguistic
influence. Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Landau, B., Smith, L.B., & Jones, S.S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning.
Cognitive Development, 3, 299-321.
Middleton, E.L., Wisniewski, E.J., Trindel, K. A., & Imai,
M. (2004).
Separating the chaff from the oats:
evidence for a conceptual distinction between count
noun and mass noun aggregates. Journal of Memory
and Language, 50, 371-394.
Samuelson, L.K., & Smith, L.B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: do ontology, category structure and
syntax correspond? Cognition, 73, 1-33.
Scholl, B.J. (2001). Objects and attention: the state of the
art. Cognition, 80, 1-46.

1339

Simon, T.J. (1997). Reconceptualizing the origins of
number knowledge: a non-numerical account .
Cognitive Development, 12, 349-372.
Soja, N.N. (1992). Inferences about the meaning of nouns:
The relationship between perception and syntax.
Cognitive Development, 7, 29-45.
Soja, N.N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E.S. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meaning: object terms and substance terms. Cognition,
38. 179-211.
Trick, L., & Pylyshyn, Z. (1994). Why are small and large
number enumerated differently? A limited capacity
preattentive stage in vision. Psychological Review,
101, 80-102.
Uller, C., Huntley-Fenner, G., Carey, S., & Klatt, L. (1999).
What representations might underlie infant numerical
knowledge? Cognitive Development, 14, 1-36.
Wynn, K., Bloom, P., & Chiang, W. (2002). Enumeration
of collective entities by 5-month-old infants.
Cognition, 83, B55-B62.
Xu, F. (2003) Numerosity discrimination in infants:
evidence for two systems of representations.
Cognition, 89, B15-B25
Xu, F., & Spelke, E.S. (2000).
Large number
discriminations in 6-montold infants. Cognition, 74,
B1-B11.

1340

