UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Object and Gist Perception in a Dual Task Paradigm: Is Attention Important?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9d5326tg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Constantinou, Elena
Koushiou, Maria

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Object and Gist Perception in a Dual Task Paradigm: Is Attention Important?
Maria Koushiou1 (maria_koushiou@yahoo.com)
Elena Constantinou1 (elena_constantinou@yahoo.gr)
1

Department of Psychology, University of Cyprus,
P.O. Box 20537, 1678 Nicosia, Cyprus

Abstract
An experiment was conducted to investigate object and gist
perception under conditions of inattention. Participants
performed an attentionally demanding central task while
responding to a secondary peripheral task involving object
categorization or gist identification in natural scenes. Participants
were unexpectedly more accurate on object than gist
categorization, a finding attributed to a possible facilitatory
effect of object figure saliency. This hypothesis was confirmed
by a second experiment comparing the peripheral tasks under
single-task conditions. A third dual-task experiment was
conducted to compare object and gist perception when
controlling for figure saliency by using the exact same stimuli
for both peripheral tasks. No significant differences were found
in the third experiment. Conflicting results and methodological
issues are thus discussed.
Keywords: object categorization; gist perception; dual-task
methodology.

Introduction
Modern computational models of visual attention propose as
a necessary stage in the processing of visual stimuli a preattentive level during which early visual features are
computed in a bottom-up fashion in order to direct attention
towards stimuli of interest (Itti & Koch, 2001). However the
extent of processing that takes place at this pre-attentive
stage is not quite clear, with empirical evidence often
offering contradicting results.
Phenomena like inattentional blindness and change
blindness, provide evidence for the presence of significant
pre-attentive perceptual limitations since humans fail to
perceive highly visible objects (Mack, 2003) or to detect
large changes in a visual scene (Simons & Ambinder, 2005)
when their attention is allocated elsewhere. However, the
use of priming methodology in inattentional blindness
experiments, has shown that unconscious information prime
subsequent behavior, indicating that visual information (e.g.
the observer’s name) may be processed perceptually prior
the engagement of attention (Mack, 2003).
This empirical contradiction is also depicted in theory
since early selection theories (Broadbent, 1958) support that
only a rudimentary analysis of physical features occurs
before attentional selection while late selection theories
(Deutch & Deutch, 1963) claim that perception is achieved
in an automatic and parallel fashion, with attentional
selection intervening only after full perception of items is

achieved. Lavie (1995) proposed a model in an attempt to
resolve the early vs. late selection controversy. According to
this model, the perceptual load of high-priority relevant
stimuli determines whether selection is early or late.
Experimentally, one way of testing the applicability of the
above theories is provided by the dual-task paradigm. In this
paradigm attention is drawn to a perceptually demanding
central task while irrelevant to the central task stimuli are
presented on the periphery. In dual task experiments
researchers assess whether secondary tasks involving
peripheral stimuli interfere with performance in the
concurrent central task.
Experiments using this procedure have shown that our
perceptual system is subject to capacity limits when the
stimulus load is increased (Pashler & Johnson, 1998).
Efficient performance on each task requires perceptual
analysis followed by central operations to produce a
response. Since central processing of the two tasks cannot
be done concurrently, the processing of one task presumably
occurs in parallel with the perceptual analysis of the other
task. Thus, in a dual task condition our brain seems to
switch the central processing from one task to another,
while buffering the essential information for both tasks
concurrently (Pashler & Johnson, 1998).
Different levels of perceptual processing have been
examined using dual task methodology to determine the
type of information that can be processed at a pre-attentive
level. The present study focuses on two kinds of processing
natural scenes, namely the categorization of objects in
scenes and the perception of the scene’s gist. Our aim is to
examine what types of information one can extract from a
natural scene before focusing attention on certain aspects of
it. An overview of previous research examining these two
types of processes is presented next.

Perception of Objects in a Scene
According to the classical view, perception without
attention is possible when detecting primitive, low-level
features such as motion, orientation, texture and brightness.
Objects, on the other hand, consist of superior stimuli that
require focused attention and a higher level of processing
(Braun, 2003 cited in Evans & Treisman, 2005).
Experimental evidence from studies using the dual task
paradigm, Inattentional Blindness, and Rapid Serial Visual
Presentation (RSVP), challenge the aforementioned view,

1746

suggesting that high-level representations can be accessed
under conditions of little or no attention. For example, Li,
VanRullen, Koch and Perona (2002) examined performance
on a natural scene categorization task under single-task and
dual-task conditions and found no significant differences. In
the single-task condition, participants had to detect an
animal or a vehicle in natural images that were briefly
flashed in front of them whereas in the dual-task condition
participants were asked to perform the same task while
simultaneously performing an attentionally demanding
foveal letter discrimination task. Their results indicated that
complex stimuli (e.g. animals) appearing in different
environmental contexts can be detected even when attention
is allocated on a demanding central task (Li et al, 2002).
In support of the previous findings, Li, VanRullen, Koch
and Perona (2005) found that removing color information
from a scene, lack of training, or training on a different type
of scene categorization (other than animal), has no effect on
the performance of participants on the natural scene
categorization task under the same dual task conditions.
Increasing distracting information by adding an extra copy
of the natural scene in the periphery also failed to impair
participants’ performance thus indicating that natural scene
categorization, as a secondary task, poses little or no
attentional load on the central processing system.
Evans and Treisman (2005), on the other hand, examined
the robustness of the human visual system in categorizing
natural scenes with a series of RSVP experiments. The
presentation rate of the images was high enough to prevent
attention engagement in the processing of the natural scene.
Even though participants were able to accurately detect the
target (either animal or vehicle) in a string of 6 images that
serially flashed in front of them they were not able to report
the identity and the location of the target in the scene. It
seems that participants are able to extract various features of
a natural scene on which they rely for target detection but
they are not able to bind these features together in order to
form a complete representation and subsequently report the
identity or the location of the object (Evans & Treisman,
2005).
Evans and Treisman (2005) reject the notion that natural
scene categorization requires high-level processing
including semantic processing but rather propose a featurebased detection that is in line with the two-stage perceptual
model presented by Marois et al (2004). According to
Marois et al (2004) detection and/or efficient categorization
of items entail unconscious, attention-free perceptual
analysis whereas identification of visually presented items
requires processing that accesses awareness (e.g., binding
and consolidation; Evans & Treisman, 2005).

Gist Perception
Another important aspect of high-level scene perception is
the capture of the gist, i.e. the general meaning of a scene.
Gist perception has been found to occur quickly and early in
the visual processing of a scene (see Henderson &
Hollingworth, 1999 for a review). It seems that only 100ms

after the presentation of an image, observers can recognize
the basic-level category of a scene, its spatial layout and
other global structural and object-related information
(Oliva, 2005). Thus, gist can be conceptual (related to the
meaning of the picture) and/or perceptual (related to the
perceptual properties of the image, like colour or texture;
Oliva, 2005; Potter, Staub, Rado and O’Connor, 2004).
Empirical evidence suggests that a scene may be
processed initially as a whole, extracting global information
about the image. Segmentation of the scene in specific
objects providing local information may occur later in a
more elaborated gist formation process (i.e. with regards to
intra-objects relations; Henderson & Hollingworth, 1999).
Thus, both perceptual and conceptual representations of gist
could be initiated without a priori object identification
(Oliva, 2005).
On the other hand, Fei-Fei, Lyer, Koch and Perona (2007)
found that after 107 ms of scene exposure people could
name both object categories and scene environments (e.g.
classroom). With shorter presentations, though, people
recalled the shape and other low-level sensory features, with
semantic information about objects or scenes appearing after
40-67ms of exposure (Fei-Fei et al., 2007). Thus, it seems
that shape-related information of a scene exhibits a
processing benefit over semantically meaningful
recognition.
Fei-Fei et al. (2007) also point out what previous research
suggests, i.e. a mutual facilitation of object and scene
perception. Researchers hypothesize that scene processing
stages occur in parallel and feed information back to each
other, facilitating in this way the overall recognition of
specific segments of a scene. Thus, as long as semantic
information arises our brain takes advantage of it to further
process objects and scenes (Fei-Fei et al., 2007).
As far as we know, object and gist perception have not
been previously compared directly. In the first experiment
we compare object and gist perception using a dual-task
paradigm. We expect that gist (operationalized as
environment identification) will be extracted more easily
since it seems to occur first during scene perception. Object
categorization is expected to be harder, since it seems to
incorporate both low-level feature information and semantic
information (gist) based on Oliva’s (2005) theoretical
framework and empirical findings.

Experiment 1
The first experiment aims at investigating the level of
processing that occurs under conditions of inattention using
a dual task paradigm. Participants had to complete an
attentionally demanding central task, while performing a
secondary task of detection involving a) object
categorization and b) gist identification. Both object
categorization and gist identification were tested using
natural scenes.
Based on previous research we expected that: a)
participants' performance on the secondary task will become
inferior as the level of processing demands increase, i.e.

1747

their performance will be better in terms of accuracy on gist
identification than on object categorization and b)
participants performing better on the central task (indicating
attention deployment to the central task) will perform less
accurately on object categorization than gist perception.

Methodology
Participants Thirty-seven undergraduate and graduate
Psychology students from the University of Cyprus, with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision, participated in the
experiment.
Experimental Design A dual task experiment with two
within-subject conditions (peripheral tasks: object
categorization and gist identification in natural scenes) was
conducted. Each participant performed 128 experimental
trials, 64 for Object Categorization and 64 for Gist
Identification.
Material and apparatus Testing took place in a laboratory
at the Department of Psychology of the University of
Cyprus. Participants were seated in front of a computer
screen, which presented the stimuli for each task.
The peripheral task stimuli were taken from various
sources including databases like LabelMe for gist images
(Oliva & Torralba, 2001), SIMPLIcity (Li & Wang, 2003)
and Caltech 101 (Fei-Fei, Fergus, & Perona, 2004) as well
as by using the Google image search tool for some images.
The object categorization images included pictures of
animals, buildings, vehicles and pictures of food. The gist
category images included pictures of each of the following
natural scenes: coasts, cities, mountains and forests.
Central Letter Discrimination Task Each trial started with
a fixation cross presented 300 ms before the onset of the
first stimulus. The fixation cross was then substituted by the
central task’s stimuli (a combination of 8 letters). The 8
letters were either all identical, (i.e. all L’s presented at
random orientations) or included one letter that was
different from the other 7 (i.e. one T among L’s). The
letters remained onscreen for 100 ms before the peripheral
stimulus appeared. Stimuli for both tasks remained on the
screen for 180 ms. Then, the peripheral task was masked
while the central stimulus remained onscreen either until the
participant entered a response or after 2000 ms. Participants
had to decide whether all letters were the same or not by
pressing the appropriate button. For half experimental trials
(64 out of 128) the letters were the same while in the
remaining half one letter was different. Reaction time (RT)
and accuracy scores were recorded for each trial.
Peripheral Task In half of the trials the peripheral task was
an Object Categorization task (64 trials) and in the other
half it was a Gist Identification task. The order of the
presentation of the two blocks of trials was counterbalanced
across participants. In each trial, the stimulus was presented
100 ms after the central stimulus onset. The peripheral
stimulus remained onscreen for 180ms and it was followed
by a mask.
Peripheral stimuli consisted of coloured images depicting
animals, food, buildings or vehicles for the object

categorization trials (Figure 1a), and images of coasts,
mountains, forests and cities for gist identification trials
(Figure 1b). In all cases, an image was flashed randomly for
180ms at one of four possible locations in the periphery and
it was followed by a blank image (mask). Images were of
the same size and appeared at a constant distance from the
central stimulus.

a)

b)

Figure 1: Examples of pictures used in Experiment 1.
After the termination of the central task, participants were
asked to report what they saw in the periphery by means of
a multiple choice question. The possible answers referred to
the four main image categories for each task appearing in a
different random order in each trial. Accuracy scores were
recorded for each trial.
Procedure Each participant initially completed 16 practice
trials of the dual task, comprised of the central task (letter
discrimination) and a peripheral task (8 trials with object
categorization and 8 trials with gist identification). The two
experimental blocks (total of 128 trials) followed the
practice block. The timeline of each trial is illustrated in
Figure 2. Participants were instructed to focus attention on
the central task.

300 ms

100 ms

180 ms

2000 ms

Figure 2: Dual task experiment sequence as appeared in
Study 1 trials.

1748

Mean number of accurate
responses

70
60
50
40
30

Peripheral task Accuracy (%)

Overall participants’ performance on the central task was
assessed based on mean RT. The overall RT was to 813.18
ms (S.D. = 265.84) and the overall percentage of accurate
responses was 79.3%. Participants’ accuracy in each
condition of the peripheral task was also assessed by the
percentage of accurate responses. Overall accuracy was
79.1% for object categorization and 66.9% for gist
perception. Paired-samples t-tests were conducted revealing
no significant differences between the object categorization
and gist perception conditions for either RT or accuracy on
the central task. A statistically significant difference,
though, was found on the participants accuracy on the
peripheral task with better performance on the object
categorization than gist perception, t (36) = 5.35, p< .001.
(Figure 3).

Gist

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
High Accuracy

Low Accuracy

Central task Accuracy

Figure 4: Participants Central Task Accuracy (high/low) and
accuracy on the two peripheral tasks1.
A one-way ANOVA showed a significant effect of the
type of stimuli on the accuracy for both object, F (3, 144) =
5.06, p .01, and gist perception, F (3, 144) = 5.24, p .01.
Post hoc comparisons using the LSD test indicated that
participants were better on building recognition (M. =
14.11, SD = 2.61) than on animal (M. = 11.81, SD = 2.56)
or food (M. = 11.84, SD = 3.44). In the gist identification
task, participants could recognize more accurately city
scenes (M. = 12.05, SD = 3.14) than mountain (M. = 9.13,
SD =3.67) or forest scenes (M. = 10.71, SD = 3.47).

20

Discussion

10
0
Object

Gist

Peripheral Task Conditions

Figure 3: Mean accuracy for the two conditions of the
peripheral task1.
In order to examine whether participants shifted their
attention to the peripheral task and to assess the possible
effects of this shift on performance on the peripheral task,
we divided our sample into groups according to their
performance on the central task. Participants were assigned
into two groups based on their mean RT (fast/slow) and two
groups according to the mean number of accurate responses
(high/low accuracy). A Multivariate Analysis of Variance
(MANOVA) revealed that the high accuracy group
performed significantly more accurately than the low
accuracy group in the object categorization condition but
not in the gist perception condition, F (1, 33) = 4.22, p< .05.
(Figure 4). Central task RT (fast/slow groups) did not
differentiate significantly the performance in the peripheral
tasks.

1

Object

70

Results

Present results indicate that participants could perform
above chance level on both the central and the peripheral
task, showing that object and gist perception can occur
under dual task conditions. However, participants performed
better on the object categorization than on the gist
identification task, a finding that contradicts our initial
hypothesis.
One possible explanation for this finding could be that
objects in natural scenes are more salient and their features
(e.g. contour, texture, and surfaces) facilitate the object
recognition procedure without a significant effect on the
central task performance. In support of this, participants
were more accurate at building images, which include large
figures, distinct from their background and consist of
straight lines and surfaces, as compared to images with food
and animals. Even more, participants are more accurate in
recognizing the gist of city scenes than any other category
possibly due to the fact these scenes include salient features
(e.g. buildings).
Another unexpected finding of this study was that better
performance on the central task was associated with higher
accuracy in object recognition. Higher accuracy on the
central task seems to be an index of successfully divided
attention as opposed to full attention towards the central
task, as it was related to higher accuracy in the peripheral
object recognition task. On the other hand, participants with
low performance on the central task did not manage to

Error bars represent standard deviations.

1749

divide their attention successfully in order to perform more
accurately either the central or the peripheral task. This
effect was observed solely in the object recognition task and
was not present for the gist identification task, perhaps
because extracting the figures in object recognition images
was easier than extracting the gist.
A significant limitation of the study is the lack of a singletrial condition that would indicate whether the object and
gist pictures we used were comparable in terms of
perceptual saliency. This was deemed necessary since all
images underwent editing before being used in the
experiment and especially those used in the gist
identification task could have been more indiscernible than
the object pictures.

Experiment 2
We conducted a second experiment in order to investigate
whether the advantage of object over gist perception found
in Experiment 1, can be attributed to image related factors
like figure saliency, regardless of attentional focus.

Methodology
Twenty students from the University of Cyprus participated
in the experiment. The procedure was the same as in
Experiment 1, although some modifications were made for
the peripheral task. The peripheral task was used as a
between-subject variable, with half of the participants
performing object categorization on the periphery and the
others performing gist identification.
The experiment consisted of 135 experimental trials for
all participants and 18 practice trials. There were three types
of objects (people, animal, and vehicle) that appeared
equally often in three different contexts (city, beach, forest).
Fifteen coloured images for each combination (beachanimal, beach-people, beach-vehicle, city-animal, cityvehicle, city-people etc.) were used for both tasks (Figure
5). Therefore, all participants viewed the same 135
peripheral images, but half of them had to identify the
object in the scene and the other half the gist of the scene.
Both accuracy and reaction time were recorded.

Methodology
Fourteen students from the University of Cyprus performed
the peripheral tasks of Experiment 1 under single-task
conditions. The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1
(with the same images appearing at the periphery) but
without the central letter discrimination task. Both object
categorization and gist identification were performed by all
participants.

a)

b)

Results
An independent samples t-test revealed that participants
were more accurate on object categorization than on gist
identification, t (26) = 3.65, p <.001. However, RTs were
not statistically different between conditions.

Discussion
These results show that object categorization task is easier
than gist identification even in the case of full attention.
This can be attributed to the possible facilitatory elements of
the object pictures (e.g. edges and surfaces). The advantage
of object categorization over colour discrimination found in
the Li et al. (2002) study was confirmed herein, even when
compared to other also semantic stimuli (gist). A third study
is however mandated in order to eliminate the effect of
different and probably non equivalent in terms of features
images used in each category (gist and object images).

Experiment 3
The aim of Experiment 3 was to investigate object and gist
perception under dual task conditions, by using the same
images for each peripheral task. The images selected for this
study, are real-life photos of various contexts (city, forest
and beach), all containing objects, animals or people usually
found in these sceneries.

c)

d)

Figure 5: Examples of peripheral images from Experiment
3.

Results
An Independent Sample T-test indicated no significant
differences among the two groups of participants on their
performance on the central task, neither on the accuracy nor
on their reaction time means. The percentage of accurate
responses on the central task was 77.77% for the object
categorization condition and 78.51% for the gist
identification condition, which indicates comparable
attention allocation to the central task. Importantly, no
statistically significant differences were found on
participants’ accuracy on the two peripheral tasks, with
object categorization accuracy reaching 57.63% and gist
identification accuracy 58.30% respectively.

Discussion
Results from Experiment 3 contradict the findings from both
Experiments 1 and Experiments 2 suggesting that under

1750

dual-task conditions people have comparable ability to
perceive objects and the gist of a scene. We consider the
findings of Experiment 3 more valid, since the exact same
real-life images were used for both conditions.
Overall, participants’ performance on the peripheral task
under dual-task conditions was better when they were
presented with images containing a single object that
appeared centrally in the image (79.1% percentage of
accurate responses on object categorization task in
Experiment 1). This does not seem to hold when more
complex images are used. The images used in Experiment 3
are considered more complex and rich since they contained
either more than one object from a category (people, animal
or vehicle) or other surrounding context-related objects (i.e.
umbrellas on the beach), which probably explains the lower
performance (57.6%) compared to Experiment 1. These
results are in line with the finding of Walker, Stafford and
Davis (2008), who also reported diminished accuracy on
object categorization in scenes with multiple foreground
objects under dual-task conditions.
Based on the results of our last experiment, we concluded
that there is no clear difference in the processing demands
required by object and gist perception as these were
examined with complex real-life scenes. Lack of differences
may be attributed to image properties, since even with the
exact same images (as in our third experiment) it is very
difficult to control for factors such as saliency of an object
within the same context e.g. a coloured parrot in a forest,
and a gorilla in the same forest. Furthermore, the exposure
time we used was much longer than 107 ms, at which object
and gist perception occur mutually facilitating each other
according to Fei-Fei et al. (2007). It is not, though, clarified
if shorter exposure time can differentiate the two processes.
What seems to emerge from all three experiments is the
need for creating different image databases to be used in
these sorts of studies, i.e. studies that compare object and
gist processing, since the different images typically used for
each process (landscape images for gist, single central
object images for object processing) may confound
conclusions about attentional demands.
Conclusively, future research is needed to delineate the
processes required in object and gist perception using larger
samples and should compare these processes using images
with shorter exposure time that are equal in properties (e.g.
number of objects, colour and size of the objects) and
processing load.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Dr. Marios Avraamides for his valuable
contribution to the methodological design and realization of
this study and foremost for his encouragement and trust. We
are also grateful to all fellow students who participated in
the experiments and our reviewers for the useful comments.

References
Evans, K. K. & Treisman, A. (2005). Perception of objects
in Natural Scenes: Is it Really Attention Free? Journal

of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 31(6), pp. 1476-1492.
Fei-Fei, L, Fergus R., & Perona P. (2004). Learning
generative visual models from few training examples:
an incremental Bayesian approach tested on 101 object
categories. IEEE. CVPR Workshop on GenerativeModel Based Vision.
Fei-Fei, L., Lyer, A., Koch, C. & Perona, P. (2007). What
do we perceive in a glance of a real-world scene?,
Journal of Vision, 7(1):10, pp.1-29.
Henderson, J.M. & Hollingworth, A. (1999). High-level
scene perception, Annu. Rev. Psychol., 50: 243-271
Itti, L. & Koch, C. (2001). Computational modelling of
visual attention, Nature Reviews/Neuroscience, 2, pp. 19.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary condition
for selective attention, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
21(3), pp.451-468.
Li, F. F., VanRullen, R. Koch, C. & Perona, P. (2002).
Rapid Natural Scene Categorization in the near absence
of attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of America, 99(14), pp. 9596-9601.
Li, F. F., VanRullen, R. Koch, C. & Perona, P. (2005). Why
does Natural Scene Categorization require little
attention? Exploring attentional requirements for
natural and synthetic stimuli. Visual Cognition, 12(6),
pp. 893-924.
Li, J., & Wang, J. Z. (2003). Automatic linguistic indexing
of pictures by a statistical modeling approach, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 25(9), pp. 1075-1088.
Mack, A. (2003). Inattentional blindness: looking without
seeing, Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12
(5), pp.180-184.
Oliva, A. (2005). Gist of the scene. In L. Itti, G. Rees, and
J.K. Tsotsos (Eds.) The Encyclopedia of Neurobiology
of Attention, Elsevier, San Diego, CA (pages 251-256).
Oliva, A.& Torralba, A. ( 2001). Modeling the Shape of the
Scene: A Holistic Representation of the Spatial
Envelope, International Journal of Computer Vision
42(3), pp. 145–175.
Pashler, H., & Johnson, J.C. (1998). Attentional limitations
in dual-task performance. In H. Pashler (Ed.),
Attention (pp. 155–189). Hove, England: Psychology
Press.
Potter, M.C., Staub, A. & O’Connor, D.H. (2004). Pictorial
and conceptual representation of glimpsed pictures,
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 30(3), pp. 478-489.
Simons, D.J. & Ambinder, M.S. (2005). Change blindness:
Theory and Consequences, Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 14 (1), pp. 44-48.
Walker, S., Stafford, P. & Davis, G. (2008) Ultra-rapid
categorization requires visual attention: Scenes with
multiple foreground objects, Journal of Vision, 8(4):21,
1–12.

1751

