UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Online processing of speech prosody in children with autism spectrum disorders: An eye-
tracking study
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/31s2x0gm
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Matsui, Tomoko
Miura, Yui
Osanai, Hiroo
et al.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
  eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

 Online processing of speech prosody in children with autism spectrum
                                disorders: An eye-tracking study
                                                    Yui Miura
                                    Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University
                                                Tomoko Matsui
                                    Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University
                                                 Yoshikuni Tojo
                                                  Ibaraki University
                                                  Hiroo Osanai
                                         Musashino Higashi Education Center
Abstract: This study examined autistic childrens sensitivity to speech prosody in Japanese, which discriminates
lexical contents (e.g. áme (rain) vs. amé (candy)) or speakers certainty strengths (e.g. hébi (snake.) vs. hébi?
(snake?)). Children between 6-9 years of age were presented with two images, followed by an utterance referring to
either of them. Their looking behaviors for 2000 ms after the speech onset were analyzed.
   The results showed that, even though the autistic group showed precise fixations in the phonemic condition as
control (e.g. kása (umbrella) vs. kába (hippopotamus)), their looking-time proportions for the target image in the
two experimental conditions (i.e. lexical and certainty prosody) were significantly smaller than those of typically-
developing children, and did not reach above chance level. Although their off-line understanding of the verbal choice
seemed to be intact (scoring significantly above chance in all three conditions), their immediate on-line processing
was found to be compromised.
                                                         3212

