UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preschoolers' Understanding of Freedom of Choice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7kp4f5bz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Chernyak, Nadia
Kushnir, Tamar
Wellman, Henry

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preschoolers’ Understanding of Freedom of Choice
Tamar Kushnir (tk397@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Henry M. Wellman (hmw@umich.edu)
Department of Psychology and The Center for Human Growth and Development,
University of Michigan
530 Church Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA

Nadia Chernyak (nc98@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

distinctions between actions caused by psychological states
(e.g. beliefs, and desires), and those caused by physical
forces (e.g. gravity) or biological processes (e.g. reflexes;
Schult & Wellman, 1997; Inagaki & Hatano, 1993; Schultz
& Wells, 1985). Preschoolers are also able to reason about
counterfactuals – that things could have been different
(Harris, German & Mills, 1996). Thus, it is certainly
plausible that preschoolers may have some concept of
freedom of choice.
To date, however, only one study (Nichols, 2004) directly
asked 4- and 5-year-olds about whether an agent could have
done otherwise. Nichols (2004) showed children a box with
a sliding lid. The experimenter opened the box and either
stuck his hand inside or dropped a ball inside the box.
Children were asked “after the lid was open, did I [the ball]
have to touch the bottom, or could I [it] have done
something else instead?” Children overwhelmingly said
that the experimenter, but not the ball, could have done
something else.
This result is promising, but not conclusive. Nichols
(2004) showed that children were able to appropriately
answer a direct question about a change to a past behavior;
that is, children did not attribute the ability to “do something
else instead” to an inanimate object (the ball). This is
consistent with the fact that even toddlers attribute goals and
intentions to agents and not inanimate objects (Melzoff,
1995). However, the critical question still remains: did
children respond “yes” to the human action because they
understood that the situation (reaching into a box) affords
the choice? That is, can preschoolers distinguish between
actions that can be freely chosen and actions that cannot?
The following studies explore this issue. In Experiment
1, we contrast the ability to do otherwise with the desire to
do otherwise. We do this by asking children if a story
character could have done something that is a) possible, but
not desired versus b) impossible, but desired. In experiment
2, we ask about the child’s own ability to do otherwise when
they are free to act versus prevented from acting (by being
externally constrained). In both experiments, the contrasts

Abstract
Our folk psychology includes the ability to reason about
freedom of choice. That is, we believe that an agent who has
performed an action could have done otherwise. This study
investigates the development of the concept of freedom of
choice in preschool children. Importantly, we contrast
choices with desires, outcomes and constraints on action. In
Experiment 1, four- and five-year-olds were shown a
character that first desired and then achieved a given outcome,
and were asked whether the character could have chosen to do
otherwise. In Experiment 2, children acted themselves then
were asked to reason about whether they could have done
otherwise. We found that preschoolers appropriately reasoned
about their own and others’ freedom of choice. Moreover,
they appropriately reasoned about lack of choice when actions
were physically impossible (Experiment 1) or externally
constrained (Experiment 2). These findings have implications
for the development of social cognition and moral reasoning.
Keywords: Free will, theory of mind, social cognition,
intentional action, moral reasoning.

Introduction
Our folk psychology includes the ability to reason about
freedom of choice. Simply put, freedom of choice is the idea
that, all other things being equal, an agent could have done
otherwise (Nichols, 2004). This commonsense notion plays
a central role in adults’ explanations of behavior (Nichols,
in press; Ross, 1977) and is critical to our ability to reason
about moral obligation and social responsibility (Nichols, in
press, Wellman & Miller, 2006). Moreover, freedom of
choice dominates the experience of our own actions
(Wegner, 2002). Though there has been much interest in
the psychology of freedom of choice in adults (see Baer,
Kaufman, & Baumeister, 2008) very little research has
examined the development of the concept of freedom of
choice in children.
Research on children’s social cognition shows that, by the
time children are 4 or 5 years old, they can reason about the
psychological causes of human actions, including goals,
beliefs, desires, and intentions (Gopnik & Melzoff, 1997;
Wellman, 1990).
Importantly, preschoolers make

87

Table 1: The sequence of events in each of the four stories in Experiment 1
Mary Stories
Story 1: Possible

Story 2: Impossible

“This is Mary. Mary is standing on a small stool”
“I’ll tell you what Mary wants to do. Mary wants to step “I’ll tell you what Mary wants to do. Mary wants to step
off the stool and go right down to the ground.”
off the stool and float in the air and never come down.”
Desired Action: “Can Mary do that? Can she step off Desired Action: “Can Mary do that? Can she step off
the stool and go right down to the ground?”
the stool and float in the air and never come down?”
(explanation probe)
(explanation probe)
“Let’s see what happens. Mary steps off the stool and goes right down to the ground.”
Alternate Choice: “Did she have to do that, or could Alternate Choice: “Did she have to do that, or could
she have just stayed on the stool?”
she have just floated in the air and never come down?”
(explanation probe)
(explanation probe)
John Stories
Story 3: Possible

Story 4: Impossible

“This is John. John’s hand is near this brick.”
“I’ll tell you what John wants to do. John wants to push
with his hand so that the brick moves over there (point to
other side of table).”

“I’ll tell you what John wants to do. John wants to push
his hand right through the brick. The brick would still be
there, but his hand would just ooze right through it.”

Desired Action: “Can John do that? Can he push with
his hand so that the brick moves over there?”
(explanation probe)

Desired Action: “Can John do that? Can he push his
hand right through the brick – so it would ooze
through?”
(explanation probe)
“Let’s see what happens. John pushes with his hand and the brick moves over there.”
Alternate Choice: “Did he have to do that, or could he Alternate Choice: “Did he have to do that, or could he
have just left the brick right here (point)?”
have just pushed his hand right through the brick – so it
(explanation probe)
would ooze through?”
(explanation probe)
are all made between human actions, rather than between
human actions and the actions of inanimate objects.

Methods

Experiment 1

Participants Participants were 20 four- and five-year-olds
(M=4 years, 7 months; SD=5.5 months) attending preschool
in a university town. The sample was predominantly
middle- and upper-middle class and reflected the diversity
of the local population. Five additional participants were
excluded from the analysis – two due to non-compliance
and three due to experimenter error.

In Experiment 1, 4-year-olds heard two stories – one
about a character who desired to perform a possible action
(e.g. stepping off of a stool) and one about a character who
desired to perform an impossible action (e.g. floating in the
air). The stories were adapted from Schult & Wellman’s
(1997) study of children’s psychological, biological, and
physical explanations for human actions. In both stories, the
outcome was the same (stepping off of the stool and ending
up on the ground). Children were asked if the character
could have done something different (Alternate Choice
Question).
We predicted that children’s responses would depend on
the nature of the action (possible or impossible), and not on
the outcome of the action. Critically, in the possible story,
even though the outcome was desired, possible, and
ultimately attained, children should say that the character
could have chosen a different course of action.

Materials and procedure Materials consisted of four
stories and six colored drawings mounted on 8x11 cards.
Each story was illustrated using three of the picture cards.
The first card was a picture of the main character (Either
Mary or John) standing alone. The second card was a
picture of the same character getting ready to perform an
action. The third card was a picture showing the outcome of
the action. In the outcome card the character’s face was
turned away so no emotional expression was depicted.
Children were interviewed individually in a quiet room at
their preschool. Children heard two stories – a possible
story and an impossible story. If a child heard a possible
story about Mary, then they heard an impossible story about

88

John, and visa versa.
The order of stories
(possible/impossible, Mary/John) was counterbalanced.
Table 1 shows the exact sequence of events in the four
stories. First the character was introduced, (for example
“This is Mary. Mary is standing on a small stool.” Next the
character’s desired action was revealed (for example “I’ll
tell you what Mary wants to do. Mary wants to step off the
stool and go right down to the ground.”). After that children
were asked to restate the desired action (to make sure they
were on task). Then the experimenter asked the Desired
Action question (e.g. “Can Mary do that? Can she…?”) and
probed for an explanation (“How can she do that?/Why
can’t she do that?”). Finally, the outcome was revealed,
children was asked the Alternate Choice question (e.g. “Did
she have to do that, or could she have just…?”) and probed
for an explanation (“How could she have done that?/Why
couldn’t she do that?”). If a child did not answer one of the
yes/no questions or said “I don’t know” the question was
repeated exactly as before. Silent responses (nods/shakes of
the head) were accepted. If a child did not initially provide
an explanation, or simply restated the facts, the
experimenter followed up with a second request for an
explanation (“Can you tell me more about that?”). The
child’s complete response was recorded.

children answered both Desired Action questions correctly,
and no child answered both incorrectly (McNemar’s,
p<.0001).
Critically, children’s responses to the Possible Alternate
Choice question (“Did she have to do X, or could she have
just done Y?”) demonstrate an understanding of freedom of
choice. Only 5/20 (25%) children said that the character had
to perform his/her desired action. Instead, a significant
majority (15/20; 75%) correctly stated that the character
could have done otherwise, going against both the outcome
and the character’s initial desire (binomial test, p<.05). In
contrast, in the impossible condition, 17/20 (85%) of the
children correctly stated that the character could not have
done otherwise (that is, could not act in accordance with an
impossible desire, binomial test, p<.01). The difference
between conditions was significant - 13 children answered
both Alternate Choice questions correctly, and only 1 child
answered both incorrectly (McNemar’s, p<.01).
100%
90%

Percentage "yes" responses

80%

Coding Children’s responses were coded independently by
the first author and a researcher blind to the hypothesis of
the study. Responses to the Desired Action Question and
the Alternate Choice Question were coded yes or no.
Agreement was 95%.
Explanations were coded as 1) physical, 2) psychological,
or 3) other/don’t know by the criteria used in Schult &
Wellman, (1997).
This was straightforward for the
impossible stories. However, children’s explanations for
possible stories were predominantly restatements of the
characters actions (or the alternate choices), followed by the
child acting out the desire/choice themselves (by getting up
and jumping, for example). Thus, we included a fourth
category of restatements/reenactments.

70%
60%
Possible

50%

Impossible

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Desired Action Q: "Can she Alternate Choice Q: "Did
do [action]?"
she have to do [outcome]?"

Figure 1: The percentage of children responding “Yes” to
the Desired Action questions and “Had to do that” to the
Alternate Choice questions in each condition.

Results and Discussion

A qualitative analysis of children’s explanations for ther
Alternate Choice responses reveals several interesting
patterns.
The first is that children provided more
explanations (and fewer restatements/reenactments) when
asked about impossible rather than possible alternate
choices. Moreover, the content of their explanations
replicates Schult & Wellman’s (1997) finding that children
explain physically impossible events by appealing to
physical causes. For the Mary stories, examples range from
“Because you don't have any wings" to “"No… because
gravity pushed you down." For the John stories, examples
include "Because it doesn't have a hole in it" and "Because
[his hand] is not oozy.”
The second pattern that emerges is that relatively few
children appealed to psychological causes in their
explanations for alternate choices. This despite the fact that
our intuitions (as adults) are than freedom of choice is a

The results are depicted in figure 1. Results did not differ
between the Mary and John possible stories (1 and 3) or the
Mary and John impossible stories (2 and 4) and thus were
collapsed for further analysis. Children’s responses to the
desired action questions replicate the findings of Schult &
Wellman (1997). Almost all (16/20, 80%) of the children
said that the character could perform the possible desired
action (binomial test, p<.01). 1 In contrast, only 1/20 (5%) of
the children said that the character could perform the
impossible desired action (binomial test, p<.0001).2 Fifteen
1

These results represent the first answer to the yes/no question only.
However, the explanations of the 4 children who responded “no” to the
possible action involved physical limitations such as “it is too far away,”
“he can only slide it, not push it” or “she will fall down.” Thus, these
explanations reveal an understanding of physical possibility.
2
This child explained by saying “mom say you can.”

89

The sequence of events was as follows. First, the
experimenter began by holding either the paper (Free
Drawing) or the child’s hand (Constrained Drawing) and
said “I’m going to hold the paper [your hand] really hard so
it doesn’t move.” Next, the experimenter requested that the
child draw. In the free trial, she asked the child to draw the
dot. In the constrained trial, she asked the child to draw the
line, but prevented the child from doing so by holding her
hand. Thus, the outcome on each trial was the same – a dot
on the page.
After drawing, the experimenter checked children’s
understanding of their own intentions and outcomes by
asking “Which one did you try to draw?” and, while
pointing to the child’s drawing, “Which one is this?” All
responses to these questions were correct, with the
exception of 2/20 who said they tried to draw the dot when
constrained.
The experimenter then moved the placemat to the far end
of the table and brought out the placemat for the next trial.
Before beginning the next trial, she asked the Alternate
Choice question by pointing to the placemat from the
previous trial and saying, “Last time on the [red] mat, when
I held [the paper/your hand] like this so that it didn’t move
could you have drawn the line? She then asked the child to
explain her answer.
Eleven children received the Free Drawing trial first; the
remaining 9 received the Constrained Drawing trial first.
The colored placemats was randomly ordered.

psychological phenomenon. For the possible actions, the
only psychological explanations were “she did what she was
expecting [but] she could have just stayed” and “she didn’t
want to” (to explain a “no” response). For the impossible
actions, there was one child who said “"She had to do
that…it will be too hard." Perhaps children’s understanding
of the fact that the character is free to choose (as evidenced
by their yes/no responses) precedes their ability to reason
about how choices are made (as evidenced by their
explanations). This speculation warrants further empirical
examination.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, preschoolers’ responses demonstrated an
understanding that a person could have chosen to act against
an expressed (and fulfilled) desire. Moreover, those same
children correctly stated that a person cannot choose to act
in accordance with a physically impossible desire. In
Experiment 2, we asked whether young children could
reason about their own actions in a similar way. To
investigate this, each child drew two pictures. In the Free
Drawing trial, children were asked to draw a dot (and they
did). In the Constrained Drawing trial, we asked children to
draw a line, but prevented them from doing so by holding
their hand in one place. The resulting drawings were
identical – each looked like a dot on the page. We then
asked children if they could have drawn something different
(a line). We expected that children would correctly respond
“yes” in the Free Drawing trial and “no” in the Constrained
Drawing trial.

Results and Discussion
Like in the previous experiment, children’s responses to
the Alternate Choice question (“Could you have drawn the
line?”) demonstrate an understanding of freedom of choice.
The majority of children (16/20; 80%) said that they could
have drawn the line instead of the dot in the Free Drawing
trial (binomial test, p<.01), going against their own just
completed action and its visible outcome. In contrast, in the
Constrained Drawing trial, only 3/20 (15%) children stated
that they could have drawn the line (that is, could act against
a physical constraint, binomial test, p<.01).

Methods
Participants Participants were 20 four- and five-year-olds
(M=4 years, 9 months; SD=6 months) attending preschool
in a university town. The sample was predominantly
middle- and upper-middle class and reflected the diversity
of the local population.
Materials and procedure Materials consisted of five
colored placemats (blue, red, green, yellow, and brown),
blank white paper, and markers. In addition, there were two
drawings prepared by the experimenter: a dot and a
horizontal line.
Children were interviewed individually in a quiet room at
their preschool. Each child began with a warm up (coloring
a triangle) on the first placemat, and then the placemat was
removed. The two drawings (dot and line) were placed in
the center of the table. The experimenter asked the child to
label the dot and line (“What is this? You’re right, it’s a
dot!”). If the child labeled one of the drawings differently
(e.g. by calling the dot a “circle”) than the child’s label was
used throughout the experiment. After the drawings were
labeled, the experimenter placed the next colored placemat
in front of the child and put a piece of paper on top. Then
the first trial (Free Drawing or Constrained Drawing,
counterbalanced) began.

90

Conclusion

100%

Taken together, the results of the two experiments
demonstrate that preschoolers can appropriately reason
about their own and others’ freedom of choice. In
Experiment 1, children saw a character achieving a desired
outcome, yet reasoned that he could have done otherwise.
In Experiment 2, children themselves achieved a desired
outcome, yet also reasoned that they could have made a
different choice. In both experiments, children correctly
reasoned that actions which are physically impossible
(Experiment 1) or physically constrained (Experiment 2)
limit freedom of choice.
This study represents a first step in establishing that even
very young children understand the context in which
alternate choices could have been made, and can separate
choices from desires. However, the two experiments here
do not yet provide a comprehensive picture of the scope of
children’s understanding of freedom of choice. For example,
are there differences between children’s ability to
understand the choice not to act and the choice to act
differently? If these are equally accessible notions to
children, this could have implications for the development
of moral reasoning. Also, this idea could have practical
implications for the regulation of behavior; parents of
preschoolers are familiar with recent replacement of the
words “stop” with the phrase “make a different choice.”
However, our experiments are not directly comparable in
this regard, as one involves the actions of others and one
involves the actions of the child herself. Additionally, it is
unknown whether children’s ability to inhibit and/or redirect
their own actions may provide experiences critical to these
understandings (Mischel, Shoda & Rodriguez, 1989).
Furthermore, it is important to investigate not only
whether preschoolers can reason about freedom of choice,
but whether they can use this understanding in making
moral judgments.
We have begun by showing, in
Experiment 1, that children know that a character has the
ability not to act on a desire. Do young children also
distinguish between freedom of choice and intentions?
Previous findings suggest that young children are often
confused about intentions, either conflating them with
outcomes (Montgomery & Lightner, 2004; Shultz & Wells,
1985) or desires (Schult, 2002). For adults, freedom to
choose involves not only the ability to choose a different
action, but the ability to “change your mind” (i.e. to choose
a different intention).
Clearly, more developmental
evidence is needed if we are to understand the
underpinnings of our folk-psychological notions of choice,
and of their connections to our understanding of morality
and of the social world in general.

90%

Percentage "yes" responses

80%
70%
60%
Free

50%

Constrained

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Alternate Choice Q: "Could you have draw n the line?"

Figure 2: The percentage of children who said they “could
have drawn the line” in response to the Alternate Choice
question in each trial.
Importantly, Thirteen out of 20 children answered both
Alternate Choice questions correctly. That is, they said
“yes” when asked if they could have drawn the line on the
Free Drawing trial and “no” when asked if they could have
drawn the line on the Constrained Drawing trial. Three
children said “yes” to both trials, and four said “no” to both
trials. No child answered both questions incorrectly. Thus,
this represents a significant change in responding between
the Free Drawing and Constrained Drawing trials in the
appropriate direction (McNemar’s test, p=.0001). These
judgments, like those in Experiment 1, confirm that
preschool children understand the difference between
constrained and freely-chosen actions. In this case they
make this distinction for their own just attempted actions.
Explanations help confirm and elaborate this result. In
particular, for the 13 correct responders, when asked to
explain their answers to the Free Drawing trial, only two
children gave a psychological explanation (“I know how” “I
can draw whatever I want”). Of the remaining children, the
majority (6/13) offered restatements/reenactments (i.e. “like
this” with a hand motion), one referred to the physical
properties of the paper (“the paper was flat”), two referred
to the constraint from the previous trial (“cause you weren’t
helping me,” “this time you weren’t holding my hand”), and
two did not offer an explanation. When asked to explain
their answers to the constrained trial, 10 of the 13
mentioned the physical constraint (i.e. “cause you were
holding it tight”), one said “I don’t know” and two didn’t
answer. Thus, as in Experiment 1, these results also suggest
that explaining actions in terms of psychological aspects of
choice ("if unconstrained, I can do whatever I want”) may
come after being able to make correct judgments about
when one has freedom of choice.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an NICHD post-doctoral
fellowship to the first author, and by the McDonnell
Collaborative Initiative on Causal Learning. We would like
to thank Shelley Housey, Laura Dean, Hannah Fish, Jesse

91

Emerick Sarah Fogel, Lauren Schneider, and Diana Capous
for help with data collection, transcription, and coding.

References
Baer, J., Kaufman, J., & Baumeister, R. (2008). Are We
Free? Psychology and Free Will. New York, NY US:
Oxford University Press.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1997). Words, Thoughts and
Theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harris, P., German, T., & Mills, P. (1996). Children's use of
counterfactual thinking in causal reasoning. Cognition,
61, 233-259.
Inagaki, K., & Hatano, G. (1993). Young children's
understanding of the mind-body distinction. Child
Development, 64, 1534-1549.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of
others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old
children. Developmental Psychology, 31, 838-850.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay
of gratification in children. Science, 244, 933-938.
Montgomery, D. E. & Lightner, M. (2004). Children’s
developing understanding of the differences between their
own action and passive movement. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 22, 417-438.
Nichols, S. (2004). The folk psychology of free will: Fits
and starts. Mind & Language, 19, 473-502.
Nichols, S. (in press). How can psychology contribute to the
free will debate? In J. Baer, J. Kaufman, & R. Baumeister
(eds.) Psychology and Free Will, Oxford University Press.
Ross, L. (1977) The intuitive psychologist and his
shortcomings: Distortions in the attribution process. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed), Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, Vol 10, (pp. 174-220). New York: Academic
Press.
Schult, C. (2002). Children's understanding of the
distinction between intentions and desires. Child
Development, 73(6), 1727-1747.
Schult, C. A. & Wellman, H. M. (1997). Explaining human
movements and actions: Children’s understanding of the
limits of psychological explanation. Cognition, 62, 291324.
Schulz, T. R. & Wells, D. (1985). Judging the intentionality
of action-outcomes. Developmental Psychology, 21, 8389.
Wegner, D. (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wellman, H. M. (1990). The Child’s Theory of Mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Wellman, H. M. & Miller, J. G. (2006). Developing
conceptions of responsive intentional agents. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 6, 27-55.

92

