UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preschoolers’ performance on a causal reasoning task: The development of response
strategies
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/46w2h0fb
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Huijpen, Kim
Raijmakers, Maartje
Van Schijndel, Tessa J.P.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

Preschoolers performance on a causal reasoning task: The development
                                           of response strategies
                                            Tessa J.P. van Schijndel
                                 Developmental Psychology University of Amsterdam
                                                   Kim Huijpen
                                 Developmental Psychology University of Amsterdam
                                               Maartje Raijmakers
                                 Developmental Psychology University of Amsterdam
Abstract: Several studies have demonstrated that preschoolers use causal reasoning (e.g. Sobel, Tenenbaum &
Gopnik, 2004). The conclusions generally drawn from these studies are based on the percent of children within each
age group demonstrating causal reasoning. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the diversity in
response strategies children of different ages use when confronted with cause-effect problems and the accuracy with
which they apply these strategies. 78 Preschoolers participated in 4 successive items of the blicket detector task.
With latent class analysis, three latent groups of children were identified: 1) a group applying a strategy similar to
causal reasoning, 2) associative reasoning and 3) imitation or uncertainty avoidance. As most 2-years-olds reasoned
associatively and most 5-year-olds applied the causal strategy, it can be concluded that strategy use is age-related.
These findings show the importance of paying attention to individual differences when investigating childrens causal
reasoning skills.
                                                         1995

