UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Projection, Problem Space and Anchoring

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/51s3c9bn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Kirsh, David

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Projection, Problem Space and Anchoring
David Kirsh (kirsh@ucsd.edu)
Dept of Cognitive Science, UCSD
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515
Abstract

project-create-project cycle. I believe this cycle lies at the
heart of much sense making, especially problem oriented
sense making. It lies, as well, at the heart of most planning
and tangible reasoning. A complete analysis of these
phenomena would require the simultaneous study of
behavior and brain. My analysis here is confined to the fine
grain of behavior, involving scrutiny of the details of what
people do when they make sense and reason.
In videographic studies of people understanding such
things as illustrations, instructions, models and diagrams we
found that subjects typically find ways of interacting with
at-hand tools and resources – often in creative ways – to
help them make sense of those targets. Sometimes these
sense-making actions are as simple as gesturing or pointing
with hand, body or instrument, muttering while looking,
marking or note taking, or shifting the orientation of the
target. Sometimes they involve talking with others. When
tools are placed near subjects – manipulable things such as
rulers, pencils, and physical parts of models – we found
subjects regularly use these as ‘things to think with’. They
use them to create or supplement local structure to facilitate
projection and mental experimentation. This is the heart of
the project-create-project cycle: use what is perceived to
help you do what you can in your head – namely, try to
understand things by projecting possibilities, by somehow
augmenting what you see – then externalize part of that
mentally projected augmentation so that you free up
cognitive resources.
This process of externalization
simultaneously changes the stimulus and makes it easier to
project even deeper. If tools make it easier to externalize
what you are thinking, then tools are used. This cycle of
projecting, externalizing, then projecting again continues as
long as subjects stay focused – though as with any
exploratory or epistemic process a subject may soon loop,
get stuck, or run out of novel projections. Let me define
some terms and properties.

When people make sense of situations, illustrations,
instructions and problems they do more than just think with
their heads. They gesture, talk, point, annotate, make notes
and so on. What extra do they get from interacting with their
environment in this way? To study this fundamental problem,
I looked at how people project structure onto geometric
drawings, visual proofs, and games like tic tac toe. Two
experiments were run to learn more about projection.
Projection is a special capacity, similar to perception, but less
tied to what is in the environment. Projection, unlike pure
imagery, requires external structure to anchor it, but it adds
‘mental’ structure to the external scene much like an
augmented reality system adds structure to an outside scene.
A person projects when they look at a chessboard and can see
where a knight may be moved. Because of the cognitive
costs of sustaining and extending projection, humans make
some of their projections real. They create structure
externally. They move the piece, they talk, point, notate,
represent. Much of our interactivity during sense making and
problem solving involves a cycle of projecting then creating
structure.
Keywords: Projection, interactivity, imagination, sense
making, cost structure, externalization, visual thinking,
situated cognition.

Introduction
Why do people typically perform better by staring at a chess
board, a tic tac toe board or a geometric proof and project
what they might do, rather than memorize the board or proof
as it is initially, then close their eyes while they think of
possibilities? When subjects consider possible moves in a
chess game, one popular account is that they are searching a
problem space; they are exploring a purely mental
representation of the game’s states, entertaining possible
actions and evaluating consequences. This way of speaking
leaves unexplained the relation between the physical board
that is perceived and the mental process of searching an
internal representation. The two might be uncoupled. And
in fact, masters rarely need the cognitive support provided
by a physical chessboard. They can do all the work in their
heads. So a purely mental representation seems apt for
them. But less expert players do benefit from a board’s
presence. They interactively coordinate their projections –
their simulation of what if’s – with the board as they see it
outside. Why does a board help them project? How?
My real concern here is with interactivity: how, when and
why do people interact with their environment when making
sense of situations, solving problems and so on. I present a
truncated account of what I believe is a key, perhaps the key
interactive process in reasoning and sense making: the

Projection: The basic idea
Projection is a way of ‘seeing’ something extra in the thing
present. It is a way of augmenting the observed thing, of
projecting onto it. In contrast to perception, which is
concerned with seeing what is present, projection is
concerned with seeing what is not present but might be. It
is sensitive to what is present yet sufficiently controlled by a
subject to go beyond what is perceived.
In figure 1 two rather different illustrations are displayed.
The first – a cartoon – requires subjects to interpret the
symbolic meaning of the key elements. The image must be
recast as a ‘keyframe’ in a narrative invented by the reader,
in this case, a narrative of retirees watching helplessly as

1

2310

their pension money is lost forever to inflation. If you ask
subjects to tell you what precedes this image and what is
likely to follow they usually offer a brief story, as if running
a movie forward or backward. The account typically
involves a few cartoon frames describing events leading up
to the current situation, but more importantly it usually has a
gloss about the meaning of the loss, which is not highly
visual. In observing narrative projection we found that
people rarely have an urge to mark up the picture.
In figure 1b we see a geometric illustration. It is meant to
show the givens for the question: will the line extending
from A through D bisect BC? To solve the problem
subjects scan the figure to interpret the labeling and
invariably interpret the claim by imaginatively projecting a
line from A through D and into BC. They may estimate
magnitudes, such as whether the projected line cuts BC into
equal lengths, or whether BD splits angle ABC in two. At
some point, though, they are likely to reach for their pencil
to add constructions or annotations to make their mental
projections physical. They mark angles as equal, segments
as bisected, lines as parallel or perpendicular, triangles as
congruent. This interactive process of projecting and
marking continues until they solve the problem or they
clutter the figure so badly that they cannot keep in mind
what goes with what. At that point they erase dead ends and
backtrack to an earlier point in their search process.
Both illustrations 1a and 1b involve projection of
meaning, but in 1b subjects also seem to be augmenting
what they see. I am concerned in this paper with this second
type of sense making, where subjects project quasiperceptual structure – imagery of sorts – onto the target as if
marking it up. The first example, framing and embedding
the image in a narrative, is a worthy sense-making topic; but
my focus is on projection that is more perception-like. It is
a form of projection that typically leads to physically
creating new structure.

and support inferences and allowable augmentations
(new constructions). Both phases of diagramming –
the conversion of linguistic to visual form, and the
construction of additional lines and property labels –
involve projection. In the first phase, before a subject
inks the figure in the first place s(he) usually
formulates a partial plan concerning where to draw
the lines and how they will look. In the next phase,
conjectures are often tested by projection, as if ‘seen’
through augmented reality, before pen is once again
taken to paper.

Relation to Perception and Imagination
Projection, perception, and imagination lie on a continuum
of stimulus dependence, with perception being the most
dependent and imagination the least.
Perception is strongly dependent on the physical stimulus
it is about. We cannot see what is not there. Even on those
occasions where we have a perceptual experience of
something that is, in fact, not there, such as the illusory
edges shown in the first portion of figure 2, the experience
is justified by the stimulus. Sometimes, real objects do
produce that very effect. For instance, a solid white triangle
occluding a black edged triangle would create the illusory
edges shown. So the presence of perceptual mistakes and
illusions is consistent with perception being stimulus
dependent. Our perceptual system has been designed to
recover real structure. It is tightly coupled to the outside.

Figure 2. Perception, projection and imagination
differ in their dependence on external stimuli.
Perception is meant to be stimulus dependent – our
perceptual systems were designed to perceive what is
there. Projection is anchored to stimuli but not 100%
dependent on them. We project onto external
structure but what we project is not yet there.
Imagination is not anchored, good imagers are able to
produce vivid images unconnected to what is present
and manipulate them voluntarily.

1a
1b.
Figure 1. Two illustrations: 1a is a narrative
illustration requiring the viewer to make a sensible
story out of the image. It involves identifying
narrative worthy elements and interpreting them. For
instance, the birds are not part of the narrative
content but the lost money is. 1b is a figure showing
a few geometric constructions. In one type of math
problem, subjects are given a linguistic statement of a
problem; they convert the key premises into visible
shapes, and then using the figure as an aid they prove
certain truths, such as that a line through AD will
bisect BC. The diagram is used to clarify the givens

Projection is also dependent on present stimuli but much
less so than perception. The coupling is looser because
projection offers a peak into the possible, into what could be
there, or what might be useful if it were there, but is not. It
is like wearing augmented reality glasses. But with one
difference. In staring at a chessboard and seeing how a
knight might move, a subject must mentally remove the
knight from its current spot. The layout must be changed as
well as augmented.
2

2311

It is an open empirical question how much external
structure must be present and for how long it must persist
for it to serve as the substrate of projection. But there has to
be something present to project onto, something to anchor
projection. (cf. Hutchins 2005). To grant the mind the
flexibility it constantly reveals, the anchoring structure need
not be persistent – we can anchor a thought in a person’s
gesture or in the direction a person points. But whether
persistent or ephemeral there must be some external
structure present, else there is nothing to distinguish
projection from pure imagery. Whether that structure is
enduring enough to provide a stable understructure to
support repeated projection – as a chessboard does for our
projection of possible moves – or whether it has a fleeting
presence, triggering a single projection but then is gone, the
stimulus enabling the projection in both cases has a reality
outside the agent.
What can be said about the coupling between projection
and substrate, between projection and anchor? First,
projections are most often momentary. Some may persist in
mind for minutes but usually they do not. Visual markers
nicely demonstrate this temporal distribution. A visual
marker or FINST, as Pylyshyn (1994) calls them, is the
internal counterpart of a physical indicator laid down to
mark an object or location. FINST’s help us keep track of
multiple objects in the visual scene. If two bees, similar
enough to be perceptually indistinguishable, were buzzing
around our den, and we wanted to keep an eye on each, our
visual system would conjure up two FINSTs to mark the
bees, thus providing the extra structure needed to keep the
two distinct. FINST’s of this sort have enough mental
persistence to provide the stability needed for referential
thought. “I wonder if that bee is going to land beside the
other?” But once the tracking task ends the FINST’s are
released.
And more often than not the need for
simultaneously tracking two objects in one’s nearby visual
environment is not long lived.
So if FINST’s are
representative projections they do not endure long.
In chess, the duration of projection too may vary, though
the structure projected is more complex than a FINST.
Most often, if a novice relies on a board to facilitate
projection the projected move is considered briefly, then
rejected. The ones that are not summarily dismissed form
the first step in a chain of moves, so they must persist at
least as long as the time it takes to create the chain. In both
cases, despite their differences, projection relies on external
structure being present. This contrasts with chess masters
who do not need the board to think about moves. They
operate more in a ‘virtual reality’ of their own making rather
than the ‘augmented reality’ I am introducing as the mark of
projection. And their board is conceptualized and chunked
to a much greater degree.
Imagination better describes the chess master’s mental
activity. Their representation of the board and current
situation is completely sustained internally and they have
control over what they imagine next. Imagination is often
defined as "a mental representation of a nonpresent object or

event" Solso (1991 p.267). In psychological accounts of
imagery (e.g. see Denis, 1991; Kosslyn, 2005) mental
images have two primary dimensions: vividness and
controllability. Vividness refers to the clarity, "sharpness" or
sensory richness of an image (Richardson, 1999).
Controllability refers to the ease and accuracy with which an
image can be mentally transformed or manipulated
(Kosslyn, 1990). We may assume that masters have both
vivid and well-controlled images of chess situations.

Externalization: part of the project-create cycle
Externalization is a way of taking information or mental
structure generated by an agent and transforming it into
epistemically useful structure in the environment. It is a
way of materializing structure that first was mental – it is
the create part of the project-create-project cycle.
Externalizations are everywhere: annotations, notes,
constructions in geometry, gestures, utterances, encoding
order in layout, (Kirsh 1995, 2008) etc. Often the action of
externalizing alters the information or projection in useful
ways. This is a key factor in thinking with things, in
knowing what you are thinking by seeing what you are
saying, and so on. Externalizations may leave persistent
traces, as in annotations or rearrangements, or they may be
present only during the externalization process, as when
someone gestures or talks while thinking.
Externalizations always serve an epistemic function. But
they also may have pragmatic consequences too. A chess
move is at once an externalization of an inner projection and
a move in the game. And of course there are other actions
that change the environment in epistemically useful ways
that are not externalizations: registration of maps, turning on
the news channel, etc. These are actions that alter the
epistemic landscape of activity but they do not bear the right
relation to internal activity to qualify as externalization, and
they are not part of the project-create-project cycle.

When does external structure help performance?
Externalizing a mental projection allows a person to release
at least some of their working memory, replacing it with
perceived structure. So it serves as an effective interactive
strategy for increasing mental power. The value of this
interactive method is easy to appreciate when the structure
being created is something like a construction in a geometric
proof. A construction typically starts out first as a mental
projection and then, if it seems fruitful, is materialized by
marking the illustration. But when is structure necessary to
improve performance? Some chess masters can play equally
well with eyes closed. When does externalizing help?
For example, would staring at a blank tic tac toe board
while calling out moves help performance? A blank board
does not carry any state information. How could it help?
To answer that question we ran a few simple experiments,
video’ed and analyzed performance to see how behavior and
cognitive strategy differs when a board is present from when
it is not. We used a 3 by 3 tic tac toe board first, then we
scaled the game to a 4 by 4 board to see if the complexity of
3

2312

the game affected the value of external structure. Our
conjecture was that having an empty tic tac toe table would
help in both cases.

Discussion. Coming into the 3 by 3 case, and on the
basis of our pilot data, we assumed that staring at an empty
tic tac toe table would help subjects - at least weak imagers because we thought an empty table would function as an aid
to memory. Without a table an agent must remember the

X O
1 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 9

Training

Blank

Table

Table + X O

Figure 4. Training image and the three conditions.
Experiment One. Procedure: In figure 4 the training
stimulus and all experimental conditions are shown.
Experimenter and subject took turns calling out numbers 1
to 9 corresponding to the cells in a 3 by 3 board. Subjects
could not mark their paper but could gesture if they wished.
The goal was to get three in a row defined in the classical tic
tac toe manner. Subjects were given an initial training
period during which they mastered the translation of number
to position on the table. A within subject design was used.
Each subject played in each of the three conditions: blank,
table, and table + XO. There were three games to a
condition, three conditions to a block and two blocks to an
experiment. All conditions were counterbalanced within and
between subjects to control for order effects and
microgenetic learning. In the table condition, subjects were
given a sheet with a blank tic tac toe table to view if they so
wished. In table + XO a similar tic tac toe table was given
to subjects but with the letters X and O above it. In the
blank condition subjects were given a blank piece of paper
to look at. This was meant to serve as the imagination case
– the unanchored problem space case. During our pilot
study with 7 subjects we found that performance varied
considerably among subjects. In particular, there were a
few subjects who regularly did best on the blank condition.
During debriefing it was apparent they had good imagery
abilities. So all pilot subjects were called back and given a
standard imagery test: vividness of visual imagery
questionnaire (VVIQ-2) by D. Marks (1995). In the end 27
subjects were run and all tested with VVIQ-2.

Table 1. Mean performance 3 by 3. Shorter is better.
Differences are not significant.
structure of the table as well as the values in all its cells. So
having a table to observe ought to reduce memory load.
Apparently, our conjecture is wrong in the case of 3 by 3
tic tac toe. Overall, nothing is to be gained by projection.
Imagination is just as good. Either the memory task is not
challenging enough to warrant offloading memory, as it is in
chess where the board and piece configuration contains a
huge amount of information, or subjects are already at
ceiling.
There is, however, another possibility. Projection is an
expensive process. It requires anchoring imagined elements
– mental X’s and O’s – with physical locations. There is no
a priori reason why mental tic tac toe elements should easily
fit the physical table subjects look at. Some might like a
large table others a small one. Indeed, several subjects
reported a disconnect between their imagery, or their mental
imagery strategy, and the table they were asked to use. One
reason there is no general effect in 3 by 3 tic tac toe, then, is
that, for many subjects, the benefits of projecting may not
overcome the costs. For those subjects, projection is not a
good strategy.
Some support for this interpretation can be found from the
surprising finding that a full 50% of our subjects actually
did worse in the table condition than in the imagery
condition. What might explain that other than posting a cost
to projecting – a cost to anchoring? See table 2.

Results. As shown in Table 1 the mean time to make a
move was relatively close in all conditions and statistical
tests showed no significant differences between conditions.
Apparently, seeing a table does not help in 3 by 3 tic tac toe.
When we divided the subject pool into strong visualizers –
the upper 33% of our VVIQ scores - and weak visualizers –
the bottom 33%, there were differences in means but none
that were statistically significant. We also checked for order
effects, to see if subjects showed significant learning during
the experiment. None was noted. Nor were their significant
order effects (microgenetic learning) among strong and
weak visualizers. Other individual differences were more
suggestive, however. Fully half of our subjects actually did
better on the blank condition than the table condition. This
was significant (p=.002). This difference does not correlate
with visualization ability.

!"#$%&'(%)*)+#",*-%
).($(..(/%0#"-1%
$"%#

("'#
$"$#
$"'#
!"$#

!"&#
!"!#

!"'#
)*+,-#

.+/*0#

.+/*0#1#23#

Table 2. Many subjects found it easier to play the 3
by 3 game in their imagination.
4

2313

To test whether there is threshold where the urge to use
external structure to support projection becomes
overwhelming we ran a second experiment in which we
scaled up tic tac toe to a 4 by 4 table. Intuitively everyone
has a visualization limit. Once that limit is reached the cost
of projection is more than paid back by the reward in
memory saving, or visualization reliability, or reduced
mental effort.

trying to win. Imagery alone is hard. In the table condition,
however, strong 3 by 3 players – those who typically are
better visualizers – initially believed they could project
enough state to play offensively. They felt that with the
support given them by a table they could compete with an
experimenter who played with paper and pencil. Invariably
subjects made errors and soon shifted their table strategy to
a defensive one, and their table performance improved, soon
becoming their best condition. What is interesting is that
they believed in their projective ability and that they could
endure the mental effort of following a harder strategy than
they would consider in the pure imagery condition. When
this strategy proved unreliable they fell back on using the
table with a defensive strategy for greater reliability and
speed. (Fewer errors were made in the table condition but
not significantly so).
A second qualitative observation we made concerns the
number and type of gestures made in 4 by 4 versus 3 by 3
games. It soon became apparent that the more difficulty a
subject had with the tic tac toe task, even with the help of a
table, the more likely they were to externalize state
information to help them out, in this case with hands and
fingers. Humans are ingenious at finding ways of
overcoming internal state limitations. They invent methods
of reducing the overall cost of performing a task, especially
when the alternative is failure. They project then create
structure.
For example, subject M, found a clever way of placing his
fingers on the cells and the lines between the cells in the 4
by 4 table to encode more than 10 cells worth of
information.
Obviously he would have had far more
difficulty encoding this information without the table there
to ‘lean’ on since he would have had to project a visual
structure with lines and cells ‘under’ his fingers.
There is much more to be said here concerning the nature
of coding with hands and gesture and the timing of these
interactions. But it may be more worthwhile tying this
study back to the question of how people use projection to
make sense of diagrams such as visual proofs and
illustrations of mechanical systems.
The idea I am exploring, is that projection is related to
perception, perhaps continuous with it, though it cannot be
identical with perception because it is directed at
augmenting the world. You cannot see what is not there.
Yet in some theories of perception, most notably enactive
theories, O’Regan and Noe (2001), Noe (2004) perception
already contains a component of ‘seeing the future’. For
instance, when we see an object we do not literally see its
back, but knowing it has a back is part of our perceptual
experience. A more mechanistic or computational way of
putting this is to say that when we perceive an object we
simultaneously activate or prime a constellation of
sensations we would experience if we were to move to the
right or left, manipulate the object, saccade to the top, and
so on. Projection is like perception, understood in this
special way, because it is a process of increasing the
priming level of some of the things we would see if we were

Experiment Two. Procedure: cells are
identified with numbers 1-16 and learned
beforehand. The goal of this enlarged game of
tic tac toe is to be the first to get four in a row.
!"#$"!"%&'()*""
+&',"-.)/'0.1&2"

!""#$%&'()*+#
!'%
!(%
!!%

!"#$%&'()*+,-)./#'

!"#$%
!!#(%

!"#$%
&#!%

&%

&#'%

&#'%

!"#$

!"%$

!"&$

,)-(.$

,)-(.$/$01$

$%
'%
)*+,-%

.+/*0%

.+/*0%1%23%

)*+,-%

.+/*0%

.+/*0%1%23%

'()*+$

Table 3. On a 4 by 4 game the importance of
having a table to work with becomes more valuable,
especially for weak visualizers.
Results: Unlike the 3 by 3, all subjects in the 4 by 4
reported that external supports were helpful. But their
empirical performance did not always confirm this claim.
As shown in Table 3, overall performance on the table
condition was significantly better than in others (Blank is
slower than Table p =.03, Blank slower than XO p=.01).
But we observed considerable variance in table performance
among some subjects. Most significantly, strong visualizers
were significantly faster than slow (p=.05). And weak
visualizers showed a much larger facilitation when using
tables. In fact, although strong visualizers (n=8) trended
toward a preference for the table condition their improved
performance was not significantly different than in the pure
imagery condition.
Discussion: These findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that projection has a cost that is offset once the
complexity of a problem passes a threshold. The differences
we observed between weak and strong visualizers suggests,
further, that this threshold varies considerably with imagery
capacity. Of course this does not prove that projection
happens whenever the going gets rough. But it suggests that
how necessary it is to project depends on both the
information size of a problem, and the ‘effort’ an individual
must expend in anchoring imaginary elements.
Several qualitative observations add to this picture.
During debriefing interviews several subjects reported that
they used different strategies in the table and blank
conditions. When no table was present they felt
overwhelmed and played defensively, using a strategy of
blocking the opponent as quickly as possible rather than
5

2314

to act in certain ways. The relevance to tic tac toe and to
geometry is that because we are able to label a tic tac toe
table by writing on it, we have a weakly primed version of
the labeled table already in mind. The stronger our
disposition to add labels the stronger is the priming for
seeing a table augmented with those labels. Projection is a
way of intentionally increasing the level of primed states of
the world. It lets us entertain what the world would be like if
we did act to make it so.
Now consider the visual proof shown in figure 6a that the
sum of ½n converges to 1. As you immerse yourself in the
proof do you feel you are recreating a progression of cuts?
Do you see that the operation of halving a square whose
sides are 1 by 1, and then halving the remainder (whether it
be a square or a rectangle) is a recursive process that will
never yield a structure larger than the original square? I
contend that this quasi-simulation of cutting is a form of
projection and lies at the heart of making sense of visual
proofs.

anchored to visible structure. When we project it is like
wearing augmented reality glasses: we lay structure over
existing structure. There are no doubt other modalities of
projection beside vision, but I have not considered these
here. An experiment was presented in which subjects were
tested to see if they performed better when there was more
structure of the right sort to anchor their projections. As
predicted, when useful anchoring structure is present
subjects score more highly. The usefulness of such anchors
depends on a subject’s imagery ability and the complexity
of the problem. For tasks that are simple relative to a
subject’s imagery ability, external anchors are of no value.
Projection is replaced by imagination. But as a task
increases in complexity, projection and anchoring becomes
important even for good imagers. At some point everyone
benefits from external structure. The costs associated with
projecting and anchoring are offset by the returns derived
from mental ease, memory saving and reliability.
The relevance of this to problem solving and our opening
question concerning chess players should be obvious:
masters who can play chess in their imagination do not need
to look at a board when playing. They have so overlearned
the chess board and possible configurations that they can
play equally well with or without a board. But less
practiced players need a chessboard and pieces. They cannot
sustain a meaningful problem space for chess without the
help of perception to provide anchors to a real board. Their
problem space is more a projection than autonomous mental
space. If anchors do not exist they must create them.

6a.
6b.
Figure 6. Two different types of visual reasoning
are at play in 6a and 6b. 6a shows a geometric proof
and requires understanding the recursiveness implicit
in cutting regions in half. 6b requires physical
understanding of the effect of pushing down on a
lever.

References
Denis, M. (1991). Image and Cognition. New York: Harvester
Wheatsheaf.
Hutchins, E. (2005). Material anchors for conceptual blends.
Journal of Pragmatics, Vol. 37, No. 10. pp. 1555-1577
Kirsh, D. The Intelligent Use of Space. Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 73, Number 1-2, pp. 31-68, (1995).
Kirsh, D. (2008). Problem Solving and Situated Cognition. In
Robbins, P. and Aydede, M. (eds.) The Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition. New York: Cambridge
University Press. 264-306.
Kosslyn, S.M. (2005). Mental Images and the Brain. Cognitive
Neuropsychology (22) 333-347.
Kosslyn, S.M. Flynn RA, Amsterdam JB, Wang G. (1990).
Components of high-level vision: a cognitive neuroscience
analysis and accounts of neurological syndromes. Cognition.
34(3):203-77.
Marks, D.F. (1995). "New directions for mental imagery
research". Journal of Mental Imagery, 19, 153-167.
O'Regan, J. Kevin and Noe, Alva (2001) A sensorimotor
account of vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences. (24) 939-973
Noe, Alva (2004). Action in Perception. MIT Press.
Pylyshyn, Z.W. (1994). Some primitive mechanisms of spatial
attention .Cognition, 50, 363-384.
Richardson, J.T.E. (1999). Mental Imagery. Psychology Press:
Hove, U.K.
Solso, R. L. (1991) Cognitive Psychology. 3rd ed. Allyn &
Balon

Now look at figure 6b. Is more force or less force
required to lift the load when the fulcrum is moved closer to
the foot? How did you find the answer? By mentally
moving the fulcrum and then simulating the consequences
for the foot? This projected animation cannot be perception
because, presumably, perception requires that what you see
is, in fact, there to be seen. You cannot see the future. Yet
there is something perception-like in this projected imagery
even if it is not nearly as vivid as perception. Again
projection seems to lie at the heart of our sense making
visual thinking here. As we found with tic tac toe, our
proxy for thinking in abstract problem spaces, projection
lets us probe problems by tying our thinking to external
structure. It lets us anticipate how the world might be,
when we act on it.

Conclusion
I have been arguing that projection is a basic cognitive
capacity involved in visual thinking, in much problem
solving and in making sense of illustrations, diagrams, and
many types of planning and reasoning situations.
Projection differs from imagination and imagery in being
6

2315

