UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Rapid word 'mapping' at 10 months of age

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3br6170k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Mather, Emily
Plunkett, Kim

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Rapid word ‘mapping’ at 10 months of age
Emily Mather (emily.mather@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford, UK. OX1 3UD.

Kim Plunkett (kim.plunkett@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford, UK. OX1 3UD.
important than lexical status in guiding two-year-olds’
mapping of a novel label (see also Merriman & Schuster,
1991).
An alternative approach to understanding the cognitive
processes underlying ME is to study the development of the
word-learning strategy. Halberda (2003) found evidence of
ME in an intermodal preferential looking (IPL) task at 17
months of age. Infants were presented with one familiar and
one novel object, and heard a novel label. While 17-montholds increased attention to the novel object upon hearing the
novel label, 16-month-olds did not. In contrast, 14-montholds increased attention to the familiar object. Based on
these developmental changes, Halberda suggested that ME
is implemented as the logical argument “Not A, therefore B”
(the disjunctive syllogism). Fourteen-month-olds’ attention
to the familiar object in response to the novel label might
represent the first step in ‘ruling out’ the familiar object as
the referent; however, they apparently struggled to complete
this step.
If infants respond systematically to novel labels from as
young as 14 months, then we might be able to observe other
precursors to ME at even younger ages. One enduring
question is whether ME, as a linguistic constraint, might
emerge from simpler learning mechanisms? Theories of
associative learning (e.g., Mackintosh, 1975; Pearce & Hall,
1980) predict the selective formation of new associations.
For example, pre-exposure to a stimulus reduces the
associability of the stimulus (a phenomenon known as
‘latent inhibition’; see Lubow, 1973, 1989). A basic learning
mechanism could guide the infant towards selectively
associating a novel label with a novel object.
Relatedly, some studies demonstrate that object novelty
can facilitate or disrupt the ME response depending on
whether the name-known or name-unknown category
exemplar is the more novel (Merriman & Bowman, 1989;
Merriman & Schuster, 1991). It is also well-known that
from birth, infants typically prefer novel stimuli over
habituated stimuli (e.g., Slater, Morison, & Rose, 1982,
1983).
Thus, even very young infants might respond
systematically to familiar and novel objects upon hearing a
novel label. If evidence for the use or development of the
ME response can be found for infants prior to any
substantial vocabulary development, this would suggest that
the ME assumption starts out as a general constraint on
learning.

Abstract
Where does the ‘mutual exclusivity’ bias to map novel labels
onto novel objects come from? In an intermodal preferential
looking task, we found that novel labels enhance 10-montholds’ interest in a novel object over a familiar object. In
contrast, familiar labels and a neutral phrase gradually
reduced attention to a novel object. Markman (1989, 1990)
has argued that the name for a familiar object has to be
recalled to rule out the object as the referent of a novel label.
Yet, at 10 months of age, infants’ attention might be guided
by the novelty of objects and labels, rather than knowledge of
the names for familiar objects. Mutual exclusivity, as a
language-specific bias, might emerge from a more general
constraint on attention and learning.
Keywords: cognitive development; language acquisition;
psychology.

Introduction
Infants can use their existing vocabulary to form new word
mappings. This ability is commonly known as the ‘mutual
exclusivity’ (ME) assumption: Infants will map a novel
label onto a novel object, rather than a familiar object. One
prominent explanation of ME is that infants reject second
labels for objects which already have names (Markman,
1989, 1990) 1 . Other explanations include the novel namenameless category (N3C) principle (Mervis & Bertrand,
1994) and the principle of contrast (Clark, 1987). All of
these accounts of ME require that the infant knows the name
for the familiar object. Current evidence suggests that
infants use the ME assumption to guide word learning from
around 15 to 17 months of age (Halberda, 2003; Markman,
Wasow, & Hansen, 2003).
The computations involved in ME have yet to be
identified. How does the infant judge the novelty of a label?
Does the infant have to retrieve or know the name for the
familiar object? One response to these questions is to
investigate how stimulus properties determine the use of
ME. For example, Merriman and Bowman (1989) varied
both the lexical status (i.e., whether an object was nameknown or name-unknown) and novelty of objects in one
experiment, and found that object novelty was more
1

We use the term ‘mutual exclusivity’ in a neutral manner to refer
to the behavior of mapping a novel label to a novel object, rather
than a familiar object. Markman (e.g., 1989, 1990) has previously
used the term to refer to a specific theoretical account of this
behavior.

1
2202

We report an IPL experiment with 10-month-olds to
investigate their attention to familiar and novel objects upon
hearing different kinds of labels and phrases. On each trial,
infants were presented with one familiar object and one
novel object. Infants heard either a familiar label, a novel
label, or a ‘neutral’ directive phrase.
At 10 months of age, a linguistic constraint might not be
available to produce the mutual exclusivity response.
However a basic habituation or general learning mechanism
could also create a mutual exclusivity response to novel
labels. Therefore, we predict that 10-month-olds will attend
more to a novel object upon hearing a novel label compared
to hearing either a familiar label or a neutral phrase. Infants’
responses on familiar label trials and from parental
vocabulary report can be used to check whether the infants
know the familiar object names, facilitating interpretation of
their behavior.

split into four 2.5 s phases: Two pre-naming and two postnaming phases (see Figure 2).

Look!…Look at the Meb!...Look!…Meb!

Look!...Look at that!...Oooh!…Look there!

Look!…Look at the Cup!...Look!…Cup!

Figure 1: Example of a trial block

Experiment 1

The 12 trials were split into two halves of six trials; a
different set of objects and labels was presented in each half.
Each half was further divided into two blocks of three trials,
where each trial within a block presented different familiar
and novel objects. The first block in each half presented one
example of each trial type (see Figure 1). The second block
in each half presented the same sequence of trials as the first
block, counterbalancing for side of presentation. Therefore,
every trial had both an original and repeat presentation.
Thus, during the experiment infants heard two novel labels,
two familiar labels, and the control phrase. The order of
trials within a block was randomised for each infant.

Participants
Forty-two full-term 10-month-olds (M = 10.1 months,
Range = 9.7 months to 10.5 months; 24 male and 18 female)
participated. Four additional infants were excluded due to:
fussiness (1), parental interference (1), refusal to look (1),
and side bias (1). All infants had healthy hearing and vision,
were recruited via the local maternity ward, and came from
homes where only English was spoken.

Stimuli
Auditory Stimuli Speech stimuli were recorded from a
native female speaker of English in an infant-directed
manner. Stimuli were six familiar labels (ball, car, cup,
shoe, sock, spoon) and two novel labels (meb, wug) each
uttered in the frame “Look!...Look at the X!...Look! X!”, and
the control phrase “Look!...Look at that!...Oooh!...Look
there!”. The phrase “Look!” was used as an attention
stimulus.

0.0 s

2.5 s
Look!

5.0 s

Look at the Meb!

7.5 s
Look!

10.0 s

Meb!

Figure 2: Trial timeline
To create the pairs of object images, two sets of six
familiar and novel object pairs were randomly constructed,
with the constraint that no pair was repeated across sets.
Approximately half the infants were tested on one set, while
the remaining infants were tested on the other set. Across
infants, each pair of objects served under each of the three
trial types. Each novel label was rotated across six object
pairs. Within each half of the experiment, familiar and novel
objects appeared equally to the left- and right-hand side of
the display. Side of presentation was counterbalanced for
every object pair across blocks.

Visual stimuli Visual stimuli were color images of six
typical object exemplars corresponding to the six familiar
labels, and six novel objects that the infants were unlikely to
have encountered (e.g., accordion, hair curler, etc.).
Examples are provided in Figure 1. A red cross was used as
an attention stimulus.

Design
The experiment consisted of 12 trials, each presenting a
familiar and novel object. Each trial lasted 10 s,
accompanied by one of three types of auditory stimulus.
Familiar Label trials presented the name for the familiar
object. Novel Label trials presented a novel name for the
novel object. Control trials presented the phrase
“Look!...Look at that!...Oooh!…Look there!”. Label onsets
were at 4633 ms and 7133 ms during the trial (onsets were
for ‘that’ and ‘there’ for Control trials). Allowing for a 367
ms processing latency (Swingley & Aslin, 2000), trials were

Procedure
Prior to participation, parents completed a British adaptation
of the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory
(British CDI; Hamilton, Plunkett, & Schafer, 2000). During
the experiment, infants sat on their caregiver’s lap facing a
widescreen display (1.1 x 0.4 m) with their eyes at a
distance of approximately 0.8 m, level with the vertical
2

2203

midpoint of the images and at an equal horizontal distance
from both images. Images were positioned at a distance of
62 cm center-to-center, each with a display size of 32 x 24
cm. Two cameras mounted directly above the horizontal
midpoints of each image recorded infants’ eye movements.
Synchronised camera signals were routed via a digital
splitter to produce two time-locked images. Auditory stimuli
were delivered via two loudspeakers centrally positioned
side-by-side above the display. Caregivers were asked to
keep their eyes closed, to wear headphones playing music,
and to not point at the screen. Trials were launched by the
experimenter when the infant looked toward the screen. If
the infant looked away between trials, the attention stimuli
were presented to return the infant’s gaze to center.

Figure 3 illustrates how attention to the familiar object
unfolded as a function of trial type. During the first three
trial phases, there was little difference between trial types.
However, during the final trial phase, attention to the novel
object was greater during novel label trials than during
either familiar label or control trials. In a repeated-measures
ANOVA, there was a significant interaction between trial
type and trial phase, F(4.6, 185.4) = 2.36, ηp2 = .056, p < .05
(Greenhouse-Geisser corrected). There were no main effects
(all ps > .15). An analysis of simple main effects for each
trial phase did not reveal significant differences between
conditions for the first three trial phases (all ps > .5), but a
significant effect of condition for the fourth trial phase, F(2,
80) = 4.35, ηp2 = .98, p = .016.
During the fourth trial phase, the proportion of familiar
object fixation in the novel label condition was significantly
different to both the control condition, t(41) = 3.02, d = .47,
p < .005, and the familiar label condition, t(40) = 2.41, d =
.38, p < .025. The familiar label and control conditions were
not significantly different to each other, t(40) = .43, ns.. The
proportion of attention to the familiar object in the novel
label condition at 39.8% (SD = 19.3) was significantly
below chance, t(41) = -3.41, d = .53, p = .001, and indicates
a preference to fixate the novel object. The proportion of
attention to the familiar object in both the familiar label (M
= 50.4%, SD = 17.4) and control condition (M = 52.4%, SD
= 20.3) was not significantly different to chance for the
fourth trial phase (all ps > .4) 3 .
Finally, it is worth noting that even though there were no
significant differences between conditions during the two
pre-naming phases (0 – 2.5 s & 2.5 – 5.0 s), there was a
preference across all conditions to fixate the novel object
more than the familiar object. Averaging across conditions
and the first two trial phases, preference for the familiar
object (M = 46.9%, SD = 7.07) was significantly below
chance, t(41) = -2.86, p < .005. The relation between this
‘baseline’ preference for the novel object and the
subsequent effect of hearing different labels and phrases is
discussed below.

Scoring Digital videos were coded offline on a frame-byframe basis (every 40 ms) by a skilled blind coder. Every
fixation was coded as either left looking, right looking or
other looking. Coding reliability was assessed by a second
blind coder for a random sample of 15% of infants (N = 7).
The mean intraclass correlation coefficient was r = .984
(range = .957 - .997).

Results
Main analysis A proportion of familiar object fixation
measure (total duration of fixations to the familiar object
divided by total duration of fixations to both objects) was
calculated for each of the four 2.5 s trial phases (see Figure
2), to observe how infants’ looking behavior unfolded
during the trial. This trial phase factor was entered into a
preliminary repeated-measures ANOVA with the factors of
experiment half, trial repetition, and trial type. There were
no significant interactions or main effects for experiment
half and trial repetition (all ps > .2) 2 ; further analyses are
collapsed across these factors.

Proportion of familiar object fixatio
Familiar
object fixation (%)

60

55

Familiar
Novel
Control

CDI Analysis Parental report indicated that the mean
number of words understood by the infants was 25 words
(Range = 0 – 102 words) and the mean number of words
produced was 1 word (Range = 0 – 6 words). Parents
reported low levels of comprehension for the six familiar
object labels used in the study: Ball (29 %), Car (19 %),
Cup (5 %), Shoe (7 %), Sock (10 %), and Spoon (12 %).
The inclusion of a median split on infants’ comprehension
vocabulary as a factor in the main analysis did not reveal

50

*p < .005

45

40

*p = .001
35

0.0 - 2.5 s

2.5 - 5.0 s

5.0 - 7.5 s

7.5 - 10.0 s

Figure 3: Proportion of familiar object fixation as a function
of trial type (Error bars are +/- 1 S.E.)

3

One infant did not contribute to the trial type X trial phase
analysis due to missing data for the fourth trial phase of the
familiar label condition. However, the exclusion of this infant
resulted in a highly similar pattern of findings for the fourth trial
phase: novel label vs. control condition, p = .007, and novel label
to chance, p = .003.

2

Eighteen infants contributed data to all 48 cells of the half X
repeat X trial type X trial phase design. Further analysis collapsed
across the experiment half factor, in which 39 of 42 infants
contributed data, also did not reveal any interactions or main
effects for trial repetition (all ps > .4).

3
2204

any significant interactions with the other experimental
variables. There was a main effect of vocabulary, where
high vocabulary infants had a lower preference for the
familiar object (i.e., greater preference for the novel object)
than low vocabulary infants, 43.0 % vs. 50.0 %, F(1, 39) =
12.4 , p = .001. Finally, the exclusion of trials where infants
were reported to comprehend the name of the familiar object
resulted in a similar pattern of findings to those reported in
the main analysis.

that the infants did not comprehend the familiar object
names. Parental vocabulary report supports this
interpretation, with very low levels of reported
comprehension for all six familiar object names. However,
British CDI data must be treated with some caution; a study
by Houston-Price, Mather, and Sakkalou (2007) found that
British parents appear to underestimate comprehension
vocabulary for infants aged between 15 and 21 months. It is
currently unknown whether parents underreport vocabulary
for younger infants.
A related possibility is that the infants had weak
representations of the familiar word mappings, but could not
inhibit attention to the novel object. During familiar label
trials, attention to the novel object decreased after both
presentations of the familiar label. However, if the infants
had difficulty recognising the familiar word mappings, then
recall of the familiar object name during novel label trials
would have proven difficult.
In summary, both the parental report and experimental
data suggest that the 10-month-olds did not know the
familiar word mappings. Nonetheless, we wished to
understand whether 10-month-olds might evidence
comprehension of the familiar words under different
conditions. In Experiment 1, infants’ interest in novel
objects might have disrupted attention to the named familiar
object. Hence, in Experiment 2 we paired familiar objects
together, labelling each object across trials. The trials
otherwise had the same timing of visual and auditory stimuli
as Experiment 1.

Discussion
During the experiment, infants’ responses to familiar and
novel objects did not initially differ according to the type of
labelling event. Yet, toward the end of the trial, interest in
the novel object was significantly greater after hearing a
novel label, than after hearing a familiar label or neutral
phrase. Therefore, novel labels enhance 10-month-olds’
interest in novel objects. The present findings are evidence
for the mutual exclusivity response at a considerably
younger age than previously thought (see Halberda, 2003;
Markman, Wasow, & Hansen, 2003).
It is notable that there was no difference in looking
behavior across conditions following the first presentation
of a label. However, interest in the novel object differed
across conditions following the second presentation of a
label. It is not certain that the second presentation of the
label was necessary to produce this difference; the
difference between conditions might have slowly unfolded
in response to the first label (see Mather & Plunkett, 2009,
for the role of label repetition in ME). In either case, it was
specifically a novel label which sustained interest in the
novel object during the 7.5 – 10 s phase of the trial.
In previous IPL studies of ME, infants displayed a prenaming preference for the familiar object (see White &
Morgan, 2008). Therefore, ME has been indexed as a
decrease in attention to the familiar object (i.e., an increase
in attention to the novel object) between the pre- and postnaming phases of novel label trials. In contrast, we found a
pre-naming preference for the novel object. Thus, for the
10-month-olds, the novel label did not serve to shift
attention away from the familiar object. However, attention
to the novel object persisted during novel label trials, but not
during familiar label or control trials. Thus, attention to the
novel object was congruous with hearing a novel label, but
not with hearing either a familiar label or even a neutral
phrase.
We had predicted that 10-month-olds would produce the
mutual exclusivity response because either a linguistic
constraint or general learning mechanism could cause this
behavior. The young age of the infants, and their limited
vocabulary resources, lends support to the latter explanation.
However, it is important to examine the experimental
evidence for whether or not infants knew the names for the
familiar objects.
During familiar label trials, the infants did not look at the
familiar object upon hearing it named. One explanation is

Experiment 2
Participants
Twenty-four full-term 10-month-olds (M = 10.1 months,
Range = 9.8 months to 10.4 months; 11 male and 13 female)
participated. Six additional infants were excluded due to:
fussiness (4), difficulty coding (1), and equipment failure
(1). All infants had healthy hearing and vision, were
recruited via the local maternity ward, and came from
homes where only English was spoken.

Stimuli
The visual and auditory stimuli were the six familiar objects
and labels used in the familiar label condition of Experiment
1 (see above), with the exception of the auditory attention
stimulus which was a chiming sound.

Design
The experiment consisted of 12 trials, each presenting two
familiar objects and the name for one of the two objects.
Each trial lasted 10 s and label onsets were at 4633 ms and
7133 ms during the trial. Infants were tested on one of two
sets of familiar object pairs. Each set was created by
randomly pairing the six objects into three object pairs, with
the constraint that there were different pairings in each set
(ball-spoon, car-sock, cup-shoe, or ball-cup, spoon-sock,
car-shoe). Each object pair was presented four times during
4

2205

whether infants knew the names of the six familiar objects
used in Experiment 1. Parental vocabulary report and
infants’ looking behavior during Experiment 1 suggested
that the infants did not know the names for the familiar
objects. Experiment 2 also did not provide any strong
evidence that 10-month-olds knew the names for the
familiar objects.
Therefore, the evidence favours an explanation of novel
label trials where infants do not need to know the name of
the familiar object. A general learning constraint, such as
latent inhibition (Lubow, 1973, 1989), could account for the
infants’ behavior during novel label trials, without requiring
retrieval of the familiar object names. Infants might attend
to a novel object more when they hear a novel label than
when they hear a familiar label, because the novel label is
relatively easier to associate with the novel object.
An explanation of the 10-month-olds’ behavior based on
object novelty could account for the discrepancy with
Halberda (2003), who found that 14-month-olds increased
attention to a familiar object upon hearing a novel label. The
10-month-olds appear more adept than older infants at
attending to a novel object in response to a novel label.
However, the mechanism underlying the observed effects
could differ between these ages. While a basic constraint on
learning might operate at 10 months, by 14 months of age, a
specifically linguistic constraint might underpin the ME
response. Thus, 14-month-olds could be working through a
more complex sequence of computations than 10-montholds.
One might ask why 10-month-olds do not have larger
vocabularies, if a novel label enhances their attention to a
novel object? Some researchers (e.g., Carey & Bartlett,
1978; Mervis & Bertrand, 1994) have argued that the ability
to map novel labels to novel objects is a mechanism for
‘fast-mapping’: the rapid acquisition of novel word
meanings. How might we reconcile what 10-month-olds do
in the laboratory with their level of language development?
One consideration is that while there might be a mechanism
favouring attention to a novel object upon hearing a novel
label, 10-month-olds might only retain a weak association,
if any.
The bias to attend to novel objects in response to novel
labels might not be contributing to vocabulary development
at 10 months of age. However, this bias might be a
precursor to the development of a language-specific
principle. ME might emerge from the interaction of a basic
learning mechanism, such as latent inhibition, with the
linguistic environment. A later-developing principle, geared
to the task of learning language, might produce more robust
word mappings. Nevertheless, the selective attention to
novelty required for this particular word-learning task might
be in place at the earliest stages of vocabulary development.

the experiment, and each object was named on two trials,
once on the left and once on the right of the screen. The
order of trials was randomized for each infant.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to Experiment 1, except for the
dimensions of the laboratory, which differed to Experiment
1. Infants sat on their parent’s lap facing a widescreen
display (0.7 x 0.4 m) with their eyes at a distance of
approximately 0.65 m, and at an equal horizontal distance
from both images. Images were positioned at a distance of
50 cm center-to-center, each with a display size of 20 x 15
cm.
Scoring Digital videos were coded offline on a frame-byframe basis (every 40 ms) by a skilled blind coder. Every
fixation was coded as either left looking, right looking or
other looking.

Results and Discussion
Parental report of vocabulary was similar to that for
Experiment 1. Mean comprehension vocabulary was 25
words (Range = 1 - 159 words), and mean production
vocabulary was 1 word (Range = 0 - 4 words). Parents
reported low levels of comprehension for the six familiar
object labels used in the study: Ball (21 %), Car (25 %),
Cup (0 %), Shoe (8 %), Sock (13 %), and Spoon (8 %).
A proportion of target looking measure was calculated by
dividing the total duration of fixations to the target (i.e.,
named) object by the total duration of fixations to both
objects. This measure was calculated for each of the four 2.5
s trial phases. A mixed-model ANOVA with the factors of
trial phase and a median split on comprehension vocabulary
did not reveal any significant main effects or interactions
(even with the exclusion of the comprehension vocabulary
factor there was no significant effect of trial phase).
We further compared the proportion of target looking to
chance for each trial phase. Although there was a preference
for the target object during the 5.0 – 7.5 s trial phase, M =
53.3%, SD = 7.5, t(23) = 2.14, p = .043, this effect was not
significant when adjusted for multiple comparisons. Hence,
the results of Experiment 2 do not provide any compelling
evidence that infants in Experiment 1 might have known the
names for the familiar objects.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1, we investigated 10-month-olds’ attention
to familiar and novel objects according to whether they
heard a novel label, a familiar label, or a neutral phrase. If
novel labels cause greater attention to a novel object than
either familiar labels or a neutral phrase, this would suggest
the operation of ME at 10 months. However, at an age prior
to any substantial vocabulary development, the ME
response might be a general constraint on learning, rather
than a specific word-learning strategy.
To understand what mechanism could create a mutual
exclusivity response at 10 months of age, we looked at

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council grant (BBE0074061).

5
2206

Slater, A., Morison, V., & Rose, D. (1982). Visual memory
at birth. British Journal of Psychology, 73, 519- 25.
Slater, A., Morison, V., & Rose, D. (1983). Locus of
habituation in the human newborn. Perception, 12(5),
593 – 598.
Swingley, D. & Aslin, R. N. (2000). Spoken word
recognition and lexical representation in very young
children. Cognition, 76(2), 147-166.
White, K. S. & Morgan, J. L. (2008). Sub-segmental detail
in early lexical representations. Journal of Memory and
Language, 59, 114 – 132.

References
Carey, S. & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Papers and Reports on Child Language
Development, 15, 17 – 29.
Clark, E. (1987). The principle of contrast: A constraint on
language acquisition. In B. MacWhinney, (Ed.)
Mechanisms of language acquisition (pp 1- 33). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Halberda, J. (2003). The development of a word-learning
strategy. Cognition, 87, B23-B34.
Hamilton, A., Plunkett, K., & Schafer, G. (2000). Infant
vocabulary development assessed with a British
Communicative Development Inventory. Journal of Child
Language, 27, 689–705.
Houston-Price, C., Mather, E., & Sakkalou, E. (2007).
Discrepancy between parental reports of infants’ receptive
vocabulary and infants’ behaviour in a preferential
looking task. Journal of Child Language, 34, 701 – 724.
Lubow, R. E. (1973). Latent inhibition. Psychological
Bulletin, 79, 398-407.
Lubow, R. E. (1989). Latent inhibition and conditioned
attention theory. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1975). A theory of attention: Variations
in the associability of stimuli with reinforcement.
Psychological Review, 82, 276-298.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints children place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14(1), 57-77.
Markman, E. M., Wasow, J. L., & Hansen, M. B. (2003).
Use of the mutual exclusivity assumption by young word
learners. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 241 – 275.
Mather, E. & Plunkett, K. (2009). Learning words over
time: The role of stimulus repetition in mutual
exclusivity. Infancy, 14(1), 60-76.
Merriman, W. E. & Bowman, L. L. (1989). The mutual
exclusivity bias in children's word learning. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 54(3-4,
serial no. 220).
Merriman, W. E., Marazita, J., & Jarvis, L. (1995).
Children's disposition to map new words onto new
referents. In M. Tomasello & W. E. Merriman (Eds.),
Beyond names for things: Young children's acquisition of
verbs (pp. 147-183). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Merriman, W. E. & Schuster, J. M. (1991). Young children's
disambiguation of object name reference. Child
Development, 62(6), 1288-1301.
Mervis, C. B. & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the
novel name-nameless category (n3c) principle. Child
Development, 65(6), 1646-1662.
Pearce, J. M. & Hall, G. (1980). A model of Pavlovian
learning: Variations in the effectiveness of conditioned
but not unconditioned stimuli. Psychological Review, 87,
532-552.
6

2207

