UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relating neurophysiology and drift diffusion models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7113x5t7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Palmeri, Thomas
Purcell, Braden
Schall, Jeffrey

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relating neural activity and drift diffusion models
Braden A. Purcell (braden.a.purcell@vanderbilt.edu)
Jeffrey D. Schall (jeffrey.d.schall@vanderbilt.edu)
Thomas J. Palmeri (thomas.j.palmeri@vanderbilt.edu)
Vanderbilt University, Department of Psychology, Center for Integrative & Cognitive Neuroscience,
Nashville, TN 37240 USA

Abstract
before a saccade; the movement is executed when activity
reaches a fixed threshold (Hanes & Schall, 1996).
Neurophysiological (Lee, Helms, Augustine, & Hall, 1997)
and modeling (Purcell, Heitz, Cohen, Logan, Schall, &
Palmeri, 2007) work suggest a functional connection
between visual and movement neurons in FEF and SC.
Visual and movement neurons represent distinct
perceptual and motor processes. During saccade visual
search, the time when visual neurons select a target from
among distractors is modulated by changes in targetdistractor similarity, but not response interference (Sato,
Murthy, Thompson, & Schall, 2001). This time may
indicate the conclusion of perceptual processing. A recent
study asked whether movement neuron activity could be
used to identify the start of response preparation (Woodman,
Kang, Thompson, & Schall, 2008). They found that varying
target-distractor similarity or set size modified the onset of
movement neuron activity (when activity began increasing
above baseline). The onset of movement neuron activity
also correlated with RT within difficulty conditions, but the
growth rate did not. These results suggest that both
systematic and random variability in RT is due to delays in
the start of response preparation.
Movement neuron activity has been interpreted in terms
of stochastic accumulator models. These models assume
that perceptual evidence is integrated over time until it
reaches a response boundary (Boucher et al, 2007).
Evidence accumulation is preceded by perceptual
processing time, Ter (Figure 1). The output of perceptual
processing is the drift rate, v, which is the average rate of
accumulation. Typically, these models predict that changing
the difficulty of a perceptual discrimination should primarily
affect the quality of the information (the drift rate), but not
the duration of perceptual processing (Ter). If the onset of
movement neuron activity corresponds to Ter, then this
suggests that variability in RT is due to variability in the
duration of perceptual processing. This contradicts a key
assumption of the stochastic accumulator framework:
manipulating the difficulty of a perceptual decision should
primarily influence the drift rate.
What can the onset of movement neuron activity tell us
about the transmission of information from perceptual
processing (visual neurons) to response preparation
(movement neurons)? It seems intuitive that variations in
the drift rate must lead to variations in the rate of stochastic
growth and not the time when activity begins increasing.
However, the onset of neurophysiological activity cannot be

The drift diffusion model predicts that variability in response
time (RT) is primarily due to the time required for evidence to
stochastically accumulate to a response boundary. Total RT
depends on both the quality of perceptual processing output
(the mean rate of accumulation), and also the duration of
perceptual processing (the delay from stimulus to start of
accumulation). The activity of movement neurons in the
frontal eye field (FEF) is associated with a stochastic
accumulation; these cells initiate a saccade when activity
reaches a fixed threshold. During saccade visual search, the
onset of movement neuron activity correlates with RT, and
increases when search is more difficult. This suggests that the
duration of perceptual processing was increased. We
simulated trajectories using various forms of the drift
diffusion model and measured the onset with the same
analyses used to detect the onset of neurophysiological
activity. We found that varying the rate of accumulation
resulted in large changes in the measured onset of model
trajectories even when the start of the accumulation was
fixed. These results show that a correlation between the onset
of neural activity and RT alone is not sufficient to conclude
that changes in RT were due to changes in the duration, but
not quality, of perceptual processing.
Keywords: response time models; frontal eye field; eye
movements.

Neural and Mental Chronometry
One hallmark approach of cognitive psychology is
decomposing response time (RT) into distinguishable stages
of processing (Meyer, Osman, Irwin, & Yantis, 1988)
Consider an organism confronted with a stimulus relevant to
two or more potential actions. Determining the relevance of
object features to potential responses first requires a
perceptual stage of processing. Perceptual output is
interpreted by a response preparation stage which
determines whether and when a response is made.
Neurophysiological data recorded from sensorimotor
structures in the primate brain have been used to test
competing hypotheses about the flow of information
between perceptual processing and response preparation.
Different populations of neurons in the frontal eye field
(FEF) and superior colliculus (SC) reflect visual
information about object relevance versus explicit decisions
about where and when to move the eyes. Visual neurons
respond to a visual stimulus in their response field
(Thompson, Hanes, Bichot, & Schall, 1996). Visual neuron
activity evolves over time to select the location of a taskrelevant object. Movement neurons increase their activity

171

Table 1: Diffusion model parameters.

Ratcliff et al (2003):
Monkey F:

v

s

η

Ter (s)

a

z

st (s)

sz

Easy

1.250

0.100

0.491

0.202

0.054

0.033

0.051

0.006

Hard

0.440

0.100

0.491

0.202

0.054

0.033

0.051

0.006

Easy
Hard

0.470
0.125

0.100
0.100

0.000
0.000

0.127
0.127

0.067
0.067

0.033
0.033

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

‘read out’ as the Ter parameter can; rather, it must be
measured. Information growth is stochastic, so the measured
onset may not correspond to the start of the accumulation.
The aim of this work was to determine whether a
correlation between the onset of activity and RT necessarily
indicates a change in the duration of perceptual processing.
We measured the onset of activity in both FEF movement
neurons and simulated diffusion model trajectories using the
same analyses. We show that a diffusion model may predict
correlations between the onset of activity and RT although
the start of the accumulation is fixed. We conclude that
correlations between the onset of neural activity and RT are
consistent with both changes in the duration of perceptual
processing (Ter) and changes in the quality of perceptual
output (drift rate).

assume a short and relatively invariable motor delay
(Scudder, Kaneko, & Fuchs, 2002).
The output of perceptual processing is the drift rate, v,
which is the mean rate of accumulation. Drift rate varies
systematically across stimulus conditions; a higher drift rate
indicates stronger evidence for a particular decision.
Evidence is noisy and intratrial variability in the
accumulation is distributed normally with a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation, s, which can be set to 0.1 without loss of
generality. Evidence begins accumulating from a starting
point, z, and a decision is made when it reaches either the
upper boundary, a, or the lower boundary at 0. The
complete version of the drift diffusion model assumes
across trial variability in the drift rate and starting point
(Ratcliff & Rouder, 1998). Drift rate varies across trials
according to a normal distribution with a standard deviation
of η. Starting point varies according to a uniform
distribution with range sz.
Ratcliff and colleagues (2003) fitted the diffusion model
to data obtained from non-human primates performing a
two-alternative forced choice discrimination task. Macaque
monkeys were trained to make a saccade to one of two
targets positioned to the left and right of a fixation point.
Each saccade target was associated with two possible
categorizations of a centrally presented stimulus. The
probability that an animal would be rewarded for making a
saccade to the left target increased with the distance
between the stimulus and the fixation point (maximum 10o).
The probability of reward for a saccade to the right target
varied inversely with the distance between the stimulus and
fixation (minimum 2o). Both response probabilities and
response time distributions for correct and error trials were
fitted with the full drift diffusion model using standard
techniques. Only the drift rate was free to vary between
stimulus conditions (for a total of 6 free drift rates) and all
other parameters were held constant across conditions. We
used these parameters to begin exploring the conditions
under which the diffusion model predicted a correlation
between onset of accumulation and RT.

Figure 1. Diffusion model illustration.

Simulations 1:
What Can Cause Variability in Onset?
The drift diffusion model describes a mechanism in which
stochastic samples of evidence accumulate toward one of
two response boundaries (Ratcliff, 1978; Figure 1). The first
boundary that is reached determines the response that is
made and the time it takes to reach that boundary
determines RT. The model also assumes some time for
perceptual processes that precede the decision. Perceptual
processing time varies across trials according to a uniform
distribution with a mean, Ter, and range, st. Typically, Ter
also includes time required for subsequent motor processes,
but we will be modeling FEF movement neurons and can

Method
Ratcliff et al. (2003) assumed several different drift rates for
the stimulus conditions. To simplify matters, we only used
the best-fitting drift rate parameters from two stimulus
conditions, an easy condition (>8o separation, strong
evidence for a leftward saccade) and a hard condition (6o

172

separation, weak evidence for a leftward saccade). We were
particularly interested in contrasting two variations of the
diffusion model; a version that explicitly allowed variability
in perceptual processing time (st > 0; the version that was
originally fit) and a modified version that assumed no
variability in perceptual processing time (st = 0).
We simulated trajectories for the two variations of the
diffusion model using a random-walk approximation (with
step size τ = 0.001) (see Ratcliff & Tuerlinckx, 2002). Ter
was appended to the beginning of each trajectory as a
constant equal to the starting point for that trial (as pictured
in Figure 1). As is the case with actual neurophysiological
data, we analyzed the trajectory as if Ter was not known;
rather, the onset (when activity first began increasing)
needed to be estimated using a sliding window algorithm. If
either model predicts a positive correlation between the
measured onset of activity and RT, then we will have
evidence that this is a viable model of FEF movement
neuron activity. If only the model that assumes st > 0
predicts a correlation with RT, then we will have evidence
that the onset of model activation coincides with the
conclusion of perceptual processing time
The onset of activity for each simulated trajectory was
calculated using the same backward sliding window
algorithm that has been used to analyze neural data
(Woodman et al., 2008). The window (t +/- 50 time-steps)
was started at RT and moved backwards in single time-step
increments. At each increment, a Spearman correlation
coefficient was calculated. The onset was defined as the
time point when the correlation remained nonsignificant for
100 time steps. Only correct trials in which the process
terminated at the positive boundary were analyzed, but this
onset analysis could easily be extended to error trials by
reversing the sign of the trajectory.
For each simulated trial, we generated a diffusion model
trajectory and predicted RT. We simulated 100 trials to
mirror the average number of trials observed in a typical
neurophysiological experiment. Trials were sorted by
predicted RT and divided into deciles. The first and last
deciles were dropped to minimize the influence of outliers
on correlations. An onset was calculated for the last trial
within each group, which mimicked the analysis of actual
neurophysiology as will be explained shortly. The Pearson
correlation coefficient was calculated between the onset of
activity and RT for the remaining trajectories. We repeated
this process 100 times and calculated the mean correlation
and the percentage of significant correlations across those
100 samples (α = 0.05). To contrast the predicted onset
across difficulty condition, we calculated the mean onset
time across deciles and samples for the easy and hard
conditions.

There was strong positive correlation between the onset of
activity and RT for the vast majority of sampled simulated
trials using both the easy ( = 0.854, 93.0% had p < 0.05)
and hard ( = 0.862, 90.0% had p < 0.05) conditions.
This result is not surprising. The mean perceptual
processing time (Ter = 0.202 s) accounted for the bulk of the
total RT for both conditions ( easy = 0.222 s;
hard = 0.241
s). More importantly, variability in perceptual processing
time was relatively large (st = 0.051 s). Since Ter determines
when the accumulation can begin, that variability directly
affects the onset of activity. Variability is large, so the onset
is highly likely to correlate with RT. For now, the
association of measured onset with the end of perceptual
processing seems justified.
The next set of simulations eliminated all variability in
Ter. While there was now only a weak correlation between
the measured onset and RT for the easy condition ( =
0.118, 5.0% had p < 0.05), the average correlation between
the measured RT and predicted response time for the hard
condition was fairly strong ( = 0.703, 73.0% had p < 0.05).
Furthermore, the mean onset time was 16 ms longer for the
hard condition than the easy condition, although there was
no difference in Ter time across conditions. These results
suggest that the onset time may not necessarily mark the
conclusion of perceptual processing and the start of
response preparation.

Simulations 2:
Comparing Neural and Simulated Onsets
The first set of simulations showed that the diffusion model
predicts a modest correlation between onset and RT even
when there was no variability in the perceptual processing
stage preceding the response selection stage. However,
those analyses were limited in several respects. We did not
have access to the neural data from the Ratcliff et al. (2003)
study, so we cannot be certain that the movement neurons
actually showed an onset shift in each condition.
Furthermore, we removed variability in perceptual
processing by forcing Ter and st to zero, but we cannot know
if this model actually fits the behavior. So it may be an
implausible representation of the true accumulation process.
The next set of simulations addressed these issues.
Again, our primary goal was to see if onset would vary
with RT when variability in perceptual processing was fixed
within and across conditions. We analyzed behavioral and
neurophysiological data from a subset of the data reported in
Woodman et al. (2008). Data were collected from a
Macaque monkey (Monkey F) that performed a saccade
visual search task. The animal was trained to make a single
saccade to an odd-ball target among seven distractors
arranged equidistant from fixation in a circular array. The
target was defined by color and difficulty was manipulated
by varying the similarity between the target and distractors.

Results and Discussion
The parameters from Ratcliff et al. (2003) that we used for
the simulations are listed in the top row of Table 1. The first
set of simulations used this full set of parameters as given.

173

Table 2: Onset predictions from simulations 1 and 2.

Mean r
Variable Ter:
Ratcliff et al (2003):
Constant Ter:
Ratcliff et al (2003):
Monkey F:

Easy Discrimination
%Sig
Mean onset

Mean r

Hard Discrimination
%Sig
Mean onset

0.854

93.0%

0.208

0.862

90.0%

0.225

0.118
0.852

5.0%
92.0%

0.007
0.171

0.703
0.934

73.0%
99.0%

0.023
0.220

The easy search condition used a red target among green
distractors and the hard condition used a yellow-green target
among green distractors. RT was defined as the time when
the animal’s eyes left fixation. During the search, neural
activity was recorded from FEF. Recorded cells were
classified as movement neurons if they showed an increase
in activity prior to a saccade to their response field (Bruce &
Goldberg, 1985). A total of 36 cells showed movementrelated activity. Trials were classified as correct if a single
saccade was made to the target. Only correct trials in which
the target was inside the movement field of the cell were
analyzed.

Results and Discussion
The onset of FEF movement neuron activity correlated
positively and consistently with RT for both the easy ( =
0.61, 63.9% with p<0.05) and hard conditions ( = 0.74,
75.0% with p<0.05). The mean onset also significantly
increased across conditions (easy mean onset = 0.109 s;
hard mean onset = 0.148 s; paired t = 9.21, p < 0.05). These
results agree with previous reports of a larger population of
neurons from the same database (Woodman et al., 2008).
The best fitting parameters for the EZ diffusion model to
the behavioral data for the easy and hard search conditions
are listed in Table 1. The model accounted reasonably well
for the mean RT ( ) and RT variance (σ2) for both the
easy ( obs = 0.192 s; prd = 0.194 s;σ2obs = 0.002;σ2prd =
0.002) and hard ( obs = 0.236 s; prd = 0.235 s; σ2obs =
0.006; σ2prd = 0.007) conditions. Notably, the model
accounted for the data well when only drift rate (strength of
perceptual evidence) was free to vary across conditions,
although we did not evaluate alternative models.
When the best fitting parameters were used to simulate
diffusion model trajectories, the measured onset of activity
correlated positively with RT for the vast majority of
sampled easy trials ( = 0.852, 92.0% with p<0.05) as well
as hard trials ( = 0.934, 99.0% with p<0.05). The
correlations were stronger than observed in the neural data,
but the general observation that onset correlates with RT is
clear. Importantly, there was also an increase in the mean
observed onset between difficulty conditions (easy mean
onset = 0.171 s; hard mean onset = 0.220 s) conditions.
Thus, the model predicted a difference in onset of 0.039 s
although Ter was fixed across conditions; this difference
simply emerges from the stochastic buildup of activity in
the diffusion model, how those trajectories vary over time,
and how onset is measured. We also note that the difference
between the predicted onset of activity for hard and easy
conditions (0.049 s) is relatively close to the difference
observed in actual movement neurons (0.038 s), even
though that quantity was not explicit in any of the model
fits.
To conclude, a positive correlation between onset of
activity and RT within difficulty conditions and an increase
in the mean onset across difficulty conditions was observed
in neural activity and was also observed in a diffusion
model that assumed no variability in the discrete processing
stage preceding the decision-making stage. This questions
the assumption that the onset of neural activity indicates the

Method
For each movement neuron, we determined the onset of
activity for groups of trials and assessed the relationship
between onset and RT. Each trial produced a neural spike
train that was aligned on the appearance of the stimulus
array. For each neuron, correct trials were sorted by RT.
Trials were binned into groups of ten and a single spike
density function was generated that represented the average
neural activity over time (Sato et al, 2001). The same
algorithm that was used to define the onset of model activity
in the first set of simulations was used to identify the onset
of neural activity. The size of the window for neural data
was ±25 ms to reflect the time-scale of the neural activity.
The correlation between measured onset for each RT bin
and the mean RT of that bin was determined for every
neuron. We computed the mean correlation and the
percentage of significant correlations (α = 0.05) across cells
to compare with model predictions.
Behavioral data were fitted using a simplified version of
the diffusion model. The EZ diffusion model assumes that
drift rate, residual time, and boundary separation are the
only model parameters and have no variability across trials
(Wagenmakers, van der Maas, & Grasman, 2007) The
starting point of the diffusion process is fixed at the midpoint of the response boundaries and does not vary (i.e., z =
a/2). Specifically, we used the EZ2 method to fit easy and
hard conditions simultaneously (Grassman, Wagenmakers,
& Van der Maas, 2009). Since easy and hard conditions
were interleaved within recording sessions, we assumed that
only drift rate, v, varied across conditions. Once these
parameters were defined, we simulated the diffusion model
trajectories using the same procedure described in the first
set of simulations. Measures of onset and the relationship
between onset of activity and RT were also quantified using
the same methodology.

174

end of perceptual processing and the start of response
preparation.

decision boundaries are necessary, but not sufficient to
predict a correlation between the onset of activity and RT.
We also varied the drift rate parameter, v, across a range
from 0.1 to 1.5 in increments of 0.1 (Figure 2). As drift rate
increases, there is a clear decrease in the percentage of
significant correlations between onset and RT. Recall that
drift rate dictates the mean rate of the accumulation and that
variability around that mean within a trial is normally
distributed with a fixed standard deviation of 0.1. The ratio
of drift rate to within-trial variability -- the signal-to-noise
ratio -- is a primary determinant of the shape of the
predicted diffusion trajectory. When the signal-to-noise ratio
is very low, variability in RT is due primarily to the
accumulation of noise. As the ratio increases, the shape of
the trajectory is increasingly driven by the value of drift
rate. This provides one insight into the source of the
correlation between onset and RT. When drift rate is low,
the trajectory of the diffusion is more likely to wander
around the starting point of the accumulation prior to
reaching a decision bound. The neural measures of onset
will capture this as a shift in onset.

Simulations 3:
Parameter Exploration
The first two sets of simulations provide converging
evidence that a diffusion model that assumes no variability
in perceptual processing can nonetheless predict a
correlation between onset of response preparation and RT
and an increase in the mean onset when perceptual difficulty
is increased. Following Woodman et al. (2008), this model
would incorrectly attribute variability in RT to variability in
perceptual processing time, when in fact there was none.
This result is rather surprising since only the drift rate (the
mean rate of accumulate) varied across conditions and Ter
(the actual start of the accumulation) was equivalent in all
conditions.
This final set of simulations aimed to characterize the
conditions for producing a correlation between onset and
RT in the diffusion model. In other words, what parameter
values are likely to predict a correlation between onset and
RT. For these simulations, we did not fit the diffusion model
to data. Instead, we explored a range of parameter space for
the diffusion model and the conditions under which there
was a correlation between onset of activity and RT.

Method
Following Simulations 2, we assumed a version of the
diffusion model with no parameter variability. We fixed Ter
and explored how values of drift rate, v, and boundary, a,
influenced the correlation between onset and RT. The
centroid for our exploration of parameter space was the
values providing the best fit to Monkey F’s behavioral data
from simulation set 2 (table 2, row 3). We also explored the
effect of systematic variations in drift rate when the
response boundary is set arbitrarily high. Simulated
trajectories and the measured relationship between onset and
RT were calculated as described in previous simulations.

Figure 2: Systematic exploration of the effect of drift rate
and boundary distance on the correlation between onset and
RT.

General Discussion
A fundamental question of cognitive psychology is how
information flows through sequential stages of information
processing. Discriminating between competing models has
been notoriously difficult using behavioral data alone.
Neurophysiology promises a window on the inner workings
of information processing.
Woodman et al. (2008) observed that variability in the
onset of movement neuron activity is correlated with RT.
This is consistent with a model in which increased
perceptual processing time causes a delay in both the onset
of response preparation and RT. In a series of simulations,
we showed that a model with no variability in the perceptual
processing stage readily produces a significant correlation
between onset and RT and an increase in onset when
perceptual difficulty is increased. Thus, observing this
correlation is not a signature for a particular architecture of
information processing. Our simulation results suggest that
observed relationships between the onset of neural activity
and RT alone are not sufficient to conclude whether the start
of an accumulation was delayed. Rather, the results could be

Results and Discussion
The response boundary, a, was varied across a range from
0.01 to 0.2 in increments of 0.01 while all other values were
fixed (Figure 3a). At the lowest levels of a, there was little
or no correlation between the measured onset and response
time. As a increased, a greater correlation between onset
and RT was observed, but eventually reaches asymptote.
The reason is as follows. When the distance between
boundaries is small, the diffusion process terminates rapidly
with little variability in RT. Since, variability in RT is so
low, significant correlations are rarely observed. When the
distance between bounds is large, predicted RT may vary
across a larger range. However, further increases in the
distance between bounds do not influence the relationship
between onset and RT. This suggests that relatively wide

175

explained equally well by assuming a model in which the
strength of perceptual evidence was varied.
In FEF, systematic changes in the time when visual
neurons select the target suggests that the duration of
perceptual processing may, in fact, increase with targetdistractor similarity (Sato et al., 2001). Presumably, these
visual neurons serve as the perceptual input for movement
neuron activity (Purcell et al., 2008). It is possible that
some combination of delays in the duration and quality of
perceptual processing in visual neurons contributes to the
observed pattern of movement neuron activity.
This raises the issue of whether information is
transmitted from perceptual processing discretely, or
whether there is temporal overlap. The issue of information
transmission is complex, and there are several ways in
which a given stage can be considered discrete or
continuous (Miller, 1988). These results cannot directly
speak to the temporal relationship of the perceptual
processing and response preparation because all diffusion
models assumed serial stages of processing. However, by
showing that variability in the quality of perceptual
processing mimics shifts in the onset of activation, this work
opens the door to the possibility that visual neuron activity
may be input to movement neurons in a truly cascaded
fashion.
More generally, these results demonstrate that applying
identical analyses to both model dynamics and
neurophysiological data can reveal counterintuitive
predictions. In this case, one particular measure, the onset,
was not adequate to draw strong conclusions. This work
suggests that future efforts should focus on developing new
analyses of neurophysiological data to distinguish
alternative model architectures.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Temporal Dynamics of
Learning Center (NSF Science of Learning Centers grant
SBE-0542013), RO1-EY08890, P30-EY08126, P30HD015052) and the E. Bronson Ingram Chair in
Neuroscience.
References
Boucher L, Palmeri TJ, Logan GD, Schall JD (2007).
Inhibitory control in mind and brain: an interactive race
model of countermanding saccades. Psychological Review,
114(2):376-97.
Bruce, C. J., & Goldberg, M. E. (1985). Primate frontal eye
fields. I. Single neurons discharging before saccades.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 53, 603–635.
Grasman, R. P. P. P., Wagenmakers, E.-J., & van der Maas, H.
L. J. (2009). On the mean and variance of response times
under the diffusion model with an application to parameter
estimation. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 53(2), 5568.

Hanes, D.P., & Schall, J.D. (1996). Neural control of
voluntary movement initiation. Science, 274, 427–430.
Lee PH, Helms MC, Augustine GJ and Hall WC (1997) Role
of intrinsic synaptic circuitry in collicular sensorimotor
integration. Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94: 13299-133
Meyer, D.E., Osman, A.M., Irwin, D.A., & Yantis, S. (1988).
Modern mental chronometry. Biological Psychology, 26, 3–
67. 90, 97–109.
Miller, J. (1988). Discrete and continuous models of human
information processing: theoretical distrinctions and
empirical results. Acta Psychologica, 67(3), 191-257.
Purcell, B.A., R.P. Heitz, J.Y. Cohen, G.D. Logan, J.D. Schall
& T.J. Palmeri (2008) Modeling interactions between
visually-responsive and movement- related neurons in FEF
during saccade visual search. Vision Sciences Society 8:
1080.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval.
Psychological Review, 85, 59–108.
Ratcliff, R., & Tuerlinckx, F. (2002). Estimating parameters of
the diffusion model: Approaches to dealing with reaction
times and parameter variability. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 9, 438–481.
Ratcliff, R., & Rouder, J. N. (1998). Modeling response times
for two-choice decisions. Psychological Science, 9(5), 347356.
Ratcliff, R., Cherian, A., & Segraves, M. (2003). A
comparison of macaque behavior and superior colliculus
neuronal activity to predictions from models of two-choice
decisions. Journal of Neurophysiology, 90, 1392– 1407.
Sato, T., Murthy, A., Thompson, K. G., & Schall, J. D. (2001).
Search efficiency but not response interference affects
visual selection in frontal eye field. Neuron, 30(2), 583-591.
Scudder, C. A., Kaneko, C. S., & Fuchs, A. F. (2002). The
brainstem burst generator for saccadic eye movements: A
modern synthesis. Experimental Brain Research, 142, 439–
462.
Thompson, K.G., Hanes, D.P., Bichot, N.P., & Schall, J.D.
(1996). Perceptual and motor processing stages identified in
the activity of macaque frontal eye field neurons during
visual search. Journal of Neurophysiology, 76, 4040–4055.
Wagenmakers, E.-J., van der Maas, H. L. J., & Grasman, R. P.
P. P. (2007). An EZ-diffusion model for response time and
accuracy. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 3-22.
Woodman GF, Kang M-S, Thompson KG, Schall JD (2008).
The effect of visual search efficiency on response
preparation: Neurophysiological evidence for discrete flow.
Psychological Science. 19(2):128-136.

176

