UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Search Strategies and their Success in a Virtual Maze

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3x7182jr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Buecher, Simon J.
Holscher, Christoph
Wiener, Jan

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Search Strategies and their Success in a Virtual Maze
Simon J. Buechner (buechner@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Christoph Hölscher (hoelsch@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Jan M. Wiener (mail@jan-wiener.net)
University of Freiburg
Center for Cognitive Science, Friedrichstraße 50
79098 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
The study investigates strategies for search tasks in a virtual
environment. Participants had to find and retrieve an object in
an unfamiliar environment. Trajectories as well as search
performance were analyzed with respect to three applicable
strategies when the target was hidden at two different
locations. Prior knowledge about the environment was varied
within participants and between environments. The results
show a strong preference for the perimeter strategy. Prior
knowledge improved search performance only to some extent.
Keywords: spatial cognition, navigation, search strategy,
virtual environments

Introduction
Imagine you enter an environment and you are searching for
an object. What would be a good strategy to quickly find it?
How successful would that strategy be depending on the
exact location of the object? The selection of the strategy as
well as your search performance will certainly depend on
whether you have been to the environment before or not.
Although the search for objects is a task we frequently
encounter, surprisingly little is known about the strategies
people apply when performing tasks like this.

Strategies
A variety of studies investigated the strategies humans apply
when navigating between locations (e.g. Golledge, 1995;
Hochmair & Frank, 2002; Conroy Dalton, 2003; Wiener,
Schnee & Mallot, 2004; Büchner, Hölscher & Strube, 2007).
In all these studies participants had some information about
the location of the target place. Either they have been there
before, they could permanently see it, or they could infer the
location from other information such as background
knowledge about the functional organization of buildings.
The studies listed above have been conducted in the
context of wayfinding (in its literal meaning) - participants
had to find a way from one location to another having some
knowledge about the target location. In a search task as we
define it here, in contrast, the agent has no information about
the location of the target and thus, strategies may play an
even more important role for the success and efficiency of
the search.
Different scales of space may require different search
strategies. When searching for an object in a room sized

environment in which all potential target locations are
visible, people may apply different strategies than in a
building in which walls block visibility. Montello (1993)
conceptualized space of different scales. He distinguished
between vista spaces, environmental spaces, and
geographical spaces. A Vista space is the space that is
visible from a single observation point (e.g. a room). An
Environmental space is a space in which an agent has to
move in order to comprehend its entire structure (e.g., a
maze or a building). Geographical spaces are even larger
and include, for example, landscapes and other spaces that
can only be experienced with some transportation device.
Search strategies have been subject to empirical studies in
different scales of space. Ruddle, Payne and Jones (1999)
asked participants to search for nine objects in a virtual
seascape. Participants were ‘flying’ over the seascape
experiencing the world from a bird’s eye view. The authors
found that in such a geographical space people tend to use
an anchor strategy. They start searching at a visible object
(in this case an island) and then move along the edge of that
object? The authors also observed the lawn mower strategy
(searching the area in regular back-and-forth pattern from
one end to the other).
In vista spaces, search strategies have been investigated
for visually impaired people and blindfolded participants
(Tellevik, 1992; Hill & Rieser, 1993). Tellevik (1992)
identified three major strategies: grid-line, perimeter and
reference-point. The grid-line strategy is equivalent to the
lawn-mower strategy, i.e. people followed a regular pattern
from one wall to the other, slowly moving from one end of
the room to the other. The perimeter strategy involves a path
along the outside walls of the room and a subsequent
exploration of the center. When following the referencepoint strategy people select a reference-point (often the
starting location), explore one part of the space, return to the
reference-point, explore the next part of the space and so on.
A similar strategy has also been observed for navigation in
abstract spaces like the World Wide Web: Users of websites
often navigate between ‘hub’ page and several subordinate
pages (Cockburn & McKenzie, 2001).
Most of the aforementioned strategies, however, are only
applicable in spaces in which the observer can oversee the
whole space. This is different in environmental spaces in
which walls and other objects limit visibility and impose
constraints on the ways people move through the

1066

environment (e.g. the grid-line strategy wouldn’t work in
environmental space). One strategy that is, in principle,
applicable is the perimeter strategy, another one is the
reference-point strategy, that has indeed been observed in
environmental space by Hölscher, Meilinger, Vrachliotis,
Brösamle, and Knauff (2006). Participants’ task was to find
several locations in a complex building. A frequently chosen
strategy was to search and return to the initial starting point.
In addition to these empirical studies Løvås (1998)
presented a computational model for an evacuation situation
in which an always-turn-left strategy (it works equally for
turn-right) was a successful option to get out of a building.
This strategy is functionally equivalent to the perimeter
strategy identified by Tellevik (1992) as long as the initially
selected wall is not an ‘island’ (a convex walling that is not
connected to the perimeter). It is subject to empirical
investigation whether people actually choose such a
perimeter strategy when navigating through a maze
(environmental space). Moreover, evacuation situations are
a special case of search tasks in which people are stressed
and might behave differently than when searching for an
object without time pressure. It therefore remains an open
question whether they choose the perimeter strategy for
search tasks aside from evacuation situations.

Prior Knowledge
Prior knowledge of an environment is important for strategy
selection. Hölscher, Meilinger, Vrachliotis, Brösamle, &
Knauff (2006) found that people who were unfamiliar with
the environment preferred the central point strategy (which
is similar to the reference-point strategy described above)
over hierarchical strategies that were preferred by people
who were familiar with the environment (first going to the
target region and then looking for the goal). Thus, it is
important to distinguish between uninformed and informed
search (cf. Ruddle, Payne & Jones, 1999). In uninformed
search participants are naïve with respect to the search space
(i.e. they have no knowledge about the environment). In
contrast, in informed search they have at least some
knowledge about the search space. It is not surprising that
prior knowledge also increases search efficiency (e.g.
Gärling, Lindberg & Mäntylä, 1983; Hölscher, Büchner,
Brösamle & Strube, 2007). For an extended taxonomy of
wayfinding that distinguishes tasks by different levels of
knowledge that is available to the navigator, see Wiener,
Büchner & Hölscher (2009).

Research Questions & Hypotheses
In the current study we investigated the effect of prior
knowledge on search performance as well as the effect on
the dynamics of the learning process. In general, the
availability of prior knowledge should accelerate the
learning process if asked to repeatedly search for the same
target location as participants are then able to directly access
knowledge about the environment (e.g. which path choice
options are dead-ends). In addition a lack of prior
knowledge may require to allocate more cognitive resources

to the process of spatial updating (keeping track of the
relative location of surrounding objects) in order to remain
oriented (cf. Yardley & Higgins, 1998). This could lead to a
decreased search performance.
Which strategy do people choose when searching for an
object in a maze? We identified three strategies that are
applicable in environmental spaces:
1. Directed Random Search. People just start walking. At
choice points they randomly decide between path
alternatives with a bias to avoid going back. While this
is certainly not the most efficient strategy to find a
specific location in the environment, it constitutes a
conceivable option. The trajectory should show no
regular pattern.
2. Reference-point. People try to remain oriented in order to
systematically explore the environment. Thus, they
select a reference point from which they start short
explorations in different directions and to which they
return regularly. This should result in a radiating
trajectory around one or more reference points.
3. Perimeter strategy. People follow the perimeter of the
maze. One advantage of this strategy is that it
guarantees that one does not explore one branch of the
maze twice. In addition, one easily finds back to the
starting point simply by turning around and following
the perimeter in the other direction.
We cannot claim that this is a complete list of applicable
strategies. The reference-point strategy and the perimeter
strategy have been observed before and are described in the
literature, but in different contexts. It is reasonable to
assume that these strategies are most likely selected in an
uninformed search task (i.e. a search in an unfamiliar
environment).
How successful are the strategies for different target
locations? When applying directed random search, target
locations close to the starting point should, on average, be
found faster and with less detours than locations further
away from the starting point. Predictions for search
performance for the reference point strategy are difficult,
because the success of the strategy depends on two factors:
(1) the selection of the reference point, (2) the order in
which multiple options are explored. However, if
participants choose the starting point as the reference they
should also find a location close to the starting point faster
than further away. The perimeter strategy should lead to
good search performance for targets located along the
perimeter of the environment and to worse performance for
targets located in the center of the environment. Although
directed random search and reference point should be
distinguishable on the level of the trajectory, they are not
necessarily distinguishable with respect to search
performance/efficiency. The perimeter strategy should lead
to different trajectories and different search performance.
How do the learning curves of a search-and-recover task
(i.e., find a target return to the start location and find it

1067

Figure 2: Screenshot of one of the virtual mazes. The mazes
were presented on a setup with three screens. The distortions
in this picture were not present in the experiment.

Figure 1: Setup of the immersive virtual environment with
three screens. The horizontal field of view of about 170°
allows peripheral vision.

empty with no objects in order to avoid that people use
objects as landmarks or orientation aids. In order to remain
oriented, participants therefore had to refer to geometrical
features of the environment (Fig. 2 shows a screenshot of
the environment, Fig. 3 the layouts and target locations).

Experimental Design and Procedure
again) differ when the target location is compatible or
incompatible with the applied strategy? Compatible target
locations should be found quicker with fewer detours which
should also affect the learning curves. People should learn
faster if they can simply apply the initially chosen strategy
again.
When the target location is incompatible with the strategy,
participants have to deviate from the initially chosen
strategy and select a different strategy. The additional
processing load should lead to shallower learning curves.

Method
Participants
Thirty-eight participants (16 of them female) finished the
experiment without suffering from motion sickness.
Participants were between the ages of 19 and 30 years (M=
22.8, SD= 2.7). They were recruited through postings on
campus and e-mailing lists. Most of them were students
from a variety of subjects. Participants were paid (7.50
Euro/h) or received course credit for participation.

Setting
Participants had to perform a search-and-recover task in
each of two mazes (details see below). The order of
presentation of the mazes was balanced between
participants. The tasks were presented in an immersive
virtual environment on three 28’’ screens at 60Hz and a total
resolution of 768×4080 px. The screens were set up in a
semi-circle, participants were seated about 50cm in front of
the center screen, providing a horizontal field of view of
about 170° and a vertical field of view of about 60° (Figure
1). The Vizard 3.0 Virtual Environment software was used
for the presentation of the virtual mazes. Participants used a
Logitech Rumble Pad controller with two joysticks in order
to steer around the virtual environment.
Two different virtual mazes were constructed in order to
ensure that the results are not tied to the spatial structure of
one particular maze. Both mazes were constructed in a way
that people encounter many two-option situations when they
move through the maze. The mazes were deliberately left

Before performing the experimental tasks participants were
instructed how to use the controller and had to perform a
practice run. They had to follow a red line in a virtual
training maze without running into a wall. All participants
managed to complete the task easily.
Participants then were instructed in written form about the
experimental tasks. They had to perform a search-andrecover task, i.e. they had to find a red ball hidden in the
environment, without being given any information about its
location. Once they had found it, they had to estimate the
direction to the starting point by turning in the assumed
direction and pressing a button. These pointing data exceed
the scope of this paper and will be presented elsewhere.
Participants were then put back to the starting point and the
ball was placed at the same location as before (participants
were informed about this). Participants were then again
asked to search for the ball. This procedure was repeated
until the participant found the ball three times without error.
There were two mazes and two different ball locations
(center, edge) resulting in four possible combinations of
maze and location. Each participant had to perform the task
in two of these combinations. The combinations of maze and
location as well as the order of the tasks were balanced
across all participants.
Edge
Edge

Center

Center

Start

Start

Figure 3: Layouts of the two virtual mazes with the locations
of the target objects.

1068

Subject: 56−−B

Each participant searched both mazes, maze 1 and maze 2.
Prior knowledge was varied between mazes: For one maze
participants explored the environment for eight minutes
before they had to perform the search task, for the other
maze they started with the search task right away. Half of
the participants started with maze 1, the other half with
maze 2. Within each of these two groups, 50% first
performed a task version with prior exploration, and did
their second maze without exploration. This was reversed
for the other 50% in each group.
The whole experiment lasted no longer than one hour.

2S

−Trial:1

Subject: 14−−B

1E

−Trial:1

target
location

target
location

Dependent Variables
Since the target’s distance from the starting point varied
between conditions, the time participants required to find the
target was not a feasible measure to judge search
performance. Instead we calculated a standardized distance
measure, percentage above optimal (PAO). It is calculated
by comparing the walked distance with the shortest possible
distance as follows:
PAO = ((dwalked – dshortest) / dshortest)×100
It allows comparing distances between conditions and mazes
as it standardizes the walked distance by the shortest
possible distance. The measure provides the relative amount
of distance (compared to the shortest possible distance) that
people walk in addition to the shortest distance. PAO has
also been used by other authors (e.g. Ruddle, Payne &
Jones, 1997; Wiener, Schnee & Mallot, 2004) in order to
compare performance for search tasks with different lengths.
The number and length of stops were recorded as well.

Results
Trajectories
Visual inspection of the trajectories and informal comments
by the participants suggest that participants did not perform
a random search. We also found little evidence that they
applied a reference point strategy. The majority of the
trajectories were shaped as those depicted in Figure 4.
Participants tended to follow the perimeter of the maze.
When they did this they did not necessarily walk exactly
along the wall, instead they entered rooms shortly and when
they saw that there was no path choice option they moved
on. In general, participants mostly walked along the
perimeter and only if they didn’t find the target by the time
they returned to the starting point, they changed the strategy
and also started searching for the target in the center.

Performance
For the analysis of search performance we considered the
first five trials of each participant as the majority of the
participants had found the optimal path at this time.

starting point

starting point

Figure 4: Left: Sample trajectory of one participant who
almost pristinely applied the perimeter strategy and finds the
target at the edge location quickly. Right: A different
participant in the same maze also follows the perimeter
strategy. He even searches at locations where he had already
been before, before he finds the target at the center location.
Circles display stops; the size of the circles is proportional to
the stop time.
We didn’t expect any performance differences between the
two mazes. An ANOVA with factor maze yielded no
significant difference in PAO between the two mazes
[F(1,388)= .007, p= .931; Mmaze1= 127, SDmaze1= 275,
Mmaze2= 125, SDmaze2= 276]. We can conclude that any
observed effects are not tied to the particular spatial
structure of one maze. Thus, the following analyses are
based on the combined data from both mazes.
If participants choose the perimeter strategy they should
perform better for the edge location, if they choose one of
the other two strategies they should perform better for the
center location. An ANOVA for PAO with factors target
location (center, edge) and prior knowledge (prior
exploration, no exploration) yielded a main effect of target
location [F(1,386)= 46.633, p < .001] and an interaction of
both factors [F(1,386)= 4.020, p= .046]. There was no main
effect of prior knowledge [F(1,386)= 2.272, p= .133].
Participants deviated less from the optimal path when the
target object was located at the edge of the maze (M= 40,
SD= 78) than when the object was located in the center (M=
212, SD= 362). For separate means of each level of the
factor refer to Figure 5. The results provide additional
evidence for the perimeter strategy, but not for any of the
other strategies. In addition they show that prior knowledge
has a different effect on search performance depending on
the exact location of the target.
Based on the observed main effect for target location the
following analyses were conducted separately for each
target location. In order to investigate the observed
interaction of target location and prior knowledge in detail
an ANOVA for PAO with factors prior knowledge (with
exploration, without) and trial (one to five) was conducted.

1069

prior knowledge

prior knowledge

300

PAO

error bars: +/- 1 SE

PAO

200

uninformed
(without exploration)
informed
(with exploration)

600

uninformed
(without exploration)
informed
(with exploration)

error bars: +/- 1 SE

400

400

200

200

100

0

600

0
1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Trial
target location: center
257

0

164

center

34

47

edge

target location
Figure 5: Main effect for target location as well as an
interaction of target location and prior knowledge for PAO.
Numbers in the white boxes on the bars denote means.

For the center location there were main effects for trial
[F(4,185)= 19.401, p< .001] and prior knowledge
[F(1,185)= 4.447, p= .036], though no interaction. For the
edge location there was only a main effect for trial
[F(4,185)= 5.270, p< .001], but no main effect for prior
knowledge and no interaction (cf. Figure 6).
Participants’ search performance increased from trial to
trial and they approached almost optimal search
performance in the fifth trial. They became more and more
familiar with the environment and made fewer errors when
walking the path from the starting point to the target
location. Note, that across all five trials prior exploration
only had an effect on search performance if the target was
located on the edge.
If only trial one is considered (in which participants have
no knowledge about the target’s exact location), there is no
effect of prior knowledge for both, the center location
[F(1,185)= .120, p= .729] and the edge location [F(1,185)=
1.206, p= .274]. Figure 6 shows that in trial two, however,
the learning curves split for the center location but not for
the edge location.
A direct comparison of the two target locations for trial
one shows that the PAO value for the edge location is less
than 1/6 (M= 84, SD= 56) of the value for the center
location (M= 576, SD= 357). This difference is highly
significant [t(39.896)= 8.508, p< .001]. The large advantage
of the edge location over the center location can only be
explained by the application of the perimeter strategy.

Discussion
The main goal of this study was to investigate which of
three strategies people choose when they search for a target
in an unfamiliar environment. People clearly did not
perform a random search. If this was the case, they would
have found the target in the center location with fewer
detours than when it was located at the edge location.

target location: edge

Figure 6: PAO decreases from trial to trial. Missing prior
knowledge of the setting only affects search performance for
the center location, not for the edge location.
Furthermore, no evidence in favor of a reference-point
strategy was observed. The selection of such a strategy
would have involved a radiant pattern of trajectories around
one or more reference points. Trajectories, however, were
mostly tied to the perimeter of the maze. The search
performance provides additional evidence for the perimeter
strategy. Participants walked fewer detours if the target
object was located on the edge of the maze rather than in the
center (location effect) although the center location was
closer to the starting point than the edge location.
There was no effect of prior knowledge in the first search
trial. Participants who had explored the maze before the
search-and-recover task did not benefit from that exposure
to the environment immediately. Together with the
qualitative trajectory analysis, this result suggests that the
choice of the ad-hoc strategy is independent of prior
knowledge. However, they do benefit in trials two to five, at
least when the target is located in the center. Their learning
curve is steeper than in the no-prior knowledge condition.
Why does the effect of prior knowledge only show up for
the center location? In general, PAO values are much lower
for the edge location. This is, presumably, due to the
selection of the perimeter strategy which supports finding
the target if it is located at the edge. Prior knowledge cannot
substantially improve search performance as it is already
close to optimal, even in the first trial. If the target was
located in the center, participants still selected the perimeter
strategy. In the first trial, prior knowledge did not affect
search performance, as participants had no information
about the target’s location. In the subsequent trials, however,
prior knowledge facilitated learning and performance
approached optimal search performance earlier than for the
condition in which people had no prior knowledge. We take
this for evidence that prior knowledge about an environment
allows for easier disengagement from the initially selected
perimeter strategy. They adapt quicker to the fact that this
strategy is not successful for the center location. This is
compatible with observations of adaptive use of path-choice
strategies in real-world wayfinding (Hölscher et al., in
press).

1070

The lack of prior knowledge does not necessarily lead to
worse performance. If the target is located on the edge, the
selection of the strategy compensates for the lack of
knowledge. When the target is compatible with strategy
selection no additional knowledge is needed to quickly find
the target.

Conclusion
We have found evidence that people do not choose their
paths randomly when they search for an object in an
unfamiliar environment. There is strong evidence from both,
trajectories and search performance measures that people
tend to use a perimeter strategy. We did not find evidence
for a reference point strategy although the selection of this
strategy has been observed in environments of the same
scale but of different kind (Hölscher et al., 2006). We
conclude that the selection of a strategy does not only
depend on the knowledge people have about the
environment, but also on the environment itself. It is subject
to future research to identify features of the environment
that determine the selection of a particular strategy.
The results also suggest that prior knowledge about the
search space facilitates the disengagement from the initially
selected strategy and that the lack of prior knowledge can be
compensated by an adequate search strategy.

Future Work
We are currently working on a computational model that
implements the perimeter strategy and compares it to a
random walker. Preliminary results show that the random
walker finds the center location quicker (and with less
detours) than the edge location. By contrast, a simulation
model that weighs path choice options along the perimeter
finds the edge location faster than the center location. Future
work will fine-tune the model and integrate the interaction
of prior knowledge and the use of the perimeter strategy.

Acknowledgments
The research has been supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) in the Transregional Collaborative
Research Center “Spatial Cognition” (SFB/TR8). We thank
Razvan Orendovici for programming work as well as
Susanne Fischer for help with the data collection.

References
Büchner, S. J., Hölscher, C. & Strube, G. (2007). Path
choice heuristics for navigation related to mental
representations of a building. In: Proceedings of the Euro
CogSci 2007, 504-509, Delphi, Greece.
Cockburn, A. &McKenzie, B. (2001). What Do Web Users
Do? An Empirical Analysis of Web Use. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 54(6):903--922.
Conroy Dalton, R. (2003). The secret is to follow your nose:
Route path selection and angularity. Environment and
Behavior, 35(1):107–131.

Gärling, T., Lindberg, E., & Mäntylä, T. (1983). Orientation
in buildings: Effects of familiarity, visual access, and
orientation aids. Journal of Applied Psychology, 68(1),
177-186.
Golledge, R. (1995). Path selection and route preference in
human navigation: A progress report. In Frank, A. and
Kuhn, W., (Eds.), Conference on Spatial Information
Theory - LNCS, Vol. 988, Semmering, Austria.
Hill, E. W., & Rieser, J. J. (1993). How persons with visual
impairments explore novel spaces: Strategies of good and
poor performers. Journal of Visual Impairment &
Blindness, 87(8), 295-301.
Hölscher, C., Büchner, S. J., Meilinger, T., Strube, G. (in
press). Adaptivity of Wayfinding Strategies in a MultiBuilding Ensemble: the effects of spatial structure, task
requirements and metric information. Journal of
Environmental Psychology.
Hölscher, C., Büchner, S., Brösamle, M., Meilinger, T., &
Strube, G. (2007). Signs and Maps – Cognitive Economy
in the Use of External Aids for Indoor Navigation. In D.
S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of
CogSci 2007, (377-382). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Hölscher, C., Meilinger, T., Vrachliotis, G., Brösamle, M.,
& Knauff, M. (2006). Up the Down Staircase: Wayfinding
Strategies and Multi-Level Buildings. Journal of
Environmental Psychology 26(4), 284-299.
Løvås, G. G. (1998). Models of Wayfinding in Emergency
Evacuations. European Journal of Operational Research,
105(3), 371-389.
Montello, D. R. (1993). Scale and multiple psychologies of
space. In A. U. Frank & I. Campari (Eds.), Spatial
information theory: A theoretical basis for GIS (pp. 312321). Proceedings of COSIT '93, Springer, LNCS 716.
Ruddle, R. A., Payne, S. J., & Jones, D. M. (1997).
Navigating buildings in "desk-top" virtual environments:
Experimental investigations using extended navigational
experience. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied,
3(2), 143-159.
Ruddle, R. A., Payne, S. J., & Jones, D. M. (1999). The
effects of maps on navigation and search strategies in
very-large-scale virtual environments. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 5(1), 54-75.
Tellevik, J. (1992). Influence of spatial exploration patterns
of cognitive mapping by blindfolded sighted persons.
Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, 92, 221-224.
Wiener, J., Büchner, S., and Hölscher, C. (2009). Taxonomy
of Human Wayfinding Tasks: A Knowledge-Based
Approach. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 9(2), 1–14.
Wiener, J. M., Schnee, A., and Mallot, H. A. (2004). Use
and interaction of navigation strategies in regionalized
environments. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
24(4):475–493.
Yardley, L., & Higgins, M. (1998). Spatial updating during
rotation: The role of vestibular information and mental
activity. Journal of Vestibular Research: Equilibrium &
Orientation, 8(6), 435-442.

1071

