UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Severe Outcomes and their Influence on Judgments of Causation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/14w7h6rd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
DeGregerio, Lisa
Hahn, Ulrike
Walsh, Clare

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Severe Outcomes and their Influence on Judgments of Causation
Clare R. Walsh (clare.walsh@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth
Plymouth, PL4 8AA, U.K.

Ulrike Hahn (hahnu@Cardiff.ac.uk) and Lisa DeGregerio
School of Psychology, Cardiff University
Cardiff, CF10 3AT, U.K.

produce an outcome and therefore undoing one will not
change the outcome. However, there are variations of
counterfactual theory which overcome this problem. Lewis
(2000) proposes that c causes e if an alteration to c would
have led to an alteration of e. Alternatively it is possible that
c causes e provided that if c had not occurred and other
causes were absent, then e would have occurred (Halpern &
Pearl, 2001). There is evidence that people use
counterfactuals in making causal attributions. For example,
when the factual events in a scenario are held constant, an
event tends to be judged to have a greater causal role if there
is an available alternative that would have led to a different
outcome (Wells & Gavanski, 1989).

Abstract
The aim of this paper is to examine whether the nature of an
outcome influences attributions of causation. We contrast two
theories of how people make causal judgments.
Counterfactual theories assume that c causes e if a change to c
would have brought about a change to e. In contrast,
generative theories propose that causation occurs if there is a
causal process linking c and e. Both theories share the
assumption that judgments of whether an event causes an
outcome should be independent of the nature of that outcome.
We describe an experiment showing that people give higher
ratings of causation to a severe than a neutral outcome when
there is no causal process linking the action and the outcome.
Individuals seek causal explanations for a severe outcome
more than a neutral one and when an analysis of the
mechanisms fails to provide one, they are more likely to rely
on a counterfactual analysis to deliver one.

Generative Theories of Causation
In contrast to counterfactual theories of causation,
generative theories define causation with reference to how
an outcome is brought about (Dowe, 2000; Salmon, 1984).
According to these theories, causation occurs when there is
a transmission of a conserved physical quantity such as
energy or momentum along a causal pathway (Bullock,
1985; Salmon, 1984; Shultz, 1982) and an interaction
involving an exchange of those conserved quantities (Dowe,
2000; Salmon, 1997). For example, a rock may be judged to
have caused a window to break because the rock interacted
with the window and transmitted energy to it. There is also
psychological evidence to support the view that people think
about the mechanism when making causal attributions. For
example people tend to use the word „cause‟ to describe a
situation where something is forced towards an outcome
against its initial trajectory (Wolff, 2007) and they are more
likely to search for evidence about possible mechanisms
than for evidence about which events co-vary with the
outcome (Ahn, Kalish, Medin & Gelman, 1995). In
addition, people are more likely to attribute causation to an
action that is linked to the outcome by a continuous
mechanism than to one that is not, even if a change to either
action would bring about a change to the effect (Walsh &
Sloman, 2005, 2009). Even young children are more likely
to make an attribution of causation when there is a
continuous mechanism linking a cause to the outcome (e.g.,
a rolling ball hits a jack in the box which pops) than when
there is not (e.g., the ball doesn‟t reach the jack in the box;
Bullock, 1985) and they are more likely to use information
about the mechanism than spatial or temporal contiguity
(Schultz, 1982). Despite extensive discussion, however, the

Keywords: Causation; Counterfactuals; Mechanisms

Causal Attribution
Causal attributions are central to our ability to explain the
world around us. Unwanted events, for example, failing an
exam or involvement in an accident are particularly likely to
elicit causal explanations (McEleney & Byrne, 2006). Our
aim is to examine whether these unwanted outcomes also
change the way we attribute causation. We will review two
theoretical views of how people attribute causation. Both
views assume that the severity of the outcome is
independent of whether or not a particular event caused it.
We then examine experimentally whether people‟s
judgments do, in fact, reflect this independence.

Counterfactual Theory of Causation
A predominant view is that causal attribution is judged with
reference to a counterfactual conditional. In other words
“event c caused event e” provided that “if c hadn‟t occurred
then e wouldn‟t have occurred” in the closest possible world
to our own in which c occurred (Lewis, 1973; see Bennett,
2003 for a review). For example, I may judge that touching
the hot pan caused my hand to be burnt provided that if I
hadn‟t touched the pan, my hand wouldn‟t be burnt.
Counterfactual theories therefore assume that causation can
be inferred without reference to a causal mechanism. These
theories are not without their problems. One important
difficulty occurs when an outcome is over-determined, that
is, when there is more than one event that is sufficient to

550

basis for causal attribution is still hotly debated. We next
turn to a parallel debate on the role of counterfactuals and
mechanisms in judgments of responsibility for doing and
allowing harm to occur.

Table 1: Predictions of Counterfactual and Generative
theories for Attributions of Causation following Actions and
Failures to Act and depending on whether there is a
mechanism linking the Action to the Outcome

Omission Bias
There is considerable evidence to suggest that people are
sensitive to the difference between actions and failures to
act. People judge harm caused by actions to be morally
worse than the same harm caused by a failure to act (Kagan,
1989). The difference is also reflected in many legal
systems. For example, most jurisdictions allow passive but
not active euthanasia (Baron, 1998). Moreover, people
regret bad outcomes caused by actions more than those
caused by failures to act (Byrne & McEleney, 2000;
Kahneman & Tversky, 1982). And, people prefer inaction
over action when both could lead to a negative outcome
even if the risk of that outcome is lower following action
(Ritov & Baron, 1990). Importantly, these differences also
occur in judgments of causation. Actions tend to be assigned
a greater causal role than failures to act when both result in
the same harmful outcome (Spranca, Minsk & Baron,
1991).
The two key theories which attempt to explain this effect
map closely onto our theories of causation. One explanation
is that the difference between actions and failures to act
depends on counterfactuals. People may be more likely to
spontaneously generate a counterfactual following an action
than a failure to act (Byrne & McEleney, 2000; Kahneman
& Tversky, 1982). In addition, these counterfactuals can
lead to different inferences. Following an action, it is
possible to imagine that the actor‟s absence would have
changed the outcome. In contrast, following a failure to act,
it is possible to imagine that the actor‟s absence would have
lead to the same outcome (Kagan, 1989) and that the actor
therefore did not cause the outcome. An alternative
explanation draws on generative theories of causation and
relates to the fact that actions tend to linked by a continuous
mechanism to an outcome whereas failures to act do not.
The two theories make different predictions for cases
involving an action which interrupts a mechanism and
which is therefore not linked by a continuous mechanism to
an outcome. For example, if Jack jumps up and catches a
ball before it hits a window then he has acted but his action
is not linked by any mechanism to the window. Yet if he
hadn‟t acted, the window would not have broken.
Generative theories predict that individuals should be less
inclined to attribute causation in these cases compared to
when there is a continuous mechanism linking the action to
the outcome. In contrast, counterfactual theories predict that
people will attribute causation equally often following both
types of action. Both should elicit a counterfactual that will
change the outcome. Table 1 shows the predictions of
mechanism and counterfactual theories for each type of
scenario. Evidence suggests that people‟s judgments follow
the predictions of generative theories, at least when
outcomes are neutral (Walsh & Sloman, 2009).

Generative
Theory

Counterfactual
Theory

ActionMechanism

High

High

ActionNo Mechanism

Low

High

InactionNo Mechanism

Low

Low

Outcome Severity
Theories of causation assume that judgments of whether or
not an event is causal should be independent of the nature of
the outcome. Counterfactual theories define causation in
terms of whether a change to the outcome brings about a
change to the effect regardless of what that change is.
Generative theories predict that an event will be judged to
be causal when there is a continuous causal process leading
to an interaction with the outcome but again this judgment
should not be influenced by the nature of that outcome. The
aim of our study is to examine whether people‟s causal
judgments do in fact respect this independence.
Although it is not known whether outcome severity
influences causal judgments, it has been shown to influence
attributions of intentionality (Knobe, 2003). In addition, it
has been shown to influence a range of judgments related to
causation such as responsibility and blame. Although the
research examining this influence has produced very mixed
results, a meta-analytic review suggests that there is a small
but significant effect (Robbennolt, 2000). The primary
explanation for why outcome severity should influence
whether or not an individual is judged to be responsible has
been termed defensive attribution (e.g., Shaver, 1985).
According to this account, as an outcome becomes
increasingly bad, individuals become more reluctant to
believe that the outcome could occur to them and they
become increasingly eager to attribute responsibility for the
event (Walster, 1966). An alternative possibility is that the
nature of the outcome may shift individuals‟ reliance on
mechanisms or counterfactuals in making a judgment.
Hence, in our experiment we used different scenarios that
allowed us to test whether judgments are based on an
analysis of the mechanisms present or on the counterfactual
alternatives when the outcome is neutral and when it is
severe.

Experiment
We generated six versions of a scenario about a boulder
rolling down a cliff. We elicited judgments of whether an

551

actor caused a neutral outcome (the boulder falling off the
cliff) or a severe outcome (the boulder knocking a man off
the cliff). The scenarios also involved one of three different
structures. The action-mechanism scenario had a mechanism
connecting the action (the boulder is pushed) to the
outcome. In the inaction-no mechanism scenario there was a
failure to act (a gate on the pathway of the boulder is not
closed) which changed the outcome.
The action-no
mechanism scenario involved an action (a gate on the path
of the boulder is opened) but there was no mechanism
connecting this action to the outcome. If causal judgments
are based on counterfactuals, then individuals will give the
same causal ratings to the action-mechanism and action-no
mechanism scenarios. In contrast, if causal judgments are
based on the mechanisms present then individuals will give
the same causal ratings to the action-no mechanism and
inaction-no mechanism scenarios. Hence, our design allows
us to test whether people judge causation by analyzing the
mechanisms present or the counterfactuals supported when
the outcome is neutral and when it is severe.

scenario, they were presented with one of the following
questions depending on the outcome in the scenario 1:
Did Marcus cause the boulder to roll off the edge of the
cliff?
or
Did Marcus cause the man to die?
and they were asked to respond to each one by giving a
rating on a 7 point scale from 1 referring to „not at all‟ to 7
referring to „very much so‟.
Results
We carried out a 2 mechanism type (mechanism vs. no
mechanism) x 2 action type (action vs. failure to act) x 2
outcome (severe vs. neutral) between-subjects ANOVA
with causal rating as the dependent variable. 2 Table 2
presents the ratings of causation for each of the six
scenarios. The results showed a main effect of mechanism
type, F(1,114) = 26.42, MSE = 59.5, p < .001, reflecting
higher ratings of causation when the mechanism was
complete (mean = 5.5) than when it was not (mean = 3.1)
and a main effect of action type, F(1,114) = 16.79, MSE =
37.8, p < .001, reflecting higher ratings of causation
following an action (mean = 4.6) than a failure to act (mean
= 2.4). Ratings of causation for severe (mean = 4.1) and
neutral outcomes (mean = 3.7) did not differ significantly, F
(1,114) = 1.04, MSE = 2.34, p > .3.

Method
Participants Participants were 120 undergraduate students
of Psychology aged between 18 and 24 who were recruited
from the experimental participant panel at Cardiff
University.

Table 2: Ratings of Causation following Severe and
Neutral outcomes depending on the mechanism and action
types

Materials, Design and Procedure There were three
independent variables, action type, mechanism type and
outcome. We constructed six different versions of a scenario
about a boulder rolling down the edge of a cliff. Half of the
versions had a severe outcome:
There is a man trapped on the cliff edge, the boulder
hits him and he falls off and dies.
The other half had a neutral outcome:
The boulder rolls off the cliff edge.
These outcomes were preceded either by an action with a
complete mechanism linking it to the outcome:
Marcus pushes a boulder which then rolls down a hill.
by an action which interrupted a mechanism and hence there
was no mechanism linking the action to the outcome:
There is a boulder rolling toward the edge of a cliff.
There is a closed gate between the boulder and the cliff
edge. Marcus is parked in a car nearby and gets out of
his car and opens the gate.
or an omission which also did not have a mechanism linking
it to the outcome:
There is a boulder rolling toward the edge of a cliff.
There is an open gate between the boulder and the cliff
edge. Marcus is parked in his car nearby but fails to get
out of his car and close the gate.
Participants were assigned at random to one of the six
conditions in a between-subjects design. After reading the

Severe

Neutral

ActionMechanism

5.2

5.8

ActionNo Mechanism

4.1

3.5

InactionNo Mechanism

2.9

1.9

All
No-Mechanism

3.5

2.7

Outcome did not interact with action type, F(1,114) = .27,
MSE = .61, p > .6, but it did interact with mechanism type,
F(1,114) = 3.47, MSE = 7.81, 1-tailed p < .04. Planned
comparisons revealed that when the mechanism was
complete, there was no significant difference in causal
1

They also answered a second question which is not discussed
here.
2
Although our study does not contain all 8 conditions, this
analysis allowed us to test for the critical interaction between
outcome and mechanism type.

552

ratings following severe (mean = 5.2) and neutral (mean =
5.8) outcomes, t(38) = 1.59, p > .1, however when there was
no complete mechanism, causation ratings were higher
following a severe (mean = 3.5) than a neutral outcome
(mean = 2.7), t(78) = 2.1, p < .04.
Planned comparisons also revealed a significant
difference in attributions of causation between the action–
mechanism and the action-no mechanism conditions, both
when the outcome was severe (means = 5.2 vs. 4.1), t(38) =
2.22, p < .04, and when it was neutral (means = 5.8 vs. 3.5),
t(38) = 4.58, p < .001). There was also a significant
difference between the action–no mechanism and inaction–
no mechanism conditions when the outcome was severe
(means = 4.1 vs. 2.9), t(38) = 2.34, p < .03, and when it was
neutral (means = 3.5 vs. 1.9), t(38) = 2.98, p < .01.

explain the difference between attributions following
actions and omissions in the absence of a complete
mechanism. This result may arise because following an
omission, individuals judge that if the actor had been absent,
the outcome would still be the same whereas following an
action they judge that if the actor had been absent the
outcome would be different (Kagan, 1989). Alternatively,
the result may arise because individuals are more likely to
spontaneously generate counterfactuals about actions than
failures to act (Byrne & McEleney, 2000; Kahneman &
Tversky, 1982). Either way a theory involving
counterfactuals is required to explain the difference.
Our study replicates the omission bias showing higher
judgments of causation following an action than a failure to
act. Our result extends previous work in this area in two
ways. It shows that the difference between actions and
inactions occurs even when the action is not linked by a
continuous mechanism to the outcome. Therefore the
presence of a mechanism cannot be a full explanation for
the difference between them. Second, our results show that
the omission bias occurs not only when there are severe
outcomes but also when the outcome is neutral.
Causal attributions underlie many of our judgments and
decisions in everyday life (Sloman, 2005). They are also
central to many legal judgments such as whether a person
should be judged liable for an offence. An understanding of
how and when people‟s judgments of causation are
influenced by the nature of the outcome is therefore of great
practical importance. We provide a step towards an
understanding of this influence.
Our motivation for testing for potential context effects in
causal judgment came from the observation that Western
legal systems use counterfactuals in testing cases whereas
past experimental studies (Walsh & Sloman, 2009) suggest
that people use mechanisms to judge causation at least when
the outcome is neutral. Of course, more than a single set of
materials will be required to nail down the impact of
different kinds of outcomes. However, even the results from
the single contrast we present here challenge current
theorizing about causation in two important ways. On a
methodological level, our results suggest that we may know
less about causation than previously assumed, because past
studies of causal learning and causal reasoning have not
systematically manipulated the nature of the putative
effects; but we found patterns of causal attribution changing
across outcome type. On a theoretical level, the results
challenge the common assumption of all major theories that
the attribution of causation is independent of the nature of
the outcome.

Discussion
The results show the novel finding that causal ratings are
influenced by the nature of the outcome. This influence
depended on the causal mechanisms present in the scenario.
When there was a complete causal mechanism, causal
ratings were independent of the outcome. But when there
was no complete causal mechanism causal ratings were
higher following a severe outcome.
The result runs contrary to all existing theories of causal
attribution. Yet there is a clear explanation. When there is a
mechanism linking an action and an outcome, consideration
of this mechanism provides a cause of the outcome. But in
the absence of a mechanism linking an action to an
outcome, the search for a mechanism may not deliver a
cause. This may be satisfactory when the outcome is not
significant, as it is not for example, when a boulder falls
from a cliff. But when the outcome is significant and
negative, as it is for example when a man falls from a cliff,
people want to find a cause (McEleney & Byrne, 2006).
Hence they may draw on counterfactuals to find one. Our
account is consistent with earlier findings which show an
effect of outcome severity on attributions of blame and
responsibility and it suggests an alternative explanation for
those results.
Our results suggest that both consideration of the
mechanisms present in a situation and consideration of the
counterfactuals that a situation supports may be necessary to
give a complete account of individuals‟ causal attributions.
Both play a role in causal judgments and their relative role
may depend on the nature of the outcome. Support for
generative theory is reflected in the finding that individuals
attributed causation to an action more often when it was
linked by a continuous mechanism to an outcome than when
it was not. In addition, outcome information differentially
influences judgments depending on the presence of a
mechanism. However, generative theories cannot explain all
of the results. In our study, we found moderate ratings of
causation even in the absence of a mechanism suggesting
that in some cases people make counterfactual based
judgments of causation. Counterfactuals are also required to

Acknowledgments
We thank Steven Sloman for comments on this work.

References
Ahn, A., Kalish, C.W., Medin, D.L., & Gelman, S.A.
(1995). The role of covariation versus mechanism
information in causal attribution. Cognition, 54, 299-352.

553

Baron, J. (1998). Judgment misguided: Intuition and error
in public decision making. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Bennett, J. (2003). A Philosophical Guide to Conditionals.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Byrne, R. M. J. & McEleney, A. (2000). Counterfactual
thinking about actions and failures to act. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26 1318-1331.
Bullock, M. (1985). Causal reasoning and developmental
change over the preschool years. Human Development,
28, 169-191.
Dowe, P. (2000). Physical Causation. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Halpern, J.Y. & Pearl J. (2001). Causes and Explanations: A
Structural-Model Approach – Part I: Causes. In
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (pp. 194-202). San
Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Kagan, S. (1989). The Limits of Morality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1982). The psychology of
preferences. Scientific American, 246, 160-173.
Knobe, J. (2003). Intentional action and side effects in
ordinary language. Analysis, 63, 190–193.
Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (2000). Causation as influence. In J. Collins, N.
Hall, and L.A. Paul (Eds.), Causation and
Counterfactuals. Cambridge: MIT Press.
McEleney, A. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2006). Spontaneous
counterfactual thoughts and causal explanations. Thinking
and Reasoning, 12, 235-255.
Ritov, I., & Baron, J. (1990). Reluctance to vaccinate:
omission bias and ambiguity. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 3, 263-277.
Robbennolt, J.K. (2000). Outcome severity and Judgments
of “Responsibility”: A Meta-Analytic Review. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 30, 2575-2609.
Salmon, W. (1984). Scientific Explanation and the Causal
Structure of the World. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Salmon, W. (1997). Causality and Explanation: A Reply to
Two Critiques. Philosophy of Science, 64, 461-477.
Shaver, K.G. (1985). The Attribution of Blame: Causality,
Responsibility and Blameworthiness. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Shultz, T.R. (1982). Rules of causal attribution.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 47, 1-51.
Sloman, S. A. (2005). Causal models: How people think
about the world and its alternatives. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Spranca, M., Minsk, E., & Baron, J. (1991). Omission and
commission in judgment and choice. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 27, 76-105.
Walsh, C. R. & Sloman, S. A. (2005). The meaning of cause
and prevent: The role of causal mechanism. In B.G. Bara,

L. Barsalou & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.) Proceedings of the
27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (pp. 2331-6).
Walsh & Sloman, (2009). The meaning of cause and
prevent: The role of causal mechanism. In submission.
Walster, E. (1966). Assignment of responsibility for an
accident. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
3, 73-79.
Wells, G. L., & Gavanski, I. (1989). Mental simulation of
causality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
56, 161-169.
Wolff, P. (2007). Representing Causation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 82 – 111.

554

