UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shape constancy, not size constancy: A (partial) explanation for the Müller-Lyer illusion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4jc2d40m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Nanay, Bence

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Shape constancy, not size constancy:
A (partial) explanation for the Müller-Lyer illusion
Bence Nanay (nanay@syr.edu)
Syracuse University, Department of Philosophy, 541 Hall of Languages
Syracuse, NY 13244 USA

logically independent explanations that he often uses
interchangeably, without explicitly differentiating between
the two. They are the following:

Abstract
The Müller-Lyer illusion is one of the best-known and most
frequently examined optical illusions. After pointing out that
it is unlikely that any one account would give a full
explanation for all the features of this illusion, I argue for two
claims. First, I aim to point out that an essential component of
the Müller-Lyer illusion has something to do with picture
perception (just as Gregory initially claimed). Second, I give
an account of this essential component of the Müller-Lyer
illusion that is not susceptible to the counterexamples and
objections Gregory’s inappropriate size constancy scaling
theory was susceptible to. The gist of my account is that the
Müller-Lyer illusion is explained not by inappropriate size
constancy scaling, but by inappropriate shape constancy
scaling.
Keywords: size constancy, shape constancy, picture
perception

(a) When we experience the Müller-Lyer illusion, we
literally see three dimensional objects (or at least
three dimensional features) in the two dimensional
surface
(b) When we experience the Müller-Lyer illusion, we
do not see a three dimensional object in the flat
surface, but we are aware of, and mislead by,
certain cues that are typically associated with the
perception of three dimensional objects.
Although these two versions of the inappropriate size
constancy scaling theory seem very different indeed,
Gregory never differentiated them explicitly and he often
wrote as if the two hypotheses were really the same. Version
(a) and (b) are both present in Gregory, 1963, but later
formulations put the emphasis on (b). Depending on which
version we choose, Gregory’s appeal to inappropriate size
constancy scaling will also be slightly different.
If, as in version (a), we literally see two three dimensional
figures when we experience the Müller-Lyer illusion, we see
the convex edge of a three dimensional object in the line
with arrow junctions and we see the concave edge of a three
dimensional object in the line with fork junctions. Further,
we perceive the concave edge to be further away than the
convex edge. And, as the two edges are perceived as being
of different distance, their size is also experienced
differently: “The parts of the figures corresponding to
distant objects are expanded and the parts corresponding to
nearer objects are reduced” (Gregory, 1963, p. 678).
If we consider version (b), the explanation will be slightly
different. We do not see anything three dimensional when
we are looking at the Müller-Lyer illusion, so the
inappropriate size constancy scaling cannot be triggered by
the perception of objects that are of different distance from
me. But we do perceive cues that we normally encounter
when we see three dimensional objects and the experience
of these cues is what triggers the inappropriate size
constancy scaling. We are used to perceiving three
dimensional objects, among them convex and concave
edges of houses and rooms. When we see the Müller-Lyer
illusion, we are mislead by cues that we normally encounter
when looking at convex and concave edges of houses and
rooms. And these cues trigger inappropriate size constancy
scaling because we are used to certain size constancy

The Müller-Lyer illusion consists of two lines of equal
lengths. We know that they are of equal length, but we
cannot help perceiving one as longer than the other. There
are several popular and less popular explanations for this
phenomenon, none of them uncontroversial. I argue that if
we modify the most popular account of explaining this
visual illusion, Richard Gregory’s ‘inappropriate constancy
scaling’ theory, we may be able to explain many (but not
all) important features of this dimension. But this
modification will be a substantive one: instead of
inappropriate size constancy scaling, the Müller-Lyer
illusion is (partially) explained by inappropriate shape
constancy scaling.

The inappropriate size constancy scaling
theory
Perhaps the most popular explanation for the Müller-Lyer
illusion was given by Richard Gregory (Gregory, 1963;
1966; 1968). He claims that the two lines of the Müller-Lyer
illusion are “flat projections of typical views of objects lying
in three dimensional space” (Gregory, 1963, p. 678). In
other words, the experience of the Müller-Lyer illusion is
intricately connected to picture perception: the perception of
three dimensional objects in two dimensional surfaces.
It is not entirely clear what the exact relation between the
experience of Müller-Lyer illusion and picture perception is
supposed to be in Gregory’s theory. It seems that he has two

579

scaling when seeing a concave edge and we are used to a
different size constancy scaling when seeing a convex edge.
Thus, the inappropriate size constancy scaling is triggered
without the experience of anything three dimensional and
without the experience of distance, purely by depth cues.
Which of the two versions are more convincing? After the
initial ambiguity between the two versions, Gregory seems
to have settled for (b), and although he never addressed the
respective advantages of the two versions, an important
consideration for version (b) of the inappropriate constancy
scaling theory is Irwin Rock’s influential criticism of
Gregory’s original account (Rock, 1975). Rock argues that
even if we grant that we perceptually interpret the line with
arrow junctions as a convex corner and the line with fork
junctions as a concave corner, there is no reason to suppose
that we perceive the convex corner to be closer than the
concave one. But inappropriate constancy scaling is
triggered only if these two are perceived to be of different
distance. Hence, Gregory’s explanatory scheme is missing
an important step. And he concludes accordingly: “the
Müller-Lyer illusion is generally not seen as threedimensional” (Rock, 1975, p. 412).
Note that this objection only applies in the case of version
(a) of the inappropriate constancy scaling theory. It is only
version (a) where the Müller-Lyer illusion is seen as three
dimensional. Thus, if we are moved by Rock’s objection but
want to preserve the spirit of the inappropriate size
constancy scaling theory, we could dispose of version (a)
and settle for version (b), which is arguably exactly what
Gregory has done.
It needs to be noted that version (b) is not unproblematic
either. Rock pointed out in the case of version (a) that we
have no reason to suppose that the two edges are perceived
to be of different distance. But an analogous worry could be
raised about version (b). What reason do we have to suppose
that the two lines are perceived as containing three
dimensional cues? And even if they are, what reason do we
have to suppose that the two lines are perceived as
containing three dimensional cues that trigger inappropriate
constancy scaling? Thus, it seems that neither version (a)
nor version (b) can explain those aspects of the Müller-Lyer
illusion that Gregory set out to explain.

movement (Festinger et al., 1968, but see Pritchard, 1958),
tilt constancy theory (Prinzmetal et al., 2001, but see
Wenderoth & Burke, 2006) or selective filtering (or, low
pass spatial filtering, see Ginsburg, 1984, also Coren &
Girgus, 1976).1
Irwin Rock’s positive account is known as the ‘incorrect
comparison theory’: when we experience the Müller-Lyer
illusion, what we really compare is not the size of the two
vertical lines, but rather the size of the whole figure (Rock,
1975, p. 313ff, the idea goes back to Woodworth, 1938, p.
645). This hypothesis is supported by the observation that if
the shaft has a different color, the illusion is not so
pronounced (Coren & Gingus, 1972).
Rock’s account is similar to R. H. Day’s very early
alternative to Gregory’s explanation (Day, 1972a; 1972b;
Degoldi & Day, 1992). Day argues that the explanation of
the Müller-Lyer illusion is similar to that of the Ebbinghaus
illusion (where a circle surrounded by larger circles looks
smaller than a circle of the same surrounded by smaller
circles), the Deloeuf illusion (where two circles of the same
size look to be of different size depending on whether there
is a circle inside or outside of them) or the simple
phenomenon that a passage on a large empty page seems
smaller than it would be if the paper were cropped
immediately under and below it. One explanatory advantage
of Day’s explanatory scheme is that it could explain the
existence of the Müller-Lyer illusion in the haptic sense
modality (Day, 1965), as the haptic sense modality is as
sensitive to the contrast of the surrounding features as the
visual one. I will return to the discussion of the haptic
Müller-Lyer illusion at the end of the paper.
Evaluating all the alternative explanations of the MüllerLyer illusion would take a book-length study. Further, we
have no reason to suppose that the Müller-Lyer illusion can
be fully explained by any one of these accounts. A number
of factors contribute to this illusion and Rock’s account may
well capture one of these factors. The aim of this paper is to
single out an important factor that also contributes to the
illusion: the one that Gregory wanted to capture and that has
something to do with picture perception and to give an
unproblematic account of this one factor only. This account
would not provide a complete explanation for the MüllerLyer illusion, but only a partial one.
There are important aspects of the illusion that are not
explained by any of the existing accounts. For example, it
has been pointed out that the illusion decreases in
microgravity, which seems to indicate that the illusion is not
fully explained in terms of the (mal)functioning of our
visual perceptual apparatus only (Villard et al., 2005). No
existing explanation of the Müller-Lyer illusion can account
for this difference. Some other odd features of the illusion
that any account should be able to at least address, if not
fully explain, include (but are not limited to) the fact that the
Müller-Lyer illusion is experienced in the haptic sense

Alternative explanations
Irwin Rock’s criticism of Gregory’s account was one of the
first objections in a series of objections against the
inappropriate size constancy scaling theory. It is virtually
impossible to enumerate all objections, and I will return to
some of these at the end of the paper. But for now it is
enough to note that these objections opened the way for
alternative explanations of the Müller-Lyer illusion. While
the ‘inappropriate constancy scaling theory’ appealed to
fairly higher order cognitive processes (such as the
recognition of three dimensional cues or picture perception),
these alternatives usually aim to explain the Müller-Lyer
illusion in terms of lower order processes, such as eye

1

Other, more ‘higher order’ explanations include the ‘latency
correction theory’ (Changizi & Widders, 2002) and the ‘figure
ground organization theory’ (Taya & Ohashi, 1992).

580

modality and that it is also experienced by some non-human
animals. I will return to these odd features at the end of the
paper.
We have good reason to suppose that there are a number
of factors that contribute to the Müller-Lyer illusion. Hence,
instead of trying to find a monolithic explanatory scheme,
the best we can do is to single out, and explain, the most
important ones of these factors. This is exactly what I aim to
do here.
Thus, the structure of my argument is the following. First,
I aim to point out that an essential component of the MüllerLyer illusion has something to do with picture perception
(just as Gregory initially claimed). Second, I give an
account of this essential component of the Müller-Lyer
illusion that is not susceptible to the objections Gregory’s
inappropriate size constancy scaling theory was susceptible
to.

Figure 1.

Picture perception and the Müller-Lyer
illusion

Compare the length of the two rectangles. Although the
illusion does not disappear completely (arguably for the
‘incorrect comparison’ reasons noted by Rock, 1975), it
diminishes significantly. This phenomenon would be very
difficult to explain without any appeal to picture perception.
If, however, we assume, like Gregory did, that our
experience of the Müller-Lyer illusion presupposes our
experience of two different three dimensional figures in the
two line drawings, we can explain why the illusion
diminishes significantly in this case. Our perceptual system
is forced to interpret the two original line drawing figures as
part of a different three dimensional object (the three
dimensional walls of a Müller-Lyer illusion shape): thus, it
cannot interpret the two original line drawing figures as a
convex and a concave edge.2
These considerations could be used to support version (a)
of Gregory’s inappropriate size constancy scaling theory as
this account posits a necessary connection between the
Müller-Lyer illusion and picture perception. But they
equally support any theory that makes a necessary
connection between the Müller-Lyer illusion and picture
perception and Gregory’s theory is not the only possible
account (and maybe not even the most plausible account)
that does so. I aim to outline an alternative to Gregory’s
inappropriate constancy scaling theory that still uses picture
perception as a starting point.

My claim is that any explanation of the Müller-Lyer illusion
that ignores the connection between this illusion and picture
perception misses out on an essential component of this
illusion. In other words, at least one mechanism that is
essentially responsible for the Müller-Lyer illusion is also
the one that helps us to see three dimensional objects in two
dimensional pictures (see also Redding & Hawley, 1993).
Some initial support for these claims comes from studies
of patients who do not experience the illusion. Patients
suffering from visual agnosia, for example do not
experience the illusion (Turnbull et al., 2004). As these
patients are also notoriously bad at seeing objects in
pictures, this finding is at least indicative of the connection
between the Müller-Lyer illusion and picture perception.
Further, it has also been pointed out that the illusion also
breaks down if the superior (and inferior) parietal cortex is
damaged, an area usually involved in three dimensional
objects perception (Weidner & Fink, 2006). As left
visuospatial neglect patients still perceive the illusion
(although the illusion is somewhat weaker in their case, see
Mattingley et al., 1995), this also indicates that the
experience of the Müller-Lyer illusion presupposes the
ability to perceive three dimensional objects.
However, I only take these findings to be indicative of the
connection between picture perception and the Müller-Lyer
illusion. Here is a more direct connection. If it is true that
our experience of the Müller-Lyer illusion is based on
seeing a three dimensional figure in the line drawings, then
the illusion is bound to diminish if we force our perceptual
apparatus to interpret the line drawings as a different three
dimensional object. This is what the following modification
of the illusion is supposed to achieve:

2

It has been argued that shading that is used to emphasize the three
dimensional visual interpretation of the two lines (as convex and
concave edges) does not increase the illusion (Zanker & Abdullah,
2004). This finding is inconclusive as, provided that the perceptual
system already interprets the lines as depictions of three
dimensional figures, we should not expect that adding shading
would make the perceptual system interpret the lines as more three
dimensional. The argument I give in this section could be thought
of as following the exact opposite strategy: I argue that adding
three dimensional cues that makes the perceptual system interpret
the lines to be depictions of different three dimensional figures
decreases the illusion.

581

than its retinal projection and their shorter parallel line is
experienced as longer than its retinal projection. But
remember that the line with arrow junctions consists of two
trapezoid shapes that share their longer parallel line and
have their shorter parallel line missing. Thus, as these
trapezoid shapes are experienced in such a way that the
longer parallel line is shorter than its retinal projection, the
line with arrow junctions is experienced as shorter than its
retinal projection. Conversely, remember that the line with
fork junctions consists of two trapezoid shapes that share
their shorter parallel line and have their longer parallel line
missing. Thus, as these trapezoid shapes are experienced in
such a way that the shorter parallel line is longer than its
retinal projection, the line with fork junctions is experienced
as longer than its retinal projection.
In other words, the two lines of the Müller-Lyer illusion
are in fact experienced as two dimensional depictions of
three dimensional figures: of a concave and a convex edge.
But we do not experience one of these edges to be further
away than the other. Rock correctly pointed out that we
have no reason to suppose that we experience the convex
edge to be closer to us than the concave one. Hence, we
have no reason to suppose that our explanation of the
Müller-Lyer illusion is based on inappropriate size
constancy scaling.
But if we explain the Müller-Lyer illusion with the help
of inappropriate shape constancy scaling, we do not have to
make the dubious assumption that we perceive the two
edges as being of different distance. According to the
inappropriate shape constancy scaling account, we do
experience the two lines as two dimensional depictions of
three dimensional figures: of a concave and a convex edge,
but we do not perceive one of them to be closer than the
other.
It is important to emphasize this point as one may wonder
how different the new shape constancy scaling account
really is from Gregory’s original size constancy scaling
account. The answer is that it is very different. According to
the size constancy scaling account, we represent the concave
edge as being further away from us than the convex edge.
And Rock powerfully argued against this assumption. The
shape constancy scaling does not entail that we represent
that concave edge as being further away from us than the
convex one. We represent the rectangles as being tilted in
space; we represent them as three dimensional objects, but
we do not represent one of them as being further away than
the other in order to experience the illusion. The account I
outlined here avoids Rock’s influential objection.
The inappropriate shape constancy scaling account can
also explain, or at least be taken to be consistent with, at
least some of the odd features of the Müller-Lyer illusion.
The illusion is more pronounced if we increase the length of
the arrows at the end of the two lines. It is not clear how
Gregory’s inappropriate size constancy scaling account can
give a robust, and not ad hoc, explanation for this. The
inappropriate shape constancy scaling account, in contrast
has a simple explanation: the longer the arrows are the

Inappropriate shape constancy scaling
Let us begin with one of the earliest demonstrations of
shape constancy (Thouless, 1931a; 1931b; 1933). If we look
at a coin from an oblique angle, our experience of its shape
is an intermediate shape between the shape projected on our
retina and the coin’s real (round) shape. As Robert Thouless
put it in 1931, “under ordinary conditions of binocular
vision, the actually experienced character of the object (or
the ‘phenomenal character’) is a compromise between the
‘real’ character of the object and the character given by
peripheral stimulation, […] the phenomenal character shows
a tendency away from the stimulus character towards the
‘real’ character of the object” (Thouless, 1931a, pp. 343344). Although there have been some worries about the
methodology Thouless used and about the scope of his
claims, the general proposal that experienced shape is
somewhere between the shape projected on the retina and
the shape of the object has not been questioned (see Epstein
& Park, 1963 for a summary). Let us now apply this
observation to rectangles and trapezoids (rather than circles
and ovals):

Figure 2.
If the shape on the right is projected on our retina, then,
because of shape constancy, the experienced shape will be
somewhere between the shape on the left, the ‘real’ shape
(rectangle) and the shape on the right, the shape projected
on the retina. It will be something like the shape in the
middle.
Now think of the two lines of the Müller-Lyer illusion as
two figures both consisting of two identical trapezoid
shapes.3 The line with arrow junctions consists of two
trapezoid shapes that share their longer parallel line and
have their shorter parallel line missing. The line with fork
junctions, in contrast, consists of two trapezoid shapes that
share their shorter parallel line and have their longer parallel
line missing.
If it is true that the experienced shape of these trapezoid
shapes is corrected by the perceptual system to be more
similar to the ‘real’ rectangular shape, then the longer
parallel line of these trapezoids is experienced as shorter
3
Fisher, 1967 suggested something similar when trying to give a
combined explanation for the Ponzo and the Müller-Lyer illusion.

582

‘incorrect comparison theory’ seems to be able to explain
the presence of the illusion in the haptic sense modality: the
haptic sense modality is as sensitive to the contrast of the
surrounding features as the visual one (see Day, 1965 for a
similar explanatory scheme).4
Yet another odd feature of the Müller-Lyer illusion is that
it is also experienced by pigeons (Nakamura et al., 2006).
Although this finding may sound disquieting for the
advocate of the inappropriate constancy scaling accounts, as
these accounts use relatively higher order cognitive
processes for explaining the illusion and one may wonder
whether pigeons are capable of such higher order cognitive
processes.
But the situation is not so dramatic (interestingly, even
Rock cautions against drawing far reaching conclusions
from these findings, see Rock, 1975, p. 440). It has been
suggested that pigeons are also capable of picture perception
(Fagot, 2000). If so, however, then pigeons have all the
cognitive apparatus that, according to the account outlined
here, is needed for the experience of the Müller-Lyer
illusion. The seemingly surprising finding that pigeons also
experience the Müller-Lyer illusion indicates that the
inappropriate shape constancy scaling account I defended in
this paper is at least on the right track.

longer the non-parallel sides of the two trapezoid shapes
will be. And the longer the non-parallel sides the two
trapezoid shapes are, the more difference the shape
constancy scaling makes to the length of the parallel sides of
the trapezoids (e.g., if the non-vertical lines in Figure 2 are
longer, the difference between the vertical lines is larger).
It has been argued as early as Gregory’s initial
explanation that the Müller-Lyer illusion is stronger among
Europeans than among African populations (Segall et al.,
1963, see also Deregowsky, 1974; Gregory, 1963, p. 680).
Further, in a later and more comprehensive study, it was
argued that within Zambia, people living in cities were more
susceptible to the Müller-Lyer illusion than those living in
rural environments (Steward, 1973, see also Leibovitz et al.,
1969). This finding is consistent with the inappropriate
shape constancy scaling account and, to a certain degree, it
can even be explained by it. If one of the major factors that
cause the Müller-Lyer illusion is the inappropriate shape
constancy scaling of rectangles, then what we should expect
is that those people who have been perceptually less
exposed to rectangles are less susceptible to the illusion. We
know that the strength of shape constancy varies with
exposition to various shapes (Myambo, 1972), if it is true
that one of the major factors that cause the Müller-Lyer
illusion has to do with shape constancy, we should expect
the same in the case of the Müller-Lyer illusion.
Another odd feature of the Müller-Lyer illusion is that it
is also experienced in the haptic sense modality. If we are
allowed to touch two objects with the shape of the two lines
of the Müller-Lyer illusion, without looking at them, we
experience the same illusion (Heller et al., 2002, the
observation goes back to Revesz, 1934). This finding does
not falsify the account I outlined here, as we could appeal to
visualizing on the basis of our tactile experiences of the two
lines when explaining the haptic illusion (Frisby & Davies,
1971, but see also Over, 1967; Suzuki & Arashida, 1992).
Even more disturbingly, even blind, further, even
congenitally blind people can experience the haptic MüllerLyer illusion (Heller et al., 2005). Here, the defender of the
explanatory scheme I defended above could still appeal to
visualizing, as there is evidence that at least some blind (and
even some congenitally blind) people are capable of
visualizing or at least of having visual imagery (see Aleman
et al., 2001; Hollins, 1985). Thus, they are still capable of
visualizing the illusion on the basis of their tactile
experiences.
Some may find the appeal to visualizing on the basis of
haptic experiences slightly problematic it is important to
point out that this explanatory scheme does not form an
essential part of the inappropriate shape constancy scaling
account. As I emphasized above, the inappropriate shape
constancy scaling is not intended to provide a full
explanation for all features of the Müller-Lyer illusion. It is
intended to provide an explanation for a major factor that
contributes to the illusion, but there may be (and there
presumably are) other factors. Irwin Rock’s ‘incorrect
comparison theory’ may capture one of these. And Rock’s

References
Aleman, A., L. van Lee, M. H. Mantione, I. G. Verkoijen &
E. H. de Haan (2001). Visual imagery without visual
experience: evidence from congenitally totally blind
people. Neuroreport, 12, 2601-2604.
Changizi, M. A. & D. M. Widders (2002). Latency
correction explains the classical geometrical illusions.
Perception, 31, 1241-1262.
Coren, S. & J. S. Girgus (1972). Differentiation and
decrement in the Müller-Lyer illusion. Perception and
Psychophysics, 12, 446-470.
Coren, S. & J. S. Girgus (1978). Seeing is Deceiving: The
Psychology of Visual Illusions. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrende
Erlbaum.
Day, R. H. (1965). Inappropriate Constancy Explanation of
Spatial Distortions. Nature, 207, 891–893.
Day, R. H. (1972a). Visual spatial illusions: A general
explanation. Science, 175, 1335-1340.
Day, R. H. (1972b). The basis of perceptual constancy and
perceptual illusion. Investigative Ophthalmology, 11, 525532.
Degoldi, B., R & R. H. Day (1992). The Müller-Lyer
illusion Mark II. Perception, 21, 269-271.
Deregowsky, J. B. (1974). Illusion and Culture. In: Gregory,
R. L. & Gombrich, E. H. (Eds.), Illusion in Nature and
Art. New York: Scribner.
4
Rock’s ‘incorrect comparison theory’ also fares better at
explaining those versions of the illusion where at the ends of the
two equal lines the arrows are replaced by circles or squares (the
examples come from Day 1972a).

583

Piaget, J., V. Bang & B Matalon (1958). Note on the law of
the temporal maximum of some optico-geometric
illusions. American Journal of Psychology, 71, 277-282.
Pollack, R. H. (1970). Müller-Lyer illusion: Effects of age,
lightness, contrast, and hue. Science, 170, 93-95.
Prinzmetal, W., A. P. Shimamura & M. Mikolinski (2001).
The Ponzo illusion and the perception of orientation.
Perception and Psychophysics, 63, 99-114.
Pritchard, R. M. (1958). Visual illusions viewed as
stabilized retinal images. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental psychology, 10, 77-81.
Redding, G. M & E. Hawley (1993). Length illusion in
fractional Müller-Lyer stimuli: an object-perception
approach. Perception, 22, 819-828.
Revesz G. (1934). System der optischen und haptischen
Raumtäuschungen. Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 131, 296375.
Rock, I. (1975) Introduction to perception. New York:
Macmillan.
Segall, M. H., D. T. Campbell & M. J. Herskovits (1963).
Cultural differences in the perception of geometric
illusions. Science, 139, 769-771.
Steward, V. M. (1973). Tests of the ‘carpentered world’
hypothesis by race and environment in America and
Zambia. International Journal of Psychology, 8, 83-94.
Suzuki, K. & Arashida, R. (1992). Geometrical haptic
illusions revisited: Haptic illusions compared with visual
illusions. Perception and Psychophysics, 52, 329-335.
Taya, R. & Y. Ohashi (1992). The reversed Müller-Lyer
illusion and figure – ground organization theory.
Perception, 21, 611-626.
Thouless, R. H. (1931a). Phenomenal regression to the real
object. Part I. British. Journal of Psychology, 21, 339359.
Thouless, R. H. (1931b). Phenomenal regression to the real
object. Part II. British Journal of Psychology, 22, 1-30.
Thouless, R. H. (1933). Phenomenal regression to the real
object. Nature, 131, 261-263.
Turnbull, O. H., J. Driver & R. A. McCarthy (2004). 2D but
not 3D: Pictorial depth deficits in a case of visual agnosia.
Cortex, 40, 723-738.
Villard, E., F. T. Garcia-Moreno, N. Peter & G. Clément
(2005). Geometrical visual illusions in microgravity
during parabolic flight. Cognitive Neuroscience and
Neuropsychology, 16, 1395-1398.
Weidner, R. & G. R. Fink (in press). The neural
mechanisms underlying the Müller-Lyer illusion and its
interaction with visuospatial judgments. Cerebral Cortex,
in press.
Wenderoth, P. & D. Burke (2006). Testing the tilt-constancy
theory of visual illusions. Perception, 35, 201-213.
Woodworth, R. S. (1938). Experimental Psychology.
Austin, TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Zanker, J. M. & A. K. Abdullah (2004). Are size illusions in
simple line drawings affected by shading? Perception, 33,
1475-1482.

Epstein, W. & J. N. Park (1963). Shape constancy:
Functional relationships and theoretical formulations.
Psychological Bulletin, 60, 265-288.
Fagot, J. (2000). Picture Perception in Animals. Hove,
Sussex: Psychology Press.
Fellows, B. J. (1967). Reversal of the Müller-Lyer illusion
with changes in the inter-fin lines. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 19, 208-214.
Festinger, L., C. W. White & M. R. Allyn (1968). Eye
movements and decrement in the Müller-Lyer illusion.
Perception & Psychophysics, 3, 376-382.
Fisher, G. H. (1967). A common principle relating to the
Müller-Lyer and the Ponzo illusions. American Journal of
Psychology, 80, 626-631.
Frisby, J. P. & Davies, I. R. L. (1971). Is the haptic MüllerLyer a visual phenomenon? Nature, 231, 463-465.
Ginsburg, A. P. (1984). Visual form perception based on
biological filtering. In: Spilman R. & Wooten, G. R.
(Eds.), Sensory experience, adaptation and perception.
Hillsdale: Erlbaum, pp. 53-72.
Ginsburg, A. P. (1986). Spatial filtering and visual form
perception. In: Boff, K. R., Koufman, R. & Thomas, J. P.
(Eds.), Handbook of perception and human performance.
New York: Wiley, pp. 34-41.
Glennerster, A. & B. J. Rogers (1993). New depth to the
Müller-Lyer illusion. Perception, 22, 691-704.
Gregory, R. L. (1966). Eye and Brain. The Psychology of
Seeing. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gregory, R. L. (1968). Perceptual illusions and brain
models. Proceedings of the Royal Society, B 171, 279296.
Heller, M. A., D. D. Brackett, K. Wilson, K. Yoneyama, A.
Boyer, H. Steffen (2002). The haptic Müller-Lyer illusion
in sighted and blind people. Perception, 31, 1263-1274.
Heller, M. A., M. McCarthy, J. Schultz, J. Greene, M.
Shanley, A. Clark, S. Skoczylas, J. Prociuk (2005). The
influence of exploration mode, orientation, and
configuration on the haptic Müller-Lyer illusion.
Perception, 34, 1475-1500.
Hollins, M (1985). Styles of mental imagery in blind adults.
Neuropsychologia, 23, 561-566.
Leibowitz, H., R. Brislin, L. Perlmutter & R. Hennessy
(1969). Ponzo perspective illusion as a manifestation of
space perception. Science, 166, 1174-1176.
Myambo, K. (1972). Shape constancy as influenced by
culture, Western education, and age. Journal of CrossCultural Psychology, 3, 221-232.
Nakamura, N., K. Fujita, T. Ushitani & H. Miyata (2006).
Perception of the standard and the reversed Müller-Lyer
figures in pigeons (Columbia livia) and humans (Homo
Sapiens). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 120, 252262.
Nijhawan, R. (1995). Reversed illusion with three
dimensional Müller-Lyer shapes. Perception, 24, 12811296.
Over, R. (1967). Haptic illusions and inappropriate
constancy scaling. Nature, 214, 629.

584

