UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Space and Time in the Child’s Mind: Evidence for a Cross-Dimensional Asymmetry.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1sk8f0tw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Boroditsky, Lera
Casasanto, Daniel
Fotakopoulou, Olga

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Space and Time in the Child’s Mind:
Evidence for a Cross-Dimensional Asymmetry.
Daniel Casasanto1

Olga Fotakopoulou2

Lera Boroditsky3

(daniel.casasanto@mpi.nl)

(ofotakop@psy.auth.gr)

(lera@psych.stanford.edu)

1

2

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
School of Psychology, Thessaloniki 541 24, Greece

3

Stanford University, Department of Psychology
Jordan Hall, Bldg. 420, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract
What is the relationship between space and time in the human
mind? Studies in adults show an asymmetric relationship
between mental representations of these basic dimensions of
experience: representations of time depend on space more
than representations of space depend on time. Here we
investigated the relationship between space and time in the
developing mind. Native Greek-speaking children (N=99)
watched movies of two animals traveling along parallel paths
for different distances or durations and judged the spatial and
temporal aspects of these events (e.g., Which animal went for
a longer time, or a longer distance?) Results showed a
reliable cross-dimensional asymmetry: for the same stimuli,
spatial information influenced temporal judgments more than
temporal information influenced spatial judgments. This
pattern was robust to variations in the age of the participants
and the type of language used to elicit responses. This
finding demonstrates a continuity between space-time
representations in children and adults, and informs theories of
analog magnitude representation.
Keywords: Space; Time; Metaphor; Conceptual
Development; Greek; Snails

Introduction
What is the relationship between space and time in the
human mind? This question has long been the subject of
philosophical inquiry and psychological experimentation
(e.g., Locke, 1689/1995; Cohen, 1967; Helson, 1930; Mach,
1886/1897; Piaget, 1927/1969; Price-Williams, 1954).
There is now no doubt that space and time are intimately
related in our minds, yet the nature of their relationship
remains controversial.
Two sets of proposals have emerged, one suggesting a
symmetric and the other an asymmetric relationship between
space and time in the mind. The first view arises from
studies of analog magnitude processing in children and
animals (Church & Meck, 1984; Gallistel & Gellman,
2000), and from neurological data showing shared brain
areas for processing space, time, and quantity (e.g., Basso,
et al., 1996). Observations from these disparate sources
were synthesized in A Theory Of Magnitude (ATOM;
Walsh, 2003). According to ATOM, space, time, and
number are all represented in the brain and mind by a
common analog magnitude system. ATOM is appealingly

simple, and appears consistent with a large body of data
from several fields.
Implicit in ATOM, however, is an assumption that time,
space, and number are symmetrically interrelated. Indeed, if
these dimensions are all manifestations of a common
magnitude metric, there is no a priori reason to posit that
one dimension should depend asymmetrically on another.
Accordingly, ATOM’s neural predictions are framed in
symmetrical terms, positing “overlapping brain regions” for
space, time, and quantity (Walsh, 2003, pg. 484). Likewise,
behavioral predictions suggest symmetrical relationships
among these domains. Walsh proposes that “experiments in
which responses are made to two or more magnitudes on
successive trials should show cross-domain, withinmagnitude priming [or interference]” (2003, pg. 487).
Although Walsh focuses on relationships among time,
space, and quantity, he suggests that ATOM may apply to
all ‘prothetic’ domains; that is, domains that can be
experienced as more or less in magnitude (Stevens, 1975).
But are all prothetic domains created equal?
An alternative proposal also holds that space, time, and
quantity are importantly related, but in a different way.
According to theories of metaphorical mental representation
(e.g., Lakoff & Johnson, 1999), representations of time and
quantity depend asymmetrically on representations of space.
Furthermore, space is of special importance for
representations in many other domains, as well, including
preference (Casasanto, 2009), intimacy (Williams & Bargh,
2008), social dominance (Schubert, 2005), and similarity
(Casasanto, 2008a).
The claim that some domains are asymmetrically
dependent on others is at the core of metaphor theory.
Representations of abstract things that we can never see or
touch (e.g., ideas, numbers, time) are hypothesized to
depend asymmetrically on representations built up through
perceptuomotor experience in relatively concrete domains
like space, force, and motion (Talmy, 1988).
The
asymmetry hypothesis follows from patterns in
metaphorical language. In English, it is nearly impossible
to talk about domains like time without using words that can
also express spatial ideas: vacations can be long or short,
meetings can be moved forward or pushed back, deadlines
can lie ahead of us or behind us. Yet, it is far less common

1090

to use temporal words to talk about space (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1999). Although we could say that we live “a few
minutes from the station”, we could just as easily express
this spatial idea in spatial words, saying “a few blocks from
the station.”
Asymmetries in language acquisition prefigure this
pattern of adult language use. In general, children produce
spatial terms earlier than their temporal counterparts (see H.
Clark, 1973, for review). Young children use the word in
spatially (e.g., in the box) far more than they use it
temporally (e.g., in a minute), even though temporal uses of
in are common in adult speech (H. Clark, 1973). Children
use here and there to designate points in space before they
use now and then for points in time. They produce where
questions earlier than when questions, and sometimes
misinterpret when as where. Eve Clark reports that when
young children were asked questions like “When did the
boy jump over the fence?” they sometimes gave locative
answers (e.g., “right there”), consistent with the proposal
that temporal terms are acquired as metaphorical extensions
of spatial terms (in H. Clark, 1973).
Yet, even given this convergent evidence from patterns of
language acquisition and language use, it would still be
imprudent to conclude that space is especially important for
thinking about time (see Casasanto, 2008a, 2009). Is the
asymmetric relationship between space and time limited to
language, or might linguistic metaphors be telling us
something important about how people conceptualize these
domains?
Two sets of behavioral studies have critically evaluated
the claim that people not only talk about time using spatial
words, but also think about time using spatial
representations -- more than the other way around. In one
series of experiments (Boroditsky, 2000), spatial primes
were found to influence participants’ processing of temporal
sentences (e.g., March comes before May).
But
importantly, temporal primes did not influence subsequent
spatial reasoning, consistent with the predicted crossdimensional asymmetry.
Another set of studies tested for an asymmetric
relationship between representations of space and time using
low-level psychophysical tasks, with non-linguistic stimuli
and responses (Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008). In each
task, English-speaking adults viewed lines or dots on a
computer screen, and reproduced either their duration or
their spatial displacement, using mouse clicks to indicate the
beginning and end of each spatial or temporal interval.
Durations and displacements were fully crossed, so there
was no correlation between the temporal and spatial
components of the stimuli.
As such, one stimulus
dimension served as a distractor for the other: an irrelevant
piece of information that could potentially interfere with
task performance.
Results of the initial experiment showed the asymmetric
dependence of time on space that was predicted by
metaphor theory. The longer a line extended in space, the
longer participants judged that it lasted in time. By contrast,

the temporal extent of stimuli did not influence judgments
of their spatial extent. Five follow-up experiments varied
the attentional, mnemonic, and perceptual demands of the
stimuli, in order to rule out task-related explanations for this
finding.
All six experiments supported the same
conclusion: distance influences representations of duration
more than duration influences representations of distance.
Thus, psycholinguistic and psychophysical data from
adults show the asymmetrical relationship between space
and time predicted by metaphor theory; not the symmetric
relationship implied by ATOM. But what about data from
children? Is it possible that space-time representations start
off ATOMic, and later become metaphoric? The goal of the
present study was to address this question.
Piaget studied children’s conceptions of time and space
extensively, and observed their close relationship. He
emphasized that “time and space form an inseparable
whole” in the child’s mind, suggesting a symmetric
relationship (1927/1969, pg. 1), but he also noted that “in
the case of space we can ignore time…[yet] when it comes
to time we cannot abstract the spatial and kinetic
relationships,” suggesting an asymmetry (pg. 2). Results of
Piaget’s experiments on time, motion, and speed suggest
that children may mistake space for time more than the
other way around (Piaget, 1927/1969; 1946/1970).
However, Piaget’s methods did not allow for a quantitative
comparison of the cross-dimensional influences of space on
time and time on space. This is what we undertake here.
Children aged 4-6 and 9-10 years old performed
computerized tasks, analogous to the psychophysical tasks
used previously in adults (Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008),
in which they were asked to judge either the temporal or
spatial dimension of a stimulus. Participants saw pairs of
cartoon snails traveling along parallel paths, and judged
which snail had traveled farther (relative distance), or
traveled for a longer time (relative duration). Control tasks
tested for understanding of the questions we used, and for
the ability to judge duration and distance per se,
independent of cross-dimensional interference.
In principle, there were three possible outcomes. First, if
spatial and temporal representations are independent in the
child’s mind, then no significant cross-dimensional
interference should be observed. Children should be able to
attend to the relevant dimension of the stimuli (whether
space or time), and ignore the irrelevant dimension. In the
terminology of psychophysics, this would indicate that
space and time are separable dimensions (Garner, 1974).
Based on previous results in children and adults, this
outcome was not likely, nor was it predicted by either theory
we were evaluating.
Alternatively, if spatial and temporal representations are
symmetrically dependent on one another, then any crossdimensional interference observed in children’s judgments
should be approximately symmetric: distance should
modulate duration judgments, and vice versa. This outcome
would be most consistent with the central claim of ATOM,
and suggest that space and time are integral dimensions.

1091

Finally, if mental representations of time are
asymmetrically dependent on mental representations of
space, then we should find an asymmetrical pattern of crossdimensional interference: distance should affect duration
estimates more than duration affects distance estimates.
This would indicate that space and time are asymmetrically
integral dimensions, consistent with predictions of metaphor
theory, and with data from adults.
Testing these relationships between space and time in
English speaking children is complicated by the fact that
English speakers usually use distance words to talk about
duration. Asking children to compare ‘how long’ events
last in the most natural ways could induce crossdimensional confusions by using distance-related words in
both spatial and temporal contexts. Fortunately, in other
languages such as Greek, it is more natural to talk about
duration without using distance words. For example,
whereas English speakers use the distance-related phrase
long time more frequently than the non-distance-related
alternative much time, the opposite is true for the Greek
translation equivalents: µακρύ χρονικό διάστηµα (tr. ‘large
time distance’) is less frequent than πολλή ώρα (tr. ‘much
time’) (see Casasanto, 2008b; Casasanto, et al., 2004).
Here we tested for distance-duration interference in native
Greek speaking children, to take advantage of the
separability of distance and duration in the Greek language.
This allowed us to phrase questions naturally, so that they
could be understood easily by kindergarteners, without the
risk of inducing superficial cross-dimensional confusions.
We varied the wording of the temporal questions across
participants (i.e., distance wording, no distance wording), to
determine whether the phrasing of the questions influenced
responses.

Methods
Participants Native Greek-speaking children (N=99) from
schools in Thessaloniki participated after giving verbal
assent, and with the informed consent of their parents and
teachers. The younger group (n=47) ranged in age from
4;5-5;9 y.o. (mean=61 mos, SD=4 mos), and the older group
(n=52) from 9;1-10;9 y.o. (mean=116 mos, SD=3 mos).
These age groups were chosen based on the ages at which
Piaget (1927/1969) reported that children begin to respond
sensibly to questions about relative distances and durations
of two simultaneously varying stimuli, and the age by which
he reported that children had largely resolved their
confusion about space and time.
Design
In the 2x2x2x2 design there were two within-subject
factors: Target Dimension (Space, Time), and Dimensional
Interference (Cross-Dimensional Interference, No CrossDimensional Interference).
The Cross-Dimensional
Interference condition required children to judge either
distance or duration in the presence of competing
information from the other dimension. The No CrossDimensional Interference condition tested distance and

duration judgments in the absence of competing information
from the other dimension. There were also two betweensubject factors: Age (Younger, Older), and Question
Wording (Distance Wording, No Distance Wording).
Questions about duration contained Distance Wording for
about half of the participants (e.g., Which one went for a
longer time?), and No Distance Wording for the other half
(e.g., Which one went for more time?)
Materials and Procedure
Each participant performed three tasks: Racing Snails (the
main Distance-Time interference task), Jumping Snails (a
task to test children’s ability to judge duration independent
of spatial interference), and Static Lines (a task to test
children’s ability to judge distance independent of temporal
interference). Each task is described below. Stimuli were
presented on a Macintosh laptop (resolution=1024x768
pixels), and were followed by written questions (displayed
for the experimenter’s benefit). The first question of each
trial was intended to focus children’s attention on the
stimulus event, and to allow the experimenter to evaluate
whether the child was paying attention. The second
question, which asked children to judge either relative
distance or relative duration, was of critical interest.
Children were tested individually at their schools, in a
private room away from other children. Each child
completed a total of 18 trials (12 cross-dimensional
interference trials and 6 no-interference control trials).
Testing lasted about 10-15 minutes.
Racing Snails (Distance-Time interference task).
Two snails, one above the other, began at the left edge of
the screen and ‘raced’ rightward along parallel tracks. One
snail was blue and the other red, so that they would be
visually discriminable and easy for the child to name (e.g.,
“the blue one”). The assignment of colors to the top and
bottom snails was counterbalanced across participants.
There were three types of movies, placing the snails in
different space-time relationships relative to one another.
The two snails traveled: (a) Different distance, different
time (b) Different distance, same time, or (c). Same
distance, different time. Distances traveled were either 400
or 600 pixels, and durations of travel were either 4 or 6
seconds. There were two variants of each movie type, in
which either the top or the bottom snail traveled longer in
space or time. This control was implemented in case
participants had an overall preference to choose the snail on
the top or the bottom. This resulted in 6 movies that could
be viewed serially without repetition.
Each participant saw all 6 of the Racing Snails movies
twice, once in each of two blocks: a Space Question block
and a Time Question block. The order of these blocks was
counterbalanced across participants, and the order of movies
within each block was randomized.
Before the Space Question block, the experimenter
encouraged the child to pay attention to how far the snails
traveled. When the child was ready, the experimenter

1092

presented the movies one at a time, following each movie
with these questions (in Greek): 1. Did the two snails stop at
the same place? (Σταµάτησαν τα δύο σαλιγκάρια στο ίδιο
σηµείο;) 2. Did one of the snails go farther? (Πήγε κάποιο
από τα σαλιγκάρια πιο µακριά;) If the child indicated ‘yes’
without specifying which snail had gone farther, the
experimenter continued: Which one of the two? (Ποιο από
τα δύο;)
Likewise, before the Time Question block, the
experimenter encouraged the child to pay attention to the
time it took for the snails to travel across the screen. When
the child was ready, the experimenter presented the movies
one at a time, following each movie with: 1. Did the two
snails stop at the same time? (Σταµάτησαν τα δύο
σαλιγκάρια την ίδια στιγµή;) In the Time Question block,
only, the phrasing of the second question depended on the
version of the experiment. In the Distance Wording
condition, the experimenter asked: 2. Did one of the snails
go for a longer time? Which one? (Κινήθηκε κάποιο από τα
σαλιγκάρια µακρύτερο χρονικό διάστηµα; Ποιο;) In the No
Distance Wording condition, she asked: 2. Did one of the
snails go for more time? Which one? (Κινήθηκε κάποιο
από τα σαλιγκάρια περισσότερη ώρα;) This phrasing
avoided using any distance words that might create or
enhance cross-dimensional interference from the (irrelevant)
spatial dimension of the stimuli.
Static Lines (Distance judgment control task).
The static lines task was used to test children’s ability to
make distance judgments without any competing temporal
information. Children judged three pairs of static lines
presented one pair at a time, one above the other. One line
was red and the other blue, with the colors of the top and
bottom lines counterbalanced across participants. The lines
were either 400 or 600 pixels in length, and came in three
combinations: (a) top line longer, (b) bottom line longer, or
(c) both lines the same length (600 pixels).
The
experimenter asked: 1. Are the lines the same length?
(Είναι οι γραµµές αυτές το ίδιο µακριές;) 2. Is one of the
lines longer? Which one is longer? (Είναι κάποια από τις
γραµµές αυτές µακρύτερη; Ποια γραµµή είναι µακρύτερη;)
Bouncing Snails (Duration judgment control task).
The bouncing snails task tested children’s ability to make
duration judgments without any competing distance
information. Children judged three movies of the red and
blue snails bouncing up and down in place, one above the
other. The colors of the top and bottom snails were
counterbalanced across participants. Each of the snails
bounced for either 4 or 6 seconds, in one of three
combinations: (a) top snail bounced longer, (b) bottom snail
bounced longer, or (c) both snails bounced for the same
duration (6 seconds). Although the snails traveled a small
distance up and down while bouncing, there was no lateral
motion and no net displacement. The experimenter asked
the same questions as in the Time block of the Jumping
Snails questions, using Distance Wording (i.e., longer time)

in one version of the experiment and No Distance Wording
(i.e., more time) in the other.

Results
Participants’ judgments of relative distance and relative
duration are summarized in Fig. 1a-d. The proportion of
correct responses from each of the four groups of
participants (i.e., Older and Younger participants in the
Distance Wording and Alternative Wording conditions)
were first analyzed separately, in four separate 2 X 2
ANOVAs, with Target Dimension (Space, Time) and
Interference (With Interference, Without Interference) as
within-subject factors. The same patterns were found in all
four groups (F-tests reported in Table 1).
To summarize the results, in every group there was a
main effect of Interference, indicating better performance
during the no-interference trials (Jumping Snails and Static
Lines) than during cross-dimensional interference trials
(Racing Snails). Additionally, there was a main effect of
Target Dimension, indicating better performance during
Space trials compared to Time trials, overall. Crucially,
there was also a highly significant interaction of
Interference and Target Dimension, indicating that the
difference between participants’ distance and duration
judgments was much greater under cross-dimensional
interference conditions than under no-interference
conditions. To paraphrase, children were not simply good at
judging space and bad at judging time; they were worse at
judging time in the presence of irrelevant spatial
information. By contrast, irrelevant temporal information
had little effect on spatial judgments.
It was possible to quantify the asymmetry in crossdimensional interference while controlling for differences in
children’s ability to judge space and time, per se, by
subtracting the proportion of correct responses during
Interference trials from the proportion correct during NoInterference trials for the same target dimension: Effect of
distance on time judgments = [(% Correct time judgments
without distance interference) - (% Correct time judgments
with distance interference)]; Effect of time on distance
judgments = [(% Correct distance judgments without
temporal interference) - (% Correct distance judgments with
temporal interference)].
The magnitude of these cross-dimensional interference
effects was compared across versions of the task and across
age groups using a mixed ANOVA with Age (Older,
Younger) and Wording (Distance Wording, Alternative
Wording) as between-subject factors and Target Dimension
(Space, Time) as a within-subject factor (fig. 2). Results
showed a highly significant main effect of Target Domain
(F(1,95=139.20, p<.0001), and no main effects of Wording
(F<1) or of Age (F<1). There was a weak and unexpected
three-way interaction of Wording, Target Domain, and Age
(F(1,95)=4.05, p<.05), but no interaction of Target Domain
with Age, or of Target Domain with Wording (F’s<1).

1093

Figure 1. Proportion of correct distance and duration responses in each group of participants. (a) Younger children,
Distance wording. (b) Younger children, Alternative wording. (c) Older children, Distance Wording. (d) Older children,
Alternative wording. Error bars indicate s.e.m.
Age group

Younger

Older

Wording

Effect

Target Dimension
Distance Interference
Dimension * Interference
Target Dimension
Alternative Interference
Dimension * Interference
Target Dimension
Distance Interference
Dimension * Interference
Target Dimension
Alternative Interference
Dimension * Interference

F-value (df) p-value
66.63(1,19)
12.96(1,19)
8.97(1,19)
105.73(1,26)
31.13(1,26)
45.94(1,26)
153.92(1,20)
74.28(1,20)
82.66(1,20)
68.24(1,30)
42.69(1,30)
47.39(1,30)

0.000
0.002
0.007
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Table 1. Results of the 2 x 2 ANOVAs conducted on
accuracy rates (% correct responses) in each group,
corresponding to panels 1a-d, above.

Figure 2. Comparison of cross-dimensional interference
effects across age groups and question wordings.

General Discussion
This study tested relationships between space and time in
the minds of kindergarten and elementary school-aged
children. Overall, children were much better at judging
distance in the presence of temporal interference than they
were at judging duration in the presence of spatial
interference, even when the wording of the questions, the
age of the participants, and the participants’ ability to judge
distance and duration, per se, were taken into account. This
finding constitutes the cross-dimensional asymmetry
predicted by metaphor theory, and reveals that space and
time are asymmetrically integral dimensions (Garner, 1974)
in the minds of children, as in the minds of adults.
These results run contrary to the simplest predictions
derived from Walsh’s (2003) ATOM proposal. If space and
time are two aspects of, or products of, a generalized
mechanism for representing and comparing analog
magnitudes, then why should one domain depend
asymmetrically on the other, both in language and thought,
adults and children? It may be possible to modify ATOM to
accommodate the present data, but such modifications

would need to be not only explanatorily adequate but also
theoretically motivated; otherwise a metaphorical account of
the observed space-time asymmetries should be preferred.
ATOM’s elegance lies in its potential to explain (at least
partly) how people represent three fundamental dimensions
of experience using a single mechanism. Yet, the theory
that abstract ideas are represented via physical metaphors
has the potential to partly explain not only the handful of
prothetic dimensions that psychophysicists ordinarily study,
but also countless other dimensions of experience, including
intelligence, pride, wealth, honesty, attractiveness: anything
that can be described in language (and by hypothesis
conceptualized) as higher or lower, more or less.
ATOM and metaphor theory make contrasting predictions
about the relationship between space and number, as well.
If we take patterns in language as a source of hypotheses
about conceptual structure, there should be a spatial basis
for numbers, since speakers often describe them as large or
small, high or low. Indeed, there is abundant evidence that
spatial schemas are mapped onto the domain of number
(e.g., Dehaene, Giraux, & Bosini, 1993; Lakoff & Núñez,
2000). But is there evidence for a symmetrical mapping
from numbers to space? In investigating such cross-

1094

dimensional relationships, it is important to distinguish the
notion of directionality from asymmetry (see Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008 for discussion). Evidence that numbers
can influence space under some circumstances (i.e., that
there is some degree of bidirectionality) would not
necessarily invalidate the hypothesized space-number
asymmetry.
Whether or not there are bidirectional
influences between domains, the metaphor theorist posits
that when given symmetrical tasks (e.g., judging different
dimensions of the same stimulus), participants should
nevertheless produce asymmetrical judgments.
Although the present findings demonstrate a continuity
between space-time mappings in adults and children, they
underscore a difference between humans and monkeys. The
psychophysical space-time tasks described in the
introduction (Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008) were adapted
for use with Macaques, who were trained to judge lines
presented on a computer screen as either long or short in
time or space. By contrast with the human ‘control
subjects’ who showed the usual space-time asymmetry,
monkeys showed more symmetrical interference from the
spatial to the temporal dimension of stimuli, and vice versa
(Merritt, Casasanto, & Brannon, 2009).
Further
experiments are needed to determine whether ‘mental
metaphors’ from space to time are uniquely human, and if
so, what properties of our languages or bodies might give
rise to the metaphoric structuring of our minds.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by a grant an NSF
CAREER grant to LB, and by an NRSA fellowship and a
grant from the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science
(#SEJ2006-04732/PSIC, DGI) to DC.

References
Basso, G. et al. (1996) Time perception in a neglected
space. Neuroreport 7, 2111 – 2114.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1–28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
Mandarin and English speakers’ conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1–22.
Casasanto, D. (2008a). Similarity and Proximity: When
does close in space mean close in mind? Memory &
Cognition, 36(6), 1047-1056.
Casasanto, D. (2008b). Who’s Afraid of the Big Bad Whorf:
Crosslingusitic differences in temporal language and
thought. Language Learning, 58, 63-79.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of Abstract Concepts:
Good and bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General. DOI:10.1037/
a0015854.
Casasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the Mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106, 579593.

Casasanto, D., Boroditsky, L., Phillips, W., Greene, J.,
Goswami, S., Bocanegra-Thiel, S., Santiago-Diaz, I.,
Fotokopoulu, O., Pita, R., Gil, D. (2004). How deep are
effects of language on thought? Time estimation in
speakers of English, Indonesian, Greek, and Spanish.
Proceedings of the 26h Annual Conference Cognitive
Science Society, Chicago, IL.
Church, R.M. and Meck, W.H. (1984) The numerical
attribute of stimuli. In Animal Cognition (Roitblat, H.L.,
Beaver, T.G. and Terrace, H.S., eds), pp. 445 – 464,
Erlbaum.
Cohen, J. (1967). Psychological time in health and disease.
Springfield: Charles C. Thomas.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of pairity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122(3), 371-396.
Gallistell, R.C. and Gellman, R. (2000) Non-verbal
numerical cognition: from reals to integers. Trends in
Cognitive Science. 4, 59 – 65.
Garner, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure. New York: Wiley.
Helson, H. (1930). The tau eﬀect – an example of
psychological relativity. Science, 71(1847), 536–537.
Lakoﬀ, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. (2000). Where Mathematics
Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings
Mathematics into Being. New York: Basic Books.
Locke, J. (1689/1995). An essay concerning human
understanding. Amherst: Promethius Books.
Mach, E. (1886/1897). Contributions to the Analysis of
Sensations (transl. C. M. Williams ) Chicago, Open Court
Publ. Co., 1897 (1st German edition, 1886).
Merritt, D.J., Casasanto, D., & Brannon, E.M. (2009). Do
Monkeys Use Space to Think About Time? Paper
presented at the Society for Research in Child
Development. Denver, CO.
Piaget, J. (1927/1969). The child’s conception of time. New
York: Ballantine Books.
Piaget 1946/1970 The child’s conception of Movement and
Speed. New York, Basic Books.
Price-Williams, D. R. (1954). The kappa eﬀect. Nature,
173(4399), 363–364.
Schubert, T. (2005). Your highness: Vertical positions as
perceptual symbols of power. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 89(1), 1-21.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 12, 49–100.
Walsh, 2003 A theory of magnitude: common cortical
metrics of time, space and quantity. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 7 (11), 483-488.
Williams, L. E., & Bargh, J. A. (2008). Keeping one's
distance: The influence of spatial distance cues on affect
and evaluation. Psychological Science, 19, 302-308.

1095

