UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Memory for Highly Familiar Environments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2zf3z19h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bulthoff, Heinrich H.
Frankenstein, Julia
Meilinger, Tobias
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Memory for Highly Familiar Environments
Julia Frankenstein (julia.frankenstein@tuebingen.mpg.de)
Tobias Meilinger (tobias.meilinger@tuebingen.mpg.de)
Betty J. Mohler (betty.mohler@tuebingen.mpg.de)
Heinrich H. Bülthoff (heinrich.buelthoff@tuebingen.mpg.de)
Max-Planck-Institute for Biological Cybernetics
Spemannstr. 38, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
In this experiment we examined orientation dependency in
human memory for a highly familiar environmental space.
Twenty-seven inhabitants living for at least two years in
Tübingen saw a photorealistic virtual model of the city center
(Virtual Tübingen) through a head-mounted display. They
were teleported to five different initial locations in Virtual
Tübingen and asked to point towards well-known target
locations. This procedure was repeated in twelve different
body-orientations for each of the initial locations. Participants
pointed more accurately when oriented northwards regardless
of the initial location. We also found a small effect of local
orientation. The more participants were aligned with the street
leading to the target location the better was their pointing
performance. Even though the strong alignment effect with a
global orientation is predicted by reference direction theory,
this theory does not predict that this global orientation is, first,
common for almost all participants, and second, that this
orientation is north. We discuss our results with respect to
well-known theories of spatial memory and speculate that the
bias we find for north orientation is due to participants relying
on memory of a city map of Tübingen for their pointing
response.
Keywords: spatial memory; reference frame; environmental
space; reference direction; view dependent; orientation
independent; alignment; map

Introduction
In a familiar environment our spatial memory is needed for
us to perform daily tasks. We must remember where our
work is located, the route to travel there from our home, and
we also need to be able to calculate a detour on occasions
when our route is obstructed. A lot of spatial processes
likely require a mental representation of our environment.
The question addressed in this paper is how highly familiar
environments are represented in memory.

Theories of Spatial Memory
There are many theoretical positions concerning the
organization of spatial memory (e.g., Burgess, 2006;
Gallistel, 1990; O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978; Rump &
McNamara, 2007; Wang & Spelke, 2002). Most theoretical
positions can be categorized with regard to their prediction
of whether humans store their environment orientation
dependent with respect to one or more reference directions,
orientation dependent with respect to experienced views,
and/or orientation independent.

Reference Direction Theory. Reference direction theory
states that humans store their spatial knowledge of the
environment with respect to one or more reference
directions. This theoretical position is mainly supported by
McNamara and colleagues (e.g., Kelly, McNamara,
Bodenheimer, Carr & Rieser, 2008; Mou, Xiao &
McNamara, 2008; Shelton & McNamara, 2001; Rump &
McNamara, 2007). The theory states that when learning a
new environment, its spatial structure is stored in the
specific orientation of a reference direction, whose
orientation is determined by either the initial exposure to
this environment (e.g., the first view of a room), or by its
most salient orientation (intrinsic axis, e.g., parallel to the
longer walls of a rectangular room). Initially reference
direction theory was only tested in vista spaces. Vista spaces
are spaces which could be explored from one point of view,
e.g., one single room (see Montello 1993). Spaces such as
our city of residence are considered environmental spaces.
This kind of space could not be explored from one single
point of view, by definition it contains at least two vista
spaces which need to be integrated. McNamara, Slucenski
and Rump (2008) extended the reference direction theory
for environmental spaces, proposing hierarchical reference
systems at different scales. Higher-order reference systems
(e.g., for a city district) define the spatial relations between
lower-order reference systems (e.g., for single streets). By
learning an environmental space, humans encode multiple
local reference systems with local reference directions.
These local reference systems become part of a higher-order
reference system by aligning their local reference directions
to a single reference direction common for the whole
environment. This global reference direction likely differs
between individuals, i.e., there is no a priori reason to
assume that all individuals should necessarily come up with
the same global reference direction. According to this
theoretical approach, humans should perform spatial tasks
within a highly familiar environment best when they are
aligned with the reference direction they use to store the
whole environmental space.
View Dependent Memory. Theories proposing a view
dependent memory assume that all parts of the environment
are stored in the local orientation in which they were
explored (e.g., Cartwright & Collett, 1983; Christou &
Bülthoff, 1999; Gillner, Weiß & Mallot, 2008; Simons &
Wang, 1998; Trullier, Wiener, Berthoz & Meyer, 1997;

2650

Wang & Spelke, 2002). A recent extension of this
theoretical approach, the network of reference frames theory
(Meilinger, 2008; see also Meilinger, Riecke & Bülthoff,
submitted) assumes that experienced views of the
environment are interpreted as separate local reference
frames (i.e., coordinate systems). The environment is
represented in a network consisting of these reference
frames (each corresponding to a single vista space) and the
metric interrelations between these frames (i.e., the
translation and the rotation necessary to get from one
reference frame to the next one). When humans are required
to perform a survey task such as pointing, it is suggested
that distant locations are imagined from the perspective of
the current location. These reference frames and the stored
metric relations between them are integrated within one
reference frame in working memory. So contrary to the
reference direction theory, which assumes a single global
reference direction common for the whole environment, this
theoretical position proposes best performance when
persons are aligned with the local orientation of the
reference frame of their current location. In a city
environment this most often means the alignment with a
street orientation as a street is most often experienced in this
view. More specifically, the orientation of the street leading
to the target of pointing should be the reference standard,
because the reference frames on the route to the target
location have to be integrated in order to solve a survey
task. Participants should thus perform better when aligned
with the street leading to the target, than when misaligned.
Orientation Independent Memory. Some authors have
proposed that spatial memory is orientation independent
(e.g., Burgess, 2006; Byrne, Becker & Burgess, 2007;
Gallistel, 1990; Holmes & Sholl, 2005; O’Keefe & Nadel,
1978; Sholl, 2001). One very detailed model of an
orientation independent memory was proposed by Sholl and
colleagues (e.g., Easton & Sholl, 1995; Holmes & Sholl,
2005; Sholl, 2001). In their theory (as is also the case in
most other orientation independent positions), spatial
memory is based on at least two interconnected subsystems:
a perspective-free allocentric organization of environmental
knowledge (object-to-object-system) and an additional
egocentric reference system representing space in self-toobject relations. Humans must therefore record and update
their positions in relation to the environment, while the
positions of the objects in the environment are defined and
updated by the relations to other objects, not in relation to a
reference direction. For this process a high familiarity with
the environment is required. If spatial memory is orientation
independent, performance should not vary due to a person’s
orientation in the environment.

Limitations of Experiments and Results about
Spatial Memory
Even though the three theoretical positions described were
tested and supported in various experiments (e.g., Christou
& Bülthoff, 1999; Easton & Sholl, 1995; Gillner et al.,

2008; Holmes & Sholl, 2005; Kelly et al., 2008; Mou et al.,
2008), most of the paradigms used did not involve highly
familiar environments. In most experiments participants
learned the environment specifically for the experiment (an
exception is Holmes & Sholl, 2005). This means that the
spatial memory tested was newly acquired and not acquired
in daily life. Therefore, the results obtained do not
necessarily generalize to knowledge of highly familiar
environments. In addition, there are at least three more
points to mention. First, most experiments were conducted
in setups based on vista spaces, for these all three theoretical
positions were supported by different experimental results
(e.g., Gillner et al., 2008; Kelly et al., 2008; Mou et al.,
2008; Shelton & McNamara, 2001). Only orientation
independent and view dependent theories have been
investigated in environmental spaces (e.g., Christou &
Bülthoff, 1999; Holmes & Sholl, 2005). Second, due to
experimental control, spatial performance mainly was
measured in artificial settings of low complexity. For
example, participants learned an array of objects and were
tested afterwards (e.g., Shelton & McNamara, 2001; Simons
& Wang, 1998). Again, it is an open question whether
results obtained also could be generalized to rich and
complex environments. Last, no study mentioned so far has
directly compared all three theoretical positions within one
experimental setting. One study did so in a simple virtual
labyrinth (Meilinger, Riecke & Bülthoff, 2007; submitted).
Their results indicate that participants encode each corridor
of the labyrinth in the orientation it was experienced, rather
than relying on a reference direction common for all
locations of the labyrinth. However, as this environment
was also newly learned during the experiment, familiarity
might not have been sufficient to form a global reference
direction or an orientation independent memory. In order to
learn more about spatial memory for highly familiar
environments, we conducted a study which compared
predictions from all three theories within one experiment
and which examined spatial memory of a highly familiar,
complex, and realistic environmental space – namely the
memory of one’s place of residence.

Methods
Participants wearing a head-mounted display (HMD) were
placed in five familiar locations (initial locations) in a
virtual model of their hometown (see Figure 1). They were
asked to point at different familiar target locations (e.g. the
main train station) which were not visible from their
location.

Participants
Twelve female and fifteen male participants, aged 18 to 50
years (M = 28.9; SD = 7.8) conducted the experiment. They
were recruited via a participant database and by personal
contacts and were paid for their participation. All
participants were naïve about the theories being investigated
in the experiment and had lived for at least two years in
Tübingen (M = 6.8; SD = 5.4).

2651

The overall setup provided important depth cues such as
stereo vision and motion parallax. For measuring
participants’ pointing performance we used a custom-made
pointing joystick (see Figure 3). This joystick provides the
ability to determine when people initiated pointing and
where they are pointing at in absolute space. The resolution
of the joystick is approximately 2 degrees.

Procedure

Figure 1: A snapshot of Virtual Tübingen.

Apparatus and Materials
For our experimental setup we used Virtual Tübingen, a
highly realistic virtual model of Tübingen, Germany (see
Figure 1; http://virtual.tuebingen.mpg.de; Meilinger et al.,
2007). Participants saw the model through the HMD as if
they were standing (eye-height approximately 1.7 m). In
order to keep viewing depth constant in all directions (i.e.,
when facing a wall vs. looking down a street) we used
simulated fog (see Figure 2). The experiment was
programmed in Virtools® 4.0 (© Dassault Systemes). We
tracked the position and orientation of the participant’s head
by using an optical tracking system including five reflective
markers on the HMD (see Figure 3) and four high-speed
motion capture cameras (Vicon® MX 13) which ran with a
frame rate of 120 Hz. The participants’ head coordinates
were transmitted to a computer (Dell Inspiron XPS Gen 2)
which rendered an egocentric view of the virtual
environment in real-time by using an NVIDIA GO 6800
Ultra graphics card with 256 MB RAM. We presented the
stimuli to our participants using a Kaiser SR80 HMD which
has a field of view of 53° (vertical) x 63° (horizontal), a
resolution of 1280×1024 pixels for each eye and a weight of
0.79 kg (see Figure 3). A fixed interpupillary distance of 8
cm was used for rendering the two views for each eye. We
adjusted the fit of the HMD, including the screen placement,
for each participant.

Our participants found themselves facing a familiar initial
location in a specific orientation, which was varied in
twelve steps in multiples of 30° (see Figure 3). First, they
were asked to self-localize and press a button on the joystick
when they felt confident that they knew their position and
orientation. Then participants pointed into the virtual
direction of three different target locations, whose written
names appeared one after the other on the HMD-screen.
After pointing the pointing stick had to be held upright
again before displaying the next target. Participants selfinitiated a trial by pressing a button. Between trials they
were allowed to take breaks as much and as long as they
wanted. Participants were allowed to rotate their head for
self-localization. During pointing they were asked to only
look straight ahead (and face the initial orientation), the
HMD screen turned black after head rotations larger than 10
degrees. Participants faced all initial locations once in all
orientations in random order. No target was pointed to twice
in one trial and all targets were pointed to equally often.
After finishing all pointing trials, participants were asked to
draw the routes they would take from the initial locations to
reach the target locations in a city map of Tübingen.

Figure 3: A participant pointing with the pointing joystick
(left side). At each initial location participants were tested in
each of twelve orientations (right side).

Figure 2: Snapshot from the model used in the experiment.
The fog ensured comparable viewing distance for all
orientations.

Participants were given written instructions and were also
instructed orally. We ensured that they knew the names of
initial and target locations by testing them on snapshot
images before they participated in the experiment. To gain
familiarity with the setup, the joystick and the experimental
procedure, participants conducted training trials in a
location in virtual Tübingen which was not used as an initial
or target location in the experiment. Then for the actual
experiment, we recorded the time to self-localize, pointing

2652

time and computed the absolute pointing error. The 60 trials
(five initial locations in twelve orientations) and three target
locations per trial therefore resulted in 180 datasets per
participant. For the statistical analysis, values deviating
more than three standard deviations from the overall mean
were replaced by the most extreme value inside this interval.

Results
Every participants’ pointing performance was better than the
chance level of 90° (28 t-tests, all t(179) > 3.86; p < .001).
All participants were, therefore, included in the analysis.
Analyzing the data for the predictions of the reference
direction theory, we found participants’ pointing accuracy
differing as a function of their global orientation (i.e.,
alignment with north, east, etc.; F(4.7, 122.4) = 31.23, p <
.001, partial η2 = .55). Performance was best when our
participants faced north (0° in Figure 4). As the participants
might differ in their individual reference direction, we
looked at their individual data. 24 of 27 participants were
better in facing north than the mean of the other orientations
(24 t-tests all t(1, 179) > 2.39, p < .019, d > .65).
Neither the time for self-localization (F(6.4, 166.1) =
1.70, p = .120, partial η2 = .06), nor the time for pointing
(F(3.9, 101.8) = .52, p = .715, partial η2 = .02) differed as
a function of global orientation, so this result could not be
explained by a speed accuracy trade-off.

Figure 5: Mean of absolute pointing error across all
participants with respect to their orientation to the street
leading to the target location. In 0° they were aligned with
the street and were looking in the direction they would start
their route towards the target location.
Although being aligned with the street leading to the
target location did not lead to best performance as predicted
by view dependent theories, we did find a significant
quadratic trend (F(1, 21) = 6.45, p = .019, partial η2 = .24)
indicating that the further participants orientation deviated
from this street, the worse performance was. Pointing time
did not differ relative to the street leading to the target
(F(2.7, 56.9) = 1.02, p = .386, partial η2 = .05).
We did not find significant differences in the time for
self-localization depending on the orientation relative to the
next street (F(2.4, 63.4) = .44, p = .688, partial η2 = .02).
Please note that for self-localization no pointing goal was
available and therefore the orientation to the next street
instead of orientation relative to the street leading to the
target location was calculated.
We did not find a significant difference between males
and females in the time they needed to self-localize t(25) =
1.19; p = .246) or their pointing performance, neither for the
pointing error (t(25) = 1.13; p = .269) nor for reaction time
for pointing (t(25) = .75; p = .460).

Discussion
Figure 4: Average pointing error as a function of global
orientation. 0° corresponds to facing north, 90° to facing
east, -180° to facing south, and -120° to facing west. Error
bars represent +- one standard deviation.
We also analyzed the individual routes our participants
would take to reach the target locations, and calculated
orientation performance relative to the first street in their
chosen route. Routes were taken from maps participants
drew after the experiment. Pointing accuracy differed as a
function of the orientation relative to the street leading to
the target location (F(6.3, 132.5) = 2.37, p = .031, partial η2
= .101, see Figure 5).

Participants in our experiment pointed most accurately when
they were aligned with topographical north. This was found
in the average across participants as well as in the individual
data of 24 out of 27 participants. We also found a small
effect of local orientation on pointing performance. Pointing
performance improved as the participants were aligned with
the street leading to the target location.
In our experiment we see a relatively large pointing error
on average for the participants. Limitations of the field of
view in the HMD-setup could have an effect on task
performance (Arthur, 2000) and using special equipment
and virtual reality could have lead to poorer task
performance, although the patterns of the results seem to be
comparable to data gained from natural setups (Ruddle,
Payne & Jones, 1997; Sellen, 1998). Since participants were

2653

tested within a virtual environment but acquired their
knowledge in the real world their poor task performance
may have been a factor of transfer from the real to the
virtual world.
So is human spatial memory orientation dependent with
respect to a reference direction? The reference direction
theory (e.g., Kelly et al., 2008; Mou et al., 2008; Shelton &
McNamara, 2001; Rump & McNamara, 2007) states that
humans encode locations in direction-based spatial
reference systems. For highly familiar spaces, as in the
present study, humans should have established a global
reference direction common for the whole environment
(McNamara et al., 2008). The strong effect of global
orientation on pointing performance can be seen as evidence
for reference direction theory. However, the theory does not
provide an explanation for why almost all participants
showed the same reference direction. The resulting
reference direction for the whole environmental space can
be expected to differ due to participants’ individual
experiences, even more as the structure of Tübingen and the
initial locations contain several axes, none of these
compelling for use as a global axes. Nor does the theory
provide an explanation for why this orientation is north and
not east or west, unless especially north would be a very
salient orientation in Tübingen or at the initial locations.
However, there is no prominent north axis to be found in
Tübingen, and the streets within Tübingen do not follow a
north-south-east-west grid. The initial locations did not
contain more north-south axes than orientations in other
directions either. Finally, there were no global landmarks neither north nor in any other direction - to be seen from the
initial locations during the pointing task. Therefore, it does
not seem plausible that the observed north orientation
originated from the specific structure of Tübingen. So the
origin of the observed bias for north in the pointing
performance of our participants could not be explained
completely by the reference direction theory.
How could our data be interpreted with respect to the
view-dependent theory? This class of theories predicts that
participants encode their environment not within a global
reference frame common for the whole environment, but in
the local orientation which the environment was explored
(e.g., Cartwright & Collett, 1983; Christou & Bülthoff,
1999; Gillner et al., 2008; Simons & Wang, 1998; Wang &
Spelke, 2002). Participants’ pointing performance should
therefore be better when they are aligned with the local
orientation of a street. Best pointing performance is
predicted, when the participant is aligned with the street
leading to the target location, because then it should be
easiest to integrate the sequence of reference frames on the
way to the target and so the participant should be able to
define the position of the target most accurately. (Meilinger,
2008). The observed alignment effects of the current study
do not provide much support for the view dependent theory,
the effect we found was rather small and there may be an
alternative explanation. For example, pointing to the front
has been shown to result in better performance than pointing

backwards (Franklin, Henkel & Zangas, 1995). In our
experiment the pointing error may have decreased when
participants were looking down the street leading to the
target location due to the fact that the target location was
more often in front of our participants in this case.
The effect of orientation in conducting the pointing task
contradicts the theory of an orientation independent memory
(e.g., Burgess, 2006; Byrne, Becker & Burgess, 2007;
Easton & Sholl, 1995; Gallistel, 1990; Holmes & Sholl,
2005; O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978; Sholl, 2001). Our
participants should, since they were living in Tübingen for
at least two years, be familiar enough to build up an
orientation independent memory.
In conclusion, our results cannot easily be explained by
the theories mentioned proposing a view dependent or
orientation independent memory. Although the results
support the reference direction theory, this theory does not
provide an explanation of why most participants performed
best when facing north.
We propose that this puzzling pattern is resolved when
assuming that participants encoded a city map of Tübingen
and used their memory of this map for pointing. City maps
are most-often printed with north as up, and they provide all
locations within one reference frame. Our results show an
alignment effect with topographical north, and the
performance curve with slight improvement at 180° is
common for using displays in different orientations
(Wickens, Vincow & Yeh, 2005).
If in fact true, this interpretation indicates two things.
First, the memory of maps encountered may dominate even
years of direct experience of an environment. The reason for
this may lie in task requirements. For pointing the initial
location and the pointing target have to be represented
within on single reference frame. Multiple experienced
views and translations between them may have to be
combined to finally come up with a single reference frame.
This might be more complicated and error prone, than using
the memory of a city map, which already presents all
locations within one single reference frame. Pointing
directions are derived from the map rather easily although
they have to be transformed into the egocentric perspective
from which the pointing task is conducted (Levine, Jankovic
& Palij, 1982).
There may be a second issue implied by the interpretation
of participants using survey knowledge acquired from a city
map used for pointing. In daily life navigators may combine
knowledge acquired from multiple sources such as maps
and direct experience during navigation to solve spatial
tasks (cf. Tversky, 1993). The pointing task in our
experiment could not be solved based on map knowledge
only, since participants had to determine their location and
orientation from visual input of their surrounding
environment. The exact nature of this combination of
multiple sources and strategies for solving spatial tasks is
subject to future research. One could imagine a simple
linkage of map-locations to the memory of the
corresponding location in the real world. This linkage may

2654

be mediated by verbal labels (cf. Meilinger, 2008).
However, it is possible as well that map and navigation
memory are fused into one representation, or that the map
memory serves as a hierarchical top-node which relates to
the hierarchical sublevels based on navigation experiences.
Future experiments will have to show which of these
speculations best explain our navigation behavior.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Michael Weyel and Stephan Streuber for
support in programming, Hans-Günther Nusseck, Harald
Teufel and Benjamin Turski for the virtual reality
environment.

References
Burgess, N. (2006). Spatial memory: how egocentric and
allocentric combine. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10,
551-557.
Byrne, P., Becker. S. & Burgess, N. (2007). Remembering
the Past and Imagining the Future: A Neural Model of
Spatial Memory and Imagery. Psychological Review, 114,
340-375.
Carthwright, B.A. & Collett, T.S. (1983). Landmark
Learning in Bees. Journal of Comparative Physiology,
151, 521-543.
Christou, C. & Bülthoff, H.H. (1999). View dependence in
scene recognition after active learning. Memory &
Cognition ,27, 996-1007.
Easton, R.D., & Sholl, M.J. (1995). Object-array structure,
frames of reference, and retrieval of spatial knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21, 483-500.
Franklin, N., Henkel, L.A. & Zangas, T. (1995). Parsing
surrounding space into regions. Memory and Cognition,
23, 397-407.
Gallistel, C.R. (1990). The Organization of Learning.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gillner, S., Weiß, A.M. & Mallot, H.A. (2008). Visual
homing in the absence of feature-based landmark
information. Cognition, 9, 105-122.
Holmes, M.C. & Sholl, M.J. (2005). Allocentric coding of
object-to-object relations in overlearned and novel
environments. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 31, 1069-1078.
Kelly, J.W., McNamara, T.P., Bodenheimer, B., Carr, T.H.
& Rieser, J.J. (2008). The shape of human navigation:
How environmental geometry is used in maintenance of
spatial orientation. Cognition, 109, 281-286.
Levine, M., Jankovic, I.N., & Palij, M. (1982). Principles of
spatial problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology General, 111, 157-175.
McNamara, T.P., Slucenski, J., & Rump, B. (2008). Human
Spatial Memory and Navigation. In H.L. Roedinger, III
(Ed.), Cognitive Psychology of Memory. Vol. [2] of
Learning and Memory: A comprehensive Reverence, 4
vols. (J.Byrne Editor). Oxford: Elsevier.

Meilinger, T. (2008). The Network of Reference Frames
Theory: A Synthesis of Graphs and Cognitive Maps. In C.
Freksa, N. S. Newcombe, P. Gärdenfors, S. Wölfl (Eds.),
Spatial Cognition VI. Berlin: Springer
Meilinger, T., Riecke, B.E. & Bülthoff, H.H. (submitted).
Recently learned environmental spaces are represented as
interconnected vista spaces. Cognition.
Meilinger, T., Riecke, B.E. & Bülthoff, H.H. (2007).
Orientation Specificity in Long-Term-Memory for
Environmental Spaces. Proceedings of the 29th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Montello, D. R. (1993). Scale and multiple psychologies of
space. In A. U. Frank & I. Campari (Eds.), Spatial
information theory: A theoretical basis for GIS. Berlin:
Springer.
Mou,W., Xiao, C. & McNamara, T.P. (2008). Reference
directions and reference objects in spatial memory of a
briefly viewed layout. Cognition, 108, 136-154
O'Keefe, J., & Nadel, L. (1978). The hippocampus as a
cognitive map. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ruddle, R.A., Payne, S.J. & Jones, D.M. (1997). Navigating
buildings
in
"desk-top"
virtual
environments:
experimental investigations using extended navigational
experience. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 3(2), 143-159.
Rump, B. & McNamara, T.P. (2007). Updating in Models
of Spatial Memory. In T. Barkowsky, M. Knauff, G.
Ligozat, D.R. Montello (Eds.), Spatial cognition V.
Berlin: Springer.
Sellen, K. (1998). Schätzen von Richtungen in realen und
virtuellen Umgebungen. Diploma thesis, Tübingen
University, Faculty of Biology.
Shelton, A.L., & McNamara, T.P. (2001). Systems of spatial
reference in human memory. Cognitive Psychology, 43,
274–310.
Sholl, M.J. (2001). The Role of a Self-Reference System in
Spatial Navigation. In D.R. Montello (Ed.), COSIT 2001
(pp. 217−232). Berlin: Springer.
Simons, D.J., & Wang, R.F. (1998). Perceiving real-world
viewpoint changes. Psychological Science, 9, 315-320.
Trullier, O., Wiener, S.I., Berthoz, A. & Meyer, J.-A.
(1997). Biologically based artificial navigation systems:
Review and prospects. Progress in Neurobiology, 51,
483-544.
Tversky, B. (1993). Cognitive maps, cognitive collages, and
spatial mental models. In A. U. Frank & I. Campari
(Eds.), Spatial information theory: A theoretical basis for
GIS (pp. 14-24). Berlin: Springer.
Wang, F.R., & Spelke, E. S. (2002). Human spatial
representation: insights form animals. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6, 376-382.
Wickens, C.D., Vincow, M. & Yeh, M. (2005). Design
applications of visual spatial thinking: The importance of
frame of reference. In P. Shah & A. Miyake (Eds.), The
Cambridge Handbook of Visuospatial Thinking.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

2655

