UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Organization of Magnitude in the Representation of Number and Emotion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4j95210h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Holmes, Kevin J.
Lourenco, Stella F.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Organization of Magnitude in the Representation of Number and Emotion
Kevin J. Holmes (kevin.holmes@emory.edu)
Stella F. Lourenco (slouren@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University
532 Kilgo Circle, Atlanta, GA 30322

Abstract
Converging behavioral and neural evidence suggests that
numerical representations are spatially organized from left-toright, the so-called mental number line. When judging parity
(odd/even), for example, smaller and larger numbers produce
faster left- and right-side responses, respectively (the SNARC
effect). Three experiments revealed that this spatial
organization of magnitude extends to the representation of
emotion. In Experiment 1, participants made parity judgments
to numbers (0 to 9) and gender judgments (male/female) to
human faces whose expressions varied in happiness. Results
showed similar patterns of spatial organization across the two
dimensions, with right-side responses becoming increasingly
faster as numerosity or happiness increased. Experiment 2
showed that magnitude, not valence, underlies this left-toright organization, and Experiment 3 provided evidence for
the flexibility and specificity of magnitude representation.
Together, our findings suggest that people automatically
extract information about magnitude, regardless of its
instantiation, representing disparate dimensions of experience
in common spatial (left-to-right) form. Number appears to be
but one example of a more general representational system
linking space and dimensions of magnitude.
Keywords: magnitude; spatial organization; SNARC effect;
number; emotion.

Introduction
Space and number are richly correlated in the world. More
numerous sets of items, for example, tend to occupy more
space (provided item size remains constant). Associations
between space and number have also been well established
in the laboratory. Perhaps the classic demonstration of an
association is the SNARC (Spatial-Numerical Association of
Response Codes) effect, whereby smaller numbers (e.g., 1,
2) are associated with the left side of space and larger
numbers (e.g., 8, 9) with the right. Dehaene, Bossini, and
Giraux (1993), for example, found that participants asked to
make parity (odd/even) judgments were faster to respond to
smaller numbers with the left hand and to larger numbers
with the right, suggesting that increasing numerical values
show a left-to-right organization, the mental number line.
Moreover, number processing has been found to elicit shifts
in covert spatial attention, with smaller numbers speeding
subsequent detection of peripheral stimuli in the left visual
field and larger numbers speeding detection in the right
(Fischer et al., 2003). This left-to-right spatial organization
may not be unique to number, however. Spatial location has
been shown to bias temporal judgments (Vallesi, Binns, &
Shallice, 2008; Vicario et al., 2008), and SNARC-like

effects have been observed for size (Bonny & Lourenco, in
preparation).
Such findings lend support to the notion of a common
representational code for magnitude across the dimensions
of space, number, and time (Walsh, 2003). Moreover, neural
evidence has pointed to posterior parietal cortex as a locus
for the processing of magnitude, given its associations with
spatial (e.g., Sereno, Pitzalis, & Martinez, 2001), numerical
(e.g., Piazza et al., 2007), and temporal (e.g., Leon &
Shadlen, 2003) processing. Recent developmental findings
suggest that a general magnitude system may be operational
from early in life. Lourenco and Longo (2009) showed that
9-month-old infants generalized learning across size,
numerosity, and duration, suggesting early representations
of magnitude that are, to some degree, abstracted from any
specific dimension.
On a general magnitude account, evidence for the spatial
organization of number (e.g., Dehaene et al., 1993; Fischer
et al., 2003), duration (Vallesi et al., 2008; Vicario et al.,
2008), and size (Bonny & Lourenco, in preparation)
suggests that space may offer a representational template for
organizing magnitude, regardless of dimension. Across all
three magnitude dimensions, “more” (whether it be greater
numerosity, longer duration, or larger size) tends to be
processed more rapidly on the right side of space and “less”
on the left. Thus, spatial organization may be a property of
magnitude representation in general, rather than being
specific to representations within a given dimension.
In theory, countless dimensions of experience may be
characterized in terms of magnitude, from the clearly
defined (e.g., number) to the more abstract (e.g., happiness).
If magnitude representation is spatial in nature, a system
that draws on magnitude as a common language of
measurement (Lourenco & Longo, 2009) might recruit
space to organize information within any dimension, so long
as the information is defined in terms of more/less relations.
This possibility suggests an even more general cognitive
system that extends beyond the trio of dimensions – size,
number, and duration – typically conceived as dimensions
of magnitude. On this über-general account, even
information that is ostensibly quite different from size,
number, and duration might show left-to-right spatial
organization.
To investigate this possibility, we selected the domain of
emotion, which includes dimensions such as happiness,
angriness, surprise, etc. If space serves to organize
dimensions for which magnitude information may be
extracted, stimuli that denote “less” and “more” of a given
emotion (e.g., facial expressions that range from less happy

2402

to more happy) should be processed more rapidly on the left
and right side of space, respectively. This pattern of spatial
organization would support the notion that magnitude serves
as a shared vocabulary linking representations of seemingly
disparate dimensions of experience.
neutral

happy

very happy

extremely happy

Experiment 1: Number & Happiness
This experiment explored whether the dimension of
happiness, as indexed by facial expression, would show
spatial organization similar to that of number. Participants
completed both a number and a face task. The number task
was a replication of Dehaene et al. (1993, Exp. 1);
participants made parity (odd/even) judgments to numbers
ranging from 0 to 9. In the face task, participants made
gender judgments (male/female) to images of human faces
whose expressions ranged from neutral to extremely happy.
In both tasks, response choices were paired with left- and
right-side response keys. If spatial organization is not
specific to the dimensions of number, duration, and size, but
instead reflects an even more general representational
system for magnitude, the two tasks should produce
analogous response patterns. Specifically, faster right-side
responses should be observed as happiness increases in the
face task, mirroring faster right responses as numerosity
increases in the number task.

Method
Participants. 18 Emory
participated for course credit.

University

undergraduates

Materials. Number stimuli were Arabic numerals (0 to 9),
presented centrally on a computer screen in black on a white
background (Arial font, 25 x 15 mm). Face stimuli were
selected from the NimStim Face Stimulus Set (Tottenham et
al., in press). Images of six models (three male, three
female), each making four distinct facial expressions
(labeled neutral, happy, very happy, and extremely happy;
see Figure 1), were selected, for a total of 24 digital
grayscale images. Face stimuli (90 x 65 mm) were presented
centrally on a white background.
Procedure. Each participant completed both a number and a
face task (order counterbalanced). In the number task,
participants made odd or even judgments to numbers by
pressing one of two response keys on the computer
keyboard. Participants completed two blocks of trials: one
in which the even response was assigned to the left key and
the odd response to the right key, and one with the reverse
assignment (order counterbalanced). Each block began with
10 practice trials, with each number presented once. On test
trials, each number was presented nine times, for a total of
90 trials per block (random order).

extremely angry

angry

neutral

happy

extremely happy

Figure 1: The range of faces used in Exp. 1 (top row) and
Exp. 2 and 3 (bottom row), shown for one of the models.
Experiment 3 omitted the neutral face.
In the face task, participants made male or female
judgments to human faces varying in happiness by pressing
left and right response keys. For one block of trials, the
male response was assigned to the left key and the female
response to the right key; a second block used the reverse
assignment (order counterbalanced). Each block began with
12 practice trials, with each of the four facial expression
categories presented 3 times (with different models). On test
trials, each of the 24 unique face images was presented 4
times, for a total of 96 randomly ordered trials per block (24
trials of each facial expression category).
In both tasks, instructions emphasized speed and
accuracy. Each trial began with a fixation cross presented
centrally for 500 ms. The target stimulus (number or face)
followed and remained on screen until a response was made.

Results and Discussion
The overall error rates were 5.0% in the number task and
2.2% in the face task. Trials in which participants made an
incorrect response or in which the RT was greater than 2.5
SD from the participant’s mean were not included in the
analyses.
Following Dehaene et al. (1993), number magnitude was
collapsed across digit pairs: 0-1, 2-3, 4-5, 6-7, and 8-9.
Mean RTs for each participant were computed for left and
right responses separately for each digit pair in the number
task and for each facial expression category in the face task.
RT differences were computed by subtracting the mean RT
for the left response from the mean RT for the right
response. For the number task, these RT differences were
regressed on digit magnitude to determine the
unstandardized slope coefficient of the best-fitting linear
regression. If increasing numerosity shows a left-to-right
organization, smaller numbers should elicit relatively faster
left responses and larger numbers should elicit relatively
faster right responses, resulting in a negative slope.

2403

Figure 2: Mean RT difference between right and left
responses for the number (top panel) and face (bottom
panel) tasks in Exp. 1. Negative values indicate faster right
than left responses.
For the face task, the facial expression categories were
assigned increasing values from 1 to 4 (1 = neutral, 2 =
happy, 3 = very happy, 4 = extremely happy). RT
differences were regressed on these values, since the
“psychological distance” between differing degrees of
happiness is unknown.1 If the dimension of happiness shows
a similar left-to-right organization to that of number, less
happy faces should elicit relatively faster left responses and
more happy faces should elicit relatively faster right
responses, again resulting in a negative slope.
The average slope coefficients for the two tasks were
compared against zero. The slopes were -6.26 ms/digit (SD
= 10.18) for number and -9.19 ms/category (SD = 14.83) for
happiness.2 Both values reflect reliable mappings between
space and magnitude, t(17) = 2.61, p < .05 for number and
t(17) = 2.63, p < .05 for happiness (see Figure 2), indicating
that participants mapped values corresponding to “less” and
“more” onto left and right space, respectively, for both
1
While the values selected may not capture the true
psychological distance between points along the happiness
continuum, it should be noted that digit magnitude may similarly
be an imperfect measure of psychological distance for number. In
accordance with Weber’s law, the discriminability of two numbers
decreases as their magnitude increases (Moyer & Landauer, 1967).
2
When slopes in the face task were calculated as a function of
model, there was a negative slope for each of the six models,
suggesting that the effects observed were not due to specific items.

number and happiness. A 2 (dimension: number or
happiness) × 2 (task order) ANOVA showed no significant
main effect of task order or interaction (ps > .3).
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that the dimension of
happiness shows a similar pattern of spatial organization to
that of number. Rather than being specific to number (or
other traditional dimensions of magnitude, such as size and
duration), spatial organization may be invoked in the
processing of other dimensions for which differences in
magnitude may be a defining attribute. Intriguingly, spatial
organization was observed for happiness even though
participants’ responses were irrelevant to emotion. This
finding suggests automatic extraction of magnitude during
the processing of everyday stimuli such as numbers or faces,
and supports the notion of a highly general representational
system linking spatial orientation and magnitude.
An alternative explanation for the results of the face task
counters this conclusion. Since the facial expressions
differed not only in magnitude but also in emotional
valence, participants may have mapped values
corresponding to relatively more negative and relatively
more positive emotion to left and right space, respectively.
This possibility is consistent with recent findings of mental
associations between emotional valence and space
(Casasanto, in press).3 If faces were organized in terms of
valence, rather than magnitude, it might be concluded that
different factors underlie the spatial organization of number
and faces. Such a conclusion would argue against the
prediction that magnitude underlies the spatial organization
of dimensions other than number, duration, and size.
Experiment 2 was designed to discriminate between these
two possibilities.

Experiment 2:
Number & Happiness/Angriness
Experiment 2 examined more closely the pattern of
spatial organization of emotion observed in Experiment 1.
As in the first experiment, participants made gender
judgments to faces by pressing left and right response keys,
but this time the range of faces included both positive and
negative emotional expressions. If the left-to-right
organization of faces is due to the processing of magnitude
information, faster right responses should be observed as the
magnitude of either positive or negative emotion increases.
If, however, the observed pattern of spatial organization is
due to associations between valence and space, more
negative expressions should produce faster left responses
and more positive expressions should produce faster right
responses. To enable comparison of findings for number
3

Casasanto’s body-specificity hypothesis predicts that
handedness moderates associations between valence and space.
There was no correlation, however, between slope coefficients and
handedness, as measured by the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory,
in any of the three experiments reported here (all ps > .3). The
results of Exp. 2, showing that emotion is organized spatially in
terms of magnitude rather than valence, are also inconsistent with
Casasanto’s proposal.

2404

and emotion, participants also completed the same number
task as in Experiment 1.

Method
Participants. 30 Emory
participated for course credit.

University

undergraduates

Materials and Procedure. The number task was identical
to that in Exp. 1. The face task used images of the same six
models as in Exp. 1, but the facial expressions were
extremely angry, angry, neutral, happy, and extremely
happy (see Figure 1), for a total of 30 images.
As in Exp. 1, there were two blocks of trials, across which
response (male or female) and side of response (left or right)
were counterbalanced. Each block began with 10 practice
trials, with each of the five facial expressions presented
twice (once with a male model and once with a female
model). On test trials, each of the 30 face images was
presented three times, for a total of 90 randomly ordered
trials per block (18 trials of each facial expression category).
All other aspects were identical to Exp. 1.

Results and Discussion
The overall error rate was 5.1% in the number task and
2.5% in the face task. Data were trimmed and RT
differences calculated using previous criteria (see Exp. 1).
For the face task, the facial expression categories were
assigned values from -2 to 2 (-2 = extremely angry, -1 =
angry, 0 = neutral, 1 = happy, 2 = extremely happy). These
values enabled discrimination between two accounts: (a)
that angriness and happiness are processed as symmetrical
dimensions organized by magnitude; or (b) that they are
processed as a single dimension organized by valence. RT
differences (right minus left) were regressed on these
values. The average slope coefficients were -4.19 ms/digit
(SD = 6.62) for number and 3.27 ms/category (SD = 11.13)
for emotion. These values were significantly different from
zero in the case of number, t(29) = 3.47, p < .01, but not
emotion, t(29) = 1.61, p > .1.
To examine the pattern of spatial organization within each
dimension individually, the average slope coefficients for
angriness (extremely angry to angry) and happiness (happy
to extremely happy) were computed. Whereas the slope for
angriness was positive (29.35; SD = 51.78), the slope for
happiness was negative (-2.87; SD = 62.23), indicating that
right-side responses became faster with both increasing
angriness and increasing happiness (see Figure 3). These
findings suggest that participants treated happiness and
angriness separately, responding to emotion on the basis of
magnitude within each dimension rather than valence
(positive vs. negative). A 3 (dimension: number, happiness,
or angriness) × 2 (task order) ANOVA revealed no
significant main effects or interaction (ps > .05).
The results of Exp. 2 suggest that participants mapped
values of “less” and “more” onto left and right space,
respectively, for number, happiness, and angriness. The
findings counter the possibility that valence underlies the

Figure 3: Mean RT difference between right and left
responses for the face task in Exp. 2.
spatial organization of emotion. Instead, they suggest that
by default, people extract magnitude information across
different dimensions and organize this information spatially.
Even when multiple dimensions were intermixed, as in the
face task, people seemed to unpack them, mentally
organizing each in terms of “less” and “more.”
What factors determine how one conceptualizes “more”?
Not all contexts support the processing of magnitude across
multiple dimensions (e.g., happiness and angriness). In
everyday life, we often reason or make judgments within the
parameters of a single dimension. For example, a doctor
confronted with a room full of sick patients must decide
which are sickest in order to allocate her time appropriately.
In making this decision, other magnitude-related
information (e.g., patients’ varying levels of hunger, selfesteem, etc.) is irrelevant and should be ignored. Whereas
default conditions, like those in Experiment 2, might
support the extraction of magnitude across multiple
dimensions, contexts that suggest magnitude should be
conceptualized in terms of a single dimension might
promote dimension-specific processing. In this latter case,
only magnitude information relevant to the dimension in
question should show spatial organization. Experiment 3
addressed this prediction within emotion dimensions.

Experiment 3:
Dimension-Specific Processing of Magnitude
Experiment 3 was designed to examine how the spatial
organization of emotion is affected by context. As in the
first two experiments, participants were presented with faces
of varying emotional expression, but this time they made
explicit judgments about emotion, designed to promote
dimension-specific processing of magnitude. Across two
tasks, participants judged either happiness or angriness for
the same facial expressions. If, as predicted, the spatial
organization of magnitude is flexible and depends on how
magnitude is conceptualized, different patterns should be
observed for the two types of judgments. For happiness
judgments, participants should show relatively faster left
responses to angrier faces and relatively faster right
responses to happier faces; for angriness judgments, the

2405

reverse pattern should be observed. If, however, the spatial
organization of magnitude is impervious to such contextual
factors, the findings should resemble those of the previous
experiment, with right responses becoming relatively faster
as either happiness or angriness increases.

Method
Participants. 20 Emory
participated for course credit.

University

undergraduates

Materials and Procedure. The same face stimuli as in Exp.
2 were used (see Figure 1), except that the neutral
expression was omitted (since it is unlikely to be treated as
happy or angry), leaving a total of 24 images. Each
participant completed both a “happy = more” task and an
“angry = more” task (order counterbalanced). In the “happy
= more” task, participants judged whether each face was
“happy” or “not happy” by pressing left and right response
keys. In one block, the “happy” response was assigned to
the left key and the “not happy” response to the right key;
the other block used the reverse assignment (order
counterbalanced). The “angry = more” task was identical,
except that the responses were “angry” and “not angry.” As
in Exp. 1, there were 12 practice trials and 96 test trials.

Results and Discussion
The overall error rate was 5.6% in the happiness task and
5.5% in the angriness task. Data were trimmed and RT
differences calculated using previous criteria (see Exp. 1).
Across both tasks, the facial expression categories were
assigned values from 1 to 4 (1 = extremely angry, 2 = angry,
3 = happy, 4 = extremely happy).4 If the spatial organization
of emotion changes depending on one’s dimension-specific
representation of magnitude (e.g., whether one conceives of
“more” as being “more happy” or “more angry”), angrier
faces should elicit relatively faster left responses and
happier faces should elicit relatively faster right responses in
the “happy = more” task. The reverse pattern should be
observed in the “angry = more” task.
The average slope coefficients were -27.15 ms/category
(SD = 59.16) for the “happy = more” task and -11.58
ms/category (SD = 51.35) for the “angry = more” task, with
no significant difference between them. A 2 (task: “happy =
more” or “angry = more”) × 2 (task order) ANOVA
revealed a significant main effect of task order, F(1, 18) =
8.04, p = .011, but no interaction, F(1, 18) = .05, p > .8,
indicating that participants’ patterns of performance on the
first task carried over to the second task. Focusing only on
the first task completed, the average slope coefficients were
-44.15 (SD = 68.40) for the “happy = more” task and 11.67
(SD = 49.69) for the “angry = more” task, with a significant
difference between slopes, t(18) = 2.44, p < .05. Thus,
participants who completed the “happy = more” task first
4

Without the neutral category, there is no obvious reason to
split the angry and happy categories, as would have occurred had
the values from Exp. 2 (-2, -1, 1, 2) been used instead.

Figure 4: Mean RT difference between right and left
responses in Exp. 3, for the first task completed.
organized the face continuum from angry (left) to happy
(right). In contrast, those who completed the “angry =
more” task first showed the opposite pattern of spatial
organization (see Figure 4).
Whereas the first two experiments suggested a left-toright organization of magnitude across different dimensions,
the findings of Experiment 3 highlight the flexibility of this
organization. When context promotes dimension-specific
processing of magnitude, spatial organization adjusts
accordingly to the dimension in question. When making
judgments about happiness, for example, participants
conceptualized “more” specifically as “more happy,” and
the mapping of magnitude to space reflected this
representation. The findings suggest that representing
magnitude spatially may offer a flexible tool for the contextspecific mental organization of experience. Disparate
dimensions may be linked through extraction of their
common denominator: magnitude.

General Discussion
The mental number line has been regarded as a useful
metaphor for highlighting the spatial nature of numerical
representation. The present research suggests that the spatial
organization of number has in some sense been unjustifiably
privileged. Spatial organization appears not to be specific to
number, but rather a property of magnitude representation
more generally. The findings of three experiments revealed
a left-to-right organization of magnitude across dimensions,
mirroring similar findings for duration (Vallesi et al., 2008)
and size (Bonny & Lourenco, in preparation). What
distinguishes the present experiments from prior work is the
demonstration that spatial organization is recruited in the
processing of emotion, a domain strikingly unlike those
studied previously. Our findings suggest that vastly different
dimensions of experience may be processed more similarly
than previously thought, with magnitude perhaps serving as
a link between them. Moreover, spatial organization may be
deployed quite flexibly in magnitude representation, across
different dimensions and spatial frames of reference. While
the current paradigm specifically examined left-to-right
organization, it is possible that other spatial frames (e.g.,

2406

up/down, front/back) may also be recruited in the processing
of magnitude (Schwarz & Keus, 2004).
What are the origins of these commonalities in
processing? One possibility is that the relation between
space and number is prepotent to some extent, with other
dimensions of magnitude taking their spatial structure from
number. External spatial representations of number, such as
those on rulers and telephone keypads, are ubiquitous, and
left-to-right counting direction predicts SNARC-like effects
in preschoolers (Opfer & Thompson, 2006). In contrast,
there would seem to be little external support for placing
happier stimuli on the right side of space. This observation
suggests that there may be differences in the strength of
spatial organization across dimensions of magnitude. While
the present experiments did not allow for cross-dimension
comparisons of this type, such comparisons will be an
important avenue for future research.
Despite the wealth of evidence suggesting that
representations of number are spatially organized, an
alternative account – termed polarity correspondence –
argues that apparent associations between space and number
(or any dimension) merely reflect task-specific stimulusresponse (S-R) compatibility (e.g, Landy, Jones, &
Hummel, 2008). This account suggests that paradigms like
that of the SNARC effect promote the binary coding of
dimensions (e.g., “small/large” for number, “left/right” for
space), with one value more “dominant” than the other; on
this account, facilitation occurs when dominant stimulus
values (e.g., “large”) map onto dominant response values
(e.g., “right”). While polarity correspondence may be
sufficient to explain the canonical SNARC effect, it cannot
account for other robust associations between space and
number that do not rely on S-R compatibility, such as the
finding that number processing elicits involuntary shifts in
spatial attention (Fischer et al., 2003), and it is unclear how
binary codes would be assigned to information spanning
multiple dimensions (as with happy and angry in Exp. 2).
Magnitude is pervasive in everyday experience. It is a
property not only of information gleaned from the senses,
but also of facets of experience that are more elusive. The
findings reported here suggest that distinct dimensions of
experience may share the common representational format
of space, with magnitude as their organizing factor.
Consistent with accounts of the spatial representation of
abstract concepts (e.g., Lakoff & Johnson, 1980), our
findings suggest that space may offer a representational
template for making sense of the seemingly intangible.

Acknowledgments
We thank Phil Wolff for comments on the paper, Laura
Namy for valuable discussion, and Lulu Kaiali and Jeong
Min Lee for help with data collection. This research was
supported by a William Orr Dingwall Fellowship to KJH.

References

Casasanto, D. (in press). Embodiment of abstract concepts:
Good and bad in right and left handers. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Fischer, M. H., Castel, A. D., Dodd, M. D., & Pratt, J.
(2003). Perceiving numbers causes spatial shifts of
attention. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 555-556.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Landy, D. H., Jones, E. L., & Hummel, J. E. (2008). Why
spatial-numeric associations aren’t evidence for a mental
number line. In B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 357-362). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Leon, M. I., & Shadlen, M. N. (2003). Representation of
time by neurons in the posterior parietal cortex of the
macaque. Neuron, 38, 317-327.
Lourenco, S. F., & Longo, M. R. (2009, under review).
General magnitude representation in human infants.
Moyer, R. S., & Landauer, T. K. (1967). Time required for
judgments of numerical inequality. Nature, 215, 1519-1520.
Opfer, J. E., & Thompson, C. A. (2006). Even early
representations of numerical magnitude are spatially
organized: Evidence for a directional magnitude bias in
pre-reading preschoolers. In R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 639-644). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Piazza, M., Pinel, P., Le Bihan, D., & Dehaene, S. (2007). A
magnitude code common to numerosities and number
symbols in human intraparietal cortex. Neuron, 53, 293-305.
Schwarz, W., & Keus, I. M. (2004). Moving the eyes along
the mental number line: Comparing SNARC effects with
saccadic and manual responses. Perception &
Psychophysics, 66, 651-664.
Sereno, M. I., Pitzalis, S., & Martinez, A. (2001). Mapping
of contralateral space in retinotopic coordinates by a
parietal cortical area in humans. Science, 294, 1350-1354.
Tottenham, N., Tanaka, J., Leon, A. C., McCarry, T., Nurse,
M., Hare, T. A., et al. (in press). The NimStim set of
facial expressions: Judgments from untrained research
participants. Psychiatry Research.
Vallesi, A., Binns, M. A., & Shallice, T. (2008). An effect
of spatial-temporal association of response codes:
Understanding the cognitive representations of time.
Cognition, 107, 501-527.
Vicario, C. M., Pecoraro, P., Turriziani, P., Koch, G.,
Caltagirone, C., & Oliveri, M. (2008). Relativistic
compression and expansion of experiential time in the left
and right space. PLoS ONE, 3, e1716.
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: Common cortical
metrics of time, space and quantity. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 483-488.

Bonny, J., & Lourenco, S. F. (in preparation). The
association of size and number in space.

2407

