UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Representations of Number and Size
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/05c8v3r7
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Bonny, Justin W.
Lourenco, Stella F.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                       Spatial Representations of Number and Size
                                                  Justin W. Bonny
                                                    Emory University
                                                 Stella F. Lourenco
                                                    Emory University
Abstract: Recent research supports a common magnitude system that underlies the dimensions of number, space,
and time (Walsh, 2003). In a classic study, Dehaene, Bossini, and Giraux (1993) demonstrated that adult participants
were faster at making judgments about small and large numbers when responding on the left and right side of space,
respectively. More recently, a similar left-to-right orientation was found for time (i.e., short duration on the left and
faster duration on the right). Here we examined the spatial representation of size information. Participants completed
tasks with different numbers (1 9) and different sized circles (9 sizes), making judgments with their left and right
hands. In Experiment 1, participants made explicit magnitude judgments, and a similar left-to-right orientation
was found for both number and size. In Experiment 2, participants made judgments unrelated to magnitude, and
only number appeared to be oriented from left-to-right. Together, these findings suggest that whereas size may be
mentally represented in a left-to-right orientation, this spatial organization may be weighted less strongly than that
for number.
                                                            933

