UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Statistical Word Learning and Object Categorization: A Cross-Linguistic Study in English and
Mandarin

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2ws929hp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Chen, Chi-hsin
Cheung, Hintat
Wu, Chih-Yi
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Statistical Word Learning and Object Categorization: A Cross-Linguistic Study in
English and Mandarin
Chi-hsin Chen, Chen Yu ({chen75, chenyu}@indiana.edu)
Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Chih-Yi Wu, Hintat Cheung
Graduate Institute of Linguistics, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 10617 Taiwan
has a certain shape. For example, from the patterns that he
learned, he may then predict that forks are all fork-shaped.
In previous research on object categorization (e.g.,
Sloutsky et al., 2001), the participants were often taught the
names for novel objects and then asked whether two objects
belonged to the same category or different categories. The
testing objects might either share the same label or have
different names. The participants were expected to group
together the objects with the same names. However, giving
identical labels to the same-category objects corresponds to
the condition of giving a basic or super-ordinate label to its
members. It is unclear whether learners are able to use more
fine-grained cues, such as the phonological features of the
labels, in object categorization.
Unlike derivational and inflectional morphology in IndoEuropean languages, compounding plays a major role in
Chinese word formation (Li and Thompson, 1981). In
modern Mandarin, names of objects are often disyllabic
compounds. Items belonging to a category often contain the
name of that category, with the first syllable as the modifier
and the second syllable as the head of a compound. In other
words, items belonging to the same category often share a
final syllable signifying the label of the category. For
example, in English, the words “pork”, “beef”, and
“chicken” do not share any constituent in their forms. In
Mandarin, however, they share a final syllable, rou4 (meat).
The second syllables of the words zhu1rou4 (pork),
niu2rou4 (beef), and ji1rou4 (chicken) indicate that they
belong to the category of “meat”. Given that words ending
with the same syllable are likely to belong to the same
category, one strategy is to form categories based on the
phonological forms of the labels. For this reason, Mandarin
speakers might be more likely to use the linguistic features
of labels in object categorization than their English-speaking
counterparts.
To examine participants’ sensitivity to the phonological
features of labels in word learning process, we adopted the
cross-situational word learning paradigm, a statistical
learning paradigm proposed by Yu & Smith (2007). In their
study, the authors presented adults with a set of learning
trials, with multiple words and multiple pictures within each
trial. To successfully solve the word-referent mapping
problem, the participants needed to track the co-occurring
statistics between words and pictures across trials. They
found that adults could rapidly learn the word-referent
mappings in highly ambiguous learning situations (see also
Smith & Yu, 2008, for an infant version). This experimental
paradigm provides an ideal learning context to examine

Abstract
Previous research has shown that both adult and infant
learners are able to learn the first-order regularities between
individual words and objects under a cross-situational
learning context. The present study further investigates
whether, in addition to the first-order word-referent
associations, adult learners are also sensitive to the secondorder correlations between the phonological features of labels
and the visuo-perceptual features of objects and whether they
can use such features as a cue in categorizing novel objects.
Two experiments were conducted to examine whether native
speakers of English and Mandarin Chinese performed
differently when exposed to training data that either reflected,
or were inconsistent with, the linguistic features in their
native language. We found that when the training stimuli
reflected the linguistic structures of their native language,
both English and Mandarin speakers were able to use the
phonological features of labels as a cue in object
categorization. Moreover, our results also suggest bidirectional real-time interactions between learning the firstorder word-referent mappings and the higher-order mappings
between phonological features in labels and perceptual
features in visual objects.
Keywords: word learning; statistical learning, object
categorization

Introduction
The ability to categorize enables us to efficiently deal with
the enormous amount of information provided by the
environment. Previous studies have shown that object
categorization and early word learning bootstrap each other
(e.g., Yoshida & Smith, 2005; Yu, 2005). The cues that can
be used in word learning and categorization include visuoperceptual cues (e.g., Soja et al., 1991; Colunga & Smith,
2003), social-pragmatic cues (e.g., Baldwin et al. 1996;
Tomasello & Akhtar 1995), and linguistic cues (e.g.,
Colunga & Smith, 2003; Yu, 2005). Among these cues,
linguistic labels play an important role in guiding
categorization (e.g., Colunga & Smith, 2003; Plunkett et al.,
2008; Sloutsky et al., 2001, Waxman & Braun, 2005).
Colunga and Smith (2003) proposed that there are three
steps in the process of early categorization. In the first step,
a child learns to associate labels to individual objects
without realizing that some referents might share the same
name. For example, a child may use the word “ball” to refer
to both a rubber ball and a basketball, and the word “cup”
for a big white cup and a smaller red one. In the second
phase, the child notices that each linguistic label refers to
objects that have something in common, in this case, their
shapes. For example, the objects with the name “ball” are all
round and the things with the name “cup” are all cupshaped. After that, he may generalize that every solid object
555

whether, in addition to learning the first-order correlations
between individual labels and objects, learners are also able
to extract higher-order regularities between the linguistic
features of labels and certain shared visual features of
category members.
The goal of this study was to investigate whether adults
were sensitive to the phonological features of labels under
statistical learning conditions in which the final syllables
(Experiment 1) or the first syllables (Experiment 2) of labels
were correlated with certain visual features of the objects.
Furthermore, we examined whether native speakers of
English and Mandarin performed differently in the learning
task.

The objects used in the training were divided into three
different categories, with six objects in each category.
Members in a category had an attached part that looked
similar. Take the objects in Figure 1 as an example, items in
this category all had an attached spiral part that spread at the
end.
Objects in a category had labels with identical final
syllables. For example, objects in Figure 1 and other
members in that same category all had a name that ended
with the syllable –ti in the English stimuli (and the syllable
–ti2 in the Mandarin stimuli).
English
Mandarin

Experiment 1
In this experiment, we investigated whether adults were able
to use the final syllables of labels in object categorization
under a cross-situational learning context (Yu & Smith,
2007), in which the participants had to keep track of wordobject co-occurrences across trials in order to find the
correct word-referent mappings. In addition, we tested
whether native speakers of English and Mandarin Chinese
performed differently when they encountered different types
of linguistic data: English-like pseudo-words and Mandarinlike pseudo-words. In Mandarin, the high frequency and the
head-final feature of compound nouns (i.e., the final
component of a compound noun determines its semantic
category) allow the speakers to identify category
membership from the final syllable of a word, while in
English, the final syllables of object labels is not a reliable
cue to category membership. Therefore, speakers of these
two languages might perform differently in the
categorization task. More specifically, Mandarin-like
pseudo-words might cue Mandarin speakers to the
compound noun patterns in their native language and this
might facilitate learning. In contrast, English speakers might
not benefit from it.

“lati”
“la1ti2”

English
Mandarin

“feti”
“fe3ti2”

Figure 1 Sample objects and labels used in the study
To avoid the problem that some final syllables might be
more attractive than others, we used two sets of stimuli in
each language. Set A and Set B were English-like pseudowords while Set C and Set D were Mandarin-like pseudowords. The stimuli in Set A and Set B were matched in their
first syllables while different final syllables were used. The
same design was applied to the stimuli in Set C and Set D.
More importantly, under the constraint of using legal
syllables (i.e., following the phonological rules of either
English or Mandarin), the stimuli in Set C were closely
matched to their counterparts in Set A in their phonetic
features while the stimuli in Set D were matched to those in
Set B. Thus, Set C and Set D could be viewed as the
Mandarin version of Set A and Set B with additional tonal
information, though the tonal information did not serve any
contrastive function in the current study 1 . The auditory
input was based on natural human voices generated by
AT&T Natural Voices (for English-like pseudo-words) and
InterPhonic by iFLYTEK (for Mandarin pseudo-words)
with modification of the speed, pitch, loudness, and lengths
of individual syllables.

Participants
Participants were 48 English-speaking undergraduates at
Indiana University who received course credit for
volunteering and 46 native speakers of Mandarin recruited
from National Taiwan University, Taiwan.

Design and Stimuli
We used a 2*2 between-subject design with the native
language of the participants (English vs. Mandarin) and the
types of linguistic stimuli (English-like pseudo-words vs.
Mandarin pseudo-words) as between-subject factors.
Participants were trained under a cross-situational
learning paradigm in which they were presented with 4
novel objects and 4 novel labels in each trial. However, they
were not provided with the information about which object
was matched to which label. In order to find the correct
mappings, they had to keep track of the co-occurrence
regularities between objects and labels across different
trials. There were a total of 18 object-label mappings to
learn. Over the training procedure, there were 12 repetitions
per instance, yielding a total of 54 trials (18 pairs x 12
repetitions / 4 pairs per trial).

Procedure
There were two phases in this experiment, the Training
phase and the Testing phase. In the Training phase, the
participants were presented with slides, each containing 4
objects and 4 auditory labels. However, the labels in each
1

We also tried to have the tones of the Mandarin-like pseudowords distributed evenly. Among these six categories of labels (3
categories * 2 sets), one category had the final syllable in Tone 1,
two categories in Tone 2, another one in Tone 3, and two in Tone
4. As to the first syllables of the labels, in each linguistic set, four
words had the first syllable in Tone 1 and Tone 3, respectively, and
five words in Tone 2 and Tone 4, respectively. To avoid the tone
sandhi problem, none of the Mandarin pseudo-words had the Tone
3+ Tone 3 combination.

556

trial were presented in a random order. Therefore, the
learners could not tell the label of an object within one
single trial. Nevertheless, the probability of an object given
its label was always 1.0. As long as the learners kept track
of the co-occurrences between objects and labels, they
should have been able to find out the correct object-label
mappings. Moreover, they might notice a higher-level
statistical regularity between object-parts and the final
syllables of labels. The category-syllable association might
in turn facilitate the word and meaning mapping.
After training, there were two tasks in the Testing
session, the word-object Mapping task and the
Generalization task. The Mapping task tested how well the
participants learned the names of the training objects. The
participants were presented with one word at a time and
were instructed to select its referent from 4 alternatives.
There were 18 trials in the Mapping task.
In the Generalization task, the participants heard one
novel word on each trial and were asked to select its referent
from three alternatives, each containing the object-part that
corresponded to the particular feature of one category. For
example, a participant might be presented with a novel label
“joti,” which rhymed with the labels of the training objects
with a spiral part, like those in Figure 1, and asked to select
its referent from three novel objects, one of which had the
spiral part. If the participant chose that object, this indicates
that he might have acquired the relationships between the
final syllables of labels and the corresponding perceptual
features of the categories. There were 9 trials in the
Generalization task (3 for each category).

Proportion Correct

English speakers trained with the English stimuli and the
Mandarin speakers trained with the English stimuli both
yielded near-significant differences (E-E: p = .065, M-E: p
= .103).
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

English speaker-English stimuli
English Speaker-Mandarin Stimuli
Mandarin speaker-English stimuli
Mandarin speaker-Mandarin stimuli

------------------- chance
------------------- chance

Mapping

Task

Generalization

Figure 2: Proportion of accurate responses in Experiment 1
To the question of whether the numbers of words learned
correlated with how likely the participants used final
syllables as a cue in generalization, we found significant
correlations in all subject-stimuli conditions (E-E: r = .558;
E-M: r = .569; M-E: r = .416; M-M: r = .876, ps< .05).

Discussion
Like previous studies on cross-situational learning,
participants in this study were able to learn the first-order
regularities between labels and objects (i.e., individual
word-referent mappings), regardless of the language in
which they were trained. Even though the labels in each
category only differed in their first syllables and had the
second syllables in common, the participants were still able
to perform above chance after 10 minutes of training. In
addition to learning the mappings between individual labels
and pictures, Mandarin speakers trained with Mandarin-like
pseudo-words, were also able to learn the second-order
correlations, in which the final syllables of labels correlated
with certain visual features of objects. In order to find the
second-order correlations, the learners might have to figure
out several correct word-referent mappings before they
could see the higher-order patterns.
In general, participants learned better with the stimuli
that followed the phonological rules of their own native
language. This suggests that the familiarity of the
phonological structures of the pseudo-words used in the
training might influence word learning. Those trained with a
set of stimuli that followed the phonological rules of a
foreign language might need more time to get familiarized
with the stimuli before they could start learning the
mappings between objects and their names.
As to the performance of generalization, only Mandarin
speakers trained with Mandarin-like pseudo-words (i.e., the
M-M group) performed significantly above chance.
Meanwhile, the M-M group was not the group that
performed the best in the Mapping task. Thus, the native
language of the participants seemed to be a key factor that
influenced the participants’ use of final syllables in the
Generalization task. In Mandarin, as compared to English,
the final syllable of an object label is a more reliable cue to
category membership. Mandarin speakers might therefore
pay more attention to the forms of labels than their English

Results
As illustrated on the left-hand side of Figure 2, participants
learned more word-referent mappings than expected by
chance. Even the group with the lowest accuracy, English
speakers tested with Mandarin stimuli, performed
significantly above chance (t(23) = 2.41, p = .024). We
performed a 2*2 ANOVA with the native language of the
participants and the language of the stimuli as betweensubject variables. We found a significant interaction (F(1,
90) = 5.204, p = .025). Participants performed better when
they were trained with the pseudo-words that followed the
phonological features of their own native language. On the
other hand, we did not find any main effect of the
participants’ native language (F(1, 90) = .026, n.s.) or the
language of the stimuli (F(1, 90) = 2.384, n.s.). Post-hoc
analyses using Bonferroni correction showed that English
speakers trained with English-like pseudo-words (i.e., the EE group) performed significantly better than their Englishspeaking counterparts trained with Mandarin-like stimuli
(the E-M group, p = .045). Even though Mandarin speakers
trained with English stimuli (the M-E group) did not learn
as well as those trained with Mandarin stimuli (the M-M
group), the difference did not reach statistical significance.
In the Generalization task, only Mandarin speakers
trained with Mandarin-like pseudo-words performed
significantly above chance (t(21) = 3.341, p = .003).
Nevertheless, compared to chance level, the scores of the

557

counterparts did. This might facilitate their use of this
feature in categorizing novel objects. However, it is not to
say that the native language of the participants was the sole
factor that influenced their use of such cue. The number of
words learned might be another factor that influenced their
generalization. From the correlation analyses, the numbers
of correct answers the participants provided in the Mapping
task were positively correlated with the numbers of correct
responses that they provided in the Generalization task.
It is worth mentioning that from the results of this
experiment, we were not able to tell whether the participants
took the final syllables as category markers or whether the
participants only associated those syllables with objectparts. If final syllables were viewed as category markers,
they might then directly guide categorization. On the other
hand, if the learners only formed associations between
shared syllables and object-parts, this association might
influence categorization indirectly, in that shared sounds
highlighted the similarities among certain objects. These
shared phonological features might then help the
participants pay attention to the right visual properties of
objects in the Generalization task.
As we predicted, English speakers did not use final
syllables as a cue in the Generalization task, perhaps
because a label’s final syllable is not a reliable cue for
judging category membership in English. But what would
they do if the training data reflect the linguistic
characteristics in their native language? Even though in
English, compounding is not as frequent as it is in
Mandarin, both languages have similar noun phrase
structures in that an adjective in a noun phrase is placed
before the head noun (e.g., “red car”). Moreover, in phrases
like red car, red hat, and red book, the first syllables (i.e.,
the first words in this case) indicate that these objects have
something in common. Similar structures can be found in
Mandarin. For example, the first syllables in the phrases,
hong2-che1 (red car), hong2-mao4 (red hat), and hong2shu1 (red book), indicate that these things are same in
colors. Therefore, if, instead of using final syllables, we put
the category markers in the first syllables to simulate the
noun phrase structures in these languages, would English
speakers still perform differently from their Mandarinspeaking counterparts?

Participants
Participants were 48 English-speaking adults and 41
Mandarin-speaking adults. None of them participated in
Experiment 1.

Design and Stimuli
The visual stimuli in Experiment 2 were identical to those in
Experiment 1. New sets of linguistic stimuli were used in
which the category markers were placed in the first syllables
of labels. For example, objects in one category might all
had their labels beginning with the syllable jo- while the
members of another category might have labels starting with
the syllable che-. Again, the English-like pseudo-words and
the Mandarin-like pseudo-words were closely matched in
their phonetic features. In addition, there were two sets of
stimuli in each language to avoid the problem that some
syllables might be more attractive than others.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to that in Experiment 1. The
participants were trained under a cross-situational learning
paradigm using a 4*4 presentation, with a total of 18 wordpicture pairs to learn. After the training, the participants
were first tested with the mappings between the trained
objects and labels. Following the Mapping task, they were
then presented with one novel label at a time and were asked
to choose its referent from 3 novel objects, each containing
the object-part of a particular category.

Results
Again, the participants performed significantly above
chance in the Mapping task (proportion correct: E-E: .60; EM: .49; M-E: .56; M-M: .53). We conducted a 2*2
ANOVA with the native language of the participants and the
language of the stimuli as between-subject variables. We did
not find any main effect or interaction.
In the Generalization task, the Mandarin speakers
performed significantly above chance, regardless of their
training data (M-E: t(20) = 4.480 p < .001, M-M: t(19) =
4.703, p < .001). The English speakers trained with the
English stimuli also performed significantly above chance
(t(23) = 5.839, p < 001). Compared to chance, the difference
scores of the E-M group (English speakers trained with
Mandarin stimuli) were near-significant (t(23) = 1.869, p =
.074). A two-way ANOVA using the native language of the
participants and the language of the stimuli as betweensubject variables indicated that there was no significant
difference among the participants in different conditions in
the Generalization task.
We also found strong correlations between the numbers of
words learned and the numbers of responses using the first
syllables of labels as a cue in the Generalization task. This
suggests that the more one learned, the more likely the
person was to use the first syllable as a cue in categorizing
novel objects. (English speakers: r = .667, p < .001;
Mandarin speakers: r = .631, p < .001).
Comparing the performance of the participants in
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 in the Mapping task, we
used a 3-way ANOVA with experiment (Experiment 1 vs.
Experiment 2), native language of the participants (English

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 revealed that in general English speakers did
not take final syllables of labels as a cue in categorizing
novel objects. One possible explanation is that the
phonological forms of labels is not a reliable cue for
categorization in their language environment and this leads
to their insensitivity to the relationships between the final
syllables of labels and the visual features of objects in the
training data. In the second experiment, we designed a
learning condition that that simulated a linguistic structure
similar in both languages, in which the category markers
were placed in the first syllables of labels. In this
experiment, members of a category had a similar objectpart. Their labels also began with the same syllable.

558

Proportion Correct

vs. Mandarin), and the language of the stimuli (English vs.
Mandarin) as between-subject variables. We found a
significant main effect of experiment (F(1,175) = 5.636, p
= .019) and significant interaction between the native
language of the participants and the language of the stimuli
(F(1, 175) = 4.061, p = .045).As shown in Figure 3,
participants in Experiment 2 learned better than those in
Experiment 1, which was true for participants in all
conditions. Moreover, learners trained with their own native
language tended to perform better than those trained with a
foreign language.
As to the participants’ performance in the Generalization
task, we conducted another 3-way ANOVA using
experiment (Experiment 1 vs. Experiment 2), native
language of the participants (English vs. Mandarin) and the
language of the stimuli (English vs. Mandarin) as betweensubject variables. Participants in Experiment 2 were more
likely to use the phonological features of labels in
generalization than their counterparts in Experiment 1 (F(1,
175) = 4.216, p = .042). However, we did not find any
significant main effect of the participants’ native language
or the language of the stimuli, nor did we find any
interaction. As Figure 4 illustrates, participants in
Experiment 2 performed better than those in Experiment 1.
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Exp 1
Exp 2

-------------------------------------------------- chance

E-E

E-M

M-E

Mapping: Exp 1 vs Exp 2

M-M

General Discussion

Proportion Correct

Figure 3 Comparison of participants’ performance in the
Mapping task
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Exp 1
Exp 2

---------------------------------------------------------- chance

E-E

E-M

M-E

Generalization: Exp 1 vs Exp 2

in the noun phrase structures might lead to similar
performance of speakers of these two languages.
Similar to the pattern seen in Experiment 1, the number of
words learned played an important role in the participants’
performance in the Generalization task. The more a person
learned, the more likely he/she was to use the phonological
features of labels in categorizing novel objects. This makes
sense since learners might need a certain number of correct
word-referent pairs to infer the relationship between the
phonological features of labels and the visual features of
objects. Moreover, discovering the relationship between
these cues might also help word learning. Taken together,
there might be a bi-directional feedback loop between the
mapping task and the categorization task.
Participants in Experiment 2 performed significantly
better in both Mapping and Generalization tasks than their
counterparts in Experiment 1 did. There are two possible
explanations to this pattern and both predict that the gain
from (partial) knowledge about categories help wordreferent mappings. The first one is that the adjective-like
first syllables facilitate the learners’ attention to the visual
features of objects to a greater extent than the final syllables
do. On the other hand, it has been suggested that first
syllables are more salient in speech processing (e.g.,
Jusczyk et al., 1999). Therefore, the second possibility is
that it might be easier to learn category membership when
the category markers lie in the first syllables. From the
current study, we are not able to determine which of the
explanations better accounts for the data. It is also possible
that the effects found in the study resulted from both
processes.

M-M

Figure 4 Comparison of participants’ performance in the
Generalization task

Discussion
The results from Experiment 2 showed that participants
were able to learn the mappings between labels and pictures
under a highly ambiguous learning context. Moreover, both
English-speakers, especially those trained with English-like
pseudo-words, and Mandarin-speakers were able to use the
first syllables of labels as a cue in object categorization.
This indicated that changing the stimuli to simulate the
linguistic features in the participants’ environment might
influence the participants’ use of such features in various
tasks. Since both English and Mandarin have adjectives
placed before the head nouns in noun phrases, the similarity

559

This study shows that in addition to learning the first-order
statistical regularities under a highly ambiguous learning
context, adult learners were also able to infer the secondorder correlations between the phonological features of
labels and the visual features of objects. That is, in addition
to learning the individual mappings between labels and
objects, the participants were also able to detect that
members of a category had a shared phonological feature in
their labels and a similar object-part. Furthermore, the more
words a participant learned, the more likely he/she was to
use the phonological features as a cue in the Generalization
task. In addition to pure co-occurrence statistics, prior
linguistic experiences also seemed to have an impact on
one’s sensitivity to different aspects of statistical regularities
in the same training data. The fact that the participants in
Experiment 2 performed better in both the Mapping and
Generalization tasks indicates that word learning and object
categorization might bootstrap each other. That is, finding
the mappings between some word-object pairs helps the
learners notice that objects with labels that share the same
first or second syllables have something in common in their
visual appearances. This just acquired knowledge might in
turn help the learning of other words, in which the learners
could use this information to rule out certain candidates or

to decide what a potential referent of a word should look
like or what a potential label of an object should sound like.
The results from the current study are consistent with the
proposal of the Attentional Learning Account (e.g., Colunga
& Smith, 2008). According to the Attentional Learning
Account, statistical regularities in the environment direct
learners’ attention to certain predictive cues. Furthermore,
this weighted attention then influences or guides future
learning. Yet, the first-order regularity in the input is not the
only information that the learners attend to. They also pay
attention to higher-order correlations in the whole system, as
it is evident from the performance differences between the
English- and Mandarin-speakers in the current study.
However, it does not mean that learning is determined by
what is in the environment. Momentary information
processed in real-time learning also causes “contextually
cued dynamic shifts in attention” (Colunga & Smith, 2008,
p. 197). As can be seen from the current study, the positive
correlations between the numbers of words learned and the
numbers of responses using the phonological features in
generalization indicate that the statistical regularities in the
experimental setting might also induce the English speakers’
use of final syllables in categorization, even though it is not
a reliable cue from their language experiences.
As the statistical regularities were the same for all sets of
stimuli in both experiments and one could only distinguish
the members of one category solely from one syllable in the
labels (i.e., first syllable in Experiment 1 and second
syllable in Experiment 2), participants in different
conditions did not perform the same. The design of the
current study, an extension of the standard cross-situational
paradigm to different linguistic stimuli and with speakers
from different linguistic environments, also shows that
statistical regularity is not the only factor that influences
learning. The factors such as the familiarity of the
phonological features of the pseudo-words and how the
training data reflect the regularities in participants’ language
experiences might all influence how one learns those
regularities. Even though the English-like and the
Mandarin-like stimuli were closely matched in phonetic
features, the Mandarin-like stimuli actually provided
additional tonal information that could be used in
distinguishing each individual labels. In spite of the fact that
the tonal information did not serve any contrastive function
in the study and that they actually provided additional
information, the unfamiliarity to the phonological features
of Mandarin stimuli might have a negative effect on the
English speakers’ learning of individual words and this
might in turn affect their performance in the Generalization
task. Also, we are not able to determine the factor that leads
to significant increase in correct responses in Experiment 2
Further investigation is needed to address these issues.

by a scholarship from the National Science Council of
Taiwan (NSC-095-SAF-I-564-077-TMS). We thank Lisa
Gershkoff-Stowe, Amy Perfors, and three anonymous
reviewers for comments and suggestions. We also thank
Daniel Yurovsky for discussion and editorial assistance.

References
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M., Bill, B., Desjardins, R.
N., Irwin, J. M. & Tidball, G. (1996). Infant’s reliance
on a social criterion for establishing word–object
relations. Child Development, 67, 3135-3153.
Colunga, E. and Smith, L. B. (2003). The emergence of
abstract ideas: Evidence from networks and babies.
Philosophical Transactions, 358, 1205-1214.
Colunga, E. and Smith, L. B. (2008). Knowledge embedded
in process: the self-organization of skilled noun
learning. Developmental Science, 11(2), 195-203.
Jusczyk, P. W., Houston, D., & Newsome, M. (1999). The
beginning of word segmentation in English-speaking
infants. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 159-207.
Li, C. N. and Thompson, S. A. (1981). Mandarin Chinese:
A Functional Reference Grammar. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Plunkett, K., Hu, J.-F., Cohen, L. B. (2008). Labels can
override perceptual categories in early infancy.
Cognition, 106, 665-681.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y-F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar?
Linguistic labels, similarity, and the development of
inductive inference. Child Development, 72(6), 16951709.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
and Samuelson, L. (2002). Object name learning
provides
on-the-job
training
for
attention.
Psychological Science, 13 (1), 13-19.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Soja, N. N., Carey, S., and Spelke, E. S. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meaning: Object terms and substance terms. Cognition,
38, 179-211.
Tomasello, M. & Akhtar, N. (1995). Two-year-olds use
pragmatic cues to differentiate reference to objects and
actions. Cognitive Development, 10, 201-224.
Waxman, S. R., & Braun, I. (2005). Consistent (but not
variable) names as invitations to form object
categories: new evidence from 12-month-old infants.
Cognition, 95, B59-B68.
Yoshida, H. and Smith, L. B. (2005). Linguistic cues
enhance the learning of perceptual cues. Psychological
Science, 16 (2), 90-95.
Yu, C. (2005). The emergence of links between lexical
acquisition and object categorization: a computational
study. Connection science, 17, 381-397.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty
via
cross-situational
statistics.
Psychological Science, 18(5), 414-420.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Institute of Health
Grant R01HD056029, National Science Foundation Grant
BCS 0544995, and National Science Council Grant NSC962411-H-002-068-MY3. The first author was also supported

560

