UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Strategies for the exploration of ornament performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82k3q0tt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Desain, Peter
Sadakata, Makiko
Timmers, Renee

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Strategies for the exploration of ornament performance
Renee Timmers (r.timmers@sheffield.ac.uk)
Department of Music, University of Sheffield
34 Leavygreave Road
Sheffield, S3 7RD UK

Makiko Sadakata (m.sadakata@donders.ru.nl)
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen
Montessorilaan 3
6525 HR Nijmegen NL

Peter Desain (p.desain@donders.ru.nl)
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen
Montessorilaan 3
6525 HR Nijmegen NL

Abstract
Performing music is a creative process, even if notated music
is performed. It is creative in the sense that performers have
to establish and refine an interpretation of the music, given
the under-specification of western notation and the aesthetic
demands to provide an individual, but coherent,
interpretation. Part of the practice is to explore interpretations
and refine a chosen interpretation. Focusing in on this
process, we asked student pianists to explore different ways
of performing a musical ornament in order to improve their
ability to imitate example performances of the ornaments,
which was tested before and after the exploration training.
Within the exploration training, participants showed a variety
of strategies to explore ornament performance, varying the
time-steal characteristics, the accenting pattern or the time
inserted to add an ornament. Principle-component-analysis
was used to define these strategies and loadings on the factors
of exploration were used to define trajectories of exploration.
This procedure highlighted strong differences between the
tendencies of participants to explore the performance space
defined by a factor. While some participants explored the
entire factor, the performances of other participants remained
within a specific area of interpretation. Wide exploration and
jumps in interpretation were generally associated.
Nevertheless, some participants combined small inter-trial
changes with wide exploration, suggesting exploration
through refinements. The results of the study are limited to
the interpretation of a specific musical element. Nevertheless,
parallel strategies seem to exist in music performance in
general, opening educational possibilities for training these
skills as well as providing direction for wider investigation of
creative strategies in performance.
Keywords: music performance; creativity; cognitive strategy;
ornament timing.

Introduction
Creativity in performance of western classical music is
related to the interpretation of music as it is notated in a
score. Although music notation restricts the potential
creativity of musicians compared to the creative possibilities
in, for example, improvised music, performing music from a

score nevertheless provides musicians considerable
expressive freedom. Although the performed notes may be
the same, the timing of simultaneous and sequential events
is varied, as well as the intensity of events, the duration,
and, for most instruments, the intonation of events. Taken
together the combinatorial possibilities for expression are
endless.
To some extent, performers tend to explore only a
particular area of the hypothetically possible performances.
This is suggested by found performance rules (e.g.
Sundberg, Askenfelt, Frydén, 1983; Todd, 1985; 1992;
Repp, 1992a; 1992b). These performance rules define
“styles of thought” or conceptual spaces, in the terminology
of Boden (2004), that can in themselves be explored.
Moreover, over the decades, performance styles change
considerably (e.g. Philip, 1992) and even on an individual
level, performers can markedly be innovative, indicating in
Boden’s terms “transformations of the conceptual space”.
A special instance of performance expression relates to
the interpretation of musical elements whose notation is
underspecified. This concerns music notation in general,
however it concerns ornamental notes in particular.
Ornaments are notated by symbols that indicate the kind of
ornament, but do not contain an explicit rhythmic
prescription that is otherwise used in music notation.
Several conventions have been established by musicians
related to the performance of ornaments. For example, it is
common in performance treatises to distinguish between
ornaments that are 1) accented and long, and conventionally
performed “on the beat”, and 2) unaccented and short, and
often performed “before the beat” (Neumann 1986;
Donington, 1989). Indeed, recently, we showed that the
timing of one-note ornaments (grace notes) clusters into two
categories, even for the same musical fragment, that show
distinct temporal positioning of the grace note and distinct
durations of the grace note (Desain & Timmers, 2008).
Having established an interpretation of the music,
performers show amazing consistency over repeated

1645

performances, which may even approach the limits of motor
control and just-noticeable differences in perception (Desain
& Timmers, 2008). However before establishing an
interpretation, performers often explore different
possibilities. Although performers seem to have a default
interpretation of familiar music that they use for example
when sight-reading, advanced performers do spend
considerable time defining, shaping, and refining an
interpretation, especially when preparing for a concert
performance (Chaffin, Imreh Lemieux, & Chen, 2003). This
process often includes the exploration of alternatives (see
also Davidson & King, 2004).
Note that “divergent thinking” is combined with a process
of “evaluation”, in this case within the same person rather
than between a person and a field (Csikszentmihalyi, 1988;
Gardner, 1993). It is the process of exploring, shaping and
refining that is creative, and which demands considerable
resources of concentration, goal-setting, self-evaluation and
problem-solving ability (Chaffin & Lemieux, 2004).
Assuming that the performer is not satisfied with a default
manner of performance, he/she has to find and refine a new
way that is satisfactory.
In the study, we asked student pianists to explore different
ways of performing a musical fragment containing a grace
note in order to refine their ability to imitate examples of
grace note timing. They had 36 trials to explore and refine
grace note performance. Participants performed on a MIDI
grand piano, which allowed us to precisely record the timing
and key-velocity of individual notes. Key-velocity is an
indication of the intensity of a note. It refers to the velocity
with which the key hits the string. Focusing on the timing
and dynamics of the grace note in the context of
surrounding notes, variations in performing and interpreting
the grace note can be captured using a relatively small
number of performance features (11 in total, see method
section). Both the recording of the second to second
development of the exploratory process and the exhaustive
definition of the performance features provides a unique
possibility of investigating cognitive strategies for
exploration in real-time without interference from an
experimenter or the interference of self-report.
Little is known about exploratory strategies in music
performance, and therefore we had limited prior
expectations besides the following. It may be that different
performers show varying preferences for the variation of
particular parameters, e.g. varying dynamics rather than
timing (Sloboda, 1983), or that performers differ in style of
exploration, being either mostly consistent or explorative (as
in Timmers, Ashley, Desain, & Heijink, 2000). Performers
may switch between different interpretations, as predicted
by the clustering observed in natural performances of these
musical excerpts (Desain & Timmers, 2008) rather than
trying out a range of interpretations in between. In other
words, they may respect the established conceptual spaces,
or break the rules. Although the musical framework
establishes a number of constraints, the ornament may

nevertheless afford exploration, when participants try to find
the limits of what is still feasible.

Method
Participants
24 piano students participated in the study (13 females and
11 males, average age: 25.5 years old). They were all
students of the Royal Conservatoire of The Hague. Most of
them were very advanced with 17.4 years of piano training
on average (std 5.2 years).

Material
The participants performed two musical excerpts taken from
the theme of Beethoven’s Paisiello Variations from musical
notation in a moderate tempo (dotted 8th note is 60 BPM).
Scores of the excerpts are shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Scores of Excerpt 1 and 2. The first six 8th
notes (illustrated as cross notes) are performed by a
computer to indicate the tempo, where after the participant
continues the performance. The timing of the notes within
the square is varied and visualized in the feedback.
In the pre-test and post-test (see procedure), nine
computer-generated performances of each fragment were
used that only differed in the timing of the grace note and its
surrounding notes. The different renditions were a sampling
of interpretations of these ornaments by professional
pianists collected and modeled in a previous study
(Timmers, Ashley, Desain, Honing, & Windsor, 2002).

Procedure
Each participant performed both excerpts, where the order
of excerpts was counter-balanced. The procedure for both
excerpts was identical and included 1) the performance of
the excerpt without the grace note, 2) a pre-test imitation of
nine computer-generated performances; participants heard
the fragment with a particular rendition of the grace note
and had one trial to imitate it, 3) an exploration training
consisting of 36 trials, and 4) a post-test imitation of the
nine computer-generated performances. In all instances,
participants continued the performance of the excerpt after a
computer-generated introduction that indicated the tempo of
performance (see Figure 1).
Half of the group of participants received visual feedback
during the exploration training, which visualized the timing

1646

of the grace note and its surrounding melody notes
(examples with explanation are given in Figure 2).

the previous IOI (Equation 2) or main IOI (Equation 3) or
acquired through shifting the next note (Equation 4).

Figure 2. Examples of the visual feedback as used in the
instruction to the experiment. Timing of the melody notes is
shown with the grace note (top) compared to the without
grace note timing (bottom).

Figure 3. Schematic of the feature parameters. The black
letters refer to timing parameters, while the gray letters in
the melody plot (top) refer to velocity parameters.

Feature analysis
The analysis focuses on the characterization of the
performances in the exploration training only. It does not
consider the effect of visual feedback, nor the relation
between the training and the imitation performances in the
post-test compared to the pre-test, which are the subject of a
follow-up study.
To characterize the grace note timing strategies in the
exploration training, a previously defined model of grace
note timing was adapted and elaborated. This model used
the grace note duration (Grace IOI or inter-onset-interval
between the onset of the grace note and the onset of the
subsequent main note, Equation 1) and the changes in the
€
onset timing or inter-onset-intervals of the surrounding
melody notes (see Timmers et al 2002).
The timing of the grace notes was modeled as “time-shift”
€
or “time-stealing”, capturing the adaptations of the timing of
the surrounding notes to add the ornament by either
inserting time and shifting all subsequent notes, or by taking
€
time and shortening intervals between surrounding notes.
These changes in timing are then expressed as proportions
of the grace duration (Grace IOI), highlighting which part
€ of
the length of the grace note is acquired by stealing time or
by shifting notes in time.
In the original model, the timing of notes in performances
with a grace note is directly compared to the timing of notes
in performances without a grace note, assuming a
performance context in which tempo differences between
performances are minimal. However, while exploring grace
note timing, participants took the freedom to slow down or
speed up the overall tempo if found necessary, and tempo
differences between trials were considerable. Therefore two
alternative definitions of timing of the grace note and timesteal and time-insert measures were formulated. The first
definition compares the actual timing of melody notes with
a grace note to the predicted timing of the melody notes
without a grace note, if participants would have continued
performing the music in the respective initial tempo.€The
difference in time is divided by the grace IOI (Equation 1)
to get the proportion of the grace duration that is taken from

In these equations, a capital letter refers to the timing of a
melody note, while a lower case letter refers to the timing of
an accompaniment note (Equations 5-7). P is the previous
note (score position -1), G is the grace note (score position
0), M is the main note (score position 0), and N is the next
note (score position 1). See Figure 3 for an illustration of the
parameters used for the features.

Gioi = M t − Gt
P
− Pioi − Gioi
pG = ioi _ pred
Gioi
M
− M ioi
pM = ioi _ pred
Gioi
N
− Nt
pN = t _ pred
Gioi

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

The second definition uses the displacement or
asynchrony between the melody and accompaniment notes,
using the tendency for the accompaniment notes to be timed
metrically. If the grace note is timed in time of the previous
IOI, it anticipates the main accompaniment (Equation 5). If
the main or next notes are delayed, they follow the timing of
their respective accompaniment notes (Equations 6 and 7).
These asynchronies are divided by the grace IOI, to get the
proportion of the grace duration that is performed in time of
the previous or main note, or that is acquired through
shifting the next note.

€

€
1647

Gt − m t
Gioi
M − mt
aM = t
Gioi
N − nt
aN = t
Gioi
aG =

(5)
(6)
(7)

Additionally, four dynamics features were defined that
take the key-velocity of the grace note, main note and next
note relative to the average key-velocity of the first melody
notes (Equations 8-10), and the difference in key-velocity
between the grace note and main note (Equation 11). These
measures give an indication of the relative accenting of the
respective notes.

€
€
€
€

avvG = Gv − Av v
avvM = M v − Av v
avvN = N v − Av v
Gvi = Gv − M v

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

Results
Participants often performed all or close to all 36 trials of
the exploration training without any mistake in
performance. However, if there was a mistake in notes or
order of notes as found through a matching procedure, the
trial was deleted. This resulted in the deletion of 4.7% of the
trials for Excerpt 1 and 6.8% of the trials for Excerpt 2.

Factor Analysis
To assess the independent or coordinated variation of the 11
performance features over the training trials and
participants, a principle component analysis was run
followed by a varimax rotation including the four factors
that had an eigenvalue greater than 1. This analysis was
done for the performances of Excerpt 1 and Excerpt 2
separately.
The main results of the factor analyses are given in Tables
1 and 2, which report the correlation between each feature
and each factor as well as the cumulative explained
variance. The results for the two excerpts are highly
comparable. The first factor is for both excerpts most
strongly correlated with the timing of the grace note and
main note with respect to the accompaniment main note (aG
and aM). Additionally, for Excerpt 1, Factor 1 is correlated
with the grace note timing with respect to its predicted
position (pG), while, for Excerpt 2, Factor 1 is correlated
with the asynchrony between the next melody and
accompaniment note (aN) (an interpretation of these results
is given below). Factor 2 is most strongly correlated with
the key-velocity of the grace note (avvG), the difference in
key-velocity between the grace and main note (Grace VI)
and the duration of the grace note (Grace IOI). Factor 3
correlates most strongly with the timing features that use the
predicted temporal position of the main note and next note
(pM and pN) for Excerpt 1, and of the grace note, main
note, and next note (pG, pM, and pN) for Excerpt 2. Factor
4, finally, correlates most strongly with the key-velocity of
the main note and next note relative to the average velocity
(avvM and avvN).
These four factors can be interpreted as representing
different strategies to vary the performance of the grace
note. Factor 1 represents the variation of the temporal
position of the grace note, through stealing time from the

surrounding notes, while keeping the time inserted constant.
In particular, the grace note is placed at varying positions
before or after the accompaniment main note, leaving the
next note unaffected for Excerpt 1, but also influencing the
asynchrony of the next note for Excerpt 2. Factor 3
represents, on the other hand, a strategy to vary the timing
by actually inserting (or subtracting) time. In this case, the
asynchronies with the accompaniment notes are unaffected,
while the positions relative to the predicted onset times are
affected. For Excerpt 1, the time insertion concerns
primarily the main and next note, while, for Excerpt 2, it
concerns all three notes, suggesting that the insertion
precedes the grace note rather than follows it. With more
time insertion (pN increases), the time stolen from the
previous and main note (pG and pM) decreases.
Factor 2 and Factor 4 rather represent variations in
accenting and lengthening the grace note (Factor 2) or
accenting the main note (Factor 4). Apparently, there is no
strong covariance between accenting pattern and temporal
placement of the grace note. Instead onset-timing and
accenting are varied separately.
Table 1: Pair-wise correlations (N = 823) between
features and factors for performances of Excerpt 1.
Cumulative explained variance is given in the bottom row.
Feature
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
Factor 4
Grace IOI -.09
.71
.00
-.14
pG
.78
.03
-.31
-.03
pM
-.29
.00
-.89
.05
pN
-.37
-.02
.90
-.02
aG
.94
-.15
.13
.03
aM
-.94
.15
-.13
-.03
aN
-.35
.39
.20
-.24
avvG
-.04
.81
.01
.48
avvM
.05
-.20
.13
.85
avvN
.00
.00
-.16
.76
Grace VI
-.07
.87
-.09
-.23
Cum. %
25
45
61
76
Table 2: Pair-wise correlations (N = 805) between
features and factors for performances of Excerpt 2.
Cumulative explained variance is given in the bottom row.
Feature
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
Factor 4
Grace IOI .16
.64
-.07
-.09
pG
-.09
-.03
-.86
.03
pM
.47
.07
-.71
-.08
pN
-.28
-.03
.96
.03
aG
-.97
-.11
.15
.06
aM
.97
.11
-.15
-.06
aN
.78
.03
-.06
-.02
avvG
-.01
.87
.08
.33
avvM
-.07
-.19
.11
.88
avvN
-.03
.06
-.06
.76
Grace VI
.05
.85
-.02
-.43
Cum. %
26
44
64
79

1648

Exploration of factorial dimensions
To characterize the manner in which participants explored
the different dimensions highlighted by the factor analysis,
each factor was subdivided into 8 zones of equal data
distribution (a subdivision in “octiles”): Zone 1 of Factor 1
contains the 12.5% of the data with the lowest scores on
Factor 1, while Zone 8 contains the 12.5% of the data with
the highest scores on Factor 1, etcetera. We use these
subdivisions of the factors to assess the areas of the fourdimensional space that participants are exploring: whether
participants stay within the same zone, jump between
different zones, explore widely or explore neighboring
zones. The reason to define these zones rather than using the
continuous scale of the factor loadings is that the data
distribution for all factors tends to deviate considerably
from a normal distribution, having long tails on both sides
as well as a peaky distribution in the middle.
Figure 4 shows the relative frequencies of data points
within each zone per participant for Factor 1 of Excerpt 2.
As can be seen, the data of some participants almost
exclusively fall within one zone, indicating a preference for
a particular interpretation, while the data of other
participants distribute almost equally over all eight zones,
suggesting wide exploration of the performance space. If we
quantify the unevenness of distributions as the relative size
of a zone compared to the next-smaller zone, participants
who are conservative in exploration show an unevenness in
distribution as large as 1.7 to 2.8, depending on the factor
and excerpt. This indicates that the frequency of occurrence
of frequent zones is on average almost twice or three times
as large as the frequency of occurrence of the next-frequent
zone. In contrast, the unevenness in distribution for
explorative participants may be as small as 1.1 to 1.2,
depending on the factor and excerpt, approaching an almost
perfectly even distribution of 1.

Figure 4: Relative frequencies of data points of individual
participants performing Excerpt 2 that fall within zones 1 to
8 of Factor 1.
Figure 5 shows a similar distribution plot for the
difference between zones of data of subsequent trials. In
other words, it characterizes the trial-to-trial behavior. As
clearly apparent in Figure 5, the most frequent difference in
zones between subsequent trials is a difference of 1,
followed by no difference (delta is 0). In contrast, the
tendency to jump to a zone far apart is very small.

Figure 5: Relative frequencies of differences in zones of
Factor 1 between subsequent trials of individual participants
performing Excerpt 2.
Nevertheless, the tendency to repeat or change
interpretations in subsequent trials varies considerably over
participants. Participants who maximally jump between
interpretations show an average weighted zone difference of
3.6 to 4.5 on a scale from 1-8, depending on the factor and
excerpt (weighted according to the frequency of
occurrence). In contrast, participants who maximally repeat
show an average weighted zone difference of only 1.8 to
2.4, depending on the factor and excerpt, showing a very
limited tendency to change interpretation.
Interestingly, for all factors of both excerpts, there are
always some participants who show both a relatively strong
tendency to repeat characteristics, being among the eight
participants with the lowest scores for average weighted
zone difference, as well as a strong tendency to explore,
being also among the eight participants with the lowest
scores for unevenness in distribution. Apparently, these
participants combine a strategy to refine and explore.

Discussion and Conclusion
The results of this study show that the tendency of student
pianists to explore grace note performance varies widely.
Some students explored interpretations widely and finely,
while others were more conservative in exploration.
Nevertheless, this preliminary investigation is not sufficient
to claim that some performers were more successful in
exploration than others. For example, some participants
might have compromised a number of constraints in order to
be more explorative than others. In particular, participants
may have shown a speed-accuracy tradeoff (Fitts, 1954;
Fitts, & Peterson, 1967): compromising speed in order to
time more finely, or, vice versa, keeping the speed, but
being less differentiated in performance.
Another issue is the availability of feedback that
visualizes the characteristics of the performed notes. It is
likely that visual information may have influenced the
explorations, functioning both as a source of information
(affording ideas for exploration) and a form of feedback.
Because the feedback highlights certain performance
aspects, we actually expect more focused exploration within
the participant group receiving visual feedback. In a
continuation of this study, we will investigate the effect of
visual feedback as well as the possible transfer of

1649

exploration training to the ability to imitate the target
performances within the “post-test”.
The results have highlighted part of the dynamics of
exploration (Thelen & Smith, 1994): how the performances
of some participants fluctuate around “attractor” zones
within the performance space, and how the performances of
other participants show less stability and vary more freely in
characteristics. It emphasized personal (p-creativity) rather
than historical creativity (h-creativity; Boden, 2004).
Nevertheless, to explore widely, participants abandoned
regular performance constraints. They explored the options
that were available: the relative positioning, the relative
intensities and durations, and the insertion of pauses.
Although these exploratory dimensions may seem
particular for ornament timing, they are actually expressive
strategies that can be used in performance more generally;
giving length to notes without losing tempo (tempo rubato;
Donington, 1989; Hudson, 1994), inserting a micropause
(Sundberg et al, 1989) or accenting using duration or
intensity (Sloboda, 1983).
For educational purposes, it might be very important to
explicitly refer to these kinds of strategies and be more
aware of their applicability. Training them in a well-defined
setting such as ornament performance might be a way of
enhancing their usability. Building on research on music
performance of ornaments as well as larger musical
structures (Desain & Honing, 1994; Timmers, 2002), an
automatic evaluation and feedback system is now within
reach that assists music students in enhancing their technical
skills as well as hopefully motivating their exploratory
tendencies.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by STW grant 06301 “Practice
Space”. We wish to thank Alex Brandmeyer for
programming the visual feedback system and David
Kuijken, Bart van Oort, Kees Tazelaar, and the Royal
Conservatoire of The Hague for help and facilities offered to
accomplish the study.

References
Boden, M. A. (2004). The creative mind: myths &
mechanisms. 2nd edition. Routledge.
Chaffin, R. Imreh, G., Lemieux, A. F., & Chen, C. (2003).
“Seeing the big picture”: Piano practice as expert problem
solving. Music Perception, 20, 465-490.
Chaffin, R., & Lemieux, A. F. (2004). General perspectives
on achieving musical excellence. In A. Williamon (Ed.),
Musical excellence: Strategies and techniques to enhance
performance (pp. 19-39). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1988). Society, culture, and person:
A systems view of creativity. In R. Sternberg (Ed.), The
nature of creativity (325-339). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Davidson, J. W., & King, E. C. (2004). Strategies for
ensemble practice. In A. Williamon (Ed.), Musical

excellence: Strategies and techniques to enhance
performance (pp. 105-122). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Desain, P. & Honing, H. (1994). Does expressive timing
scale proportionally with tempo? Psychological Research,
56, 285-292.
Desain, P., & Timmers, R. (2008). Stealing time: How grace
notes can be added. Proceedings of the International
Conference on Music Perception and Cognition 10 (p.75).
August 25-29 2008, Sapporo, Japan.
Donington, R. (1989). The interpretation of early music.
New rev. ed. London: Faber and Faber.
Fitts, P. M. (1954). The information capacity of the human
motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47, 381-391.
Fitts, P. M., & Peterson, J. R. (1964). Information capacity
of discrete motor responses. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 67, 103-112.
Gardner, H. (1993). Creating minds. New York: Basic
Books.
Hudson, R. (1994). Stolen time: the history of tempo rubato.
Oxford: Claridon Press.
Neumann, F. (1986). Ornamentation and improvisation in
Mozart. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Philip, R. (1992). Early Recordings and Musical Style:
Changing Tastes in Instrumental Performance, 19001950. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Repp, B. H. (1992a). Diversity and commonality in music
performance – an analysis of timing microstructure in
Schumann’s Traumerei. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 92, 2546-2568.
Repp, B. H. (1992b). A constraint on the expressive timing
of a melodic gesture: evidence from performance and
aesthetic judgment. Music Perception, 10, 221-242.
Sloboda, J. A. (1983). The communication of musical metre
in piano performance. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 35, 377-396.
Sundberg, J., Askenfelt, A., & Frydén, L., (1983). Musical
performance: A synthesis-by-rule approach. Computer
Music Journal, 7, 37-43.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems
approach to the development of cognition and action.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Timmers, R (2002). Freedom and constraints in timing and
ornamentation. Maastricht: Shaker Publisher.
Timmers, R., Ashley, R., Desain, P., & Heijink, H. (2000).
The influence of musical context on tempo rubato.
Journal of New Music Research, 29, 131-158.
Timmers, R., Ashley, R., Desain, P., Honing, H., &
Windsor, L. W. (2002). Timing of ornaments in the theme
of Beethoven’s Paissiello Variations: Empirical data and a
model. Music Perception, 20, 3-33.
Todd, N. P. (1985). A model of expressive timing in music.
Music Perception, 3, 33-58.
Todd, N. P. (1992). The dynamics of dynamics: a model of
musical expression. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 91, 3540-3550.

1650

