UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Subitizing, Finger Gnosis, and the Representation of Number

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/37c0j95f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bisnaz, Jeffrey
Fast, Lisa
Kamawar, Deepthi
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Subitizing, Finger Gnosis, and the Representation of Number
Marcie Penner-Wilger (mpwilger@connect.carleton.ca)
Lisa Fast (lisa@hume.ca)
Jo-Anne LeFevre (jo-anne_lefevre@carleton.ca)
Centre for Applied Cognitive Research, Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada
Brenda L. Smith-Chant (bresmith@trentu.ca)
Department of Psychology, Trent University, Peterborough, ON K9J 7B8 Canada
Sheri-Lynn Skwarchuk (s.skwarchuk@uwinnipeg.ca)
Faculty of Education, University of Winnipeg, MB R3B 2E9 Canada
Deepthi Kamawar (dkamawar@connect.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science and Department of Psychology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada
Jeffrey Bisanz (jeff.bisanz@ualberta.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E9 Canada
Abstract

(2004) asserted that subitizing is a necessary component for
the mapping of number words to numerosities, as subitizing
“allows the child to grasp the whole and the elements at the
same time” (p. 21). In Butterworth’s (1999, 2005) theory of
numeracy development, subitizing is an index of our (exact)
numerosity representations and forms the core numerical
ability upon which all others are built.
How are non-symbolic representations of number related
to more abstract symbolic representations of number? The
prevailing view is that symbolic representations of number
(number words, numerals, etc.) acquire meaning by being
mapped onto non-symbolic representations (Brannon, 2005;
Butterworth, 1999, Dehaene, 1997; Diester & Nieder, 2007;
Verguts & Fias, 2004). In contrast, Ansari (2008; Holloway
& Ansari, 2008) suggests that symbolic and non-symbolic
representations may be distinct. Regardless of the form of
the relation between symbolic and non-symbolic
representations of number, humans are able to recognize
common representational content in different vehicles (e.g.,
dots, number words, numerals, etc.). Thus, even if nonsymbolic and symbolic representations are not built upon
one another, both forms must be linked to the semantic
representation of number.
Finger gnosis is hypothesized to support the mapping of
symbolic and non-symbolic representations of number, thus
increasing the range and precision of numerical
representations. Fayol and Seron (2005) propose that the
fingers are well suited as a tool to link non-symbolic and
symbolic representations of number, as, unlike linguistic
representations “finger representations exhibit an iconic
relation to numerosities, since they preserve the one-to-one
matching relation between the represented set and the
fingers used to represent it” (p. 16). Butterworth (1999)
likewise hypothesizes that children’s use of fingers to
represent numerosities in the course of numerical
development helps to ‘bridge the gap’ from numerosity
representations to more abstract number words. Thus, the
ability to mentally represent one’s fingers is thought to aid

What precursor abilities form the building blocks of
numerical representations? Two abilities were investigated:
the ability to mentally represent small numerosities, indexed
by subitizing speed (Butterworth, 1999), and the ability to
mentally represent one’s fingers, indexed by finger gnosis
(Butterworth, 1999; Penner-Wilger & Anderson, 2008). We
examined the longitudinal relation between these abilities in
Grade 1 and tasks assessing numerical representation in
Grade 2—symbolic number comparison and number-line
estimation – for 100 Canadian children. Finger gnosis (but not
subitizing speed) in Grade 1 was related to children’s
symbolic distance effect in number comparison and to the
linearity of children’s estimates in Grade 2. Thus, children
with better finger gnosis scores had lower symbolic distance
effects and more accurate estimates, reflecting a more precise
mapping between numerals and their associated magnitude.
Keywords: number representation; numeracy; math
development; subitizing; finger gnosis, number comparison;
estimation; numerical distance effect.

Precursors to the Representation of Number
What precursor abilities form the building blocks of
numerical representations? Subitizing, the ability to quickly
enumerate small sets without counting, and finger gnosis,
the ability to mentally represent one’s fingers, are related to
children’s number system knowledge and calculation skill in
Grade 1 (Penner-Wilger et al., 2007). We hypothesized that
this relation occurs because subitizing and finger gnosis
facilitate the development of number representations
(Butterworth, 1999). In the current paper, we test this
hypothesis by examining the relation between the
precursors, subitizing and finger gnosis, in Grade 1 and tests
designed to assess the strength of numerical representations:
magnitude comparison and number line estimation in Grade
2.
Subitizing is a developmentally and evolutionarily
primary numerical ability that is seen both in infants as well
as other species (Dehaene, 1992). Benoit, Lehalle, & Jouen

520

in the mapping of non-symbolic representations (indexed by
subitizing) onto symbolic representations of number,
building up a full number system.
Three views exist on the relation between finger gnosis
and the representation of number. On the localizationist
view, finger gnosis is related to numerical abilities because
the two abilities are supported by neighboring brain regions,
and these regions tend to have correlated developmental
trajectories. On this view, there is no direct causal link
between the representation of finger and number (Dehaene
et al., 2003). In contrast, on the functional view, finger
gnosis and numerical abilities are related because the fingers
are used to represent quantities and perform counting and
arithmetic procedures. As a result, the representation of
numbers and of fingers becomes entwined (Butterworth,
1999). On the redeployment view, finger gnosis is related to
math ability because part of the functional complex for
number representation overlaps with the functional complex
for finger representation. On this view, finger and number
share a common neural resource that supports both
representations (Penner-Wilger & Anderson, 2008). In
summary, despite the distinct mechanisms proposed for the
link between finger and number representation, each view
hypothesizes a relation between finger gnosis and numerical
representations.
Numerical comparison and numerical estimation have
been proposed as indices of the strength of number
representations (Butterworth & Reigosa, 2007; Holloway &
Ansari, 2008). Butterworth and Reigosa (2007), assert that
mathematical difficulties stem in part from slower and less
efficient processing of numerical information, specifically
the estimation and comparison of numerosities. In the
current paper we investigate the relations among subitizing,
finger gnosis, number comparison and estimation to
determine whether the precursors are related to tasks
designed to assess numerical representations.

Holloway and Ansari (2008) examined the concurrent
relation between the distance effect and math achievement
in typically developing 6- to 8-year-old children. Both nonsymbolic and symbolic number comparison tasks were used.
They found that the symbolic distance effect (in response
time), but not the non-symbolic, was related to both math
fluency and calculation skill. Further analyses showed that
this relation held for both math measures for the 6-yearolds, for math fluency for the 7-year-olds, and was not
significant for the 8-year-olds.

Number-line Estimation
Estimation “is a process of translating between alternative
quantitative representations, at least one of which is
inexact.” (Siegler & Booth, 2005, p. 198). Number-line
estimation, more specifically, is hypothesized to provide
direct information about representations of numerical
magnitude (Siegler & Booth, 2005). Siegler and colleagues
assert that the linearity of children’s estimates is an index of
the quality of their numerical representations, with more
linear estimates reflecting better representations (Siegler &
Booth, 2004).
In earlier grades and for larger-scale number lines, the
relation between the targets and children’s estimates is best
fit by a logarithmic function. The shift from log to linear
representations happens between Kindergarten and Grade 2
for 0-100 number lines and between Grade 2 and Grade 6
for 0-1000 number lines (Siegler & Booth, 2004; Siegler &
Opfer, 2003). The linearity of children’s estimates correlates
with their concurrent math achievement for Kindergarten
through grade four (Booth & Siegler, 2006; Siegler &
Booth, 2004).

Predictions: Subitizing, Finger Gnosis, and
Numerical Representations
Subitizing. On Butterworth’s view (1999, 2005),
subitizing will predict both number comparison and
estimation performance, because subitizing forms the core
numerical ability upon which all others are built. On
Ansari’s view (Ansari, 2008; Holloway & Ansari, 2008),
subitizing will not predict performance on either task,
because both tasks used in the current paper are symbolic.
Ansari proposes that symbolic representations of number are
not built upon the non-symbolic representation, indexed by
subitizing, and therefore that the relation between subitizing
and symbolic number representation is not a precursor
relation.
Finger Gnosis. On Butterworth’s view (1999), finger
gnosis will predict both number comparison and estimation
performance, because finger gnosis facilitates the mapping
of
non-symbolic
representations
onto
symbolic
representations of number. On Dehaene’s view (Dehaene et
al., 2003), finger gnosis may also predict both number
comparison and estimation performance, but only due to the
shared developmental trajectory of the brain regions
involved in the representation of finger and number. On
Penner-Wilger and Anderson’s view (2008), finger gnosis

Number Comparison
Number comparison involves recognition and judgment
of the relative magnitude of numerosities, and is used as an
index of the semantic representation of number
(McCloskey, 1992). Multiple forms of number comparison
tasks exist with both symbolic and non-symbolic stimuli. In
number comparison tasks, the signature result is the
distance effect: participants are faster to judge pairs with
large differences or splits (e.g., 2 vs. 7) than pairs with small
splits (e.g., 2 vs. 3). The distance effect is hypothesized to
reflect the mapping between external and mental
representations of number, with larger distance effects
reflecting noisier mappings (Dehaene, Dehaene-Lambertz,
& Cohen, 1998; Holloway & Ansari, 2008). Both adults and
children show a distance effect, but the effect is attenuated
in adults (Dehaene, Dehaene-Lambertz, & Cohen, 1998;
Duncan & McFarland, 1980; Noël, Rousselle & Mussolin,
2005). Larger distance effects are thought to reflect lessdistinct representations of numerical magnitude (Holloway
& Ansari, 2008).

521

will predict both number comparison and estimation
performance, as all three tasks make use of a common
underlying neural resource, which originally evolved as part
of the functional complex supporting the representation of
fingers and has since been redeployed as part of the
functional complex supporting the representation of number,
serving both uses.
The Current Research. The primary goal of this study
was to examine the longitudinal relations between
subitizing, finger gnosis, and tasks designed to assess
numerical representations; a secondary goal was to examine
the concurrent relation between numerical representation
tasks and math outcome measures. To this end, we assessed
children’s subitizing and finger gnosis in Grade 1 and their
performance on number comparison, number-line
estimation, and standardized math outcome measures
(including KeyMath Numeration subtest, WoodcockJohnson Calculation subtest, and addition fluency) in Grade
2. We hypothesized that finger gnosis would predict number
comparison and estimation performance. On Butterworth’s
view (1999) subitizing would predict comparison and
estimation performance. Consistent with Butterworth’s
view, we previously found that subitizing predicted
concurrent performance on number system knowledge and
calculation skill in Grade 1 (Penner-Wilger et al., 2007,
2009). Based on the view of Holloway and Ansari (2008),
however, subitizing would not predict performance on the
symbolic comparison and estimation tasks used in the
current experiment. The participants in the current study are
the same as in Penner-Wilger et al. (2007), where we
examined number system knowledge and calculation skill
concurrently in Grade 1. Here we extend that work to
determine whether subitizing and finger gnosis are
longitudinal predictors of tasks assessing number
representations in Grade 2.

Subitizing. Children were shown arrays of one to six dots
and were asked to state ‘how many’ dots as quickly and
accurately as possible. Children initiated the trial by
pressing the space bar. The trial ended when the child stated
the numerosity of the set and the experimenter pressed a key
and then typed in the response. There were three trials of
each array size, each in a different random pattern. Two
practice sets (of 1 and 7 dots) were included as the first two
trials. The median subitizing latency was computed from
the latencies of the nine trials showing one, two, and three
dots.
Finger Gnosis. The Finger Gnosis measure is based on
Noël (2005). Ten trials were conducted on each hand,
beginning with the dominant hand. In each trial, two fingers
were lightly touched below the first knuckle. The child's
view of the touches was obstructed with a cloth cover raised
from the child's wrist. After the cloth cover was lowered, the
child pointed to the two fingers that had been touched. A
point was awarded for each correct identification of a
touched finger in a trial, with a maximum of 20 points per
hand. The total score across both hands was used as the
dependent measure, with a maximum score of 40.
Processing Speed. To assess processing speed, we
implemented a computer-based simple choice reaction time
task. Two types of stimuli (an X or an O) were displayed for
1 second, preceded by a 500 ms fixation point. Children
were instructed to press the key corresponding to the target
letter shown on the screen. The display then cleared and the
next trial began automatically 1 second later. There were 24
trials. The median response time for pressing the correct key
in response to the stimuli was used as the dependent
measure.
Vocabulary. Receptive language was measured using the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test–Third Edition, form B
(Dunn & Dunn, 1997). It was included primarily as a
measure of verbal, non-mathematical knowledge. Dunn and
Dunn cite the split-half reliability coefficient for Form B for
seven year olds as .95.
Number Comparison. The number comparison task was
designed based on the numerical condition from Landerl,
Bevan, and Butterworth (2004). The child was shown two
numerals on the screen (from 1 to 9) and was asked, “Which
number is more than the other number?” Children indicated
their response by pressing a yellow key on the side that was
more (z on the left or . on the right). For each trial, there was
a 500-ms delay prior to the stimulus presentation. Stimuli
were displayed until the child responded or until a 3-s
maximum was reached.
Stimuli varied on two dimensions, physical size (large vs.
small font) and numerical size. For congruent trials, the
number that was larger numerically was also larger
physically. For incongruent trials, the number that was
larger numerically was smaller physically. Numerical
distance was defined with small splits as a distance of 1
(e.g., 2 3) and large splits as a distance of 5 (e.g., 2 7). Half
of the trials were congruent and half were incongruent.
There were 40 trials preceded by two practice trials. The

Method
Participants
Grade 1 children (N = 148) were selected for the current
paper from a larger group who were recruited for the Count
Me In longitudinal project, which involved children from
seven schools in three Canadian cities. The children were
tested in May or June each year. Of the Grade 1 children,
112 participated the following year, in Grade 2. Data were
missing for 12 of these 112 children on both of the tasks of
interest: number comparison and number line estimation.
Thus, the present analyses are based on the 100 children (51
boys, 49 girls, mean age, in years:months, 6:10 in Grade 1,
range 5:7 to 7:4) who had complete Grade 1 data and at
least one Grade 2 outcome measure.

Materials and Procedure
Children completed the subitizing and finger gnosis tasks,
along with the processing speed and vocabulary tasks, in
Grade 1. The outcome tasks (numeration, calculation, and
addition fluency) were completed in Grade 2.

522

stimuli pairs were taken from Landerl et al. (2004) with 24
trials of the six small-split combinations (1-2, 2-3, 3-4, 6-7,
7-8, 8-9) and 16 trials of the four large-split combinations
(1-6, 2-7, 3-8, 4-9). Two pseudo-random orders were
created.
Three dependent variables were computed: overall
response time for correct trials, overall accuracy, and
distance effect calculated as in Holloway and Ansari (2008)
to capture the increase in RT from large to small splits
controlling for individual differences in RT ([small split RT
– large split RT]/large split RT).
Number-Line Estimation. Number line estimation was
measured using a computerized test of numerical estimation
skill (Siegler & Opfer, 2003). Children were shown a target
number between 1 and 1000 at the top of the screen and
used the mouse to position a vertical line at the appropriate
spot on a number line starting at 0 and ending at 1000. The
computer recorded the location and the solution latency.
Order of the 25 trials was randomized separately for each
child. The stimuli were chosen based on Laski and Siegler
(2007) and were balanced with four targets between 0 and
100, four between 900 and 1000, two targets from each
other decade and distances matched from the endpoints. The
targets were: 6, 994, 18, 982, 59, 991, 97, 903, 124, 876,
165, 835, 211, 789, 239, 761, 344, 656, 383, 617, 420, 580,
458, 542, and 500.
Regression was used to calculate the relation between the
actual values of the presented numbers and the locations that
the child chose for those numbers on the number line.
Larger R2 values are indicative of a close correspondence
between the number line locations and the presented
numbers.
KeyMath Numeration. Children completed the
Numeration subtest of a multi-domain math achievement
test, the KeyMath Test-Revised (Connolly, 2000). This test
covers concepts such as quantity, order, and place value (on
later items). Most of the items in the range for these
children require knowledge of the symbolic number system.
The reported alternate form reliability coefficient for the
grade-scaled Numeration subtest is .75 (Connolly, 2000).
Connolly provides a split-half reliability coefficient of .81
for spring Grade 2.
Woodcock-Johnson Calculation. Children completed
the calculation subtest of the Woodcock Johnson PsychoEducational Battery - Revised (Woodcock & Johnson,
1989). This calculation measure involves all four operations
(addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division),
although most of the questions that were attempted by the
children in the present study involved addition or
subtraction. This test has a median reliability of .85 and a
one-year test-retest correlation of .89 for Grades 2 through 4
(Woodcock & Johnson, 1989). The WJ-R manual cites the
split-half reliability for six year olds as .928, SEM(W)=5.7
(N=309).
Addition Fluency. The children solved 16 single-digit
sums displayed on the computer screen. In Grade 2, the
sums were greater than ten. This task has a stop condition of

five sequential errors and trials timed out if the child did not
respond within 20 seconds. The child initiated each trial by
pressing the ‘GO’ button. When the child spoke their
answer, the experimenter pressed a key to stop the timer and
typed in their response. Each child's median addition latency
was computed from their correct trials.

Results
Descriptive statistics for each measure are shown in Table
1. All results are significant at p < .05 unless otherwise
noted.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics.
Dependant Variable
Mean
SD
Processing speed1
652
108
Vocabulary3
109
11
Subitizing1
1261
198
Finger gnosis2
30.7
3.8
Distance effect
.12
.14
Estimation linearity
.68
.26
Numeration4
12.3
3.2
Calculation3
100
14
Add fluency1
3773
1208
1
Milliseconds; 2 Number correct; 3 Standardized score;
Grade-Scaled Score.

4

Distance Effect in Number Comparison
A significant distance effect was found in both accuracy
and RT. Participants were more accurate comparing
numbers with splits of five (M = 90% SD = 13) than
numbers with splits of one (M = 84%, SD = 13), F (1, 85) =
53.10, MSE = 28.76. Participants were faster comparing
numbers with splits of five (M = 1150 ms, SD = 262) than
numbers with splits of one (M = 1278 ms, SD = 269), F (1,
85) = 49.35, MSE = 14335. The distance effect in accuracy
was not correlated with subitizing or finger gnosis, and is
not discussed further in this paper.

Do Subitizing and Finger Gnosis Jointly and
Independently Predict Number Comparison?
To determine whether subitizing and finger gnosis predict
magnitude comparison performance, both jointly and
independently, multiple regression was performed. The
symbolic distance effect in Grade 2 was predicted from
subitizing and finger gnosis in Grade 1. In both this and the
following regression, gender, processing speed, and
receptive vocabulary were included as control variables. As
shown in Table 2, only finger gnosis significantly predicted
the symbolic distance effect, accounting uniquely for 10%
of the variability in the distance effect.

Do Subitizing and Finger Gnosis Jointly and
Independently Predict Number Line Estimation?
To determine whether subitizing and finger gnosis predict
performance of number line estimation, both jointly and
independently, multiple regression was performed.

523

Discussion

Estimation linearity in Grade 2 was predicted from
subitizing and finger gnosis in Grade 1. As shown in Table
2, after accounting for the control variables only finger
gnosis significantly predicted estimation linearity,
accounting uniquely for 7% of the variability in linearity.

The primary goal of this paper was to examine the
longitudinal relations between subitizing, finger gnosis, and
tasks designed to assess numerical representations. We
found that finger gnosis in Grade 1 was related to children’s
symbolic distance effect in number comparison and to the
linearity of children’s estimates in Grade 2. Children with
better finger gnosis scores had smaller symbolic distance
effects, reflecting a more precise mapping between
numerals and their associated magnitude. The relation
between the symbolic distance effect and finger gnosis is
consistent with the view that finger gnosis facilitates the
mapping between non-symbolic (magnitude) representations
and symbolic representations. Children with better finger
gnosis scores also made more precise estimates, again
reflecting a more precise mapping between numerals and
their associated magnitude.
Subitizing in Grade 1 was not related to either measure of
symbolic number representation in Grade 2. This finding is
not consistent with the predictions of Butterworth (1999),
whereby subitizing was hypothesized to relate to the
symbolic distance effect and to estimation. Holloway and
Ansari (2008) hypothesize that symbolic and non-symbolic
representations are distinct, contrary to prevailing views that
symbolic representations are built on non-symbolic
representations. The pattern of results may, therefore, be
quite different if non-symbolic versions of comparison and
estimation tasks were used. Further work will explore the
relation between the precursors and non-symbolic
representations.
A secondary goal was to examine the concurrent relation
between numerical representation tasks and math outcome
measures. The linearity of children’s estimates was related
to all investigated math outcomes including: KeyMath
numeration subtest, Woodcock-Johnson Calculation subtest,
and addition fluency. In contrast, the symbolic distance
effect was not related to any of the investigated math
outcomes.
In conclusion, finger gnosis was related to all indices of
the symbolic representation of number. This finding may
reflect a developmental phenomenon whereby the mental
representations of fingers and of number become linked
functionally, through the practiced use of fingers to
represent numerosities (Butterworth, 1999). Alternatively,
the relation between finger and number representations may
be one of identity, wherein the relation reflects a shared
underlying representational form (Penner-Wilger &
Anderson, 2008).

Table 2: Standardized regression coefficients and model R2
values for each regression analysis.
Dependent Variable
Distance
Estimation
Predictors
Effect
Linearity
Processing speed
-.09
-.13
Vocabulary
.02
.35**
Gender
.00
.33**
Subitizing
.08
-.14
Finger gnosis
-.35**
.27**
Model R2 (total)
.12
.36**
Significance levels: *p < .05, **p < .01.

Are Number Comparison and Estimation Related
to Math Skills?
To determine whether number comparison and estimation
were related to concurrent math outcomes in Grade 2 partial
correlations were performed controlling for gender,
vocabulary, and processing speed. Correlations are shown in
Table 3.
Table 3: Correlations among Grade 2 measures.
1.
2.
3.
1. Distance effect
2. Estimate linear. -.08
3. Numeration
-.12
.39**
4. Calculation
-.18
.38**
.41**
5. Add fluency
.19
-.29*
-.31*
Significance levels: *p < .05, **p < .01, df = 67.

4.

-.62**

Number comparison. In contrast to Holloway and Ansari
(2008), the symbolic distance effect was not correlated with
performance on the KeyMath Numeration subtest,
Woodcock-Johnson Calculation subtest, or Addition
fluency. This finding is surprising given that the same age
group was investigated in both studies, the studies had a
similar number of participants (N = 87 vs. 100 in the current
paper), and one of the outcome measures, the WoodcockJohnson calculation subtest, was the same. There was,
however, a task difference: We included trials in which
physical size and magnitude conflicted whereas Holloway
and Ansari did not. Thus, it is possible that the relation
between the symbolic distance effect and math outcomes is
not robust across task variability.
Number-line estimation. Consistent with Siegler and
Booth (2004), we found that the linearity of children’s
estimates were correlated with performance on the KeyMath
Numeration subtest, Woodcock-Johnson Calculation
subtest, and addition fluency.

Acknowledgments
Funding for this research was provided by the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.
More information about the project is available at
www.carleton.ca/cmi/ or from the first author.

524

References

capacities: A study of 8 & 9-year-old students. Cognition,
93, 99-125.
Laski, E V. & Siegler, R. S. (2007). Is 27 a big number?
Correlational and causal connections among numerical
categorization, number line estimation, and numerical
magnitude comparison. Child Development, 76, 17231743.
McCloskey, M. (1992). Cognitive mechanisms in numerical
processing: Evidence from acquired dyscalculia.
Cognition, 104, 107 – 157.
Noël, M. E. (2005). Finger gnosia: A predictor of numerical
abilities in children? Child Neuropsychology, 11, 413430.
Noël, M.-P., Rousselle, L., & Mussolin, C. (2005).
Magnitude representation in children: Its development
and dysfunction. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of
mathematical cognition (pp. 179 - 196). New York, NY:
Psychology Press.
Penner-Wilger, M., & Anderson, M.L. (2008). An
alternative view of the relation between finger gnosis and
math ability: Redeployment of finger representations for
the representation of number. In B.C. Love, K. McRae &
V.M. Sloutsky, (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1647–1652). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Penner-Wilger, M., Fast, L., LeFevre, J., Smith-Chant, B.
L., Skwarchuk, S., Kamawar, D., & Bisanz, J. (2007). The
foundations of numeracy: Subitizing, finger gnosia, and
fine-motor ability. In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1385-1390). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Siegler, R. S. & Booth, J. L. (2005). Development of
numerical estimation: A review. In J. I. D. Campbell
(Ed.), Handbook of mathematical cognition (pp. 197 212). New York: Psychology Press.
Siegler, R. S. & Booth, J. L. (2004). Development of
numerical estimation in young children. Child
Development, 75, 428-444.
Siegler, R. S., & Opfer, J. E. (2003). The development of
numerical
estimation:
Evidence
for
multiple
representations of numerical quantity. Psychological
Science, 14, 237 – 243.
Verguts, T. & Fias, W. (2004). Representation of number in
animals and humans: a neural model. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 1493 – 1504.
Woodcock, R. W., & Johnson, M. B. (1989). WoodcockJohnson psycho-educational battery—revised. Allen, TX:
DLM Teaching Resources.

Ansari, D. (2008). Effects of development and enculturation
on number representation in the brain. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 9, 278-91.
Benoit, L., Lehalle, H., & Jouen, F. (2004). Do young
children acquire number words through subitizing or
counting? Cognitive Development, 19, 291-307.
Booth, J. L. & Siegler, R. S. (2006). Developmental and
individual differences in pure numerical estimation.
Developmental Psychology, 42, 189 – 201.
Brannon, E. M. (2005). What animals know about numbers.
In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical
cognition (pp. 85 – 108). New York, NY: Psychology
Press.
Butterworth, B. (1999). What counts - how every brain is
hardwired for math. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Butterworth, B. (2005). The development of arithmetical
abilities. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46,
3-18.
Butterworth, B. & Reigosa, V. (2007). Information
processing deficits in dyscalculia. In D. B. Berch & M.
M. M. Mazzocco (Eds.), Why is math so hard for some
children? (pp. 65 - 81). Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Connolly, A. J. (2000). KeyMath - Revised/Updated
Canadian norms. Richmond Hill, ON: Psycan.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind
creates mathematics. Oxford: Oxford Press.
Dehaene, S. (1992). Varieties of numerical abilities.
Cognition, 44, 1 – 42.
Dehaene, S., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., & Cohen, L. (1998).
Abstract representations of numbers in the animal and
human brain. Trends in Neuroscience, 21, 355-361.
Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Cohen, L. (2003).
Three parietal circuits for number processing. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 20, 487-506.
Diester, I. & Nieder, A. (2007). Semantic associations
between signs and numerical categories in the prefrontal
cortex. PLoS Biol, 5, e294.
Duncan, E. M. & McFarland, C. E. (1980). Isolating the
effects of symbolic distance and semantic congruity in
comparative judgments: an additive-factors analysis.
Memory & Cognition, 8, 612 – 622.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (Eds.). (1997). Peabody
picture vocabulary test-III. Circle Pines, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Fayol, M., & Seron, X. (2005). About numerical
representations: Insights from neuropsychological,
experimental, and developmental studies. In J. I. D.
Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical cognition.
New York: Psychology Press.
Holloway, I. D. & Ansari, D. (2008). Mapping numerical
magnitudes onto symbols: the numerical distance effect
and individual differences in children’s mathematics
achievement. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology.
Landerl, K., Bevan, A., & Butterworth, B. (2004).
Developmental dyscalculia and basic numerical

525

