UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Temporal Contiguity in Cross-Situational Statistical Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/46d730t1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kachergis, George
Shiffrin, Richard
Yu, Chen

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Temporal Contiguity in Cross-Situational Statistical Learning
George Kachergis, Chen Yu, and Richard M. Shiffrin
{gkacherg, chenyu, shiffrin}@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological & Brain Science / Cognitive Science Program
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Recent research has demonstrated that participants often learn
a surprising number of word-referent pairings solely from
their co-occurrence statistics across individually ambiguous
trials. To isolate processes, past designs prevented the same
pairing from appearing in two consecutive trials. Yet such
temporal contiguity often appears in real world settings, and
seems likely to improve learning. The present research
examines and models the effects of such repetitions. Our
results show that allowing word-referent pairs to appear in
adjacent trials indeed increases overall learning. Not only are
the repeated pairs improved, but other pairs are improved, as
well. Repetition seems to allow segregation of pairs that are
and are not repeated from the previous trial, thereby allowing
differential attention between the subsets. However, attention
also seems to shift away from pairs that are repeated many
times—to their detriment, but to the benefit of concurrent
unrepeated pairs. The findings are explored with an
associative learning model to provide a formal account of the
underlying learning mechanisms.
Keywords: statistical learning; cross-situational
learning; language acquisition; ambiguity; attention

word

Introduction
To learn a language, people must learn which words refer
to which physical referents. A learner listening to a speaker
needs to ascertain which objects in the shared environment
are the referents intended by the speaker. Almost all
occurrences of words occur in settings where there are
multiple possible referents. Particularly early in learning,
there will be high ambiguity concerning the correct referent.
Learning nonetheless takes place because correct pairings of
words and referents tend to reoccur over many situations, a
phenomenon termed ‘cross-situational learning’ (Pinker,
1984; Gleitman, 1990). A recent proposal of interest in
cognitive development implements this well-established
idea using statistical learning, which has been shown to
work in many distinct perceptual domains (e.g., Conway &
Christiansen, 2005). In a cross-situational word learning
experiment, a learner acquires word meanings by tracking
the co-occurrences of multiple words and referents across
situations, ultimately discovering the most likely wordreferent mappings. Such statistical word learning has been
observed in both infants (Smith & Yu, 2008) and adults (Yu
& Smith, 2007).
In typical adult studies, participants are instructed to learn
which object each (novel) word denotes. They are presented
with a series of study trials, each consisting of an array of
several novel objects (e.g., a photograph of a metal
sculpture, another of a tool, etc.) and successively spoken
pseudowords (e.g., “manu”, “bosa”, etc.). Each pseudoword

refers to a single onscreen object, but the correct referent for
each pseudoword is not indicated, making referents
ambiguous on individual trials. In a typical learning
scenario, participants attempt to learn 18 pseudoword-object
pairings from 27 12-second trials, with four pseudowords
and four objects presented per trial. This configuration
allows each stimulus (and hence each correct word-referent
pairing) to be presented six times. One way to learn the
correct pairings would involve the accumulation of
pseudoword-object co-occurrence statistics across the
training trials. To assess the learning that has taken place
during training, each pseudoword is individually presented,
and participants are asked to choose the appropriate object
from a subset of the 18 objects. Yu & Smith (2007) found
that adults learned an average of 9.5 of the 18 pairings when
choosing from four alternative referents at test (i.e., 4AFC).
Remarkably, several participants manage to learn all 18
mappings. Thus, humans can use the co-occurrences of
multiple words and objects across individually ambiguous
trials to learn word-object mappings.
In order to isolate processes and better control the first
studies of this sort (Yu & Smith, 2007), an artificial
constraint was used in previous designs of cross-situational
learning studies: Word-referent pairs were not allowed to
appear in consecutive trials. However, such repetitions are
common in real learning environments, partly because of
temporal contiguity inherent in the physical environment.
For instance, a visual object that a learner is attending to at
one moment is quite unlikely to suddenly disappear at the
next; rather, it will gradually move away from the central to
the peripheral visual field, remaining in sight for some time.
This temporal contiguity in the environment may aid
learning in a number of ways if the cognitive system is able
to make use of this regularity.
For a simple example in the cross-situational paradigm,
consider two successive trials on which pseudoword A and
object a occurred, but all other stimuli – three other words
and objects on each of the trials – differed. Assuming
memory for the previous trial, the participant could infer
that A-a is a correct pairing (“a” was the only repeated
pseudoword, and A was the only repeated object). As a
second example, consider two successive trials on which
three of the four word-referent pairs are repeated (e.g., D E
F and f d e appear on both trials), but the first trial contained
B-b and the latter C-c. Given memory for the first trial, the
participant could infer that D E F must be associated with f
d e, albeit the exact pairings would remain ambiguous.
Regardless of this ambiguity, it would be possible to infer
that B-b must be correct and C-c must be correct, since these
are the only remaining possibilities. These are just two

1704

examples that illustrate the kinds of learning gains that are
possible when pairs are repeated over successive trials. The
gains are of course dependent on memory for the items in
the previous trial. Given perfect memory for all trials, such
inferences would not be restricted to repetitions on
successive trials. However, participants have imperfect
memories, and tend to remember things best from the
immediate past. Thus, learning enhancements due to
repetitions are expected to be largest when repetitions occur
on successive trials. In the following studies we assess the
effects of different degrees of temporal contiguity and
model the results.

Experiment 1
Participants were asked to learn word-referent pairs from a
series of individually ambiguous training trials using the
cross-situational word learning paradigm (Yu & Smith,
2007). On each training trial, four novel objects were
simultaneously shown while four pseudowords were serially
spoken. No information was given to denote which word
refers to which object on a given trial. Without any learning
from previous trials that could be used to reduce ambiguity,
there would be four equally possible referents for each
pseudoword or each object, and thus 16 equiprobable 1-to-1
mappings of the four pseudowords onto the four objects.
However, since words always appeared on trials with their
proper referents, and there was mixing of groups of pairs
over trials, the correct pairings reoccur more often over
trials, and hence can be learned.
The manipulation of interest in this study is the repetition
of some pairs in consecutive trials. As discussed above, the
degree of overlap between two trials affects the type of
inferences that can be made. Possible effects range from
making a single repeated pairing obvious, to making the
only unrepeated pairing obvious, to merely reducing the
number of possible associations. In general, it is expected
that trial orderings with more trial-to-trial repetitions will
yield higher overall learning.
Each trial consisted of four words and four referents,
allowing construction of training sequences of 18
pseudoword-object pairs presented over 27 trials in which
each ‘correct’ pairing occurred six times (‘incorrect’ pairing
co-occurrences ranged from 0 to 4, M = 1.5). The control
condition was a fixed temporal sequence containing no pairs
that repeated on successive trials. In all of the other
conditions, the individual training trials were the same set
used in this control condition. However, the order of the
trials was shuffled many times to create orderings with
degrees of trial-to-trial repetitions. Because the orderings
were all constructed from the same set of trials, all cooccurrence statistics remained identical across conditions.
The successive repetition (SR) score of a trial ordering is
the mean number of word-referent pairings that overlap
across all consecutive pairs of trials. The minimum SR score
is 0, as no pairs ever overlap. (A single trial repeated 27
times would give an SR score of 4, but of course this is not
a reasonable learning situation.) The maximum SR score we

were able to obtain by reshuffling the control sequence was
2.04. That is, in this condition, on average, a little over two
word-referent pairs repeated in every pair of successive
trials. The sequences we constructed and used had SR
scores of 0.00, 0.33, 0.67, 1.00, 1.41, and 2.04.
Assuming memory of the preceding trial, repeating some
of the pseudoword-referent pairs from trial n-1 on trial n
allows segregation of possible pairings into two subgroups –
repeated pairs and unrepeated pairs – perhaps as a result of
attention being drawn to the repeated stimuli. Such
segregation of a large set with many possible pairings (i.e.,
4×4=16) into two smaller subsets with a fewer total number
of pairings (i.e., 2×2+2×2=8) reduces ambiguity, so it was
expected that conditions with higher SR scores would result
in increased learning.

Subjects
Participants were undergraduates at Indiana University who
received course credit for participating. There were 50
participants in condition SR=0, 36 in conditions SR=.33,
.66, 1.0, and 1.41; and 31 in condition SR=2.04. None had
participated in other cross-situational experiments.

Stimuli
On each training trial, pictures of four uncommon objects
(e.g., a metal sculpture) were simultaneously shown while
four spoken pseudowords were serially played. The 72
computer-generated pseudowords are phonotacticallyprobable in English (e.g., “bosa”), and were spoken by a
synthetic, monotone female voice. The 72 words and 72
objects were randomly assigned to four sets of 18 wordobject pairings.
On each training trial, the four pictures appeared
immediately. After two seconds of initial silence, each
pseudoword was played for one second with two seconds of
silence between pseudowords, for a total trial duration of 12
seconds. The pseudowords were presented in random order.
Each training sequence consisted of 27 such trials, with each
‘correct’ pseudoword-object mapping occurring 6 times, and
other mappings occurring from 0 to 4 times (M =1.5).
Upon completion of each training phase, participants were
tested for their knowledge of the ‘correct’ (i.e. high
frequency of occurrence) pairings. On each test trial, a
single pseudoword was played and all 18 objects were
displayed. Participants were asked to click on the correct
object for that pseudoword. Each pseudoword was tested
once, and the test order was randomized for each participant
and condition. Participants completed four training/test
conditions. Block order was counterbalanced.

Instructions
Participants were informed that they would see a series of
trials with four pictures and four alien words played in
random order. They were also notified that their knowledge
of which words go with which pictures would be tested at
the end.

1705

Results

Discussion

Figure 1 shows the overall performance achieved in each
condition of Experiment 1. Increasing the degree of
successive repetitions does produce increased performance,
as predicted (r =.16, t(217)=2.40, p<.05). However, the
increases are surprisingly modest relative to what might
have been expected a priori. For detailed analysis of each
condition, to-be-learned pairs were grouped according to the
number of times they had successive repetitions in the
sequence (see Table 1). Surprisingly, the relation between
performance and SR was often non-monotonic. For
example, consider the trial ordering with mean SR=1.0. In
this condition, the non-repeated pairs were learned with
45% accuracy, the pairs that overlapped once were learned
with only 30% accuracy, and the pairs that overlapped three
times were learned with 66% accuracy. In some other
conditions, performance was more or less equal for all
degrees of repetition. Only in the two conditions of low SR
(SR=.33 and SR=.67) did greater successive repetition
confer a modest learning advantage. Nonetheless, overall
the groups of pairs of different SR were correlated with
performance across conditions (r =.11, t(343)=2.02, p<.05).

These results show that learning is increased by increasing
the average degree of successive repetitions, even while
leaving all within-trial co-occurrence statistics constant.
However, based on the detailed analysis in Table 1, it is
clear that this learning increase was not simply due to
increased learning for successively repeated pairs within
each condition. For instance, in the SR=1.0 condition, nonrepeated pairs were learned better than 1- and 2-repetition
pairs. The difficulty of learning a given pair is not solely
due to the number of successive repetitions for that pair in a
sequence. Perhaps the presence of other repeated pairs
interfered with the learning of a given pair. Another relevant
factor may be the interaction of spacing and sequential
effects: for each case where a pair occurs in successive
trials, that pair will appear one fewer time later in training
(since each pair only appeared 6 times during training).

Figure 1: Accuracy (18AFC; chance=.056) for conditions
with varying degrees of average successive repetitions (SR).
Greater mean SR in a condition tended to improve learning
performance, although not as drastically as expected. Error
bars are +/-SE.
Table 1: Exp.1 accuracy for SR groups in each condition.
Cells display: accuracy / number of pairs in SR group
SR
0
1
2
3
4
5

Mean
SR=.33
.32 /10
.33 / 7
.39 / 1
-

Mean
SR=.67
.29 / 4
.37 /10
.43 / 4
-

Mean
SR=1
.45/ 2
.30/ 7
.40/ 7
.66/ 2
-

Mean
SR=1.4
.43/ 3
.45/10
.36/ 5
-

Mean
SR=2
.46/ 4
.39/ 1
.40/ 2
.42/ 7
.40/ 3
.39/ 1

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed that increasing the mean successive
repetitions in a trial ordering facilitates learning for the
entire set of pairings, but that greater numbers of successive
repetitions does not always confer an advantage for the
repeated pairs. Instead, learning of unrepeated pairs seems
to improve with the presence of greater overall successive
repetitions in the condition. To better understand the role
that successive repetitions can play in statistical learning of
both repeated and unrepeated pairs, we implemented three
different types of temporal contiguity in three sequences of
27 training trials, exemplified in Table 2. In the 1 pair/2
trials condition, 9 of the 18 pairs appeared in two
consecutive trials at some point during the training. In the 1
pair/3 trials condition, 9 of the 18 pairs appeared in three
consecutive trials. Importantly, in both of these conditions,
no other stimuli in the overlapping trials simultaneously
overlapped. In the 2 pairs/2 trials condition, however, each
of the 18 pairs at some point appeared with another pair in
two consecutive trials.
Importantly, these conditions offer different ways to
perform inferences and consequently reduce the degree of
ambiguity. For example, consider just two successive trials
with one pair only repeated, as in the 1 pair/2 trials
condition. The repeated pair may be immediately inferred to
be correct, but the remaining six pairs on the two trials
remains ambiguous—there are still 9 possible pairings for
each of the three remaining words and objects in each trial.
For another example, when two pairs are repeated in two
successive trials, as in the 2 pairs/2 trials condition, no
pairing can be unambiguously inferred. However, overall
ambiguity is considerably reduced: If (A B X Y; b a y x)
occurred on trial n, and (A B E F; a b e f) occurred on trial
n+1, then memory for the preceding trial allows the
following inferences: (A, B) and (b, a) must go together, in
some pairing; (E, F) and (f, e) must go together, in some
pairing; (X, Y) and (y, x) must go together, in some pairing.
Thus no pairing can be unambiguously determined, yet the
six items on the two trials have only eight possible

1706

pairings—a significant reduction of ambiguity. Note that in
all of these conditions, the conceivable inferences are reliant
upon memory and attention.
Table 2: Summary of conditions in Experiment 2.

Figure 2: Accuracy (18AFC; chance=.056) for the three
conditions in Exp. 2, and the TC=0 condition (no overlaps)
from Exp. 1 for comparison. Error bars are +/-SE.

Participants were undergraduates at Indiana University who
received course credit for participating. Twenty-three
participants completed only the three SR conditions, and an
additional 44 participants completed all conditions. None
had participated in other cross-situational experiments.

However, performance for repeated pairs (M = .40) in the 1
pair/3 trials condition was not significantly greater than for
the non-repeated pairs (M = .36, paired t(62)=1.31, p > .05).
Instead, a higher proportion of non-repeated pairs were
learned in the 1 pair/3 trials condition than in the 1 pair/2
trials condition (paired t(62)=3.24, p < .01). Thus, although
there was no SR advantage within the 1 pair/3 trials
condition, more non-repeated pairs were learned instead,
and overall pair learning in this condition (M = .37) was not
significantly different than overall learning in the 1 pair/2
trials condition (M = .33, paired t(62)=0.98, p > .05).
Although each of the conditions with some variety of
successive repetition trended toward greater overall
performance than the condition with no repetitions, none
were significantly greater.

Stimuli & Procedure

Discussion

Trial

1 pair/2 trials

1 pair/3 trials

2 pairs/2 trials

n
n+1
n+2 ..

ABCD, abcd
AEFG, aefg
HIJK, hijk

ABCD, abcd
AEFG, aefg
AHIJ, ahij

ABCD, abcd
ABEF, abef
GHIJ, ghij

Subjects

The sets of pseudowords and referents for Experiment 2, the
number of trials, the number of stimuli per trial, and other
details of the procedure were identical to those used in
Experiment 1, except that individual trials and their
orderings were constructed to be consistent with the three
different types of successive repetitions described above.

Results
Figure 2 displays the overall learning performance for each
training condition1 in Experiment 2. Participants learned
significantly more successively repeated pairs (M = .47)
than non-repeated pairs (M = .27) in the 1 pair/2 trials
condition (paired t(66)=6.93, p < .001), demonstrating that a
single successive repetition boosts learning of that pair.

It is rather striking that performance dropped for
successively repeated pairs from condition 1 pair/2 trials to
1 pair/3 trials to 2 pairs/2 trials, even though the
opportunities for unambiguous inference rose from 1 pair/2
trials to 1 pair/3 trials, and then dropped very low for 2
pairs/2 trials. It is equally intriguing that the non-repeated
pairs benefited more when one pair repeated over three
rather than two successive trials. Our working hypothesis is
that this has to do with how statistical learners allocate their
real-time attention during statistical associative learning,
how the repetitions of certain pairs create a local attentional
salience—either for the repeated pairs or for the unrepeated
pairs, and how learners dynamically adjust their attentional
weights while associating pairings trial by trial (see
Kruschke 2003, e.g.). A formal account of this hypothesis
requires a computational model to allow us to further
investigate these processes that may comprise statistical
word learning.

Modeling
Several computational models were constructed and
evaluated. We present one model that captures the intuitions
we have discussed, and that fits the observed data
reasonably well. We fit the model to Experiment 2, and
then predicted the results of Experiment 1 with those best-fit
parameters. There are several critical principles encoded in
the model:
1) There are learning limitations such that the total amount
stored in long-term memory per trial is a constant.2
2) Observers are assumed to remember the previous trial,
and also any item repeated over three successive trials.

1

Data for four participants in the 1 pair/3 trials condition was
lost due to computer failure.

2

The final choice rule is stochastic, so some of our storage
assumptions do not assume variable rules.

1707

3) Based on this memory, association strengths are stored
only for possible pairings that respect logical inferences.
4) Observers have access to the current state of their longterm memory and add association strength to a pair that is
probabilistically chosen in proportion to the current
strengths of present referents.
5) When some pairs repeat over successive trials and others
do not, a bias that stores more or less association strength
for the repeated subset of pairs than the non-repeated
subset is allowed.
a) This bias is allowed to vary for cases where the
repeated pair(s) are just a one trial repeat, and the cases
where an item repeats three or more trials in succession.
The change in bias allows observers who believe they
already ‘know’ a pairing (because it repeats three times
in a row) to divert attention/storage to other pairings.
The model is instantiated as follows (see Figure 3 for
pseudocode). An 18 (word) by 18 (referent) associative
matrix is filled initially with constant values (1/18 in every
cell), reflecting initial uncertainty about the pairings. Every
trial, a fixed total amount, X, of additional association
strength is added to this matrix. When two successive trials
have no repeats, then when a pseudoword is presented an
object is chosen in proportion to the strengths currently in
the association matrix between that pseudoword and the
four objects. For the chosen pairing, X/4 is added to its cell
in the matrix. The three succeeding pseudowords are treated
similarly, except for the constraint that objects are chosen
without replacement, for the current trial. (Sampling without
replacement is utilized for all following cases, as well.)
For the case of one repeated stimulus pair, when the word
is encountered during the trial, the pair’s matrix cell is
augmented by α⋅X (α representing an attentional bias for
repeated vs. non-repeated items; α = .5 would represent no
bias). When any of the three non-repeated pseudowords is
encountered, an object is selected in proportion to the
current values in the three relevant cells, and that cell
augmented by a value (1-α)⋅X/3. Successive non-repeated
pseudowords are treated similarly, albeit respecting the
sampling without replacement constraint. In the case when
the one repeated pair occurs three trials in succession, the
same rules apply, but a different value for α is allowed: α′.
The intuition is that attention may shift for pairs that are
repeated many times: once learned, the regularity of a
repeated pair may be used to reduce ambiguity for the
remaining pairs.
For the case of two repeated items, the same rules apply,
with the same α, save a repeated choice is made from the
two repeated objects, with storage α⋅X/2, and a nonrepeated choice is made from the two non-repeated objects,
with storage (1-α)⋅X/2 (again respecting sampling without
replacement).
At test, an object response is probabilistically selected in
proportion to the association strengths stored in the matrix,
in the row for the tested pseudoword.

Figure 3: Pseudocode of statistical learning algorithm.

Results
Figure 4 displays the human and model performance on the
SR and non-SR pairs in Experiment 2. The model achieves
an excellent qualitative fit to the data. The best-fitting
parameters were X=1.118, α=0.468, and α′=0.028 (i.e.,
attention shifts to unrepeated pairs when some pair is oftrepeated). Figure 5 shows the predictions when the model
uses these parameters to fit the results for Experiment 1. The
presented model does an excellent job, but is tailored to fit
the observed data and hence should best be considered
descriptive and representative. Future experimentation will
be needed to test the assumptions and refine the model. The
general lesson for statistical learning is the importance of
strategies that are based on reasonable inferences drawn on
the basis of memory for the immediately preceding trial
(and perhaps earlier), particularly repetitions that provide
logical constraints on possible pairings.

Figure 3: Comparison of the best-fit model performance and
human learning in Exp. 2. Error bars are +/-SE.

1708

Figure 5: The model’s predictions for Exp. 1 using the bestfit parameters from Exp. 2. Although the model slightly
outperforms humans, especially for SR=1, the fit is not bad.

General Discussion
Learning from the successive presentation of instances
requires that learning in one moment be connected to
learning in previous moments. That is, in order for a learner
to use a past trial containing the information that A is linked
to a to rule out a link between A and b, the learning must
connect the noticed association on this trial to previously
learning. Given all that we know about human memory, the
temporal separation of the two learning trials should matter.
That is, unlike batch statistical processors, for human
learners, the order of learning trials and the temporal
contiguity of certain trials should matter. Two experiments
in the present study confirmed our hypothesis. Adult
learners performed significantly better in the learning
conditions with repeated pairings. A closer look of the
results in Experiment 1 showed that both repeated and nonrepeated words were learned better. This observation
suggests two plausible ways that the additional information
in temporal continuity may be utilized to facilitate learning.
In general, a key mechanism in a statistical associative
learner is to decide in real time which word-referent pairs to
attend to among all possible ones available in an
unambiguous environment. From this perspective, repeated
pairs may be temporally highlighted and therefore attract the
learner’s attention. On the other hand, the novelty of nonrepeated pairs may demand attention, causing oft-repeated
pairs to fade into the background as attention to them is
attenuated (as evidenced by the small α′ estimated for the
model). These two mechanisms may operate in parallel and
dynamically interweave. Indeed, the results in Experiment
2 provide direct evidence to support this proposal – human
learners in that study seem to be able to fully take advantage
of different types of temporal continuity by developing

different computational inferences, suggesting that the
learning system seems to be highly adaptive by discovering
and adjusting to the most effective way to process the
learning input.
Cross-situational statistical learning mechanisms may be
criticized on the basis that these processes may not be
efficient because they require the accumulation of statistical
evidence trial by trial until it is strong enough to
disambiguate learning situations. Nonetheless, statistical
regularities and physical constraints in the real world may
provide more information than the stimuli in our training. In
the real world of real physics, there is likely to be
considerable overlap between the objects present in a scene
from one moment to the next and in the topics of discourse
from one moment to next. Natural discourse seems likely—
as in our overlapping conditions—to shift incrementally
from one trial to the next. If language learners in the real
world are sensitive to overlapping regularities as we suspect,
cross-situational learning mechanisms which allocate more
attention to novel stimuli may be well fit for the task of
word learning.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Institute of Health
Grant R01HD056029 and National Science Foundation
Grant BCS 0544995. Special thanks to Jeanette Booher for
data collection.

References
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meaning of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Conway, C. & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). Modality
constrained statistical learning of tactile, visual, and
auditory sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 31, 24-39.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1, 1-55.
Goodman, J. C., Dale, P. S., Li, P. (2008). Does frequency
count? Parental input and the acquisition of vocabulary.
Journal of Child Language, 35(03), 515-531.
Kruschke, J. K. (2003). Attention in learning. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 171-175.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language
development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Smith, L. & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.
Yurovsky, D. & Yu, C. (2008). Mutual exclusivity in crosssituational statistical learning. Proceedings of the 30th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
715-720). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

1709

