UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Visual Information on Reference Assignment in Sentence Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/33w9t002

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Coco, Moreno
Keller, Frank

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Visual Information on Reference
Assignment in Sentence Production
Moreno I. Coco (M.I.Coco@sms.ed.ac.uk) and
Frank Keller (keller@inf.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK
Abstract

(depicted alternatively as Agent or Patient of the event). The
goal of the study was to investigate whether there is a sequential relation between the visual entities fixated their linguistic naming. A key observation is that the fixation of a
visual entity and the production of a linguistic referent are
closely timelocked; the latency between the two modalities is
referred to as the eye-voice span.

Reference is the cognitive mechanism that binds real-world entities to their conceptual counterparts. Recent psycholinguistic
studies using eye-tracking have shed light on the mechanisms
used to establish shared referentiality across linguistic and visual modalities. It is unclear, however, whether vision plays an
active role during linguistic processing. Here, we present a language production experiment that investigates how cued sentence encoding is influenced by visual properties in naturalistic
scenes, such as the amount of clutter and the number of potential actors, as well as the animacy of the cue. The results show
that clutter and number of actors correlate with longer response
latencies in production, and with the generation of more complex structures. Cue animacy interacts with both clutter and
number of actors, demonstrating a close coupling of linguistic
and visual processing in reference assignment.
Keywords: language production, sentence encoding, picture
description, visual information, clutter, accessibility, animacy.

A similar effect can be observed in VWP studies of language comprehension (e.g., Altmann & Kamide 1999). Here,
participants listen to a speech stimulus while viewing a scene,
and typically they fixate a visual entity shortly after a corresponding linguistic referent has been encountered in the
speech. The VWP has mainly been used in psycholinguistic
research, with a focus on how specific aspects of the linguistic stimuli cause certain visual objects to be selected as referents (Knoeferle et al., 2006; Snedeker & Trueswell, 2003). In
these studies, visual information is merely used to provide a
context for language processing, without taking into account
mechanism of scene comprehension studied extensively in
the visual cognition literature (Henderson et al., 2007). This is
compounded by the fact that the visual stimuli used in VWP
studies typically include clip-art objects arranged in arrays or
pseudo-scenes. The resulting visual processing is of reduced
complexity, perhaps consisting merely of responses to the linguistic input. Moreover, this visual simplicity often results in
a one-to-one mapping between visual and linguistic referents.
This is unrealistic compared to naturalistic scenes where the
same linguistic label can often correspond to multiple visual
objects.

Introduction
When humans comprehend or produce language, they rarely
do so in isolation. Linguistic information often occurs synchronously with visual information, e.g., in everyday activities such as attending a lecture or following directions on a
map. The visual context constrains the interpretation of the
linguistic material, and vice versa, making processing more
efficient and less ambiguous. Linguistic and visual processing have been investigated extensively in isolation, but there
is little work that explicitly relates the two modalities to each
other.
In this paper, we focus on a particular aspect of synchronous linguistic and visual processing, viz., the formation
and maintenance of shared reference between the two modalities. Essentially, this is the problem of determining that a visually perceived entity such as CUP is referentially linked to a
sequence of words such as the cup. On the linguistic level, the
complexity of this task increases if referring expressions are
embedded into larger linguistic structures (e.g., the cup on the
table, the spoon in the cup). On the visual level, complexity
increases if the CUP is embedded into a scene, for example an
interior such as a kitchen, which can contain a large number
of objects.
Insights into the mechanisms underlying the interaction between visual and linguistic processing can be obtained using
the Visual World Paradigm (VWP, Tanenhaus et al. 1995).
In VWP studies, participants are engaged in a synchronous
visual and linguistic task while their eye-movements are
recorded. For example, in a language production study conducted by Griffin & Bock (2000), participants were eyetracked while they described pictures containing two actors

A realistic theory of the formation and maintenance of reference across modalities has to treat visual information on a
par with linguistic information. Such a theory must explain
how mechanisms known to operate independently in both
modalities cooperate in referent assignment. The present paper aims to contribute to such a theory. On an abstract level,
the hypothesis we test is that the visual stimulus properties
exert an influence on linguistic processing. Previous work has
investigated the influence of low-level visual properties such
as saliency (a composite of color, intensity, and orientation,
Itti & Koch 2000). In a VWP study, Coco & Keller (2008)
found that saliency influences the resolution of prepositional
phrase (PP) attachment ambiguities in language comprehension. They found that saliency has referential effects; it is used
to predict which visual objects can be encoded as post-verbal
arguments in a given sentence.
However, it is important to note that low-level visual fea-

274

Clutter A way to define reference in vision is to look for
a global measure of visual information. Measures of visual
information can be defined in various ways; a common approach uses the notion of set size. The bigger the set of objects
in a visual search task, the slower the response time. Hence,
the number of countable visual objects has been assumed to
give a direct measure of visual information (Wolfe, 1998).
However, this notion of visual information has recently been
criticized (Rosenholtz et al., 2007), especially in the context of naturalistic scenes, where it can be come difficult, if
not impossible, to define and count each single object in the
scene.
An alternative way of quantifying visual information is
clutter (Rosenholtz et al., 2007) (see Figure 1 for an example). Clutter is defined as the state (organization, representation) of visual information in which visual search performance starts to degrade. Clutter can be modeled statistically
and quantified using the feature congestion method (for details see Rosenholtz et al. 2005). In our study, we use this
Clutter measure to investigate the effect of the amount of visual information on sentence encoding.

tures such as saliency are not referential per se; they are
properties of image regions, not of objects (Henderson et al.,
2007). It is therefore necessary to focus on higher-level visual
properties, which are clearly object-driven and likely to affect
the mechanisms of referent assignment in sentence encoding
directly. In this paper, we present a language production experiment that investigates how scene descriptions are influenced by high-level features such as visual clutter (the density
of objects in a scene) and of the number of animate referents
available. We use naturalistic scenes as visual stimuli to avoid
the limitations of visual arrays and clip-art images, traditionally used in the VWP literature.

Experiment
Design
In this experiment, participants had to describe a naturalistic
scene, after being prompted by a single word (the description
cue). As dependent variables we recorded Looking Time, i.e.,
the time that elapsed before the onset of the response, Description Time, i.e., the time taken to complete the response,
and we also investigated the syntactic structure of the response produced. The design of the experiment manipulated
both visual and linguistic referential information. We varied
the total amount of visual information present in the scene in
the factor Clutter (Minimal vs. Cluttered). We also manipulated the number of animate objects present in the scene in
the factor Actors (One vs. Two). On the linguistic side, we
varied the prompt given to participants for their description
in the factor Cue, which could refer either to an animate or an
inanimate object in the scene (Animate vs. Inanimate). The
scenes were designed such that they always contained at least
one animate object and two identical inanimate objects, so
as to introduce systematic visual referential ambiguity. As an
example, see Figure 1, where the clipboard is the ambiguous
inanimate object. Note that the animate objects are referentially unambiguous, even in the two actor condition (man and
woman in the example stimulus).
The null hypothesis for this experiment is that visual and
linguistic factors do not interact in language processing. This
would mean that Clutter and Actors should only influence
Looking Time in a way that is compatible with behavior
in standard visual search tasks: we expect longer Looking
Time in the Cluttered condition, as more objects have to be
searched, and longer Looking Time also in the Two Actors
condition, which contains an additional object. Our experimental hypothesis is that visual information has an impact on
language production, which means that we expect an interaction between the visual factors Clutter and Actor and the
linguistic factor Cue (in addition to the main effects of the
visual factors that may be caused by standard visual search
processes).
In the following we will give a more detailed motivation
for the factors included in the design and describe how they
were operationalized.

Actors and Animacy A crucial feature that distinguishes
different types of real-world entities is animacy. Animacy
is known to play a role in language production; in particular, it can influence the assignment of grammatical functions and word order (Branigan et al., 2008). Animate entities
are conceptually more accessible than inanimate ones (Levelt
et al., 1999) and therefore privileged during syntactic encoding. This is reflected by the fact that animate entities are more
likely to be encoded with the grammatical function subject,
while inanimate entities occur mostly with the function object.
In this study we took a broader view of the feature animacy; animacy is not only a linguistic notion, but it is also
visually encoded. We therefore manipulated animacy in both
the linguistic and the visual modality. Visually, we introduce
different degrees of animacy by changing the number of actors depicted in the scene. Linguistically, we either gave an
animate or an inanimate noun as the cue for sentence production.

Method
The experimental design crossed three factors, each with two
levels. The two visual factors were number of Actors in the
scene (One or Two) and the degree of visual Clutter (Minimal
or Cluttered). The linguistic factor was the Cue given to the
participants to prompt their sentence production (Animate or
Inanimate).
As stimuli, we created a set of 24 photo-realistic scenes
using Photoshop by cutting and pasting visual objects from
a set of preexisting photographs. Differences in luminosity,
contrast and color balance between the different photographs
were adjusted through an accurate use of layers, luminosity
masks and color balancing. In order to (1) control for the se-

275

Results and Discussion
We analyze two response time measures. The first one is
Looking Time, i.e., the time participants spent scanning the
image before starting to type. It is calculated from the onset
of the trial until participants pressed the first key on the keyboard. The second response time measure, Description Time,
is the time participants took to type their response. It is calculated from the first key press until Enter was hit to move on
to the next trial.
We also analyzed the syntactic patterns in the responses
produced by participants. For this, we tagged each sentence
produced using a an automatic part-of-speech tagger, viz.,
Ratnaparkhi’s (1996) maximum entropy tagger, which performs with an accuracy of 96.6%. The tagger uses the Penn
Treebank tagset to assign syntactic categories to words. We
collapsed the various tags for nouns in the tagset (e.g., NNS,
NNP) and verbs (e.g., VBD, VBN) to two general categories
(NN, VB). For each sentence, we recorded the frequency of
these two categories, as well as the occurrence of existential there and clause coordinator and. We also identified and
counted the number of passive constructions (for this the full
tag set was used, which marks passive verb morphology).
The statistical analyses were carried out using linear
mixed-effect models (Jaeger, 2008) to determine the effect
the categorical predictor variables on both reaction times and
syntactic frequency. We chose mixed models for their ability
to capture both fixed and random effects (Baayen et al., 2008).
We included the following predictors in our analysis: Actors
(One or Two), Clutter (Minimal, Cluttered), Cue (Animate,
Inanimate) and Language (Native, NonNative). The baseline
on which the Intercept was calculated was given by the condition Cue-Inanimate, Actor-One, Clutter-Cluttered, LanguageNative. The mixed models were built and evaluated following
the model selection procedure suggested by Crawley (2007).
We started with a fully specified model containing all the predictors and all possible interactions and then we reduced the
model iteratively by removing the highest order interaction
with the highest p-value. The estimates were recomputed at
each iteration.

Figure 1: An example of an experimental stimulus, with the
four visual variants which occur in the experiment and the
two linguistic cues presented.

mantic variability across visual scenes and (2) ground language production in a restricted semantic domain, all pictures
were created using six different interior environments: bathroom, bedroom, dining room, entrance, kitchen, and office.
Each interior was represented by four different scenes. For
each scene, we created four variants by manipulating Clutter and Actors, as illustrated in Figure 1. The scenes were
designed such that the inanimate object was referentially ambiguous, i.e., each picture contained two visual instances of
it, while the animate one was unambiguous, even in the Two
Actors condition.
In the experiment, participants were first presented with a
set of instructions explaining the task and giving examples.
After a practice phase, they saw one visual stimulus at a time,
together with the linguistic cue. They were instructed to provide a written description of the stimulus using the cue. The
total of 192 different items were distributed over four lists using a Latin square design. Each subject saw one of the lists,
i.e., 48 stimuli in total (each of the 24 scenes was presented
twice, once with animate and one with inanimate cue). The
stimuli were randomized for each participant, and presented
without fillers. The experiment took about 15 minutes in total.

Reaction Times Table 1 presents the coefficients and pvalues of the mixed model for Looking Time (only significant
predictors and interactions are included). The model intercept
represents the response time in the baseline condition in milliseconds, and coefficients indicate the effect a given predictor has on Looking Time (again in milliseconds). We find that
participants were significantly faster to scan the pictures in
the condition Clutter-Minimal compared to Clutter-Cluttered.
This finding is likely to be an effect of visual search, as the
scene needs to be searched for the cued object; in the Cluttered condition more objects are present, leading to longer
search time.
Significantly shorter Looking Time was also observed in
the Cue-Animate condition. Again, this can be explained in
terms of visual search behavior, as our stimuli contain more

The experiment was realized using the WebExp software
package for conducting psychological experiments over the
web. WebExp is able to measure reaction times with accuracy comparable to that of lab-based experiments, as shown
by Keller et al. (2009) for self-paced reading data.
Participation was open to both native and non-native speakers of English (this was included as a factor in the analysis). The sample included 32 participants, including 16 native
speakers and 16 non-native speakers.

276

Predictor
Intercept
Clutter-Min
Cue-Anim
Language-NonNative
Actors-Two:Cue-Anim
Clutter-Min:Cue-Anim
Predictor
Intercept
Actors-Two
Language-NonNative
Cue-Anim

Looking Time
Coefficient
p
3774.6
0.0006
-503
0.01
-1097.4
0.01
1120.3
0.04
-468.4
0.05
596.2
0.01
Description Time
Coefficient
p
12053
0.0024
987.2
0.04
2139.3
0.01
-1801.1
0.0001

Predictor
Intercept
Cue-Anim
Actors-Two:Cue-Anim
Predictor
Intercept
Clutter-Min
Cue-Anim
Actors-Two:Cue-Anim
Clutter-Min:Cue-Anim

Noun
Coefficient
p
2.2520
0.0002
-0.3333
0.0001
0.2252
0.01
Verb
Coefficient
p
1.6129
0.0006
0.1968
0.004
0.2307
0.0001
0.1624
0.03
-0.2267
0.002

Table 2: Mixed effects models of noun frequency and verb
frequency

Table 1: Mixed effects models of Looking Time and Description Time

is thus shortened by the larger set of possibilities. Moreover,
the unambiguous visual reference of Cue-Animate may boost
the selection of those conceptual structures that are related to
the actor cued, contributing on the decrease of looking time.
This interpretation is supported also by our syntactic analysis
(see next section) in which Actor and Cue-Animate positively
correlate with the use of nouns and verbs. Participants produce longer sentence structures, often encoding both Actors.
Table 1 also presents the mixed model for Description
Time (again only significant predictors and interactions are
included). The results overlap with those for Looking Time.
For condition Cue-Animate, participants were faster to generate a sentence compared to Cue-Inanimate. As for Looking
Time, this result can be explained by the fact that animate
entities are more accessible in language production, and that
visual search is faster, as there is only at most one other animate object in the scene. We also find significantly increased
Description Time for the Actor-Two condition. An inspection
of the responses (see below) shows that participants tend to
encode both actors in their descriptions of the scene, which
explains why encoding takes longer in this condition, compared to the Actor-One condition, in which only one actor
is encoded. Again, non-native participants show a longer response time than native ones, presumably because sentence
production is slower in non-native speakers.

inanimate than animate cues, thus making it easier to discriminate animate objects, leading to reduced search time. In addition, the cue animate object was always unambiguous, while
the cued inanimate object was always present twice in the
scene, creating referential ambiguity, and thus increasing visual search time. There may also be an explanation in linguistic terms: As mentioned above, animate entities are conceptually more accessible than inanimate ones, which gives them a
privileged status during syntactic encoding.
We also found that in the condition Language-NonNative,
participants take longer to scan the picture. This can be explained by the fact that non-native speaker presumably take
longer to decode the cue and to plan their utterance.
Turning to the interactions, we found that Clutter-Minimal
significantly interacts with Cue-Animate: participants took
longer to respond to animate prompts in the minimal clutter condition. This interaction cannot be explained purely in
terms of visual search. The Clutter-Minimal, Cue-Animate
condition is the one with the fewest competing objects (minimal clutter) and only one or two animate objects to consider;
visual search should therefore be particularly fast, and the interaction should be absent or have a negative coefficient. The
fact that we find a positive interaction indicates that a linguistic process is at work. In a visual scene with few objects
it is more difficult to retrieve enough information regarding
actions that a potential actor can perform. Thus, participants
spend more time scanning the scene and planning their utterance before sentence encoding starts.
There is also a significant negative interaction of ActorsTwo and Cue-Animate; Looking Time is reduced in this condition. Again, this cannot be explained purely in visual terms;
the presence of two actors cued by the animate cue should
lead to longer search times, as two objects need to be considered instead of one. Instead, we find a negative coefficient
for this interaction. Presumably, the more animate entities the
scene contains, the more conceptual structures are activated.
The time spent on planning a conceptual structure to encode

Syntactic Categories Table 2 presents the results for the
syntactic analysis of the picture descriptions generated by the
participants. We fitted separate mixed models to predict the
number of nouns and the number of verbs included in the
responses. Again, only significant predictors and interactions
are listed in the table; the intercept represents the noun or
verb frequency in the baseline condition, and the coefficients
indicate how this frequency increases or decreases under the
influence of the relevant predictor.
The results indicate that significantly fewer nouns are produced in Cue-Animate condition. This condition was visually
unambiguous, and thus required less elaborate descriptions
compared to the Cue-Inanimate condition, for which partici-

277

Syntactic Constructions We also selectively analyzed a
number of syntactic constructions contained in the responses
generated by the participants. Such construction provide information about the sentence structures employed to describe
the pictures. We counted how often participants employed the
existential there construction. The results show that this construction occurred less frequently in the Cue-Animate condition (coefficient −0.2153, p < 0.0001). This indicates that
participants were less likely to give static spatial descriptions
of animate visual referents, compared to inanimate ones.
We also find that and is used less frequently in the CueAnimate condition (coefficient −0.0868, p < 0.0001). This
result can be attributed to the ambiguous visual reference of
Cue-Inanimate. The use of and marks a strategy of ambiguity
resolution when both visual referents for Cue-Inanimate are
linguistically encoded. The connection between referents is
established by combining clauses through coordination.
When we analyzed the number of passive constructions,
we again found a significant negative effect of Cue-Animate
(coefficient −0.0436, p < 0.0001). This is in line with standard findings in the sentence production literature: animate
entities are likely to be realized as subjects of active constructions, while inanimate tend to be realized subjects of passive
constructions (assuming that the cued entity is typically realized as a subject). An example of a production that contains
the use of both coordination and passive is A teddy is being
hugged by the girl sitting on the bed and another teddy is
sitting on the floor at the corner of the bed.

pants generated longer sentences in order to unambiguously
pick out one of the two visual referents available in this condition. Moreover, the competition between the two visual objects for the inanimate cue was often resolved by encoding
both visual referents within the same sentence structure. An
example of a sentence produced in this condition is The mug
is beside the man, another is on top of the files, both mugs
have pencils in them. Except of the referring expression itself,
all nouns are used in combination with spatial prepositions to
unambiguously differentiate each visual referent.
However, when Cue-Animate was in interaction with
Actor-Two, participants produced significantly more nouns.
This correlates with the shorter Looking Times found for
the same interaction. Participants often referentially encoded
both visual actors within the same sentence structure. An example is A man stands behind a counter in a hotel while a
customer writes on a piece of paper. Even though the cue
given (here, the man) refers only to one actor and was visually unambiguous, the participant encoded also the second
actor.
Turning now to the analysis of the number of verbs produced, we again find a significant effect of Cue-Animate, but
with a positive coefficient, which means that participants generated more verbs than in the Cue-Inanimate condition. This
underlines the connection between the feature Animacy and
the semantics of verbs. As verbs encode actions, they are less
likely to occur in descriptions of inanimate entities. The latter
tend to include verbs describing static, mostly spatial, relations like lie or place, whereas animate entities can be related
to a broader range of events, both static and dynamic, resulting in more verbs being generated.

General Discussion
The overall goal of this study was to investigate how visual
factors influence sentence encoding. The analysis focused on
shared reference between the two modalities, and the mechanisms through which reference is established in language
production. We assumed an interactive account of visual and
linguistic processing, where informational changes in one
modality are reflected in the processing of the other one. In
our experimental design, we manipulated different aspects of
visual reference such as visual clutter and the number of potential actors, and the animacy of the cue used for sentence
production. Moreover, we systematically introduced visual
referential ambiguity for the inanimate cue in order to investigate the strategies of ambiguity resolution adopted.
The analysis of Looking Time shows significant effects of
the visual factors such as Clutter and Actors: the more clutter or actors, the more time the participants spend before
starting to type the sentence. The Animacy of the cue was
also significant: an inanimate cue resulted in longer Looking
Time, mainly because of visual referential ambiguity. However, more interesting were the interactions between the visual factors and Animacy. If we assumed independence between visual and linguistic processing, we would expect response latencies typical of standard visual search tasks, based
on the referential properties of the cue and influenced only
by the visual properties of the stimulus. Instead, we found a

An interaction between Actor-Two and Cue-Animate is
also present, which is consistent with the main effect of CueAnimate. The more animate entities are presented in the visual scene, the more verbs are used to relate them with the
event that is being encoded. An example description is A
woman drinks from a cup while a man prepares a chicken
to be cooked.
The factor Clutter-Minimal also has a significantly positive coefficient, which means that more verbs are generated if
the scene is uncluttered. However, there is also a significant
negative interaction of Clutter-Minimal with Cue-Animate.
The minimal amount of visual information available in the
Clutter-Minimal scenes makes it more difficult to select and
encode the actions performed by the actor, resulting in fewer
verbs being generated. This result is in line with the longer
Looking Time for the same interaction. We can assume that
the greater number of verbs found in Clutter-Minimal can be
attributed to Cue-Inanimate, in which the ambiguous visual
reference leads to more elaborate descriptions. An example
description that illustrates this interpretation is An open book
is sitting on the counter and there is another one sitting on
the table.

278

References

clear interaction of visual information and Animacy. A visual
scene with minimal clutter means that the set of actions that
can be used to relate animate actors is impoverished. Thus,
longer visual search is required to integrate the animate cues
with information of the scene, the opposite of what is predicted under an explanation in terms of visual search alone.
On the other hand, two actors in a scene mean a larger set
of conceptual structures is available to relate to the animate
cue. Also, an animate actor is easier to relate to another animate actor in the same sentence with an action description,
compare to an animate and an inanimate entity. This interpretation meshes with the results we obtained for the syntactic analysis of the responses produced by participants. For
the Actors-Two and Cue-Animate conditions, we found that
longer sentences were produced (containing more nouns and
verbs), often encoding both actors. Such results can only be
explained in an account in which linguistic and visual processing interact closely.

Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: restricting the domain of subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247–264.
Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixed-effects
modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and
items. Journal of memory and language, 59, 390–412.
Branigan, H., Pickering, M., & Tanaka, M. (2008). Contribution of animacy to grammatical function assignment and
word order during production. Lingua, 2, 172–189.
Coco, M. I., & Keller, F. (2008). Competition between visual
and linguistic resources. Presented as poster at AMLAP,14,
Cambridge, UK.
Crawley, M. (2007). The R book. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.
Griffin, Z., & Bock, K. (2000). What the eyes say about
speaking. Psychological science, 11, 274–279.
Henderson, J., Brockmole, J., Castelhano, M., & Mack,
M. (2007). Visual saliency does not account for eyemovements during visual search in real-world scenes. Eye
movement research: insights into mind and brain.
Itti, L., & Koch, C. (2000). A saliency-based search mechanism for overt and covert shifts of visual attention. Vision
Research, 40, 1489–1506.
Jaeger, T. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
anovas (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of memory and language, 59, 433–446.
Keller, F., Gunasekharan, S., Mayo, N., & Corley, M. (2009).
Timing accuracy of web experiments: A case study using
the WebExp software package. Behavior Research Methods, 41, 1–12.
Knoeferle, P., Crocker, M., Scheepers, C., & Pickering, M.
(2006). The influence of the immediate visual context on
incremental thematic role-assignment:evidence from eyemovements in depicted events. Cognition, (pp. 481–529).
Levelt, W., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. (1999). A theory of
lexical access in speech production. Behavioral and brain
sciences, (pp. 1–75).
Ratnaparkhi, A. (1996). A maximum entropy model for partof-speech tagging. In In Proceedings of the conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing, (pp.
133–142).
Rosenholtz, R., Li, Y., & Nakano, L. (2007). Measuring visual clutter. Journal of Vision, 7, 1–22.
Rosenholtz, R., Mansfield, J., & Jin, Z. (2005). Feature congestion, a measure of display clutter. SIGCHI, (pp. 761–
770).
Snedeker, J., & Trueswell, J. (2003). Using prosody to avoid
ambiguity: Effects of speaker awareness and referential
context. Journal of Memory and Language, (pp. 103–130).
Tanenhaus, M. S.-K., M.J., Eberhard, K., & Sedivy, J. (1995).
Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken
language comprehension. Science, (pp. 632–634).
Wolfe, J. (1998). Visual search. Attention, (pp. 13–73).

We also analyzed Description Time and the syntactic structure of the responses and found that these are mainly influenced by the animacy of the cue and the presence of visual
referential ambiguity. When the cue was inanimate, participants spent more time resolving the visual ambiguity. The
sentences produced in this condition contained more nouns,
which were used to spatially disambiguate between the two
competing visual objects. Moreover, disambiguation often
occurred together with the use of conjunction and. In line
with previous research on language production, the use of
passives and existential there was correlated with cue animacy. An inanimate cue is more likely to be a subject of a
passive and correlated with static spatial descriptions.
Our results are limited by the fact that we only had two response time measures available, Looking Time and Description Time. A more fine-grained way of investigating the time
course of sentence production is desirable, e.g., using eyetracking. In particular we have to be careful not to presuppose that Looking Time corresponds to the time spend doing
visual search and planning the resulting utterance, while Description Time corresponds to the time spend generating the
utterance. In reality, these two processes are likely to happen
in an interleaved manner, rather than in sequence.
In future work we will further investigate integrated reference from a lexical point of view. In particular, we are interested in the relationship between contextual scene information (bedroom, kitchen, etc.) and the lexical items generated. This could be investigated using additional statistical techniques, e.g., cluster analysis. Furthermore, we are
planning to conduct an eye-tracking experiment to measure
the impact of visual factors on sentence encoding more directly. Such a study is likely to shed light on (1) the changes
in eye-movement patters triggered by visual factors such as
clutter, (2) the effects of cueing a linguistic referent which
may, e.g., result in more localized visual search behavior, and
(3) whether visual referential ambiguity and its linguistic resolution are correlated.

279

