UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Persistence of Procedural Memory for Content-Specific Prior Memory Operations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/49s168ww

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Was, Christopher A

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Persistence of Procedural Memory for Content-Specific
Prior Memory Operations
Christopher A. Was(CWAS@Kent.Edu)
Department of Educational Foundations and Special Services, 405 White Hall
Kent, OH 44240 USA
Abstract

but not actively kept in the focus of attention (e.g. Cowan,
1995, 1999; Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995; Oberaurer, 2002).
More importantly, Woltz and Was (2007) proposed that the
priming effects related to available long-term memory
(ALTM) could be in part explained by persistent memory
for prior operations and not by activation of semantic
content as describe in spreading of activation accounts of
priming effects (e.g., Collins & Loftus, 1975). This
explanation was in part based on the finding that regardless
of the content of the comparison trials (category exemplars
or category features) priming effects were found as long as
the memory set identification and subsequent comparison
trials were congruent, but were not present when the
memory set and comparisons were incongruent.
This interpretation is perhaps representative of Ericsson
and Kintsch’s (1995) conceptualization of long-term
working memory (LT-WM) as immediate and effortless
access to LTM within highly familiar tasks or knowledge
domains. This access to LTM is described as “specific
control processes used to encode heeded information in
LTM in a retrievable form” (p. 211). If one conceptualizes
the task employed by Woltz and Was (2006, 2007) in terms
of repeated operations, then the increased availability of
elements within LTM occurs due to the strengthening of
those memory operations through repetition.
It may also be that the findings of previous studies of
ALTM represent long-term semantic transfer (McNamara,
2005). Unlike short-term priming effects, long-term
semantic transfer does not rely on the spread of activation to
increase the availability of long-term memory elements but
instead relies on the repetition of specific cognitive
operations performed previously.
A second reason for these possible interpretations is the
duration of the available LTM effects. Woltz and Was
(2007) found that when a minute of intervening tasks
transpired (a lag of 32 trials) between the processing in
working memory of specified content and the measure of
increased availability of LTM, the priming effects were still
present. These enduring priming effects are not
unreasonable for perceptual or repetition priming, but are on
the order of long-term priming effects for conceptual and
semantic priming (Becker, Moscovitch, Behrman, and
Joordens, 1997). Many models of memory make a clear
distinction between semantic and procedural memory (e.g.,
Anderson, 1993; Schacter & Tulving, 1994). It is possible
that these enduring effects are indicative of this distinction.
In contrast to the momentary activation of semantic content,
memory for cognitive operations is assumed to be longer
lasting.

Woltz and Was (2006, 2007) demonstrated persistent and
sizable priming effects following simple processing of
information in working memory. The results of these previous
studies were interpreted as the demonstration of the
strengthening of prior memory operations. In the current
study, these priming effects were found to be present
following minimum of a 24-hour delay between processing of
information in working memory and measures of increased
availability of long-term memory elements.
Keywords: Working memory; long-term working memory;
priming

Introduction
In the results of several experiments, Woltz and Was (2006,
2007) demonstrated increased availability of long-term
memory (LTM) elements following simple working
memory (WM) processing. An impetus for the first Woltz
and Was (2006) investigation was recent proposals
regarding the content and nature of WM (e.g. Cowan, 1995,
1999; Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995; Oberaurer, 2002). Many of
these models include activated or highly accessible
components of LTM as part of WM. Cowan (1995, 1999)
proposed an embedded processes model of WM. In this
model, the contents of WM consist of LTM, a subset of
LTM elements that are in an active state, and a subset of
those activated LTM elements that are currently in the focus
of attention. Woltz and Was (2006, 2007) had hoped to
demonstrate, as Cowan and others have proposed, that
processing in WM activates LTM elements associated with
the contents of the focus of attention.
In their experiments, Woltz and Was (2006, 2007)
required participants to remember a short list of words
containing two or more exemplars from each of two
categories. Following the memory list presentation,
participants were required to identify one or both categories
and then later perform a category comparison task. The
category comparison task required participants to determine
if two words were of the same or different category. The
category comparison trials represented memory set
exemplars and/or associates (primed trials), or category
exemplars from a category not previously encountered
(unprimed trials). In all five of the experiments it was found
that participants were faster and more accurate at identifying
exemplars from the same category when the exemplars were
primed than when they were not.
Woltz and Was (2006, 2007) interpreted the results within
the context of models of WM that include instant and direct
access to LTM elements that are available for processing,

365

In an attempt to gather further evidence for the
strengthening of specific memory operations explanation the
current study employed a similar experimental paradigm as
found in the Woltz and Was (2006, 2007) studies.
Specifically the task used in Experiment 1 from Woltz and
Was (2007) was employed with one major change. The
category comparison trials did not occur following the
intervening task, but were delayed by 24 hours. To
foreshadow, results of the current experiment are similar to
those previously demonstrated. Again, the interpretation of
the data is that of strengthening of specific memory
operations following processing in WM.

three words from one category could not be presented
contiguously.
There was a 1 s delay following the final memory set item
followed by 12 Number Stroop items (Morton, 1969; Woltz,
Gardner & Gyll, 2000). The Number Stroop frames were
preceded by the following instruction for 4 s: Get ready to
EVALUATE NUMBER STRINGS… Rest four fingers on the
number keys 1,2,3,4 at the top left of the keyboard. Each
Number Stroop item presented a string of between 1 and 4
identical digits (e.g., 222, 44, 3333, 1). Participants were
instructed to respond to each string by entering the string
length (e.g., 3, 2, 4, 1 for the previous examples). Prior
research has shown a Stroop-like interference effect when
the numbers in the string differ from the length evaluation,
and a facilitation effect when the numbers agree with the
length evaluation. A feedback frame presented the accuracy
and average response latency for the number string
evaluations of each trial.
After completing the 12 Number Stroop items,
participants were then prompted to recall the three words of
the focus category in order. There were three recall frames
that each asked, What was the <first, second, third> word
that you were to remember? Participants were instructed to
type the first two letters of each word they were
remembering. Following the recall of focus category
exemplars and a 1 s blank frame, a separate frame asked
participants to identify the other category in the memory set.
Two category names were presented one the left and one
on the right sections of the display: the ignored category
name and the unprimed category name. Participants pressed
the 1 or 2 key corresponding to the left and right category
name. The position of the ignored category name was
randomized on each trial. This question was asked to make
sure that participants evaluated the category membership of
the ignored category during memory set processing.
Woltz and Was (2007) incorporated the Number Stroop
items before the recall frames in their first experiment. In
the current study, this order of task components was
reversed to ensure that participants were required to
maintain the focus category memory load items, as well as
the identity of the ignored category, active for a sustained
period of time. It was hypothesized that the magnitude of
priming may be diminished had the participants completed
immediate recall of the focused category exemplars and
made the ignored category determination immediately
following the memory load. Importantly, Woltz and Was
(2006) found that the magnitude of increased ALTM effects
were not decreased by a concurrent attention demands.
The day two session began with participants receiving
directions regarding the category comparison trials. Each
trial began with the instruction, Get ready to COMPARE
words… Rest your fingers on the D and L keys. This
instruction was presented for 4 s followed by a 2 s blank
screen to allow participants to prepare for the comparison
frames. Each comparison frame began with two asterisks
presented for 500 ms, one on top of the other in the location
that the two stimulus words would appear. This cue was

Method
Participants. A total of 108 undergraduate students (78%
female) participated in the experiment in exchange for
course credit in a college of education course. The median
age of the sample was 20 (range = 18-49).
Apparatus. Participants performed the experiments on
personal computers with 17” SVGA monitors, standard
keyboards, and circumaural sealed headphones. The tasks
were programmed using E-Prime software (Schnieder,
Eschman, &Zucclotto, 2002).
Experimental Task. Category stimuli were adapted from
earlier research (Woltz & Was, 2007, 2006). Order and
procedure of the current task were similar to that of
Experiment 1 in Woltz and Was (2007). Figure 1 illustrates
the sequence of trial components over the two-day task. All
task components were presented visually via the computer
display, with the exception of the memory set which was
presented aurally via headphones. The auditory presentation
of the six-word memory set was necessary because the
words would later appear in some of the category
comparisons. It was assumed that the change in modality
would eliminate facilitation from perceptual priming.
Figure 1 presents and example of the experimental task.
The current experiment required two sessions to complete.
The two sessions were completed on consecutive days with
a minimum of a 24-hour and maximum of 32-hour delay
between sessions. On day one, each trial began with a
statement indicating that a new word list would be
presented, and designating the category that should be
remembered (i.e., the focus category name). Moving
forward from this frame was self-paced, followed by a
frame for 4 s containing the words, Get ready to memorize
words. This was followed by a low tone for 1 s, a 1 s delay,
and the aural presentation of six memory set words, three
from each of the two memory set categories. Each sound
file for the individual memory set words was 2 s in length,
beginning with approximately 500 ms of silence and ending
with as much silence as needed to fill the remainder of 2 s.
Each word sound file was preceded with the visual
presentation of an asterisk for 500 ms, and which remained
visible during the auditory file presentation. A 1 s interstimulus interval separated each word presentation and the
subsequent asterisk. The ordering of the exemplars from
the two categories was random with the constraint that the

366

Figure 1. Example of Task Components
followed by a blank screen for 750 ms, and then the two
stimulus words. The stimuli remained on the screen until
the participant responded by pressing either the L (for like)
or D (for different) key. A 1 s interval separated the
response and the attention cue for the subsequent
comparison. During the entire set of comparison frames, the
lower left portion of the display contained the reminder
D=Different, and the lower right portion of the display
contained L=Like. Participants were instructed to decide if
the two exemplars in each comparison came from the same
category (L response) or different categories (D response).
A total of 16 category comparisons were completed per
trial; four warm-up comparisons (two positive and two
negative comprised of content unrelated to focused, ignored,
and unprimed categories), and four comparisons from each
of the three content types. Categories comparisons were
comprised of three content types: focus category exemplars
(i.e., from the memory load category gems in the current
example), ignored category exemplars (i.e., from the
memory load category, trees in this example), and unprimed
category exemplars (e.g., from a category not presented in
the memory load such as relatives). Half of the category
comparisons from each content type were negative matches
(e.g., oak tomato) Negative match comparisons were never
formed by combining exemplars from the three content
types. Half of all trials of the focused and ignored content
were exemplars from the memory set, or old exemplars (i.e.,

oak elm), and half were new exemplars from the memory set
categories but not in the memory set (i.e., spruce maple).
The distinction of old-new exemplar was not pertinent to the
unprimed category. As in previous experiments (Woltz &
Was, 2007, 2006), 24 sets of category triplets were created
from 72 categories each having six exemplars.
Following the category comparison frames, summary
feedback was provided for the entire trial. Participants were
informed of their overall accuracy for the recall frames and
their accuracy and average response time for the category
comparison frames. Prior to the next trial, participants were
reminded that they should try to obtain perfect accuracy on
the recall frames and try to respond as quickly as possible
without making errors on the category comparison. The
feedback and goal reminder frames were self-paced.
Procedure. Participants performed the experimental task
in two 1-hr sessions. They performed the experiment in
groups of 1-4 subjects, with each participant seated in a
computer carrel separated by sound-deadening panels. Equal
numbers of participants (n=18) performed the 6
counterbalanced versions of the experiment.
Category comparison frames were organized in trials
around the same category triplets within the memory sets
from Day 1. Trials and category frames within trials were
randomized. As stated previously, a total of 16 category
comparison frames were complete per trial; four warm-up
comparisons (two positive and two negative comprised of

367

content unrelated to focused, ignored, and unprimed
categories), and four comparisons from each of the three
content types. That latter 12 comparisons in randomized
order for each participant.
The category triplets were organized in order to minimize
conceptual overlap between categories. Counter-balanced
across participants, one category from each set was assigned
to be the focused category in the memory set, one was
assigned to be the ignored category in the memory set, and
the remaining one represented a category unrelated to the
memory set. Additionally, of the six exemplars in each
category, three were assigned to the memory set (and direct
priming condition of the comparison phase) and three to the
indirect priming condition of the comparison phase. Six
versions of the experiment were created that represented a
complete counterbalancing of triplet assignment to priming
condition (focused, ignored, and unprimed).

Table 1. Mean Error Rate (Percentage) and Response
Latency (Milliseconds) for Positive Match Comparisons by
Priming Condition
Error
Latency
Priming
M
SD
M
SD
Condition
Unprimed
8.61
6.99
1162
305
Old ignored

6.73

7.40

1089

296

Old focused

5.63

6.46

1049

275

New ignored

7.35

7.72

1143

315

New focused

7.55

6.58

1143

320

index is corrected as a function of error rate. This
transformation is interpreted as the number of correct
responses per minute in the current analysis. The index
incorporates meaningful variance from both errors and
latency and therefore provides a more complete descriptive
of the size of priming effects in a single metric.
Figure 2 presents the mean response speed for positive
match category comparisons. As can be seen in the figure,
there was a significant overall speed advantage for primed
categories (focused and ignored) compared to the unprimed
categories, F(1,107) = 69.24, partial η2 = .39. Furthermore,
response speed was greater for the focused category as
compared to the ignored category, F(1,107) = 4.03, partial
η2 = .04.
Figure 3 presents category comparison mean response
speed comparing exemplars from the memory load and new
exemplars to unprimed category comparisons. Not
surprisingly, category comparison speed for memory load
exemplars was much higher than for unprimed category
comparisons, F(1,107) = 133.28, partial η2 = .56. The speed
of the ignored category comparison was significantly higher
than unprimed comparisons, F(1,107) = 68.77, partial η2 =
.39, and focused category comparison from the memory
load were also significantly faster than ignored category
comparisons with memory load exemplars, F(1,107) =
16.02, partial η2 = .13.
Of greater interest to the current research is the contrast
between category comparisons based on new exemplars and
unprimed category comparisons. Comparing all primed
category comparisons (focused and ignored categories) with
new exemplars to unprimed comparisons revealed a
significant difference in speed, F(1,107) = 9.42 partial η2 =
.07. As with memory load comparisons, the contrasts
between unprimed and ignored category comparisons
containing new exemplars was also significant, F(1,107) =
7.32, partial η2 = .36. The contrast between comparisons
containing new focused and ignored comparisons was in
opposite direction of they hypothesized results, but not
significant (F < 1).

Results
Due to the within-subjects design utilized in this study,
repeated measures analysis of variance was used to test the
hypothesized effects. An alpha level of .05 was used in all
statistical tests performed in this experiment.
Participants were relatively accurate in selecting and
recalling the focus category words following the Number
Stroop trials. Mean accuracy was 92.17% (SD = 10.78) for
the first word, 91.97% (SD = 14.14) for the second word,
and 90.86% (SD=15.50) for the third word. Participants
were highly accurate at correctly identifying the ignored
category in the memory set (M = 97.22%, SD = 6.38.).
Consistent with other measures of the Stroop effect,
participants were more accurate in evaluating consistent
numeral strings (M = 99.36%, SD = .01) compared to
inconsistent strings (M = 95.03%, SD = .10), F(1,07) =
21.85, partial η2 = .17. They also responded more quickly to
consistent (M = 658 ms, SD = 177) compared to inconsistent
strings (M = 710, SD = 152), F(1,107) = 26.45, partial η2 =
.20 The occurrence of Stroop-type interference supports the
assumption that the intervening task was attention
demanding for participants.
Only data from positive match category comparisons
were analyzed on the basis of prior evidence that priming
effects are insignificant in negative match comparisons
(Woltz & Was, 2006, 2007). Table 1 displays the response
means and standard deviations of error and latency for
positive match comparisons by condition. As can be seen in
this table, the expected patterns of priming in the ignored
and focused categories compared to unprimed comparisons
were evident in both response accuracy and latency. As in
previous studies using the same basic experimental
paradigm (Woltz & Was, 2007, 2006) latency and accuracy
were combined and transformed. Each participant’s number
of correct responses per condition was divided by the sum
of the response latency for all comparisons in that condition
(both correct and incorrect) and then divided by 60,000.
This transformation results in a measure of response speed
because it is the reciprocal of response latency and the speed

368

Figure 2. Response speed by priming condition
These findings closely resemble those of Experiment 1 of
Woltz and Was (2007) with a delay of at least 24 hours
between the memory load presentation and category
comparison trials, thus indicating that the increased
availability of LTM is present following a 24-hour delay.
Another important goal of this experiment was to test the
long-lasting priming effects of direct priming, as measured
by the old exemplars from the memory set, versus the longlasting effects of indirect priming as measured by the new
exemplars not in the memory set. A significant speed
advantage was found for category comparisons containing
old exemplars versus those using new exemplars F(1,107) =
88.46, partial η2 = .45. Most models of ALTM make the
assumption that prior attention processes play a principal
role in determining the levels of LTM availability. Although
not a surprising finding, these results do reflect that
assumption.

Figure 3. Response speed by priming condition and
exemplar type.
The savings demonstrated in the category comparisons
using indirect priming (category exemplars not in the
memory load) was also substantial. The savings for focused
and ignored category associates combined as compared to
unprimed trials was approximately 3%. These effects
represent strictly semantic priming effects
Most important in the current findings is the duration of
the priming effects. Becker, et al. (1997) described longterm semantic priming as spanning lags of up to 8 items.
Even more impressive, Hughes and Whittlesea (2007)
demonstrated long-term priming following lags on average
of 90 intervening trials. Becker, et al make the argument
that for long-term semantic priming to occur a substantial
amount of semantic processing must occur. Becker, et al.
demonstrated these long-term priming effects within the
context of an attractor neural network. Simulations and
human participant experiments supported their hypothesis
that under sufficient semantic processing demands, priming
effects are longer lasting than previously demonstrated
priming effects. There are however, some questions
regarding the consistency of the long-term priming effects
described by Becker and Joordens and their colleagues
(Becker, et al., 1997; Joordens & Becker, 1997).
McNamara (2005) explained that distributed network
models provide a more tenable explanation than spread of
activation accounts for long-term semantic priming.
McNamara also contended that perhaps the findings of
Becker and Joordens (Becker, et al., 1997; Joordens &
Becker, 1997) are more readily explained by memory for
prior cognitive operations. In his explanation, McNamara
states that these long-term priming effects may be similar to
the semantic transfer effects demonstrated by Hughes and

Discussion
The current study was undertaken to determine if the
increased availability of LTM elements following simple
processing in WM, would remain following a 24-delay. The
results of this study indicate that primed category exemplars
(both from the memory set and associated exemplars) are
more available for later processing.
The scale of direct priming effects from category
comparisons is quite remarkable considering the measure of
increased availability of LTM was preceded by a 24-hour
delay. Expressing the priming effect in terms of percent
savings in response speed, comparison trials comprised of
focus category exemplars from the memory load were 12%
faster than unprimed trials. Representing direct priming of
ignored category exemplars in the same fashion, it is found
that there was an 8% savings in response speed. Although
this priming effect is based on repetition of the memory load
exemplars, it represents conceptual priming and not
perceptual repetition priming in that the memory load and
category comparisons was cross-modal presentation
of(auditory presentation of the memory load and visual
presentation of the category comparisons).

369

Whittlesea (2003) and Woltz (1990, 1996), in that these
long-term semantic transfer effects require substantial
semantic processing in both the priming and testing
components of the task, rely on an episodic component, and
are specific to the decision being made about the stimulus.
The ALTM task reported here and in earlier studies (Liu
& Fu, 2007; Woltz & Was, 2006, 2007) required
participants to not only rehearse and recall the memory set
exemplars, but to distinguish category membership during
and after the memory set presentation and in the category
comparison trials (substantial semantic processing). The
decisions being made during the memory set presentation
and the category comparison trials are category membership
decisions (specific to the decision being made) and require
and episodic component.
One interpretation of the current findings is that the
priming effects demonstrated here represent a learning
process. The processing of the memory set, requires the
participant to make category membership decisions. These
decisions are for specific categories. When faced with the
category comparison trials on the second day, participants
have previously established the memory operation of
deciding whether exemplars are representative of the
specific categories.
It is clear that the findings of the current study are not
explainable by spread of activation accounts of priming
effects. It is the author’s opinion that the results represent
the strengthening of specific prior memory operations. This
process may reflect the creation of LT-WM as proposed by
Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) or perhaps long-term semantic
transfer as described by McNamara (2005). In either case, as
Was and Woltz (2007) stated, the effects found using the
ALTM task represent “persistent procedural memory for
content-specific memory operations” (p. 100).
The current data have a wide range of implications for
cognition and learning. Was and Woltz (2007) found that
individual differences in performance of a variant of the
ALTM task not only predicted individual differences in a
listening comprehension task, but also mediated the effect of
WM on comprehension. Perhaps individual differences in
priming effects over longer delays would predict learning.
This is an interesting hypothesis that will require a great
deal of empirical research.

Cowan, N. (1999). An embedded-processes model of
working memory. In A. Miyake, & P. Shah (Eds.),
Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active
maintenance and executive control. (pp. 62-101).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working
memory. Psychological Review, 102(2), 211-245.
Hughes, A. D., & Whittlesea, B. W. A. (2003). Long-term
semantic transfer: An overlapping-operations account.
Memory and Cognition, 31, 401-411.
Joordens, S., & Becker, S. (1997). The long and short of
semantic priming effects in lexical decision. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 23, 1083-1105.
Liu, Y., & Fu, X. (2007). How does distraction task
influence the interaction of working memory and longterm memory? In D. Harris (Ed.), Engineering
Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics (pp.366-374).
Springer-Verlag: Berlin
McNamar, T. (2005). Semantic Priming: Perspectives from
Memory and Word Recogntion, New York, NY:
Psychology Press.
Oberauer, K. (2002). Access to information in working
memory: Exploring the focus of attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28, 411-421.
Schacter, D. L., & Tulving, E. (1994). What are the memory
systems of 1994? In Schacter, daniel l. (ed); tulving,
endel (ed). (1994). Memory systems 1994. (pp. 1 38).
Cambridge, ma, us: The mit press. Viii, 407 pp.See book.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime User's Guide (Version 1.1). Pittsburgh: Psychology
Software Tools Inc.
Woltz, D. J. (1990). Repetition of semantic comparisons:
Temporary and persistent priming effects. Journal of
Experimental Psychology Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 392-403.
Woltz, D. J. (1996). Perceptual and conceptual priming in a
semantic reprocessing task. Memory and Cognition, 24,
429-440.
Woltz, D. J. & Was, C. A. (2006) Activation in long-term
memory during and after attention focus in working
memory. Memory and Cognition, 34(3), 668-684.
Woltz, D. J., & Was, C. A. (2007). Available but
Unattended Conceptual Information in Working Memory:
Temporarily Active Semantic Knowledge or Persistent
Memory for Prior Operations? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 33(1),
155-168.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Becker, S., Moscovitch, M., Behrmann, M., & Joordens, S.
(1997). Long-term semantic priming: A computational
account and empirical evidence. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 10591082.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreadingactivation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82(6), 407-428.
Cowan, N. (1995). Attention and memory: An integrated
framework. New York: Oxford University Press.

370

