UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Limits of Cognition: Forgetting in Short-Term and Working Memory
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1fc8s4kq
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Lewandowsky, Stephan
Oberauer, Klaus
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                  The Limits of Cognition: Forgetting in Short‐Term and Working Memory
                               Stephan Lewandowsky (lewan@psy.uwa.edu.au)
                     School of Psychology, University of Western Australia, Crawley 6009
                                  Klaus Oberauer (k.oberauer@bristol.ac.uk)
                       Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, UK
         Human cognition would be unthinkable without a “short‐term” or “working” memory (WM) that
provides ready access to task‐relevant information. For example, mental arithmetic would be impossible
without memory for intermediate sums, and we can only understand a spoken sentence such as ``while
Bob hunted the deer ran into the woods'' by re‐examining already‐heard material to resolve our initially
incorrect understanding. It is perhaps unsurprising, therefore, that the capacity of our WM predicts
higher‐level cognitive abilities with considerable precision.
         Notwithstanding its importance, the capacity and duration of WM are strikingly limited: People
rarely remember more than a handful of items and sometimes forgetting is complete even after a
second or two—what explains these striking limitations? Two opposing views vie for an explanation of
this rapid forgetting: On the one hand, theorists have postulated that time per se is responsible for
forgetting, either through decay or loss of distinctiveness. On the other hand, theorists have rejected
temporal accounts and have instead proposed that interference is responsible for forgetting.
         This talk reviews some recent evidence and modeling that addresses this issue. We focus in
particular on studies in which retention time was manipulated while (a) preventing rehearsal and (b)
limiting the extent of interference. Irrespective of whether the method involves a simple‐span (i.e., a list
followed by recall) or a complex span (list items are interleaved with processing activity), increasing
retention duration does not lead to a decline in performance. Moreover, quantitative modeling of the
data shows that an interference model provides a better account of the data than various time‐based
models. We suggest that time per se does not contribute to our striking cognitive limitations.
                                                 References
Lewandowsky, S., Duncan, M., & Brown, G. D. A. (2004). Time does not cause forgetting in short-term
       serial recall. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11, 771-790.
Lewandowsky, S., & Farrell, S. (2008). Short-term memory: New data and a model. The psychology of
       Learning and Motivation, 49, 1-48.
Lewandowsky, S., Geiger, S. M., & Oberauer, K. (2008). Interference-based forgetting in verbal short-
       term memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 200-222.
Lewandowsky, S., & Oberauer, K. (2008). The Word Length Effect Provides No Evidence for Decay in
       Short-Term Memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 875-888.
Lewandowsky, S., Oberauer, K., & Brown, G. D. A. (in press). No temporal decay in verbal short-term
       memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences.
Oberauer, K., & Lewandowsky, S. (2008). Forgetting in immediate serial recall: Decay, temporal
       distinctiveness, or interference? Psychological Review, 115, 544-576.
                                                     2384

