UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Perceptual-Motor Experience on Skill-Relevant Action Capabilities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4j20r9kz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Riley, Michael
Shockley, Kevin
Weast, Julie A.
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Perceptual-Motor Experience on Skill-Relevant Action
Capabilities
Julie A. Weast (weastja@email.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati Department of Psychology, ML 0376 Dyer Hall
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Kenneth Wright (wrightks@email.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati Department of Psychology, ML 0376 Dyer Hall
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Kevin Shockley (kevin.shockley@.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati Department of Psychology, ML 0376, Dyer Hall
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Michael A. Riley (michael.riley@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati Department of Psychology, ML 0376, Dyer Hall
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Abstract
The role of perceptual-motor experience in affordance
perception is fundamental in understanding the reciprocity of
perception and action and their relevance to cognition. An
experiment investigating perception of the maximum height
to which actors could reach, jump to reach, and sit was
conducted. The role of perceptual-motor experience was
investigated by evaluating the performance of basketball
players and non-basketball players. Reaching, reaching-withjump and sitting height estimates were compared to the actual
action capabilities. Basketball players more accurately
perceived a skill-relevant affordance (maximum height
another could reach by jumping) than non-basketball players,
but perceived a non-skill-relevant affordance (the maximum
height of a surface upon which one could sit) with the same
accuracy as non-basketball players. These results demonstrate
the role of specific action experience in perception of
affordances for others.
Keywords: Affordance; experience; expertise; basketball;
perception-action.

A natural part of ordinary perception is the perception of
affordances. Affordances are invariant (e.g. unchanging)
combinations of surface/substance properties of our
environment taken with reference to an animal’s action
capabilities; in other words, affordances are possibilities for
action (Gibson, 1986). Affordances change with changes in
one’s action capabilities, and affordance perception changes
accordingly in real time. For example, Mark (1987)
demonstrated what is sit-on-able for a person corresponds to
a rigid surface that is 45% of the person’s eye height and,
importantly, that perception changes with experience.
Moreover, he showed that if a perceiver wears blocks on
their feet, changing the maximum sit-on-able height to 50%
of their eye height, they will initially make inaccurate
judgments based on their previous fit to the environment.
However, perceivers re-calibrate to this new scaling relation

extremely quickly, and accurately judge the maximum
height of what is sit-on-able with their new legs.
Previous research has also demonstrated that humans can
perceive affordances for others (i.e., what the environment
affords another person). For example, Ramenzoni, Riley
Shockley and Davis (2008a) have shown that observers are
able to perceive how high another can reach overhead at a
similar level of accuracy as perceiving the affordance for
themselves and how high another person can reach while
jumping both for themselves and for another person.
Likewise, Stoffregen, Gorday, Sheng and Flynn (1999)
found observers can differentiate the maximum height at
which different sized people could sit.
Moreover, perception of affordances is a function of our
own perceptual-motor experience. For example, Hove,
Riley, and Shockley (2006) demonstrated that hockey
players perceive which hockey sticks are better for power
versus precision shots differently than non-hockey players.
This perceptual sensitivity may indicate a type of perceptual
learning via attunement—that is, perceptual-motor
experience in a sport aids the discovery of information that
is specific to a sport-relevant affordance (Hove, Riley &
Shockley, 2006; Abernethy, Gill, Parks & Packer, 2001).
The implication is that experts in a particular sport may
have over-developed capacities for perception and may,
therefore, be more sensitive to perceiving affordances
related to their skill domain as compared to non-experts
(Fajen, Riley & Turvey, 2008).
Given the fact that humans can perceive affordances for
others and that athletes may be differentially sensitive to
perceptual information about affordances related to their
domain of sports, the present study evaluated whether
basketball players were more accurate at perceiving
basketball-relevant affordances than non-basketball players.
Basketball was selected as the sport of interest because prior
research has shown that affordances that are related to

1764

basketball playing, namely reaching and reaching-withjump (e.g. shooting, rebounding, passing, etc.), can be
accurately reasonably accurately for self and for others
(Ramenzoni et al., 2008a; Ramenzoni, Riley, Davis,
Shockley & Armstrong, 2008b). Basketball players were
hypothesized to be more accurate at perceiving basketballrelevant affordances (the maximum height another can reach
overhand and the maximum height another can reach
overhand by jumping) than non-basketball players both for
self and for another. Basketball players were hypothesized
to be no more accurate than non-basketball players at
perceiving a non-basketball-related affordance (the
maximum height at which one can sit upon a surface) both
for self and other.

Method
Twenty-two undergraduate students at the University of
Cincinnati participated in this study. Eleven participants had
never played on a basketball team (non-basketball players;
mean height = 174.70 cm) and 11 had played on a
basketball team within two years prior to participating in
this study (basketball players; mean height = 179.05 cm).
Non-basketball players spent an average of 1.05 hours/week
playing and practicing basketball, while basketball players
spent an average of 8.64 hours/week playing and practicing
basketball. With the exception of one basketball player who
was also a cheerleader, no participants from the basketball
group played a sport other than basketball. No participants
from the non-basketball group played other sports.
Participants made three types of perceptual estimates for
themselves and for a model actor. These estimates included
the maximum height that could be reached overhand
vertically while standing on the floor (reach), the maximum
height than could be reached overhand vertically by
jumping from the floor (reach-with-jump), and the
maximum height of a sitting plank upon which one could sit
without lifting the heels of the feet (sit). These instructions
were explained to all participants before starting the study,
however participants’ actual reaching/reaching with
jump/sitting heights were not determined until after all
estimates had been made (cf. Mark, 1987). All participants
were asked to remove their shoes for the duration of the
study. A large wooden apparatus (325 cm high  95 cm
wide) was used as the backdrop for the moving object.
Consistent with previous affordance studies of this type
(Ramenzoni et al., 2008a; Ramenzoni et al., 2008b),
participants stood 3 m from the front of the apparatus. The
model stood directly beside the apparatus while observers
made judgments for the model, allowing participants to see
the model clearly while making all types of judgments. For
reach and reach-with-jump judgments, the target was a
small cylindrical object (5 cm  4 cm) suspended from the
ceiling and attached to a pulley in front of the wooden
apparatus perpendicular to the floor (see Figure 1). For
sitting judgments, the target was a seating plank (85 cm
long  35 cm wide) attached to the same pulley.

Figure 1. Apparatus and position of subject, model and
experimenter for reach, reach-with-jump and sitting
conditions.
Each type of judgment was obtained in one of three
blocks of trials, randomized by block across participants
within each type of report (self or other) and
counterbalanced across participants. For reachability and
reachability-while-jumping,
perceivers
made
their
judgments by directing the experimenter (who was standing
out of sight, behind the apparatus) to stop moving the small
cylindrical object, which started at either a low height and
moved up or a high height and moved down, with the
starting position randomized across trials. For sit-on-ability
judgments, participants were asked to judge the maximum
height of the plank upon which the affordance target
(perceiver or model actor, depending on self or other
condition) could sit without lifting the heels of the feet using
the same procedure. After informing the experimenter to
stop moving the target on the apparatus, the participant was
allowed to make fine adjustments to the position of the
target. The height corresponding to the participant’s
judgments (in cm) as indicated by occluded measuring tape
attached to the apparatus was recorded by the experimenter.
After completing three blocks of eight trials each, the
participant approached the apparatus to determine his actual
reaching and reaching-with-jump heights. Reaching height
was defined as the height at which the participant could
reach and touch the object with their fingertips.
Reaching-with-jump height was defined as the height at
which participants could touch the object with their
fingertips while performing a vertical jump. Actual sitting

1765

Absolute Error (cm)

35
30
25
20

Maximum Reach Height
Affordance Target
Other
Self

15
10
5
0

35

Absolute Error (cm)

Results and Discussion
Accuracy of the participants’ estimates was evaluated using
the error in judgments of the three affordances (reach,
reach-with-jump, sit) as a function of judgment type (self,
other) and perceiver type (basketball player, non-basketball
player). An average perceptual judgment for each judgment
type was obtained from the eight trials. We had no basis to
predict whether participants would over- or under-estimate
height judgments, thus absolute error (absolute error =
|actual height – mean perceived height|) was used as the
dependent measure. Basketball players exhibited similar
error in reach judgments both for self (mean error = 4.83
cm) and other (mean error = 8.65 cm) when compared to
non-basketball judgments for self (mean error = 8.64) and
other (mean error = 9.86 cm). Basketball players exhibited
less error in reach-with-jump estimates as well, both for self
(mean error = 13.29) and other (mean error = 11.15), when
compared to non-basketball judgments for self (mean error
= 19.70) and other (mean error = 26.86). Basketball players
ranged in height from 168.5 to 191.5 cm (mean = 179.1 cm,
SD = 9.1cm) and ranged in eyeheight from 154.5 to 181.0
cm (mean = 166.9 cm, SD = 9.7 cm). Non-basketball
players ranged in height from 163.5 cm to 184.0 cm (mean
= 174.7 cm, SD = 6.5 cm) and ranged in eyeheight from
152.0 cm to 168.5 cm (mean = 161.5 cm, SD = 5.9 cm). The
model had a height of 182 cm and an eyeheight of 170 cm.
Actual sitting height was calculated using Mark’s (1987)
ratio of what is sit-on-able for a person (actual sitting height
= eyeheight (EH)  0.45). Basketball players exhibited
similar error in sitting judgments for self (mean error =
14.16) and other (mean error = 15.53) when compared to
non-basketball judgments of self (mean error = 15.33) and
other (mean error = 19.46) (see Figure 2 below).
Accuracy of reaching and reaching-with-jump judgments
was determined by the difference between actual and
estimated reach and reach-with-jump heights, however this
was not how accuracy was determined for sitting judgments.
The increase in error for sitting judgments for both groups
of participants may have been due to the use of a bodyscaled measurement instead of actual sitting height
measurements, possibly making it more difficult for
differences to emerge between groups.
Mean absolute error in affordance judgments for each
condition were submitted to a 2 (perceiver type)  2
(affordance target) mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA)
for each affordance type with perceiver type (basketball vs.
non-basketball) as a between subjects factor and judgment
target (self vs. other) as a within subjects factor. For
reaching judgments, neither perceiver type, F(1, 20) = 1.38,
p > .05, 1 - β = .19, ηp2 = 0.06, nor affordance target, F(1,
20) = 1.55, p > .05, 1 - β = .21, ηp2 = 0.07, significantly
influenced error and there was no significant interaction, (F
< 1, 1 - β = .09, ηp2 = 0.02) (1 – β refers to the observed
power of the test). For reach-with-jump judgments, there

was a significant main effect for perceiver type, F(1, 20) =
10.97, p < .005, 1 - β = .87, ηp2 = 0.33, with basketball
players exhibiting less error than non-basketball players.
There was no significant influence of affordance target (F <
1, 1 - β = .14, ηp2 = 0.04) and no significant interaction, F(1,
20) = 2.99, p > .05, 1 - β = .36, ηp2 = 0.13. For sitting
judgments, there was no significant influence of perceiver
type, F(1, 20) = 1.14, p > .05, 1 - β = .17, ηp2 = 0.05. There
was, however, a significant influence of affordance target,
F(1, 20) = 11.10, p < .005, 1 - β = .90, ηp2 = 0.36, with
judgments for self being more accurate than judgments for
other. There was no significant interaction, F(1, 20) = 2.79,
p > .05, 1 - β = .34, ηp2 = 0.12.

30

Basketball

Non-basketball

Maximum Reach-with-Jump
Height

25
20
15
10
5
0

35

Absolute Error (cm)

height was determined using Mark’s (1987) proportion of
eye height to maximum sit-on-ability.

Basketball

Non-basketball

Maximum Sitting Height

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Basketball

Non-basketball

Group

Figure 2. Mean perceived error for reach, reach-with-jump,
and sitting tasks.
In partial support of our hypotheses, basketball players
were more accurate at perceiving the experience-relevant
affordance, maximum reach-with-jump height, than the nonexperience-relevant affordance, maximum sitting height.

1766

This finding suggests that expertise in playing a sport that
relies on highly accurate affordance perception for self and
for others enables athletes to better perceive skill-related
affordances for themselves and others than those without a
background in sports. Such a finding extends our
understanding of how our own perceptual-motor experience
and skills influence our perceptual capabilities. Athletes
know how to perceive and act in contexts relevant to their
skill domain because they are coupled with their sport
environment; their specific perception and action
experiences regulate their sports performance by attuning
them to relevant perceptual information (Araújo & Davids,
2009).
Unexpectedly, athletes were no more accurate than nonbasketball players at perceiving another experience-relevant
affordance, maximum overhand reach height while
standing. This may indicate that perceiving the maximum
overhand reach height of another is not an affordance
judgment skill unique to basketball players. It could be that
reachability is a common affordance encountered by all
people who make reaching judgments during activities in
their daily lives. Alternatively, this finding, in comparison
to the finding for reach-with-jump judgments, may offer an
additional insight regarding the type of information to which
athletes exhibit greater sensitivity. Fajen, Riley, and Turvey
(2008) identified two classes of affordances—body-scaled
affordances (e.g., step-on-ability, sit-on-ability, pass-underability) and action-scaled affordances (e.g., braking
distance, jumping to reach) (see Fajen, Riley & Turvey,
2008, for a review). Body-scaled affordances have been
shown to be a function of the geometric fit between the
dimensions of the environment and the perceiver/actor (e.g.,
the proportion of eye height to something in the
environment; Mark, 1987; Ramenzoni et al., 2008a), while
action-scaled affordances have been shown to be a function
of the relation between the dimensions of the environment
relative to the force-production capabilities of the
perceiver/actor (e.g., Fajen, 2007; Ramenzoni et al., 2008b).
Accordingly, action-scaled affordances for others may be
specified by different perceptual information than bodyscaled affordances, namely information in the movement
patterns (i.e., kinematic information) of the actor in question
(Runeson, 1977/1983). For example, Ramenzoni et al.
(2008a) demonstrated that perception of reach-with-jump
height for another becomes more accurate after observing
the actor walk. Thus, the present finding of greater
sensitivity by athletes to an action-scaled, experiencerelevant affordance (reaching while jumping) as compared
to a body-scaled affordance (reaching) may reflect greater
sensitivity of athletes to kinematic information that captures
the force production capabilities of others.
Athletes have been found to be superior in perceiving
affordances relevant to their experience in their particular
sport. Presumably, for basketball players, this reflects their
specific experience observing others jumping to reach
basketballs or nets. However, if greater sensitivity to
kinematic information is the basis for this superiority, then

the present results do not rule out the possibility that
athletes, generally, may be more sensitive to kinematic
information, generally, and not necessarily to kinematic
information relevant to their particular sport (Abernethy et
al., 2001; Oudejans et al., 1996). For example, basketball
players might be superior at perceiving maximum ballkicking distance as well as reaching-with-jump heights.
Therefore, experience-specific sensitivity needs to be
disambiguated from kinematic-specific sensitivity in future
research.

References
Abernethy, B., Gill, D.P., Parks, S.L & Packer, S.T. (2001).
Expertise and the perception of kinematic and situational
probability information. Perception, 30, 233-252.
Araújo, D. & Davids, K. (2009). Ecological approaches to
cognition and action in sport and exercise: Ask not only
what you do, but where you do it. International Journal of
Sport Psychology, 40, 5-37.
Fajen, B.R., Riley, M.A. & Turvey, M.T. (2008).
Information, affordances, and the control of action in sport.
International Journal of Sport Psychology, 40, 79-107.
Fajen, B.R. (2007). Affordance-based control of visually
guided action. Ecological Psychology, 19, 383-410.
Gibson, J. J. (1986). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
(Original work published 1979).
Hove, P., Riley, M.A. & Shockley, K. (2006). Perceiving
affordances of hockey sticks by dynamic touch.
Ecological Psychology, 18, 163-189.
Mark, L.S. (1987). Eyeheight-scaled information about
affordances: A study of sitting and stair climbing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 13, 361-370.
Oudejans, R. R. D., Michaels, C. R, Bakker, F. C., & Dolne,
M. (1996). The relevance of action in perceiving
affordances: Perception of catchableness of fly balls.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 22, 879-891.
Ramenzoni, V. C., Riley, M. A., Shockley, K., Davis, T.
(2008a). An information-based approach to action
understanding. Cognition, 106, 1059-1070.
Ramenzoni, V.C., Riley, M.A., Davis, T., Shockley, K. &
Armstrong, R. (2008b). Tuning in to another person’s
action capabilities: perceiving maximal jumping-reach
height from walking kinematics. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 34,
919-928.
Runeson, S. (1983). On visual perception of dynamic events.
Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis: Studia Psychologica
Upsaliensia, (Serial No. 9). (Original work published
1977).
Stoffregen, T. A., Gorday, K. M., Sheng, Y. Y., & Flynn, S.
B. (1999). Perceiving affordances for another person's
actions. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human
Perception and Performance, 25, 120-136.

1767

