UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The inuence of target discriminability on the time course of attentional selection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9t32t1gx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bowman, Howard
Chennu, Sirvas
Craston, Patrick
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The influence of target discriminability on the time course of attentional selection
Srivas Chennu1 , Patrick Craston1 , Brad Wyble2 , Howard Bowman1
(srivas@gmail.com, patrick@craston.de, bwyble@gmail.com, hb5@kent.ac.uk)
1 Centre
2

for Cognitive Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
Abstract

A wealth of neurophysiological data has demonstrated that visual attention can selectively enhance target representations
early in the visual processing pathway. In addition, behavioural evidence tells us that the extent to which irrelevant
items interfere with target processing depends on their featural similarity to the target. In this context, how does target
discriminability influence temporal selection? We present results from an electrophysiology study that addresses this question by investigating the time course of the neural processes
involved in target selection as target distinctiveness is varied.
The results suggest that, in line with previous findings, making discrimination harder reduces the accuracy of target identification. We find that there are significant differences in the
perceptual processing of the target in the two conditions, as indexed by early visual ERPs and the P3 ERP. We ground this
and previous empirical evidence within a theoretical framework for understanding the mechanism of attentional selection represented in the ST2 model, a neural network model of
temporal attention and working memory. By simulating both
experimental conditions, we show that the model provides a
convincing explanation of the pattern of experimental results,
in addition to informing questions about the nature and time
course of attentional selection.
Keywords: Visual Masking; Event-Related Potential; Temporal Selection

Introduction
The deployment of endogenous attention allows the visual
system to selectively enhance the neural representations of
task-relevant features in the environment. Our understanding
of the neurophysiology of vision in monkeys suggests that
focal attention can modulate neural activity very early in the
visual processing pathway. Studies of neural firing patterns
in spatial selection tasks report correlates of endogenous attention in the primary visual cortex, when a salient feature
must be discriminated and selectively enhanced in the presence of competing spatial distractors (Reynolds, Chelazzi, &
Desimone, 1999). In humans, ERP studies of selective spatial
attention have found that stimulus features at attended locations are enhanced as early as 70-80ms after onset (Hillyard
& Anllo-Vento, 1998). But how does selective attention operate in time? Specifically, when the visual system is rapidly
presented with successive fleeting stimuli at an already attended spatial location, how quickly can it discriminate a target embedded in a sequence of distractors, and generate a
transient attentional enhancement? In this regard, previous
behavioural research has found that the extent to which irrelevant distractors temporally interfere with target processing critically depends on how effectively the visual system is
configured to distinguish between featural characteristics of
targets and distractors (Visser, Bischof, & Di Lollo, 2004).

Visser et al. (2004) use two variants of a sequential stimulus presentation paradigm, previously used by Ward, Duncan, and Shapiro (1997) to study the well-known attentional
blink phenomenon (Raymond, Shapiro, & Arnell, 1992). In
the first variation, referred to in this paper as Rapid Serial
Visual Presentation (RSVP), targets are inserted in a sequential stream of distractors presented at the same spatial location. In the second variation, referred to as Onset (termed
the ‘Skeletal’ task by Ward et al. (1997)), no stream of distractors is used. Instead, targets are briefly presented and are
followed by a backward visual mask. Though the attentional
blink deficit is found in both variations, the authors find that
the presence of distractors nevertheless influences the difficulty of target selection. Specifically, making the distractors
featurally similar to targets reduces behavioural accuracy of
target identification.
In this paper, we build upon this finding, and investigate
how the time course of target processing is affected by target
discriminability. Adapting an experimental paradigm similar
to that used by Visser et al. (2004), we record EEG data to
provide an index of the temporal dynamics of the underlying neural processing evoked by the presentation of a single
target. Importantly, we compare the differences in the ERP
signatures evoked by targets presented in the above conditions, and propose an explanation of these differences within
the context of a theoretical framework. To this end, we employ the ST2 model of temporal attention and working memory (Bowman & Wyble, 2007), which implements a twostage neural network to model temporal visual processing.
The model explains and predicts a broad set of experimental
findings encompassing the attentional blink, repetition blindness, and RSVP in general. By following through a sequence
of theoretically sound changes to the existing model, we enable it to simulate the Onset paradigm. The modifications are
validated by comparing virtual ERP traces generated from the
model to human ERP traces. As we shall see, the model provides a convincing explanation of the pattern of experimental
results, in addition to informing questions about the cognitive equivalence of target processing in masking and RSVP
experiments.

Target processing in Onset and RSVP
We first present the behavioural and electrophysiological results for targets in Onset presentation and targets in RSVP.

1506

Methods
Participants Twenty-two university students were paid to participate in the experiment. Two were excluded due to an excessive
number of EEG artifacts, and a further three were excluded because
of insufficient number of trials in the skeletal condition, leaving 17
participants for the behavioural and EEG analysis (mean age 22.2;
SD 3.3). All were free from neurological disorders and had normal
or corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli and Apparatus We presented alphanumeric characters
in black on a white background at a distance of 100cm on a 21” CRT
computer screen (1024x768 @ 85Hz) using the Psychophysics toolbox (Brainard, 1997) running on Matlab version 6.5 under Microsoft
Windows XP. Stimuli were in Arial font and had an average size of
2.1◦ x 3.4◦ visual angle.
Procedure Participants viewed four blocks (3 RSVP/1 Onset,
counterbalanced between subjects) of 100 trials. Within each block,
there were 96 trials containing a single target and four trials consisting only of distractors. Five practice trials preceded the first block
in both the RSVP and Onset conditions, which were not included in
the final analysis. The underlying structure and timing of RSVP and
Onset streams was the same; however, whereas in RSVP the target
was embedded into a continuous stream of distractors, Onset streams
contained only the target and a following distractor. The target for
each trial was chosen at random from a list of 14 capital letters (B,
C, D, E, F, G, J, K, L, P, R, T, U, V); distractors could be any digit
except 1 or 0. The target item’s position in the stream varied between
position 10 to 54. The ‘distractor only’ trials were randomly inserted
to make the occurrence of the target less predictable. Trials were randomly ordered and 50% of targets were followed by a blank in both
RSVP and Onset trials to equate patterns within blocks. However,
for the purposes of this paper, only data from the Onset masked and
the RSVP masked conditions were analysed.
A fixation cross presented for 500ms preceded the first item of
each stream. Items were presented at approx. 20 items per second (item duration 47.1ms; no inter-stimulus interval) to ensure participants’ detection accuracy was not at ceiling. An RSVP stream
consisted of 70 items. Each stream ended with a dot or a comma
presented for 47.1ms. Following stream presentation, participants
were asked to enter using a keyboard the final item followed by the
target they saw, if any. The dot-comma task was included to ensure
that participants maintained their attention on the stream till the end.
EEG recording EEG activity was recorded from Ag/Ag-Cl
electrodes mounted on an electrode cap (FMS, Munich, Germany)
using a high input impedance amplifier (1000MΩ, BrainProducts,
Munich, Germany) with a 22-bit ADC. Electrode impedance was reduced to less than 25kΩ before data acquisition. The sampling rate
was 2000Hz (digitally reduced to 1000Hz at a later stage) and the
data was digitally filtered at low-pass 85Hz and high-pass 0.5Hz during recording. 20 electrodes were placed at the following standard
locations according to the international 10/20 system: Fp1, Fp2, Fz,
F3, F4, F7, F8, Cz, C3, C4, C7, C8, Pz, P3, P4, P7, P8, Oz, O1,
O2, T7 and T8. Electrooculographic (EOG) activity was bipolarly
recorded from below and to the right side of the right eye.
EEG data analysis The EEG data was analysed using BrainVision Analyzer (BrainProducts, Munich, Germany), in conjunction
with EEGLAB 6.01b (Delorme & Makeig, 2004) and custom MATLAB scripts. The data was referenced to a common average online
and re-referenced to linked earlobes offline. Left mastoid acted as
ground. Signal deviations in the EOG channel of more than 50µV
within an interval of 100ms were identified as eye blink and movement artifacts. These were removed by rejecting data in the window
of 200ms before and after an eye artifact. After artifact rejection,
there were a total of 1517 trials where the target was seen in the
RSVP condition (with an average of 89 trials per subject, and the
smallest trial count being 52), and 560 trials where the target was
seen in the Onset condition (with an average of 33 trials per subject,
and the smallest trial count being 19). We verified that this large

Figure 1: Human ERP for targets in RSVP and Onset presentation averaged across P7 and P8 electrode locations. ERPs
are time-locked to target presentation time ‘T’.
difference, due effectively to the experimental design, did not influence the statistical results. For each statistical comparison, this was
done by redoing the statistical tests after randomly sampling trials
from the RSVP condition for each subject, equal in number to Onset
condition, and ensuring that the results did not change qualitatively.
ERPs were time locked to the onset of the target and extracted
from -200ms to 1200ms with respect to target onset. The average
activity at the P7 and P8 electrodes was used for analysis, as it contained both distinctive early ERP components and the P3 ERP. After segmentation, direct current drift artifacts were removed using
a DC detrend procedure employing the average activity of the first
and last 100ms of a segment as starting and end point, respectively.
Following this, the baseline was corrected to the prestimulus interval (-200ms to time point 0) and segments were averaged to create
ERPs. ERP component latencies were calculated using 50% area
latency analysis (Luck & Hillyard, 1990). Statistical analysis was
performed in MATLAB, and a 25Hz low pass filter was applied to
enhance visualisation of ERP components.

Computational modelling In order to simulate single target
RSVP streams with 50ms presentation rate, the input patterns presented to the ST2 model contained 40 items with the target appearing at position 14 of the stream. Each item was presented for 10
timesteps, which is equivalent to 50ms. Each item presented to the
ST2 model has a certain strength value. Distractors have a constant
value of 0.526. To simulate the single target paradigm for Experiment 1, the target strength values iterate from 0.442 to 0.61 in steps
of 0.014. This results in the ST2 model simulating 13 trials for the
single target paradigm, one simulated trial per target strength.

Results
Behaviour Overall, when compared to RSVP, Onset presentation makes targets easier to detect. Participants report
76% (SEM 0.03) of targets correctly if they are embedded in
a regular RSVP stream, whereas in the Onset condition target
accuracy is 86% (SEM 0.03). This difference is statistically
significant: F(1,16) = 7.87, MSE < 0.01, p = 0.01, and corroborates a similar finding by Visser et al. (2004).
ERP early components Whether a target is presented in
Onset presentation or RSVP has a strong effect on early processing. Figure 1 illustrates a highly significant difference

1507

0.005

0
10

semantic representations. Both target and distractors generate
activation at the task filtered layer (TFL), but a task demand
mechanism operating at this layer ensures that only targets
are selected for working memory encoding. Despite the fact
that stimuli are presented serially during the AB task, processing within stage one may exceed the presentation time of
sequentially presented items. Hence, these layers are parallel
or simultaneous in nature, in that more than one node can be
active at a time.

0.01

Power

Power

0.01

20
30
Frequency (Hz)

40

0.005

0
10

20
30
Frequency (Hz)

40

Figure 2: Fast fourier transform (FFT) of the ERP from the
P7 and P8 electrode locations for the RSVP (left) and Onset (right) condition. The RSVP condition shows a peak in
the FFT plot at the frequency of target presentation (approx.
21Hz), which is not present for Onset presentation.
in the P1 and N1 ERP early components between targets
in RSVP and Onset presentation. The mean absolute value
in the area from 0-200ms after target presentation is 3.3µV
(SEM 0.27) for targets in Onset streams and 1.02µV (SEM
0.09) for targets in RSVP (F(1,16) = 91.93, MSE = 0.479, p
< 0.001).
Instead of evoking P1/N1 early components, RSVP targets produce an ssVEP (steady state Visual Evoked Potential)
wave (Di Russo, Teder-Sälejärvi, & Hillyard, 2003) oscillating at the same frequency as the presentation rate of items in
the RSVP stream. As seen in Figure 2, each item is presented
for 47.1ms (corresponding to the RSVP rate of roughly 20
items per second), resulting in a peak at approx. 21Hz in the
FFT plot for the RSVP condition.
ERP P3 component The P3 component, which is depicted
in Figure 1, temporally overlaps with the ssVEP evoked by
the sequence of distractors preceding and following the target,
and shows a different profile for Onset compared to RSVP
targets. The 50% area latency of the P3 in the 200-600ms
window is shorter for Onset (mean 422.24ms, SEM 21.49)
than RSVP targets (mean 484.76ms, SEM 9.91). This difference is significant; F(1,16) = 6.45, MSE = 5155.26, p = 0.02.
However, the difference in the mean amplitude of the P3 in
the 200-800ms window is not significant (F ¡ 1).

Stage 2 - working memory encoding An item is encoded
into working memory by connecting its type in stage one to
a working memory token in stage two, thereby representing
episodic information and encoding serial order. This process
is referred to as ‘tokenisation’. If at the end of a trial, any type
node of a target has a valid connection to a token, that target
is considered to have a reportable representation in working
memory. Winner-take-all inhibition between working memory tokens ensures that only one tokenisation process can be
active at a time, thus serialising working memory encoding.
Temporal attention from the blaster Temporal attention
is implemented by a mechanism termed the blaster, which is
triggered by task-relevant items, as specified by an filter that
is selective for targets. When active, the blaster provides a
powerful enhancement to the later layers of stage one. This
allows targets to become sufficiently active to initiate the tokenisation of recently presented targets. During tokenisation,
the blaster is suppressed until encoding of the target has completed. The suppression prevents a second target from refiring
the blaster while the first target is being tokenised.

Generating virtual ERP components

The ST2 model
The ST2 model, as published in Bowman and Wyble (2007),
can simulate the RSVP, but not the Onset condition. We
briefly summarise its architecture. Refer to Bowman and
Wyble (2007) for a full description of the model and the
mathematical details of its neural network implementation,
Neural-ST2 .
Stage 1 - Input & extraction of types The extraction of
types (Chun, 1997), which represent featural and semantic
properties of a stimulus, occurs in stage one. Input values,
which simulate target letters and digit distractors, are fed into
the input layer. Subsequent layers reflect forward and backward masking in early visual processing and the extraction of

Different layers of the ST2 model correspond to distinct
stages of cognitive processing. By summing over simulated
neural activation in specific layers of the model, we extract
‘virtual ERP’ (vERP) activity (Craston, Wyble, Chennu, &
Bowman, 2009) reflecting particular stages of cognitive processing. In analogy with human ERP (hERP) components,
we can compare how the resulting vERP components are
modulated by the various experimental conditions.
In the model, the input and masking layers most closely
resemble processes occurring in early visual cortex. We
term the average activity at these layers the virtual SSVEP
(vSSVEP), analogous to the human SSVEP wave. Similarly,
the virtual P3 component (vP3) contains activation from later
parts of Stage 1 (item layer and TFL), the nodes in stage two
(tokens) and the binding link connecting the two stages.

Modelling the Onset condition
By making a number of theoretically justified changes to the
architecture of the model, we now replicate our behavioural
and EEG data for Onset presentation.

1508

.070
.060

Task Demand

Blaster
Circuit

.050

Activation

Stage 2

Blaster
Output

.040

Task Filtered
Layer (TFL)

weight
0.02003

Blaster
In

STEP 2
Item Layer

.030
.020

RSVP
Onset

.010
.000
-200

Blaster 'trigger' for
simulation of
RSVP
Onset

0
T

200

weight
0.015

Masking Layer

Excitatory
Inhibitory

400 600 800 1000 1200
ms equivalent

Figure 3: Virtual EEG activity from input and masking layers
of the ST2 model simulate the ssVEP for the RSVP condition
and early components for the Onset condition. ERPs are timelocked to target presentation time ‘T’.

Step 1: Simulating early visual processing
Manipulation In Onset presentation, the stream contains
just the target and the distractor following the target. All other
distractors are replaced by blank intervals. In order to simulate such a stream in the ST2 model, we modify the array of
values that serve as input to the model. All distractors - except the one following the target - are set to a value of zero,
equivalent to no activation.
Results The modification of the input array has a strong effect on virtual ERP traces resembling early visual processing.
For targets in RSVP, the model shows a continuous virtual
ssVEP wave oscillating at the frequency of target presentation
(Figure 3), replicating the pattern of human data observed in
Figure 2. The first item of the RSVP stream causes an increase of activation in early layers of the model, and subsequent stimuli excite early layers and suppress previous stimuli due to masking, producing a sustained oscillation that lasts
until the end of the RSVP stream. In effect, the cumulative
effect of early visual processing in the model manifests as
the virtual ssVEP, instead of as distinctive early virtual ERP
components.
In contrast, in Onset presentation, there are no distractors
and hence there is no activation preceding the target. Presentation of the target creates a strong burst of activation at early
layers of the ST2 model. As there is no forward masking, the
activation evoked by the Onset target at early layers is higher
than in regular RSVP. The distractor following the target in
Onset presentation then produces a second large burst of activation, as it is not constrained by backward masking. All of
this activation at early layers occurs between the model equivalent of 100 and 200ms following target presentation. There
is a qualitative match between the virtual ERP from the ST2
model (Figure 3) and the human early ERP components for

Input Layer
Stage 1

Figure 4: Step 2 of simulating Onset presentation: The connection that triggers the blaster is moved from the TFL to the
masking layer.
Onset presentation from Figure 1.
In summary, virtual ERP activation associated with early
visual processing shows a distinct activation for Onset targets
and an oscillatory pattern for RSVP targets, thus qualitatively
replicating the human ERP. Furthermore, the timing of the
Onset vERP activation occurs within a similar time window
as the P1/N1 wave observed for Onset targets in the human
ERP.

Step 2: Simulating the P3
Manipulation Replication of behavioural accuracy and the
virtual P3 component requires theoretically justified changes
to the architecture of the ST2 model. Onset targets appear
on a previously blank screen, whereas in RSVP, the target
has to be selected from a continuous stream of distractors.
In terms of the ST2 model, we hypothesise that the difference between target detection in these conditions influences
the way in which the blaster is triggered:
• In RSVP, the system cannot distinguish targets from distractors until they have reached the TFL. There, the task
demand mechanism acts as a filter, selectively enhancing
targets and inhibiting distractors.
• In Onset presentation, there are no distractors preceding
the target, hence, the system can assume that the first item
that is ‘presented’ to the input layer is the target. Accordingly and as seen in Figure 4, we propose that in Onset
presentation, the blaster is triggered as soon as activation
reaches the masking layer. Moving this connection from
the TFL to the masking layer also requires a modification
of the weight value of that connection (see Figure 4), because activation levels in the TFL and masking layers differ1 .
1 Compared

to the TFL, activation values at the masking layer
are higher in absolute terms. Hence, we reduce the weight values
between masking layer and blaster, to prevent the blaster circuit from
being overcharged by the input from the masking layer.

1509

omitted it here for the sake of parsimony, this additional step
would be of interest if it could be demonstrated that the P3
had a statistically lower mean amplitude and/or longer duration in the Onset condition compared to the RSVP condition.

Activation

.200
.150
RSVP
Onset

.100

Discussion and Conclusions

.050
.000
-200

0
T

200

400 600 800 1000 1200
ms equivalent

Figure 5: After Step 2: Virtual P3 for the RSVP and Onset
condition. The RSVP vERP is baseline corrected to -200 to
0ms with respect to target onset to account for distractor related activity, which is absent in the Onset condition. ERPs
are time-locked to target presentation time ‘T’.
Results Activation propagates through the ST2 model with
a temporal lag from one layer to the next. Hence, if the blaster
is triggered from the masking layer, the blaster fires at an earlier time point relative to target onset than if activation has
to propagate to the TFL before the blaster can be triggered.
Consequently, the blaster’s output is also shifted earlier in
time. The first consequence of this change is a shift in latency of the virtual P3 for Onset compared to RSVP targets,
as seen in Figure 5. With the change in model architecture
to reflect processing of Onset targets, the blaster is triggered
earlier, and thus initiates the target’s tokenisation and virtual
P3 earlier than in the RSVP condition.
The change in model architecture means that the blaster
now fires for all Onset targets. This correctly increases the
accuracy of the ST2 model at encoding Onset targets relative to RSVP targets (100% vs 77%). Although the simulated
accuracies are not the same as that observed in human behaviour, the changed model replicates the qualitative difference between the two experimental conditions. Furthermore,
the same change in the model that simulated the behavioural
effect also produces a latency difference in the virtual P3:
The 50% area latency of the vP3 in the 200-600ms window
is shorter for Onset (365ms) than for RSVP targets (430ms).
This pattern replicates the significant latency difference observed in human P3 data.
In summary, after making the described changes to the ST2
model, we have enabled it to simulate the Onset condition in
terms of its qualitative relationships to the RSVP condition,
with respect to both behavioural and EEG data. It should be
noted that we have investigated a further change to the model
architecture, described in Craston (2009), which involves a
slight reduction in the task demand at the end of Stage 1, in
order to produce a better fit to the behavioural accuracies and
ERP patterns observed in the human data. Though we have

Our experimental results inform behavioural research into
the interaction between targets and distractors in RSVP
paradigms. Visser et al. (2004), whose work this paper builds
upon, find that target identification accuracy deteriorates as
distractors become more similar to targets. They explain their
findings using a variant of the two-stage theory of temporal
visual processing (Chun & Potter, 1995), and surmise that a
broadly tuned ‘input filter’ at the end of the parallel first stage
allows target-like distractors to contingently capture attention
and processing resources in the serial second stage.
The pair of experimental conditions we have described in
this paper lie at opposite ends of the range of target discriminability manipulations employed by Visser et al. (2004),
thereby emphasising differences in the ERPs between them.
In the Onset condition, targets are detectable simply by their
visual onset. In contrast, in the RSVP condition, letter targets are visually very similar to digit distractors, and must be
processed categorically before they can be discriminated. We
were interested in characterising the differences in the time
course of target processing in this pair of conditions, and have
done so by comparing the corresponding ERPs. It should be
noted that our findings do not conflict with those reported
by Vogel, Luck, and Shapiro (1998), who observed early
components in response to the visual onset of a probe flash
(which is similar to our Onset condition) within an RSVP
stream.
Further, we have grounded our findings within the wellestablished ST2 framework that implements the two-stage
theory. By extending the framework to simulate the Onset condition, we propose a mechanistically explicit explanation of how the visual system, and especially the triggering
of transient attentional enhancement, might be differentially
configured in response to the demands of target discrimination. In particular, the extension of the model instantiates our
hypothesis that temporal selection happens earlier in the Onset condition, and that the task demand at the end of Stage
1 does not need to perform any discrimination to detect targets. Finally, as discussed next, this investigation informs the
choice of experimental paradigm for studying the attentional
blink phenomenon, and the interpretation of EEG data collected therefrom.

Is Onset presentation an equal substitute for RSVP?
Despite its common application in experiments designed to
study temporal visual processing, the RSVP paradigm has a
number of practical disadvantages. Due to the fast presentation rate, RSVP streams contain a large number of distractors,
and have a typical duration of 2-3 seconds. Furthermore, the
rapid presentation of items is often taxing for participants,
especially in long experiments. This situation arises when

1510

conducting EEG or Magnetoencephalography (MEG) experiments, where, in order to increase the signal-to-noise ratio by
averaging, each condition is presented several times. Hence,
as experimental time in an EEG/MEG laboratory is costly,
there is a major incentive to minimise the duration of the experiment.
In comparison, the Onset task ‘minimises demands both
on selective attentional processing and on location switching
mechanisms’ (Ward et al., 1997), while nevertheless seeming
to reveal the attentional limitations underlying the AB. Thus,
due to simpler and shorter experiments, the Onset paradigm
seems ideal for studies employing MEG or EEG to study
the AB. Indeed, as a previous study investigating the AB by
means of MEG and the Onset paradigm states: ‘an AB effect is observed whether targets are embedded in a 20-item
RSVP stream or just presented on their own followed by
masks (Duncan, Ward, & Shapiro, 1994; Ward et al., 1997).
In order to save measurement time, we decided to employ
this abbreviated version for our study’ (Kessler et al., 2005).
However, from the results presented in this paper, we argue
that there are considerable differences in target processing between Onset presentation and RSVP. Though our experiment
employed only a single target, we believe that these results
inform and are directly relevant to dual target RSVP studies.
Consequently, direct comparisons between EEG/MEG data
collected using these two paradigms should be interpreted
with caution.

References
Bowman, H., & Wyble, B. (2007). The Simultaneous Type,
Serial Token Model of Temporal Attention and Working
Memory. Psychological Review, 114(1), 38-70.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Chun, M. (1997). Types and Tokens in Visual Processing:
A Double Dissociation Between the Attentional Blink and
Repetition Blindness. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 23(3), 738-755.
Chun, M., & Potter, M. (1995). A Two-Stage Model for Multiple Target Detection in Rapid Serial Visual Presentation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 21(1), 109–127.
Craston, P. (2009). Applying cognitive electrophysiology to
neural modelling of the attentional blink. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Kent.
Craston, P., Wyble, B., Chennu, S., & Bowman, H. (2009).
The attentional blink reveals serial working memory encoding: Evidence from virtual & human event-related potentials. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(3), 550566.
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source
toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 134(1), 9–21.
Di Russo, F., Teder-Sälejärvi, W., & Hillyard, S. (2003).

Steady-state VEP and attentional visual processing. In
A. Z. . A. Proverbio (Ed.), The cognitive electrophysiology of mind and brain (p. 259-274). San Diego: Academic
Press.
Duncan, J., Ward, R., & Shapiro, K. (1994). Direct measurement of attentional dwell time in human vision. Nature,
369, 313-315.
Hillyard, S. A., & Anllo-Vento, L. (1998). Event-related
brain potentials in the study of visual selectiveattention.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 95(3), 781-787.
Kessler, K., Schmitz, F., Gross, J., Hommel, B., Shapiro, K.,
& Schnitzler, A. (2005). Target consolidation under high
temporal processing demands as revealed by MEG. NeuroImage, 26(4), 1030–1041.
Luck, S. J., & Hillyard, S. A. (1990). Electrophysiological evidence for parallel and serial processing during visual
search. Perception & Psychophysics, 48, 603-617.
Raymond, J., Shapiro, K., & Arnell, K. (1992). Temporary
Suppression of Visual Processing in an RSVP Task: An
Attentional Blink? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 18(3), 849–860.
Reynolds, J. H., Chelazzi, L., & Desimone, R. (1999). Competitive Mechanisms Subserve Attention in Macaque Areas
V2 and V4. J. Neurosci., 19(5), 1736–1753.
Visser, T., Bischof, W., & Di Lollo, V. (2004). Rapid serial
visual distraction: Task-irrelevant items can produce an attentional blink. Perception & Psychophysics, 66, 1418-32.
Vogel, E., Luck, S., & Shapiro, K. (1998). Electrophysiological Evidence for a Postperceptual Locus of Suppression During the Attentional Blink. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 24(6),
1656–1674.
Ward, R., Duncan, J., & Shapiro, K. (1997). Effects of similarity, difficulty, and nontarget presentation on the time
course of visual attention. Perception & Psychophysics,
59(4), 593-600.

1511

