UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Referent of Accented Pronouns is Determined by Coherence Relations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/13j1s3pz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hoeks, John C.J.
Redeker, Gisela
Stowe, Laurie A.
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Referent of Accented Pronouns is Determined by Coherence Relations
Ryan C. Taylor (r.taylor@rug.nl)
CLCG/BCN NeuroImaging Center, University of Groningen
P.O. Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands

Laurie A. Stowe (l.a.stowe@rug.nl)
CLCG/BCN NeuroImaging Center, University of Groningen
P.O. Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands

Gisela Redeker (g.redeker@rug.nl)
CLCG, University of Groningen
P.O. Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands

John C. J. Hoeks (j.c.j.hoeks@rug.nl)
CLCG/BCN NeuroImaging Center, University of Groningen
P.O. Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands
Abstract
This study investigates the effect of coherence relations and
accent on pronoun reference. Participants heard sentences like
John saw Jeff, and Jane called him, and indicated which noun
the pronoun referred to. Here, the pronoun is said to be ambiguous because it can refer either to John or to Jeff. The
sentences had one of two different types of coherence relations (Kehler, 2002), and were varied for pronoun accent. Coherence relations describe the relation between two different
propositions. Accenting the pronoun changed the referent in
one coherence relation condition, but not the other. Contra
Kehler, Kertz, Rohde, and Elman (2008), different coherence
relations responded to accenting in dissimilar ways. Furthermore, coherence relations were more important in determining
pronoun referent than syntax, against Smyth (1994).
Keywords: Discourse Processing; Pronoun Interpretation;
Prosody; Accent; Parallel Structure; Coreference.

Introduction
Pronouns are used to indicate entities already accessible
within the discourse model, and accenting is used to make
items more salient. Therefore, accenting a pronoun seems
paradoxical at first: Why draw attention to something which
is already active? Pronouns themselves are not straightforward. There are sometimes several candidates for reference
and therefore there is a risk of ambiguity. Nevertheless, pronouns are used with great frequency. What is more, they are
used more often by those with limited processing capacities
(Hendriks, Englert, Wubs, & Hoeks, 2008). It follows that
the interpretation of ambiguous pronouns has long been of
interest to both psycholinguists and computational linguists,
with influential models from one field being used in the other
(Ledoux, Gordon, Camblin, & Swaab, 2007; Gordon, Grosz,
& Gilliom, 1993). Accenting is itself controversial. In spite
of being recognized as important, the workings of prosody are
still a matter of debate (Fodor, 2002; Shneiderman, 2000).
Researching accented pronouns is all the more relevant in
view of Kothari (2007). This corpus study demonstrated that
pronouns are accented in natural speech in order to change
their referent to a less expected referent. Corpus data represents proof that a particular construction is used in language.

Kothari (2007) concludes that her work corroborates previous
experimental work (that of Venditti, Stone, Nanda, & Tepper,
2002), but she also found accenting unrelated to coherenceparallelling. Speaker, or more specifically speaker style was
an important factor in determining the frequency of pronoun
accenting.
Thus, we bring together pronoun reference and prosody in
the form of accented pronouns. We propose that the result is
a greater understanding of both pronouns and accenting.

The Resolution of Ambiguous Pronouns
The importance of understanding pronoun resolution is perhaps best demonstrated by the large amount of research that
has already been done. In particular, pronoun research in psycholinguistics has focussed on parallel sentences with an ambiguous pronoun. The term ambiguous has traditionally referred to morphological ambiguity, in the sense that the pronoun has the same gender as two or more nouns in the preceding sentence (see Smyth, 1994; Kehler et al., 2008; Venditti
et al., 2002). These are sentences with two clauses as shown
in (1):
(1)

John1 saw Jeff2 , and Stephen called him.
NP1 VP NP2 and NP3
VP Pro

In order to be a parallel sentence, each of the clauses must
have a verb (VP) and a subject (NP1 , NP3 ), and be conjoined
by and.
Parallel sentences have been much explored in the literature. Many of the initial attempts to explain coreference in
these sentences creatively exploited syntactic theory. Early
syntactic accounts suggested that the grammatical role was
the most important feature in determining pronoun reference.
Smyth (1994), however, put forward the Extended Feature
Marking Hypothesis (EFMH); the idea that it is the degree
of match between the grammatical roles in the first and second sentences which is most important, and not the grammatical role per se. For example, in his sentences (2-a. and -b.)

1621

both express the same idea and involve the same characters,
but the plumber occupies a different grammatical role in each
sentence (p. 202):
(2)

a.
b.

The carpenter gave the plumber an invoice, and
the electrician gave him a cheque.
The carpenter invoiced the plumber, and the electrician gave him a cheque.

Importantly the first and second clauses of (2-a.) have two
objects (the plumber, the invoice and him, a cheque); but in
the first clause of (2-b.) there is just one object, the plumber,
while in the second clause there are two objects him, and a
cheque.
According to Smyth (1994) the differences in Grammatical Role Parallelism between (2-a. and -b.) should have important consequences. Specifically, according to the EFMH,
a pronoun will refer to the NP in the previous clause which
shares the same grammatical role, as in (2-a.). However, in
the event that two clauses do not match in terms of grammatical roles, the pronoun will refer to the subject of the previous clause, as in (2-b.). This hypothesis was supported by an
off-line task. In this pronoun antecedent selection task participants read the sentence, and then had to circle the referent
that corresponded to the pronoun. Any sentences that were
felt to be “pragmatically biasing” were excluded. Whereas it
is apparent that extra-linguistic factors play a role in pronoun
attribution, the term pragmatic factors has been consistently
applied to those sentences where pronoun reference results
from world knowledge, and is beyond the scope of whatever
theory is being proposed (Smyth, 1994; Caramazza, Grober,
Garvey, & Yates, 1977; Garvey, Caramazza, & Yates, 1975).

Coherence Relations
Discourse relations have recently been used to account for
coreference, and by extension pronominal reference. Coherence Relations describe the relation between two ideas
(propositions) in a discourse (see Kehler, 2002). In this way,
they are able to account for the “pragmatic factors” that other
theories have avoided. Recall that while a sentence often corresponds to one proposition, linguistic syntax and logic are
separate levels of analysis. In logic, a proposition is a statement which may be either true or false. Propositions therefore
differ from sentences, which are purely syntactic.
Of relevance here are the Coherence Relations parallel, result and occasion. Parallel relations are used when a speaker
or writer wishes to express the similarity between participants, actions, or participants and actions in two propositions.
Sentence (1) above is a parallel relation: the similarity between Stephen’s participation in the action and Stephen’s action (seeing) with John’s action (calling) is made apparent to
the comprehender. Sentences related by parallel can be paraphrased as X, and similarly Y.
Result relations are used to express a causal relationship
between two events, where the first event causes the second
event. In the sentence Jessica helped Angela, and she was

thankful, the event expressed in the first clause results in the
event in the second clause. The relation between the two sentences can be paraphrased by X, and as a result Y.
Propositions related by occasion are related in such that X
represents the state of events before Y, although unlike result
relations there is no causal relation between the two. An example would be Steve went to the store, and bought a book.
Unlike in a result relation, going to the store does not necessarily imply that someone will buy a book.

Prosody and Coherence Relations
Kehler et al. (2008) and Kehler (2005) make strong claims
about the relation of accent to coherence relations and pronoun reference. What then is accent? A word is accented if
it is made acoustically prominent. This accent can be used to
indicate contrast in a discourse (Dimitrova, Redeker, Egg, &
Hoeks, 2008).
Prosody has a different motivation in different coherence
relations: in parallel sentences, “Elements in the second
clause that are not coreferential with their parallel elements
in the first must be [accented]” (3):
(3)

Mary cleaned her room, and S UE read a BOOK
(Kehler, 2005, ex. 24b)

If a pronoun is accented in a parallel sentence this indicates
that the pronoun is not coreferential with the element that is
parallel to it in the first sentence (the same would be true if
HER were replaced with the full noun phrase R ICE (4):
(4)

Condi Rice1 admires Hillary Clinton, and George W.
Bush absolutely worships HER1 . Kehler et al. (2008,
ex.19)

This is different than result (and occasion) sentences, where
“[Accenting] is build around Given information” (Kehler,
2005, p.10), for example (5), where the new information is
accented:
(5)

John pushed Bill, and he FELL. (Kehler, 2005, ex. 29)

Kehler goes on to suggest that accent is used when information is unexpected. For example, in (6), the act of falling is
predictable, but that it was John who fell is not:
(6)

John1 pushed Bill, and HE1 fell (Kehler, 2005, ex. 31)

To recapitulate, in parallel, a noun is stressed when it is not
coreferential with something in the same position in the previous clause; in result relations, words that are improbable
given world knowledge are stressed.
Venditti et al. (2002) tested the interaction of coherence relations and accent using the Visual World Paradigm. Prosody
was used to change the referent of a pronoun. More particularly, eye-tracked participants looked at a picture as they
heard a short narrative of like (7):
(7)

1622

a.

The zebra and the pig wanted to wash the car together.

b.
c.
d.

The zebra put a bucket of soapy water next to the
pig near the front of the car.
(i) Then he got out some sponges.
(ii) Then HE got out some sponges.
And together they started washing the hood and
the fenders.
p.3

Two characters were introduced in the first sentence (7-a). In
each of the critical conditions was a sentence starting with
then (7-c). Their hypothesis is that the coherence relation
between (7-b) and (7-c-i) is occasion, and between (7-b) and
(7-c-ii) is parallel.
This auditory, on-line experiment provides evidence that
accenting switches the referent of a pronoun under some conditions. They found that when asked which character was
represented by he in (7-c), participants looked at a different
referent in the accented condition than in the neutral condition.
There is, however, a theoretical problem with Venditti et al.
(2002). They state that their stimuli are ambiguous between
the relations parallel and occasion. But then is far from being a neutral conjunction. It explicitly encodes temporal adjacency: X then Y implies that X occurred first and Y followed.
In comparison with then, and is coherence relation-neutral;
the coherence relation is thus biased towards occasion. The
conjunction and is therefore a better choice for an experiment testing parallel relations. Hence, in the experiment we
present below, the stimuli are either unambiguously result or
unambiguously parallel.
Venditti et al. (2002) also tested pronouns in subject position. In conjoined clauses where the subject of the first clause
is the same as the subject of the second clause, the pronoun
can be gapped. That is, when the subject of the first sentence
is the same as the subject of the second sentence, there are
three possibilities (8):
(8)

John emailed Jeff, and...
a. John called Stephen.
b. he called Stephen.
c. John called Stephen.

Full name
Pronoun
Gapped

Sentence (8-b) is typically claimed to be ambiguous, but in
(8-a) and (8-c) the subject of the second sentence is unambiguously the subject of the first sentence (i.e., John). Since
pronouns are used as a labour saving device (Ledoux et al.,
2007; Gordon et al., 1993; Hendriks et al., 2008), as is gapping (Hoeks, Redeker, & Hendriks, 2009), speakers may prefer gapping in situations like (8). The study that we present
below avoids the complication of gapping by examining object pronouns, which, unlike subject pronouns, cannot be
gapped in English.
Our experiment constitutes a necessary clarification of the
results in Venditti et al. (2002). Unlike this previous study,
our stimuli were unambiguously of one coherence relation
or another, and two coherence relations were tested. And,
as mentioned, while subject pronouns have most often been

experimented on, we experimented on object pronouns. For
these pronouns, gapping is not an option and thus we could
be completely certain that pronominalization was the most
natural choice.
In this experiment, we tested whether the existence or absence of accent on an object pronoun changes the referent.
Kehler et al. (2008) suggested that accent will change the referent of an ambiguous antecedent in parallel and result sentences. This experiment constitutes an empirical test of intuitions presented by Kehler et al. (2008) regarding the interaction of Coherence Relations, Accent and Pronoun Reference.

Method
Participants
Twenty-seven native speakers of English (nine women, one
left-handed) residing in Edmonton (Western Canada) participated in the experiment.

Materials and design
The experiment used a 2 × 3 design, taking Coherence Relation (result, parallel) as one factor, and Accent (No–accent,
NP3 –accent, Pro–accent) as another. In the NP3 – and Pro–
accent conditions there was an L*+H accent on NP3 (the subject) and the pronoun (Pro) respectively. The No–accent condition contained no accent. No other accents were present in
the second clause. The participants heard only one version of
a given stimulus; there were 60 sentences in total, presented
in a pseudo-randomized manner. In order to assure that parallel -related sentences could not also be result sentences, the
second verb in parallel-related sentences was a near synonym
(e.g. phone–email), following Kehler et al. (2008). In the result sentences, the verb in the second clause was the result of
the first clause (e.g. foul–eject from the game)
We thought it possible that participants would just pick the
NP2 as the referent in No–accent and NP3 –accent conditions
and NP1 heard as the referent in Pro–accent condition. To
prevent this strategy, there was a nested factor in the result
condition. This factor, NP-bias, had two levels, NP1 and NP2 .
The stimuli took the form shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: NP1 and NP2 sentences.
There were 17 items in NP1 and 14 in NP2 . In NP1 sentences, antecedent preference is in the direction of the first
NP, and for NP2 towards the second NP, as determined by an
off-line rating task (seeFigure 1).
Additionally, following Kehler et al. (2008) we tested
Smyth’s EFMH hypothesis as a nested factor within the parallel condition. This factor had the levels Partial and Complete. As per the the discussion above, the two clauses either

1623

Prosodic naturalness

had exactly the same grammatical roles, or there was additional material in one of the clauses. In table (9) we see that
the grammatical roles are not parallel, because in the Complete condition the syntactic structure of both clauses is the
same. In the Partial condition the pronoun was expressed with
a preposition.
(9)

a.
b.

In order to ascertain that any results found in further analyses
were not attributable to unnatural prosody, an ANOVA analysis was performed on the naturalness ratings of the items
(Figure 2).

Sally called Monica, and Robert summoned her.
Complete
Amanda wrote Alisha, and Stevie made amends
with her.
Partial

Six sentences in the parallel condition were drawn from
Smyth (1994), and eight from Kehler et al. (2008). Only one
of Kehler et al.’s sentences was used in the result condition,
because the other sentences included intransitive clauses, and
were therefore not amenable to this experiment. The proper
names in the first sentence had the same gender so that there
was a potential ambiguity in the referent of the pronoun. The
proper names used were chosen to be unambiguously male or
unambiguously female. All items were recorded by a native
speaker of English for presentation over speakers or headphones.

Procedure
For practical reasons, some participants were tested as individuals (nine), and others in groups (18 participants, in three
different groups). Those tested as individuals heard items
through headphones, and those tested as a group heard the
stimuli presented over speakers. Individuals paced themselves and were told they could freely listen to a stimulus
item several times. In group testing the experimenter paced
the presentation of items to the speed of participant responses,
assuring that all participants had answered before continuing.
People participating as part of a group were told that they
could ask for the stimuli to be re-played. Participants rated
which person named in the previous sentence they felt to be
the antecedent of the pronoun using a seven-point scale.
The names of the characters of the first two sentences were
included on the response sheet, allowing participants to deal
with the large number of names presented. Prosodic naturalness ratings from 1–5 were also collected (One was unnatural,
five was natural). Participants were asked to go with their first
intuition and not to over-think their answers.
The instructions were read by participants and explained
orally by the experimenter. Particular efforts were taken to
assure participants that there was no prescriptive rule and that
their intuitions would not be judged for correctness, but simply analysed.

Results
We present below a series of ANOVA analyses. To compensate for violations of the sphericity assumption, we applied
the Greenhouse Geisser correction where appropriate. The
original degrees of freedom are reported.

Figure 2: Analysis of prosodic naturalness. 1 = Unnatural, 5
= Natural.
While there was no overall interaction (F1 (2, 5) = 1.7, p =
.186; F2 (2, 114) = .265, p = .8) there were main effects of
Coherence Relation (F1 (1, 24) = 37.0, p < .001; F2 (1, 57) =
8.4, p < .01) and Accent (F1 (2, 48) = 36.7, p < .001;
F2 (2, 114) = 33.8, p < .001). For Coherence the level result
(3.9, SE = .1) was higher ranked than parallel (3.7, SE = .1).
For Accent, the No–accent condition (4.2, SE = .1) was rated
highest, followed by the NP3 –accent condition (4.0, SE = .2),
with the Pro–accent condition (3.2, SE = .2) ranked least natural.

Antecedent Preference
We took the ratings performed by the participants, and averaged them by condition. The ratings in this form were considered the preference for a particular NP as antecedent. The
scores were then analysed by items and by participants using
a 2 × 3 ANOVA designs, taking Coherence Relation (parallel, result) as one factor, and Accent (No–accent, NP3 –accent,
Pro–accent) as the other, shown in Figure 3 (see also ex.1).
There was a main effect of Coherence Relation
(F1 (1, 26) = 32.8, p < .001; F2 (1, 57) = 18.4, p < .001). The
participants were more certain of the antecedent of pronouns
in result (1.8, SE = .1) than in parallel (1.0, SE = .1). There
was also a main effect of Accent (F1 (2, 52) = 85.5, p < .001;
F2 (2, 114) = 97.8, p < .001).
Contrasts indicated that participants preferred the nonpreferred NP as antecedent in Pro–accent condition
(0.2, SE = 0.2) relative to the NP3 –accent (2.0, SE = 0.1)
and the No–accent conditions (all ps < .001, 2.0, SE = .1).
The No–accent condition and the NP3 accent condition, however, were not significantly different from each other (Fs< 1).
These main effects were, however, qualified by the existence of an interaction between Coherence Relation and Accent. This interaction was highly significant in both by par-

1624

occurred, we tested the means of the different groups against
the value zero, the central value of the scale. Values significantly different from zero have therefore changed referent as a result of Accent. All of the result conditions and
two of the parallel conditions were significantly greater than
zero (all ts> 5.0, p < .001). Object–accent had, however, reduced the mean of participant responses below zero in parallel (t1 (26) = −2.9, p < .01;t2 (28) = −3.1, p < .005).

NP1 and NP2 verbs

Figure 3: Likelihood of choosing the preferred referent by
Coherence Relation.

ticipant and by items analyses (F1 (2, 52) = 30.186.0, p <
.001; F2 (2, 114) = 18.0, p < .001).
To better understand the nature of these interactions we
performed further analyses. First we looked at the effect
of Accent of the parallel and result conditions separately:
For parallel–related sentences, there was a significant effect
of Accent (F1 (2, 52) = 81.4, p < .001, F2 (2, 54) = 84.4, p <
.001). Bonferroni post-hoc analyses indicated that this effect was due to significant differences between the Pro–accent
condition and the other two conditions (all ps < .001); the difference between the No–accent condition and the NP3 –accent
conditions was not significant. (true for F2)
For the result sentences there was also a significant effect
of Accent (F1 (2, 52) = 28.8, p < .001, F2 (2, 60) = 19.3, p <
.001). The post-hoc analyses showed that here too the relationship between the Pro–accent condition and the other two
conditions was the locus of this effect. So, in both conditions
we find a similar pattern, which is more pronounced in the
parallel than in the result condition. To find out whether this
was true, we compared parallel and result conditions at each
of the levels of Accent. We found that there was a significant
difference between the parallel and result relations in two of
the Accent conditions: significant results were found in No–
accent (F1 (1, 26) = 10.2, p < .005, but only a trend by participants, F2 (1, 57) = 3.8, p = .06) and Pro–accent (F1 (1, 26) =
51.8, p < .001; F2 (1, 58) = 39.1, p < .001), but not in NP3 –
accent (Fs< 1.6).
Visual inspection suggested that although the difference
between the Accent conditions was significant in all three
conditions, the difference was most pronounced in the Pro–
accent condition; This was confirmed by post-hoc pairwise
comparisons of the effect of Coherence Relation between the
different levels of Accent. All analyses taking NP3 –accent
and Pro–accent as levels were statistically significant (F >
12, p < .001). When No–accent and NP3 –accent were taken
as a factor alongside Coherence, the interaction of Accent and
Coherence is not significant, showing instead a trend of interaction (F1 (1, 26) = 3.8, p = .06; F2 (1, 58) = .3, p = .56).
In order to determine whether a referent switch had in fact

To make sure that participants were not blindly choosing the
second NP in the no–accent condition and subject accent conditions, we included the variable NP. To that end, we took
NP1 vs. NP2 (henceforth NP) as a factor in an ANOVA. Thus,
NP was a factor on the one hand, and Accent (No–accent,
Pro–accent, and NP3 –accent) on the other, yielding a 2 × 3
design.
ANOVA analysis showed that there was no main effect of
NP for subjects or items (F < .04). There was an interaction
of NP and Accent in the by items F2 (2, 58) = 2.4, p = .5) but
not by subject condition (F1 (2, 52) = 2.9, p = .07). Visual inspection indicates that this results from the NP2 preference
being weaker in the Pro–accent condition and stronger in the
subject accent condition, relative to the NP1 condition; in the
NP3 accent condition, the reverse was true.

Grammatical Role Parallelism
In order to further assess the correctness of the EFMH
(Smyth, 1994), we included the nested variable Grammatical Role Parallelism with the factors Complete and Partial,
within the Parallel condition. Combined with Accent, this
gave a 2 x 3 design. An ANOVA analysis comparing Complete (1.0, SE = .1) and Partial (1.0, SE = .1) found no main
effect (F < .1).
Grammatical Role Parallelism was not significant in the
by subject or by items analysis (F1 (2, 52) = .07, p = .8;
F2 (1, 26) = .2, p = .6).

Discussion
Our findings were not totally in line with the expectations of
Kehler et al. (2008). Whereas they predicted that both result
and parallel relations would respond the same way to pronouns, we found that it was in fact only in parallel-related
sentences that accented pronouns selected a different referent
than their unaccented analogues.
Furthermore, this experiment clarified the results of Venditti et al. (2002). Because our experiment separated Coherence Relation from Accent, and examined object pronouns,
our results gave a more effective account of the interaction of
prosody and coherence relation. Accented pronouns in a parallel-related sentence change referent, those in result-related
sentences do not.
Taking the perspective that the results of Venditti et al.
(2002) refer strictly to occasion-related sentences (as we do),
the present study and the previous study are therefore complementary, because our study shows the effect of accenting

1625

pronouns in two more types of coherence relations: parallel
and result.
The results suggest that Coherence Relations determine
how pronouns are interpreted, and how accented pronouns
are interpreted. Accenting object pronouns switched the referent in the parallel condition, but not in the result condition.
Again, this interaction was modified by neither grammatical role parallelism, nor NP. These results demonstrate that
accenting plays a different role in parallel-related sentences
than it does in result sentences.
These inferences are mitigated by the multiple control conditions we included, and by previous research. With regards
to control conditions, the prosodic naturalness rating showed
that the stimuli used were possible and natural sentences of
English. We ensured that Grammatical Role Parallelism was
not responsible by including a nested factor within the parallel condition. This demonstrated that with respect to Grammatical Role Parallelism, partially parallel structures were
interpreted no differently than fully parallel structures. We
tested the effect of accenting pronouns in the result condition
that referred to the the first or the second NP: Again we found
no difference.
Research has so far investigated parallel, occasion and result relations, showing differences between the first two and
the last. Moreover, there are various other coherence relations discussed in the literature that remain completely unstudied psycholinguistically in relation to coreference, and by
extension pronominalization. Another obvious step in this
line of research is to investigate whether there is any interaction of Coherence Relations with other factors—particularly
in on-line experimentation. It seems possible that other factors, like syntax, play a role in on-line processing which did
not surface in our off-line study. Future studies should sort
out differences between output and the on-line processes that
achieve this output.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Laura Kertz for providing us with
her materials (from Kehler et al., 2008), and Veerle M. Baaijen, Diana Dimitrova, Lars Meyer, Jennifer Spenader, and our
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on earlier
drafts of this paper.

Garvey, C., Caramazza, A., & Yates, J. (1975). Factors influencing assignment of pronoun antecedents. Cognition,
3(3), 227–243.
Gordon, P., Grosz, B., & Gilliom, L. (1993). Pronouns,
names, and the centering of attention in discourse. Cognitive Science, 17, 311–347.
Hendriks, P., Englert, C., Wubs, E., & Hoeks, J. (2008). Age
differences in adults’ use of referring expressions. Journal
of Logic, Language and Information, 17(4), 443–466.
Hoeks, J., Redeker, G., & Hendriks, P. (2009). Fill the gap!
Combining pragmatic and prosodic information to make
gapping easy. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research.
Kehler, A. (2002). Coherence, reference, and the theory of
grammar. Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of Language
and Information Publications.
Kehler, A. (2005). Coherence-driven constraints on the placement of accent. Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Semantics and . . . .
Kehler, A., Kertz, L., Rohde, H., & Elman, J. (2008). Coherence and coreference revisited. Journal of Semantics(25),
1–44.
Kothari, A. (2007). Accented pronouns and unusual antecedents: A corpus study. In S. Keizer, H. Bunt, & T. Paek
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th sigdial workshop on discourse and dialogue (pp. 150–157). East Stroudsburg, Pa:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ledoux, K., Gordon, P., Camblin, C., & Swaab, T. (2007).
Coreference and lexical repetition: Mechanisms of discourse integration. Memory & Cognition, 35(4), 801–815.
Shneiderman, B. (2000). The limits of speech recognition.
Communications of the ACM, 43(9), 63–65.
Smyth, R. (1994). Grammatical determinants of ambiguous
pronoun resolution. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
23(3), 197–229.
Venditti, J., Stone, M., Nanda, P., & Tepper, P. (2002). Discourse constraints on the interpretation of nuclear-accented
pronouns. In B. Bel & I. Marlien (Eds.), Proceedings of
speech prosody 2002, international conference.

References
Caramazza, A., Grober, E., Garvey, C., & Yates, J. (1977).
Comprehension of anaphoric pronouns. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16(5), 601–9.
Dimitrova, D., Redeker, G., Egg, M., & Hoeks, J. (2008).
Linguistic and extra-linguistic determinants of accentuation in dutch. In B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th annual conference of
the cognitive science society (p. 2191-2196). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Fodor, J. (2002). Psycholinguistics cannot escape prosody. In
B. Bel & I. Marlien (Eds.), Proceedings of speech prosody
2002, international conference.

1626

