UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Cultural Narratives in Moral Decision Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7gx9r0dc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dehghani, Morteza
Ekhtiari, Hamed
Forbus, Kenneth
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Cultural Narratives in
Moral Decision Making
Morteza Dehghani1, Sonya Sachdeva1, Hamed Ekhtiari2, Dedre Gentner1, Ken Forbus1
1
{morteza, s-sachdeva, gentner, forbus}@northwestern.edu
2
h_ekhtiari@razi.tums.ac.ir,
1

Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-0834, USA
2

Neurocognitive Laboratory,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Abstract
Cultural narratives such as those mentioned in religious texts
and folk stories are instrumental in teaching core cultural
moral values. In this paper, we investigate the role of cultural
narratives in understanding novel moral situations. We
examine whether the processes by which core cultural
narratives are applied in people‘s lives follow the principles
of analogical retrieval and mapping. In particular, we
examine how analogical accessibility influences the use of
canonical moral narratives. We also show how access to
different moral stories results in differences in moral
preference across cultures. We report on the results of two
experiments performed among Iranian and American
participants. Our results indicate that analogical accessibility
to cultural narratives that are similar in structure to a given
dilemma is the differentiating factor in our participants‘
responses across the different variants and between the two
cultural groups.

Introduction
Judgment and decision making researchers have highlighted
a number of ways in which culture may influence decision
making. Probably the most well-known results are the
findings on cultural differences in judgments of risk. Hsee
and Weber (e.g. 1999) have found that participants from
collectivist cultures, such as East Asian cultures, are more
risk-seeking because they have a larger social cushion to fall
back on in case of loss. Weber and Hsee (1998) argue that a
variety of cultural products such as proverbs could influence
people‘s decision making.
One type of cultural product that may underlie culturally
specific moral values is core cultural narratives. Certain
elements of moral reasoning can be best learned and
transferred in narratives as they are not common situations
encountered in daily life. Great cultural narratives, such as
those contained in most religious texts or in folk stories, can
deeply imprint our long term memory, whether or not we
ever encounter these situations in real life. It is not
implausible to think that those values seep into our beings
and affect our reasoning.

Prasad (2007) conducted ethnographic research in
Sringeri in Southern India looking at how oral narratives
shape moral identities. She argues that the way in which
cultural narratives about morality are interpreted and
reinterpreted at every telling are instrumental in the complex
nature of moral reasoning.
In this work we investigate whether cultural narratives
guide people‘s moral decision making. That is, whether
moral reasoning is influenced by analogies with the core
narratives. If so, then moral reasoning should manifest the
keynote phenomena that characterize analogical processing.
We focus on whether analogical accessibility influences the
use of canonical moral narratives and shapes our
understanding of novel moral situations. Additionally, we
examine how access to different moral narratives can result
in differences in moral preference among cultures.
We begin by summarizing relevant results on the
relationship between analogy and decision making. Next,
we discuss the role similarity in long-term memory retrieval.
Then we explain our hypotheses and describe our
experiments. We close with implications and future work.

Analogy and Decision Making
The link between analogy and decision-making has been
explored from various perspectives, including consumer
behavior (Gregan-Paxton, 1998), political reasoning (May,
1973) and legal decision-making (Holyoak and Simon,
1999). Goldstein and Weber (1995) argue that the process of
decision making is a constructive process in which the
decision maker relies extensively on his/her background
knowledge and previous experiences. Medin et al. (1995)
demonstrate that similarity processing and decision making
share important commonalities which suggest common
mental processes for the two tasks. When making a choice,
the decision maker recognizes the current situation as
analogous to some previous experience and draws
inferences from his/her previous choices (Markman and
Medin 2002). The next section summarizes the relevant
findings regarding similarity and retrieval.

1912

Similarity, Retrieval and Alignment
In our studies we varied the kind of similarity between the
target given to the participants and the core cultural story
(which is never presented). The first question is how
similarity between the target story and the core story will
influence reminding of the core story. In general, surface
similarity is the best predictor for whether a current target
story will retrieve a given base story from LTM; and
structural similarity is the best predictor for inference
(Forbus et al,. 1994; Gentner et al, 1993; Holyoak & Koh,
1987). However, structural similarity can also influence
retrieval for experts in a domain (Novick, 1988), and also
for novices who have previously compared the base story to
another analogous story (Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Gentner et
al, 2003). (Of course, these phenomena may be related.)
Thus the question for retrieval is (a) whether Iranians will
show remindings to the core cultural story; and, if so, (b)
whether their reminding will be influenced by surface
similarity, structural similarity, or both.
The second set of questions and predictions concern
inference. Assuming that the core narrative is accessed, in
order to draw inferences, it must first be aligned with the
target story (Clement & Gentner, 1991; Gentner, 1983). The
correspondences created by this alignment are used to
import knowledge from the base representation into the
target. Thus, if analogy is operative, then Iranians should
make more inferences from the core narrative for targets
that are structurally alignable with the core narrative.

Experiments
We suggest that some important elements of moral
reasoning are learned and retained in cultural narratives, and
that these cultural narratives play a role in understanding
novel moral situations. Further, we suggest that the
processes by which these narratives are applied in people‘s
lives follow the principles of analogical retrieval and
mapping. That is, we argue that by using analogy we apply a
moral theme, a certain relational structure from one domain
(that of the cultural narrative) to a novel, but structurally
similar domain. In sum, our chief prediction is that, for
Iranians, moral reasoning should abide by the key
constraints of analogical processing: that is, structural
similarity to the core narratives should guide inference. Of
course, we predict no such pattern for Americans, because
the stories are designed to match core Iranian narratives.
With respect to retrieval, the question is whether Iranians
will show the typical pattern (that is, surface similarity as
the main predictor of retrieval), or whether they will show
the pattern characteristic of experts (of structural similarity
also as a strong predictor of retrieval). A key feature of
these studies is that the base domain (the cultural narrative)
is never presented to participants. We are predicting that
such narratives are sufficiently entrenched in the minds of
members of the culture that no presentation is necessary.

We focus our studies on the notion of sacrifice. The idea
of sacrifice is embedded in narratives of many cultures, with
great saliency in some cultures—in particular, the Iranian
culture that concerns us here. As Prasad (2007) notes, such
narratives can have great power in a culture.
In order to compile a list of salient stories for a given
culture, we performed an Internet based pilot study using
199 Iranian subjects. Among other questions, subjects were
asked to list the top 10 cultural and religious moral stories
they could think of. Based on subjects‘ answers, we
compiled a list containing the most referred to non-religious
and non-political narratives. Next, for each of these
narratives, we came up with four different variants: surface
changes relative to the base scenario; structural changes;
both surface and structural changes; and changes that affect
the core cultural values (sacred values) that underlie the
narrative. Our prediction was that for people who hold these
values sacred, alteration of these values in a story should
decrease structural similarity.
Our hypotheses are that for Iranians, (1) changing the
surface structure of the scenarios should still allow inference
from the original cultural stories, while changing the deep
structure should block the inference; (2) the rate of retrieval
of cultural narratives should vary based upon the degree of
surface and structural similarity with the new scenario; (3)
Americans, who lack these cultural narratives, should show
no difference between these variations.

Experiment 1
To test these questions, we created story variants for the
following cultural narrative, prominent in Iranian culture:
Base Story:
Pourya Vali was the most famous wrestler of his time. The
morning before wrestling with a young athlete from another
province, he goes to a mosque and sees the mother of the young
athlete praying and saying ―God, my son is going to wrestle with
Pourya Vali. Please watch over him and help him win the match so
he can use the prize money to buy a house‖. Pourya Vali thinks to
himself that the young wrestler needs the money more than he
does, and also winning the match will break the heart of the old
mother. He has two choices, he can either win the match and keep
his status as the best wrestler in the world or he could lose the
match and make the old mother happy. Even though he was known
not to ever lose a match, he loses that one on purpose.

Surface change (ΔSF):
Ali is the greatest ping pong player of his city. The morning before
a match with a young athlete from another city, he goes for a walk
outside the stadium and sees the mother of the young athlete
praying and saying ―God, my son is going to play a match with Ali
the famous ping pong player. Please watch over him and help him
win the match so he can use the prize money to get married‖. Ali
has two choices, he can either win the match and keep his status as
the best ping pong player or he could lose the match and make the
old mother happy.

Structure change (ΔST):

1913

Ali was the most famous wrestler of his city. The morning before
wrestling with a young athlete from another province, he goes to a
mosque and sees the mother of the young athlete praying and
saying ―God, my son is going to wrestle with Ali. Please watch
over him and help him win the match so he can use the prize to
buy me new expensive clothes‖. Ali has two choices, he can either
win the match and keep his status as the best wrestler in the world
or he could lose the match and make the old mother happy.

Surface + Structure change (ΔSS):
Ali is the greatest ping pong player of his city. The morning before
a match with a young athlete from another city, he goes for a walk
outside the stadium and sees the mother of the young athlete
praying and saying ―God, my son is going to play a match with Ali
the famous ping pong player. Please watch over him and help him
win the match so he can use the prize money use the prize to buy
me new expensive clothes‖. Ali has two choices, he can either win
the match and keep his status as the best ping pong player or he
could lose the match and make the old mother happy.

Sacred Value Change (ΔSV):
Ali was going to wrestle against the most famous wrestler of his
city. The morning before the match, he goes to a mosque and sees
the mother of the famous athlete praying and saying ―God, my son
is going to wrestle with young Ali. Please watch over him and help
him win the match so he can keep his status as the best wrestler in
the world‖. Ali has two choices, he can either win the match and
beat the best wrestler in the world or he could lose the match and
make the old mother happy.

After reading one of these dilemmas, the subjects were
asked the following questions:
1. What should Ali do?
a. Win the match
b. Lose the match and make the old woman happy
2. What narrative does this scenario remind you of?
3. If it reminds you of any narratives, please list the similarities
between the two.
4. Please list the differences between the two.

Choice ‗a‘ in question 1 corresponds to the utilitarian
choice, that is the choice that brings the highest overall
utility to the agent. Choice ‗b‘ represents the choice
involving sacrifice, where the agent disregards his own
immediate utility for the better of others. The control group
received English translations of the above scenarios with the
changes in the names, sports and the locations such that they
would be more familiar to American audiences (e.g.,
Andrew instead of Ali, tennis instead of wrestling, etc.).
Method
364 subjects in Iran between the ages of 17 to 41 (mean =
18.67, Female/Male: 191/173), completed our questionnaire.
These subjects were either students at University of Tehran
or enrolled in the college preparation course (4 th year of
high school). The control group was 48 Northwestern

undergraduates (mean age = 18.91; Fe-male/Male: 28/20).
Each participant received one target variant (randomized
across subjects). For the Iranian subjects, the answer to the
second question was coded as a recall only when they
recalled the cultural narrative. However, for the control
group a recall was coded when they indicated any story
retrieved from LTM (including children‘s stories, movie
plots, etc.). The answers to questions 3 and 4 were coded
using the following scheme: if subjects reported attribute
similarities/differences to/from the base, these were coded
as
surface
similarities/differences,
whereas
functional/relational similarities/differences were reported
as structural similarities/differences. Translations were done
by independent translators.
Results
The proportion of sacrificial choices (choice b) to the total
number of selected choices for each variant is reported in
Table 1. As predicted, Iranians who received the ΔSF target
were highly likely to make the sacrifice inference. Those
receiving ΔSS were also highly likely to make this
inference. There was a significant difference between the
following variants: ΔSF and ΔST (χ2 = 6.5291, df = 1, p <
0.01), ΔSF and ΔSV (χ2 = 4.3829, df = 1, p < 0.05), ΔST
and ΔSS (χ2 = 5.8091, df = 1, p < 0.05) and ΔSS and ΔSV
(χ2 = 3.7877, df = 1, p < 0.05). For the control group, there
were no significant differences among the variants1.
Among the Iranian subjects who chose the sacrificial
choice, a significantly larger number reported structural
similarities to the cultural narrative (N = 66) than reported
surface similarities (N = 32) (χ2 = 17.2997, df = 1, p <<
0.001). Among those who chose the utilitarian choice, the
reverse held: a significantly larger number reported
structural differences (N = 20) rather than surface
differences (N= 2) (χ2 = 18.6941, df = 1, p << 0.001). Note
that even those Iranians who chose the utilitarian option still
mostly made reference to the cultural narrative.
The results for retrieval (question 2), as expected, show
dependence on both surface and structural similarity.
Iranians who received the ΔSS variant showed significantly
lower retrieval of the cultural narrative (51%) than did those
who received the ΔSF situation (66%) (χ2 = 3.6497, df = 1, p
= 0.05). Moreover, those in the ΔSS condition reported a
larger number of alternate stories (31%) than did those in
the ΔSF condition (12%) (χ2= 4.5158, df = 1, p < 0.05).
Among the Iranians who were reminded of the core story,
a significantly larger number of subjects chose the
sacrificial choice (choice b) (76%) than chose the utilitarian
choice (20%) (χ2 = 157.533, df = 1, p << 0.001).

1

A power test revealed that even had there been the same
number of subjects in the American group as in the Iranian group,
the probability that all of the above differences would hold among
the Americans would have been very low (less than 2.5% for the
first experiment and less than 10% for the second experiment).

1914

Logistic regression revealed a significant difference in the
trend of answers to these variants between the Iranian
subjects and the control group (z= -3.87, p << 0.001).2
Table 1: Proportions of sacrificial choices to total number of
selected choices for Experiment 1

Iranian Group
Control Group

ΔSF
0.83
0.07

ΔST
0.65
0.00

ΔSS
0.82
0.00

ΔSV
0.68
0.00

Discussion
As predicted, Iranians were highly likely to draw the
inference suggested by their core narrative, especially when
they could align the structure of the target with that of the
core narrative. Also as predicted, Americans (who lack this
core narrative) showed no such pattern; there were no
differences among the variants. We speculate that
Americans may have shown a different cultural value, that
of observing the rules of the game. That is, they more or less
might have treated these rules as sacred values and as they
were inclined not to violate their principles regardless of the
consequences. Future research will investigate this possible
difference in core values.
Interestingly enough, among the Iranians, when both
surface and structure were modified (ΔSS), retrieval of the
core story was significantly reduced as compared to the ΔSF
variant. In fact, many Iranians were reminded of other
stories that have surface and structural resemblance to the
ΔSS variant (chiefly a moral story about another wrestler
and a moral story about a running match). These remindings
may have contributed to the many sacrificial answers for the
ΔSS variant as these stories also laud the value of sacrifice.
The clear difference between ΔSF and ΔST variants
among Iranian participants indicates a strong preference for
inference from the core story in the ΔSF variant over the
ΔST variant. This follows the general hypothesis that
structural similarity is the most important feature for
inference. Moreover, as indicated above, a significantly
larger number of the Iranian subjects reported structural
differences, as opposed to surface differences, from the base
story when they chose the utilitarian choice (when the
inference was blocked from the base to the target).
Importantly, even those Iranians who chose the utilitarian
option still mostly did so by reference to the cultural
narrative; they simply considered that the structural
differences were sufficiently serious as to block the
analogous inference.
There was no significant difference between ΔST and
ΔSV, indicating that a change in sacred values, in this case
swapping the roles of the actors, had effects similar to a
2

An ANOVA power test suggests that the difference would stay
significant if there were an equal number of subjects in both
groups.

change in structure. In the Vali story, a person in power,
helping someone in need by sacrificing his status is
considered the moral message of the story.
In conclusion, the results of the first experiment
highlights how analogical accessibility to a base moral
theme affected participants‘ decision making when faced
with moral dilemmas. The trend of sacrificial decision
making among the Iranian subjects depended on whether the
probe could be structurally aligned to the base moral
narrative or not. However, due to the fact that the control
group did not have access to the base, structural differences
between the variants did not affect their decision making. In
the second experiment, we examine the effects of a more
recent cultural story on people‘s decision making.

Experiment 2
In the second experiment we used a story about the Iran and
Iraq war.
Base story:
During the Iran and Iraq war, Hossein, a young boy who has
sneaked into the army, is confronted with a convoy of tanks that if
not stopped will destroy a part of the city that the boy is fighting at.
Hossein can either try to run to his commander on time, inform
him about the situation and save his own life or he can stop a tank
by sacrificing his own life. Hossein, therefore, took a grenade from
a nearby body, pulled the pin out, and jumped underneath the Iraqi
tank, killing himself and disabling the tank. This stopped the Iraqi
tank division's advance and saved many people‘s lives.

ΔSF:
During the Bosnian and Serbian war, a young boy sneaks in to the
army. One day during the war, he is confronted with a convoy of
enemy buses carrying soldiers and weapons. If these buses are not
stopped, they will help the enemy destroy part of the city that the
boy is fighting at. He can either try to run to his commander on
time, inform him about the situation and save his own life or he
can stop a bus by running underneath it and activating a mine
which otherwise would not work.

ΔST:
During a war, a young boy who has sneaked into the army, is
confronted with a tank that if not stopped will destroy a part of the
city that the boy is fighting at. He can either try to run to his
commander on time and inform him about the attack which would
cause the commander to issue a strike from other units against the
tanks or he can stop a tank by running underneath it and activating
a mine which otherwise would not work.

ΔSS:
During the Bosnia and Serbian war, a young boy sneaks in to the
army. One day during the war, he is confronted with a convoy of
enemy buses carrying soldiers and weapons. If this bus is not
stopped, it will help the enemy destroy part of the city that the boy
is fighting at. He can either run to his commander on time, inform
him about the situation which would cause the commander to issue
a strike from other units against the convoy of buses or he can stop
a bus by running underneath it and activating a mine which
otherwise would not work.

1915

Table 2: Proportions of sacrificial choices to total number of
selected choices for Experiment 2

ΔSV:
During the Bosnian and Serbian war, a young Serbian boy sneaks
in to the army. One day during the war, he is confronted with a
convoy of Bosnian buses carrying soldiers and weapons. If these
buses are not stopped, they will help the Bosnians destroy part of
the city that the boy is fighting at. He can either try to run to his
commander on time, inform him about the situation and save his
own life or he can stop a bus by running underneath it and
activating a mine which otherwise would not work.

After reading one of these dilemmas, the subjects were
asked similar questions to those asked in experiment one,
with only the first question being different:
1. What should the young boy do?
a. Run away
b. Sacrifice his own life

The control group received exact translations of the above
variants.
Method
The participants and procedure were as in Study 1.
Results
The proportion of sacrificial choices to the total number of
selected choices for each variant is reported in table 2. As
in Study 1, Iranians who received the ΔSF variant were
highly likely to choose the sacrificial option. For the Iranian
group there was a significant difference between the
following variants: ΔSF and ΔST (χ2 = 4.2817, df = 1, p <
0.05), ΔSF and ΔSV variants (χ2 = 5.6432, df = 1, p < 0.01)
and ΔSS and ΔSV (χ2 = 4.0652, df = 1, p < 0.05). For the
control group, there were no significant differences between
the different variants1.
As in Study 1, among the Iranians who chose the
sacrificial option, a significantly larger number reported
structural similarities to the base (N = 47) rather than
surface similarities (N = 19) (χ2 = 17.5544, df = 1, p <<
0.001). Furthermore, among participants who chose the
utilitarian option, a significantly larger number reported
structural (N = 66), rather than surface (N = 10), differences
from the base (χ2 = 57.8086, df = 1, p << 0.001). As
expected, given that Americans did not know the base story,
none of these differences were observed in this group.
As in the first experiment, Iranians who received the ΔSS
variant, showed a significantly lower (79%) amount of
recall than those who received the ΔSF variant (93%) (χ2 =
4.6738, df = 1, p < 0.05).
Among Iranians, a significantly larger number of subjects
who were reminded of a story chose the sacrificial options
(92%), compared to the utilitarian option (83%) (χ2 =
4.6609, df = 1, p < 0.05).
Comparing the trend of the choices across different
variants using logistic regression revealed a significant
difference between the two cultures (z = -2.045, p < 0.05) 2.

Iranian Group
Control Group

ΔSF
0.50
0.33

ΔST
0.32
0.17

ΔSS
0.45
0.25

ΔSV
0.30
0.22

Discussion
Among the Iranian subjects, there was again a clear
difference between ΔSF and ΔST/ΔSV variants: subjects
more often chose the second option in the ΔSF variant than
they did in the ΔST or the ΔSV variants. This follows our
prediction that people draw influences suggested by their
core narratives when they can be structurally aligned. As in
experiment 1, we found a high rate of sacrificial inferences
when both structure and surface were changed (ΔSS).
Also, similar to the results of the first experiment,
modifying the sacred value had the same effect as
modifying the structure of the scenario. Altering the role of
the sacred value(s) involved in a decision making scenario,
seems to have structural effects, and this reduces the
possibility of analogical inference from the base. There was
no difference between ΔSF and ΔSV among the control
group, which is expected given that defending Muslim land
is not a sacred value for the American subjects.
The major difference between the two experiments is the
reverse trend in the number of sacrificial answers among the
two cultures. The Iranian subjects made significantly more
sacrificial choices in the first experiment than they did in the
second experiment (χ2 = 17.0665, df = 1, p << 0.001).
However, this was reversed among the American subjects,
who made more sacrificial choices in the second experiment
than they did in the first (χ2 = 23.7252, df = 1, p << 0.001).
This may be because the American subjects were often
reminded of super-hero movies. Among Iranians, the overall
rate of retrieval was higher in Study 2 than in Study 1. We
speculate that the rate of retrieval of the core narrative was
higher for the second story is because that story is highly
publicized in the media (In fact a picture of Hossein is on
one of Iranian bills).

General Discussion
The results of our experiments suggest that analogical
mapping from core cultural narratives can influence moral
reasoning about current moral dilemmas. Supporting the
hypothesis that analogical processing occurs during moral
decision making, our results manifest some of the keynote
phenomena that characterize analogical processing: (1)
changes to surface structure of the scenarios allowed
inference from the original cultural stories, while changing
the deep structure blocked the inference; (2) to a large
degree, the rate of retrieval of cultural narratives varied
based upon the degree of surface and structural similarity
with the presented dilemma; and (3) these effects were seen
only for Iranians, not for Americans, consistent with the

1916

1.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Iranians, Exp 1
Americans, Exp 1
Iranians, Exp 2
Americans, Exp 2

SF

ST

S

PV

Figure 1. Proportions of Sacrificial Answers
claim that the effects stem from core narratives of the
Iranian culture. One difference from laboratory studies was
the very high rate of retrieval overall. We conjecture that
this high retrieval rate stems from the importance of the
narratives in Iranian culture, as well as from their frequent
repetition and schematization (Blanchette and Dunbar,
2000; Gentner et al., in press).
Our results suggest that a core differentiating factor in
moral reasoning between cultures may be familiarity with
different collections of cultural narratives. Even if the
foundations and the logic of morality were universally
present, the different cultural stories would cause
differences in the judgment of morality between cultures.
We believe some well known findings on moral reasoning
might be explained by formal examination of moral
narratives present within and across cultures.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a grant from the
AFSOR MURI. We would like to thank Doug Medin and
Rumen Iliev for their continuous help and support. We also
would like to thank Soroush, Kherad and Soudeh high
schools for giving us access to their students; Mr. Bagheri
for translating the scenarios into Farsi and also Mr. Rezvani,
Ms. Amini Khoo and Francisco Iacobelli for all their help.

References
Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2000). How analogies are
generated: The roles of structural and superficial
similarity. Memory and Cognition, 28, 108–124.

Clement, C. A., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a
selection constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive
Science, 15, 89-132.
Forbus, K., Gentner, D., and Law, K. (1994). MAC/FAC: A
model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science,
19, 141-205.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A Theoretical
Framework for Analogy. Cognitive Science 7, 2, 155-170.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J.,&Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 393–
408.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M.J., & Forbus, K. (1993). The
roles of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability and
inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 524-575.
Gick, M. L. & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology 15, pp. 1–38.
Gregan-Paxton J. (2001). The role of abstract and specific
knowledge in the formation of product judgments: an
analogical learning perspective. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 11(3): 141-158.
Goldstein, W. M., & Weber, E. U. (1995). Content and
discontent: indications and implications of domain
specificity in preferential decision making. In: J.
Busmeyer, D. L. Medin and R. Hastie (Eds). Decision
making from a cognitive perspective. Academic Press.
Hsee, C., & Weber, E. (1999). Cross-National Differences
in Risk Preference and Lay Predictions. J. Behav. Dec.
Making, 12, 165–179.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory and Cognition,
15, 332-340.
Holyoak, K. J., and Simon, D. (1999). Bidirectional
reasoning in decision making by constraint satisfaction.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 128, 3-31.
Markman, A. B., & Medin, D. L. (2002) Decision Making.
Vol. 2, edited by Medin D. L. and Pashler, H. 413-466.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
May, E. R. (1973) “Lessons” of the Past. Oxford University
Press, New York, NY.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Markman A. B. (1995).
Comparison and choice: Relations between similarity
processing and decision processing. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review 2, no. 1, 1-19.
Novick, L. R. (1988). Analogical transfer, problem
similarity, and expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, memory, and Cognition 14, pp.
510–520.
Prasad, L. (2007). Poetics of Conduct. Columbia University
Press, New York.
Weber, E., & Hsee, C. (1999). Cross-cultural Differences in
Risk Perception, but Cross-cultural Similarities in
Attitudes Towards Perceived Risk. Management Science,
Vol. 44, No. 9, 1998

1917

