UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of comparison on the perceived similarity of faces

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2cp9j7s3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Engelbrecht, Paula

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Comparison on the Perceived Similarity of Faces
Paula C. Engelbrecht (pce205@soton.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Southampton, Highfield,
Southampton, SO171BJ UK

Abstract
This study investigates the effect of comparison on the
perceived similarity of unfamiliar faces. Participants were
asked to compare pairs of faces, and to list either their
commonalities or the differences between them before rating
their similarity. The results of the first experiment show that
listing commonalities and differences can both increase the
perceived similarity of the compared faces. This pattern of
results is interpreted in line with structural alignment theory
which posits that the detection of commonalities is an
essential component of both similarity and difference
comparisons. The results of the second study show that the
effect of comparison on perceptual similarity is limited by the
perceptual attributes of the compared faces. Under conditions
where the compared faces are highly similar and the detection
of commonalities do not require any mental manipulation,
comparison has little or no effect on perceived similarity.
Keywords:
perception.

Comparison;

structural

alignment;

face

Introduction
Comparison – the process of assessing commonalities and
differences between two or more entities – is an integral
aspect of human cognition. It plays a role in a wide variety
of cognitive tasks including categorisation (Nosofsky,
1984), recognition memory (Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997),
problem solving (Ross, 1989) and decision making
(Simonson, 1989). The current study investigates whether
comparison also plays a role in visual cognition.
Specifically, it addresses the question whether comparing
visual stimuli affects the perceived similarity between them.
Tentative support for this notion is provided by the
finding that comparing two labelled images results in an
increase in their perceived similarity (Boroditsky, 2007,
experiment 1). However, because the images used were
labelled exemplars of common categories (e.g. horse, goat)
it is not clear whether comparison has affected their
perceptual similarity, their conceptual similarity, or both.
Stronger evidence in support of the notion that comparison
affects perceptual similarity is provided by the finding that
comparing similar-looking novel objects increases their
perceived similarity (Boroditsky, 2007, experiment 4).
However, the novel objects used in this experiment were
again labelled (e.g. Chico and Groucho). It remains unclear
whether the participants were only rating the perceived
visual similarity of the stimuli or whether their similarity
ratings were also affected by conceptual inferences about
„Chicos‟ and „Grouchos‟ they may have drawn during the
comparison process. The latter interpretation is supported by
findings that comparison plays an important role in the
acquisition of conceptual knowledge (Gentner, Loewenstein

& Thompson, 2003; Gentner & Namy, 1999). In the current
study unlabelled pairs of unfamiliar faces were used as
stimuli to allow the effects of comparison on perception to
be dissociated from its effects on conceptual knowledge.
Face perception is a well studied phenomenon that is
driven by the visual attributes of a face, as well as by a host
of top-down influences. For example, the visual appearance
of a face affects how well it is recognised (e.g. Bartlett,
Hurry & Thorley, 1984; Light, Kayra-Stuart & Hollander,
1979; Valentine, 1991). Specifically, faces that are visually
distinctive have been found to elicit fewer false positives
when acting as distracters (Light Kayra-Stuart & Hollander,
1979; Valentine, 1991), to elicit more hits when acting as
targets (Bartlett, Hurry & Thorley, 1984; Shepherd, Gibling
& Ellis, 1991) and to be recognised faster (Valentine &
Bruce, 1986a, 1986b). A well documented top-down
influence on face perception is the availability of categorical
information. A study using morphed images, which
represented a continua of familiar famous faces, found that
participants were better at discriminating between face pairs
that straddle apparent category boundaries (i.e. where one
comparison face is slightly more similar to famous face A;
the other is slightly more similar to famous face B), than
when both comparison faces are similar to the same famous
face (Beale & Keil, 1995). More recently, categorical effects
have also been observed for pre-experimentally unfamiliar
faces, which were presented in conjunction with category
labels (names) prior to the discrimination task (Levin &
Beale, 2000; Kitukani, Roberson & Hanley, 2008). These
findings illustrate that categorical effects in face perception
can be induced quickly.
There is evidence to suggest that comparison may also act
as a top down influence on face perception. A study on face
memory conducted by Mäntylä (1997), found that focusing
on differences between faces led to a greater number of
„remember‟ responses (explicit recollection) than did
focusing on similarities. Conversely, focusing on
similarities among faces was associated with a greater
number of „know‟ responses (familiarity). Mäntylä (1997)
interprets these findings in light of the distinctiveness
hypothesis. According to the distinctiveness hypothesis
remembering is facilitated by perceptual and conceptual
processes that focus encoding on the distinctive attributes of
the information being encoded. Processes that emphasize
similarities, on the other hand, facilitate familiarity-based
recognition (Mäntylä, 1997).
Despite the observed differences in recollection
experience, participants who focused on differences
between faces did not recognize more faces correctly than
participants who focused on similarities (Mäntylä, 1997).

1900

Similarly, another study which investigated recognition
accuracy for faces following dissimilarity and similarity
comparisons also failed to find a significant difference in
performance (Brown & Lloyd-Jones, 2005). The observed
lack of memory advantage for difference focussed
comparisons is somewhat surprising, considering the fact
that dissimilar faces are so well remembered. Comparisons
that focus on differences highlight the distinctive features of
the compared faces, and are therefore expected to result in
increased memory performance (Brown & Lloyd-Jones,
2005).
One possible explanation for the absence of a memory
advantage for difference focussed comparisons is that the
same cognitive process underlies both similarity and
difference comparisons. A recent study, which investigated
the effects of comparison on perceived similarity, found that
comparing two things which are relatively similar increases
the perceived similarity between the two items, even when
the comparison task involves looking for differences
(Boroditsky, 2007). According to Boroditsky (2007) the
process of structural alignment underlies both similarity and
difference comparisons. According to the structural
alignment view, the discovery of meaningful differences
involves first discovering similarities.

view (comparison face). Three pairs of faces with high
similarity ratings (M = 4.2, SD = 1.7) were used in the
similar faces condition; and 3 pairs of faces with low
similarity ratings (M = 1.6 SD = 0.8) were used in the
different faces condition. Examples of these face pairs are
shown in figure 1.

Experiment 1: similarity and dissimilarity
comparisons
The present experiment investigates the effect of
comparison processes on the perceived similarity of faces.
According to the distinctiveness hypothesis, perceived
similarity should decrease following dissimilarity
comparisons and increase following similarity comparisons.
According to structural alignment theory both similarity and
dissimilarity comparisons should result in an increase in
perceived similarity.
The present experiment also explores how the comparison
process interacts with the perceptual attributes of faces. That
is, whether the comparison process has a differential effect
for pairs of similar faces compared to those that are
dissimilar.

Method
Participants One hundred and sixty-two University of
Southampton undergraduate students volunteered to take
part. They were randomly allocated to the two treatment
conditions: 86 students participated in the similar faces
condition; the remaining 76 participated in the dissimilar
faces condition.
Materials The stimuli consisted of pairs of black and white
images of male faces obtained from the Psychological
Image Collection at Stirling (http://pics.psych.stir.ac.uk). In
a pilot study 51 volunteers were asked to judge the
similarity of 3 target faces to 12 comparison faces on a
Likert scale of 1 (not similar) to 7 (very similar). Each of
the 36 pairs of faces consisted of one face presented in full
frontal view (target face), and the other in a three-quarter

Figure 1: An example of the dissimilar (top row) and
similar (bottom row) face pairs used in study 1.
Procedure The participants were asked to fill in a short 5
page booklet at the beginning of a lecture. Depending on the
treatment condition the questionnaire contained either 3
similar or 3 dissimilar face pairs. Each participant
completed a control condition, a similarity comparison
condition and a difference comparison condition. In the
control condition participants were asked to indicate on a
Likert scale of 1 to 7 “how similar the two faces are”. In the
similarity comparison and difference comparison conditions
this similarity rating was preceded by the question “Please
describe 3 similarities (differences) between the two faces”.
The allocation of face pairs to the treatment conditions and
the order of presentation were randomized across
participants.

Results
A 3 (preprocessing condition: no preprocessing, similarity
comparison, difference comparison) x 2 (stimulus type:
similar faces, dissimilar faces) repeated measures ANOVA
revealed a significant main effect of stimulus type (F(1,

1901

160) = 2068.06, p < .001). This manipulation check
confirms that participants indeed perceived the similar faces
(M = 3.8, SD = 1.3) to be more similar in appearance than
the dissimilar faces (M = 2.3, SD = 1).
Table 1: Mean similarity ratings (and associated standard
deviations) for study 1
All faces
Control

2.87 (1.45)

Similar
faces
3.6 (1.42)

Dissimilar
faces
2.04 (0.97)

Similarity
comparison
Difference
comparison

3.18 (1.4)

3.92 (1.28)

2.32 (0.96)

3.16 (1.31)

3.76 (1.24)

2.49 (1.01)

dissimilarity judgments. Another explanation for the
observed effects of comparison on similarity perception is
that it might be attributable to participants‟ greater
familiarity with the compared faces. The fact that compared
faces had already been seen may have acted as an additional
commonality between them during the similarity rating task.
This alternative hypothesis was tested in the second
experiment.

Experiment 2: other forms of preprocessing

The mean similarity ratings, displayed in Table 1, indicate
that faces which were compared prior to similarity
judgments were perceived to be more similar to each other
than pairs of faces which were not compared. The main
effect of preprocessing was significant (F(2, 320)= 4.92, p <
.01). Planned contrasts revealed that faces whose
commonalities were assessed were subsequently perceived
to be more similar to each other than face pairs in the no
preprocessing condition ( F(1, 160) = 7.29, p < .01). The
same pattern of results was observed for faces whose
differences were assessed prior to similarity judgments (F(1,
160) = 8.38, p < .01). The interaction between stimulus type
and preprocessing condition was not significant (F(2, 320) =
1.22, p = .3).

Discussion
Faces that were compared prior to similarity judgments
were perceived to be more similar to each other than face
pairs which were not compared. An increase in perceived
similarity was observed following both similarity and
dissimilarity comparisons. This pattern of results can be
interpreted in line with structural alignment theory (Gentner
& Gunn, 2001). According to structural alignment theory
the same underlying process is involved in both similarity
and dissimilarity comparisons. In both comparison tasks the
two visual representations need to be structurally aligned.
During the structural alignment process, similarities are
established first and related differences are noticed second.
Thus, regardless of whether a comparison involves the
identification of similarities or differences, the process of
structural alignment always necessitates the perception of
commonalities between the two representations.
The findings of the first study do not support the
distinctiveness hypothesis - which predicts that focusing on
differences between faces should lead to a decrease in their
perceived similarity. Furthermore, the observed increase in
perceived similarity following dissimilarity comparisons
would also suggest that the results are not attributable to a
judgment bias. If the participants were motivated to
conform to perceived task demands, they would presumably
have judged faces to be less similar to each other following

The aim of the second experiment was to asses whether the
finding of increased perceived similarity following
comparison might be attributable to participants‟ greater
familiarity with the stimuli or to the fact that these stimuli
underwent deeper processing prior to similarity judgments.
To test these hypotheses a shallow and a deep processing
condition were introduced. It is predicted that if familiarity
with the stimulus pairs is the cause of the increase in
perceived similarity observed in experiment 1, then both the
shallow and the deep processing conditions should result in
an increase in perceived similarity. If the increase in
perceived similarity is attributable to the deeper processing
of stimuli in the comparison conditions (rather than the
comparison process per se), then only the deep processing
condition should result in an increase in perceived
similarity.
A further difference between the second experiment and
the first is that the second experiment employs a more
objective manipulation of stimulus similarity. In order to
manipulate stimulus similarity in a systematic manner
morphed images of faces were used.

Method
Participants One hundred and fifty-three Southampton
University undergraduates volunteered to participate. They
were randomly allocated to the two treatment conditions: 76
students participated in the similar faces condition; the
remaining 77 participated in the dissimilar faces condition.
Materials The stimuli used in the “different faces”
condition consisted of 10 morphed images of male faces
that were generated by morphing 30 colour images obtained
from the Productive Aging Laboratory Face Database
(Minear & Park, 2004). The ten morphed faces were each
composed of three different individual male faces. For the
“different faces” condition the 10 stimuli were presented in
pairs. Both faces in a pair were presented in a frontal view
(see figure 2 top row). For the similar faces condition 5
further stimuli were generated by morphing the faces that
were paired in the different faces condition (see figure 2
bottom row). For example, for face A and face B (paired in
the different faces condition), the equivalent pair in the
similar faces condition consisted of face A and a morphed
face that was 50% face A and 50% face B. The morphing
was done using Psychomorph face morphing software.

1902

Procedure The procedure was the same as in experiment 1,
with the addition of two further treatment conditions. In the
shallow processing condition participants were asked to
decide whether each face in a pair was older or younger than
40 years before rating the similarity between them. In the
deep processing condition participants had to judge the
apparent health of each of the two faces. A further
difference to study 1 was that the similarity of the face pairs
was rated on a Likert scale of 1 (not similar) to 9 (very
similar), as opposed to a 1to 7 scale.

shallow processing and deep processing conditions were not
significant (p > .1). The interaction between stimulus type
and preprocessing condition was significant, (F(4, 604) =
2.40, p < .05). To investigate this interaction the data for the
similar and dissimilar faces were analysed separately.
Repeated measures ANOVAs revealed a significant main
effect of preprocessing for dissimilar faces (F(4, 304) =
4.19, p < .01) but not for similar faces (F(4, 300) = 0.91, p =
.46). A contrast showed that similarity comparison
increased the perceived similarity of dissimilar faces (F(1,
76) = 15.57, p < .001). The deep processing manipulation
also led to an increase in the perceived similarity of
dissimilar looking faces (F(1, 76) = 4.03, p < .05). The
contrasts between the no preprocessing condition and the
difference comparison and shallow processing conditions
were not significant (p > .1).
Table 2: Mean similarity ratings (and associated standard
deviations) for study 2
All faces
Control

4.84 (1.95)

Similar
faces
5.8 (1.66)

Dissimilar
faces
3.9 (1.75)

Similarity
comparison
Difference
comparison
Shallow
processing
Deep
processing

5.41 (1.62)

6 (1.41)

4.83 (1.6)

5.06 (1.84)

5.84 (1.69)

4.29 (1.65)

5.1 (1.94)

6.13 (1.53)

4.09 (1.76)

5.1 (1.92)

5.84 (1.76)

4.36 (1.8)

Discussion

Figure 2: An example of the dissimilar (top row) and
similar (bottom row) face pairs used in study 2.

Results
A 5 (preprocessing condition: no preprocessing, similarity
comparison, difference comparison, shallow processing,
deep processing) x 2 (Stimulus type: similar faces,
dissimilar faces) repeated measures ANOVA revealed a
significant main effect of stimulus type, (F(1, 151) = 83.07,
P < .001). This manipulation check confirms that the similar
faces (M = 5.9, SD = 1.6) were perceived to be more similar
to each other than the dissimilar faces (M = 4.3, SD = 1.7).
There was a significant main effect of condition (F(4,
604) = 3.23, P < .05). Planned contrasts revealed that faces
whose commonalities were assessed prior to similarity
rating were perceived to be more similar to each other than
face pairs in the no preprocessing condition (F(1, 151) =
14.33, p < .001). Planned contrasts between the no
preprocessing condition and the difference comparison,

Comparing two dissimilar faces was found to increase the
perceived similarity between them, but only when
comparing for similarities. Difference comparisons did not
result in similarity ratings that were significantly different
from those of face pairs that had not been preprocessed.
This pattern of results does not support the distinctiveness
hypothesis, which would have predicted a significant
decrease in the perceived similarity of faces that have
undergone difference comparisons. However, the results
only provide tentative support for the structural alignment
hypothesis; although difference comparisons resulted in a
slight increase in the perceived similarity of the different
looking faces (see table 2), this increase was not significant.
Shallow preprocessing of individual faces in a pair did not
lead to a significant increase in the perceived similarity
between them. This finding suggests that mere familiarity
with the faces that comprise a pair is unlikely to be the
cause of increases in their perceived similarity following
comparison.
Preprocessing of individual faces at a deep level of
processing led to a significant increase in the perceived
similarity of dissimilar faces. Although this finding suggests
that the observed effects of comparison on perceived
similarity might be ascribable to a more general effect of

1903

stimulus preprocessing on perceived similarity, this
interpretation should be treated with caution. In order to
control for any effects of mode of presentation on perceived
similarity, the two faces comprising a pair were presented
simultaneously in all of the preprocessing conditions.
Simultaneous presentation may have invited comparison of
the faces in a pair. This strategy seems particularly likely in
the deep processing condition in which participants were
required to assess the perceived health of the two faces. In
the absence of a criterion of what comprises a healthy
looking face, participants may have judge the health of the
two faces in a pair relative to each other. The issue of
whether the observed effect of preprocessing is attributable
to comparison of the two faces can be addressed in a future
study, which employs a sequential mode of presentation.
Comparison did not lead to an increase in the perceived
similarity of similar looking faces, nor did the two levels of
processing manipulations. Paired faces in the similar faces
condition had a very high level of similarity because the
second face in each pair consisted of a 50% morph of the
first. There were therefore many perceptual commonalities
between these faces. It appears that for highly similar faces
any influence of comparison on perceived similarity is small
or non-existent. This relationship between the degree of the
perceptual similarity between faces and the influence of
comparison on their perceived similarity will be further
explored in the general discussion.

General Discussion
The aim of the present study was to investigate whether
comparing complex visual stimuli such as faces affects their
perceived similarity. The first experiment found that both
similarity and dissimilarity comparisons increased the
perceived similarity of faces. The second experiment also
found an increase in perceived similarity following
comparison, but only for dissimilar faces which had been
compared for similarities. Overall these findings suggest
that comparing faces increases their perceived similarity.
These results extend the finding obtained by Boroditsky
(2007) that both similarity and dissimilarity comparisons
increase the similarity ratings of exemplars of related
categories (e.g. hoofed animals) and of similar novel
objects. It is not clear from Boroditsky‟s (2007) study
whether the comparison process has acted on perceptual
similarity, on conceptual similarity or on both. In the current
study, by using unfamiliar male faces as stimuli, the effects
of comparison on perceptual similarity were dissociated
from its effects on conceptual knowledge. The findings of
the current study show that comparison can affect the
perceptual similarity of unfamiliar faces.
The absence of an effect of comparison on the perceived
similarity of similar faces in the second experiment
highlights some of the limitations of the effects of
comparison on perceptual similarity. In the first experiment
a significant increase of perceived similarity was found for
both similarity and dissimilarity comparisons. In the second
experiment only similarity comparisons led to a significant

increase in perceived similarity. A possible explanation for
these differences lies with the visual attributes of the
stimuli. In the first study one face in each pair was presented
at an angle (three-quarter view); comparison of the two
faces thus required a degree of mental manipulation. This
was not the case in the second experiment, where both faces
were presented in a frontal view. A further difference
between the stimuli used in the two experiments is that,
whereas the first used images of individuals, the second
experiment employed morphed faces. The morphing process
renders faces more homogenous by averaging their features
and by removing some of their distinctive characteristics.
Thus, the stimuli used in the second experiment were more
homogenous, even in the different faces condition.
It appears that the effects of comparison on perceived
similarity interact with the perceptual attributes of the
stimuli. The greater the heterogeneity of the stimuli and the
greater the amount of mental manipulation involved in the
discovery of commonalities and alignable differences, the
more pronounced the effect of comparison. The most
pronounced effect of comparison was observed in the first
experiment because the stimuli used were more
heterogeneous (they depicted individual faces) and the
comparison process necessitated mental manipulation (in
order to align individual features). The stimuli used in the
second experiment were highly homogenous and the
discovery of commonalities between them did not require
any mental manipulation. This might explain why the effect
of comparison on perceived similarity was found to either
be diminished (dissimilar faces) or absent (similar faces) in
the second experiment.
A second aim of the current study was to explain the
finding that faces which have undergone dissimilarity
comparisons are not better remembered than those which
have undergone similarity comparisons (Brown & LloydJones, 2005; Mäntylä, 1997). According to the
distinctiveness hypothesis, dissimilarity comparisons should
produce a memory advantage because the identification of
differences focuses the viewer‟s attention to the distinctive
(more memorable) features of a face. Structural alignment
theory, on the other hand, posits that both similarity and
difference comparisons involve the discovery of similarities
and of alignable differences. According to this view
similarity and difference comparisons should not have a
differential effect on face memory. The finding of an
increase in the perceived similarity of faces following both
similarity and difference comparisons is as predicted by the
structural alignment view. Thus, rather than focussing the
viewer‟s attention to either the distinctive or non-distinctive
(common) features of the compared faces as they intended,
both comparison manipulations employed by Brown and
Lloyd-Jones (2005) aided the perception of similarities and
differences.
Although the faces used in the dissimilar faces condition
in experiment 1 were quite dissimilar from each other they
were not necessarily distinctive. A future study could
explore whether the process of comparison also results in an

1904

increase in the perceived similarity of highly distinctive
faces.
The results from the present study suggest that
comparison plays a role in visual perception. Specifically,
comparison has been found to increase the perceived
similarity of unfamiliar faces. Although there are no
theoretical reasons to think otherwise, whether or not this
finding extends to other complex visual stimuli (e.g. natural
scenes), remains to be tested empirically. More crucially,
the mechanism by which comparison affects the perceived
similarity of faces needs to be established. Attention is one
possible mechanism by which comparison might affect the
perceived similarity of faces. The process of structural
alignment highlights areas of commonalities between the
compared face pairs. It is possible that these areas are
attended more frequently or for longer during similarity
ratings.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Itiel Dror, Clare Davies and Matthew
Billings for helpful discussions of this research.

References
Bartlett, J. C., Hurry, S. & Thorley, W. (1984). Typicality
and familiarity of faces. Memory & Cognition, 12, 219228.
Beale, J. M., & Keil, F. C. (1995). Categorical effects in the
perception of faces. Cognition, 57, 217-239.
Boroditsky, L. (2007). Comparison and the development of
knowledge. Cognition, 102, 118-128.
Brown, C., & Lloyd-Jones, T. J. (2005). Verbal facilitation
of face recognition. Memory & Cognition, 33, 1442-1456.
Gentner, D., & Gunn, V. (2001). Structural alignment
facilitates the noticing of differences. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 565-577.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: a general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 393408.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Kikutani, M., Roberson, D., & Hanley, J. R. (2008). What‟s
in the name? Categorical perception for unfamiliar faces
can occur through labeling. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 15, 787-794.
Levin, D. T., & Beale, J. M. (2000). Categorical perception
occurs in newly learned faces, other-race faces, and
inverted faces. Perception & Psychophysics, 62, 386-401.
Light, L. L., Kayra-Stuart, F., & Hollander, S. (1979).
Recognition memory for typical and unusual faces.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 5, 212-228.
Mäntylä, T. (1997). Recollections of faces: remembering
differences and knowing similarities. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 23, 1203-1216.

Minear, M. & Park, D. C. (2004). A lifespan database of
adult facial stimuli. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 36, 630-633.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity and the context
theory of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 104114.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarities: different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 456-468.
Shepard, J. W., Gibling, F., & Ellis, H. D. (1991). The
effects of distinctiveness, presentation time and delay on
face recognition. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 137-145.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for
recognition memory: REM: retrieving effectively from
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 145-166.
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: the case of
attraction and compromise effects. Journal of Consumer
Research, 16, 158-174.
Valentine, T. (1991). A unified account of the effects of
distinctiveness, inversion and race in face recognition.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 43A, 161204.
Valentine, T. & Bruce, V. (1986a). Recognizing familiar
faces: the role of distinctiveness and familiarity.
Canadian Journal of Psychology, 40, 300-305.
Valentine, T. & Bruce, V. (1986b). The effects of
distinctiveness in recognizing and classifying faces.
Perception, 15, 525-535.

1905

