UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Use of Categorical Features in Adult Spatial Reorientation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5493p5tt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Durgin, Frank
Grodner, Daniel
Pietsch, Carey

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Use of Categorical Features in Adult Spatial Reorientation
Daniel J. Grodner (dgrodne1@swarthmore.edu)
Department of Psychology, 500 College Avenue
Swarthmore, PA 19081 USA

Carey Pietsch (cpietsc1@swarthmore.edu)
Department of Psychology, 500 College Avenue
Swarthmore, PA 19081 USA

Frank H. Durgin (fdurgin1@swarthmore.edu)
Department of Psychology, 500 College Avenue
Swarthmore, PA 19081 USA
Abstract

(Huttenlocher & Vasilyeva 2003), a rhombus (Hupbach &
Nadel 2005), and an octagon (Newcombe & Ratcliff 2006).
It has been proposed that geometric information might
play a privileged role in guiding reorientation. Gallistel
(1990) points out that, in a natural environment, the
geometric layout of a landscape is relatively stable.
Nongeometric features such as the colors or textures of
landmarks are subject to seasonal and other types of
variation. For this reason, organisms may have evolved to
be especially sensitive to geometric information when
reorienting. Support for the special status of geometric cues
comes from the fact that non-geometric information is often
ignored in this task. For instance, Cheng found that rats
searched rotationally equivalent corners of a rectangular
room even when provided with a landmark feature, such as
a differently colored wall, that could specify the correct
location (1986). Children up to five years-old also fail to use
nongeometric information in certain circumstances (Hermer
& Spelke 1994, 1996; Hermer-Velasquez, et al 2001;
Learmonth, Nadel & Newcombe 2002). These results have
been adduced as support for an encapsulated module that
considers only geometric information in reorienting (Cheng
1986; Gallistel 1990; Hermer & Spelke 1986; Wang &
Spelke, 2002, 2003)
Despite its theoretical appeal, recent results cast doubt on
the existence of a purely geometric module for reorienting.
One issue is that the size of the enclosure influences
sensitivity to nongeometric information. For instance
children will ignore featural information if a rectangular
enclosure is four feet by six feet, but become more likely to
use featural information if the dimensions increase to eight
feet by twelve feet (Learmonth, Newcombe & Huttenlocher,
2001; Learmonth, Nadel & Newcombe 2002). This
demonstrates that nongeometric information can be used in
certain ordinary environments, reducing somewhat the
scope of a potential module.
Another challenge for a modular architecture is that some
types of non-geometric information can be used by children
as young as 18-24 months. Huttenlocher and Laurenco
(2007) used a square enclosure with circles on the walls.
Opposite walls had identically sized circles, but the circles
for adjacent walls differed in size. Though all corners were
geometrically equivalent, toddlers reliably selected the

Children often fail to use informative non-geometric features
to recover orientation in cases where adults succeed. The
present work demonstrates that adults can also fail to use
distinguishing information if that information is not encoded
categorically. Adults were shown an object being hidden in a
corner of a rectangular room rendered with an immersive
virtual display. They were then disoriented and asked to
locate the object. The short walls of the room were
discriminably different colors so that they could be used to
uniquely specify the orientation of the viewer with respect to
the enclosure. When the colors were members of different
major color categories, participants were more likely to
succeed in the task. In fact, participants succeeded in the task
if and only if they encoded the color difference lexically.
This indicates that categorical encoding plays an important
part in reorienting with non-geometric features and implicates
language as a default medium of categorical encoding.
Keywords: Spatial Memory; Navigation; Language; Reorientation

Introduction
All mobile animals appear to possess mechanisms for
reestablishing orientation in a familiar environment after
disorientation (Cheng & Newcombe 2005). To investigate
these mechanisms, researchers commonly employ a variant
of the disorientation procedure. In this task, the animal or
human participant observes while an object is hidden in an
enclosed space. The animal is then disoriented before being
allowed to search for the object. By manipulating the
environmental cues available in the enclosure, a researcher
can identify the allocentric features used in this process. For
instance, Cheng and Gallistel determined that rats can
reorient using the relative lengths of adjacent walls in a
rectangular enclosure. If food is concealed in a corner of
the room (e.g., where a long wall is to the left of the short
wall), a disoriented rat will search both in the correct corner
and the opposite corner, which is geometrically equivalent
(Cheng & Gallistel 1984; Cheng 1986). Subsequent
research has established that children and many animals
perform similarly (see Ratcliff & Newcombe 2008 for a
review). Children have also been shown to use the
geometric arrangement of extended surfaces when
reorienting in an enclosure shaped like an isosceles triangle

280

correct corner or its rotational equivalent. Subsequent
studies seem to indicate that children also exhibit sensitivity
to non-geometric cues when adjacent walls have lines of
different orientation and when adjacent walls have different
shades of grey (Laurenco & Addy 2008). The fact that nongeometric features can be used in such circumstances is
difficult to reconcile with an encapsulated geometric
module.
Intriguingly, toddlers at the same age failed to identify the
correct corners of a square room when adjacent walls were
different colors, such as blue and red (Huttenlocher &
Laurenco 2007). Taken together, these results suggest that
children may be able to map features onto spatial locations
when the features take on different values along a scale
(e.g., size, slope, luminance), but not when the features are
most naturally coded into discrete categories (e.g., colors).
Huttenlocher and Laurenco hypothesize that when the
available features can be ordered on a continuum, they can
be more easily mapped onto the continuum of relational
space than when these features consist of distinct,
unordered, categorical properties.
While the Huttenlocher and Laurenco hypothesis provides
a potential explanation for why children sometimes fail to
use non-geometric information, it does not explain how
adults come to successfully incorporate such information
(e.g., Hermer-Velasquez, Spelke, & Katsnelson 1999;
Ratcliff & Newcombe 2008). Complete understanding of
human reorientation abilities requires examination of the
mature system. One possibility is that adults use of nongeometric information hinges on the ability to encode and
maintain categorical properties. The developmental shift
from reliance on continuous properties to reliance on
categorical encoding is likely reflected in, and possibly
aided by, the mastery of linguistic labels. The current study
explores these ideas by comparing adult reorientation in a
case where a categorical contrast was required to specify a
spatial location versus a case where a non-categorical
contrast was required. The results indicate that categorical
encoding is necessary for success. Below we present the
experiment followed by arguments that linguistic labels
provide a default representational code which underlies
adult categorical encoding when reorienting.

environment. It is possible to encode them comparatively
along a continuous dimension (e.g., wall1 is darker/purpler/
more-prototypically-blue than wall2). The hypothesis under
investigation here is that categorization is the most natural
means of solving the task for adults.
If adults solve the reorientation task by encoding this
relationship categorically, then cross-category color
differences should be more useful than within-category
differences. If instead categorical encoding does not
contribute to reorientation, participants should have similar
success rates in both conditions.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-two Swarthmore undergraduates (12 male)
completed the experiment. They were paid for their
participation. They were all native speakers of English and
had normal, or corrected to normal, visual acuity. One
additional participant did not complete the experiment.

Figure 1: Participants’ view of a corner of the room
including target.

Virtual Environment

Experiment

The environment was a rectangular room (12 x 8 ft and 7.5
ft high), that had two long walls which were white and two
shorter walls whose colors were determined by the
condition the participant was in. A virtual ball (.2 m in
diameter) moved around the room and disappeared behind
one of four identical textured panels in the corners of the
room. During the disorientation phase of the experiment, a
textured cylinder (2 m in diameter) dropped from the virtual
ceiling and rotated around the participant. An image of one
corner of the room, with the ball visible is shown in Figure
1.

To test the hypothesis that categorical encoding contributes
to adult reorienting behavior, we adapted the reorienting
task of Cheng and Gallistel (1984). Participants were
disoriented in a virtual rectangular room for which the long
walls were white and the short walls were colored. The
colors on the short walls were different so that their spatial
arrangement could be used to uniquely determine
orientation in the room. Color pairs either came from the
same color category (blue) or spanned a color boundary
(blue-green). Importantly, each color pair was easily
discriminated.
Note that categorically encoding the two colors is not a
logical prerequisite to recovering orientation in this

281

gender (i.e., six males and ten females were in each
condition).
The ball was depicted as traveling along the walls of the
room starting from the middle of one of the white walls.
There were 16 different paths (series of path segments) that
the ball could travel around the virtual environment before
disappearing behind one of the textured panels in each
corner of the room. Each path included both of the colored
walls. The ball traveled one of these paths per trial, so that
each participant viewed all 16 possible paths in random
order. Each corner was used as a hiding place four times.
Initial room orientation was random with respect to the
physical space. At the beginning of the search phase, the
participants were always oriented by the experimenter in the
same direction in the physical room, and the virtual room
was oriented so that they were directly facing one or the
other of the two colored walls, at random. Participants then
oriented themselves toward the corner where they believed
the ball had been hidden and pressed a button to indicate
their response. Both their orientation and the time of
response were recorded.
A debriefing questionnaire at the end of the experiment
was used to gather reports concerning how successful
participants thought they had been, what conscious
strategies they had adopted, the perceived shape of the
room, what colors they had thought the walls were, what
they thought the experiment was investigating, and whether
they had anomalous color perception.1

Color Selection and Rendering
The colors were matched in lightness and saturation, and
equally separated along the hue dimension of Munsell color
space –a space designed to represent perceptual differences
(Munsell 1912). Three Munsell colors, 7.5 BG 6/8 (10 113
114), 5B 6/8 (10 108 15), and 2.5 PB 6/8 (42 97 165) were
selected for the walls. The Munsell groupings and intuitions
among the experimenters concurred that the first color was
most naturally labeled “green” whereas the latter two were
most naturally labeled “blue.” The head-mounted virtual
display was calibrated using EasyRGB.com. This allowed
us to identify the appropriate RGB values of the target
colors for our display. Those RGB values, converted to
linear proportions were used in the OpenGL specification of
the colors of the walls to be shown in the display. Lighting
was disabled in the OpenGL set-up so that the intended
colors would be presented without shading, which would
have caused the color to vary along the walls according to
distance and angle from the light source. Note that this kind
of color control is not easily achieved in an actual
environment.
For the within-category group of participants, the walls
were 5B 6/8 and 2.5PB 6/8 (both blue). For the crosscategory group of participants, the two colors were 7.5BG
6/8 and 5B 6/8 (green and blue respectively). The two sets
of colors were equally far apart in Munsell space. To ensure
that both color sets could be easily discriminated, an
additional set of participants who did not perform the main
experiment was enlisted in a categorization task. Half of the
participants were assigned to the within category pairing,
and half were assigned to the between category pairing.
Individuals wore the head-mounted display and were shown
one colored wall or the other on each of 100 trials. They
were asked to classify each color as either “A” or “B.”
Feedback was given after each response.
With the
exception of the first trial, which required the participant to
learn which color was “A” and which was “B,” performance
was essentially flawless for both color sets. When asked
afterward what the colors had been, people in the withincategory group generally used multi-morphemic descriptors
(e.g., "purply-blue" and "turquoisy-blue" or “greeny-blue”
and “dark blue”), whereas those in the cross-category task
systematically used the mono-morphemic color names
"blue" and "green."

Apparatus
The experiment was conducted in an immersive virtual
environment using an nVis head-mounted display (HMD).
The resolution of the HMD was 1280 x 1024 @ 60 Hz, with
a field of view of 39 x 51 degrees of visual angle. The
display was in stereo and the software used the
interpupillary distance of each participant (IPD, measured
with an electronic PD meter) to specify the scene
perspective. A HiBall headtracker provided position and
orientation information (6 DOF) with sub-mm precision at
120 Hz. The system had very a low effective lag (about 3550 ms). Participants were seated in a heavy chair that
allowed them to easily rotate to face any direction in the
virtual environment. The chair allowed us to re-orient
participants during the storage phase of each trial. Earplugs
(NR 29) were worn to reduce auditory localization
information from the physical environment. Participants
indicated their response using a radio mouse.

Design and Procedure
Participants for the main experiment were assigned quasirandomly to one of two conditions. In one condition the
two short walls of the virtual room were from different color
categories. In the other condition the two walls, though
different in color, would both be described as blue. These
color differences were intended to operationalize
linguistically-distinct and linguistically non-distinct color
categories. The random assignment was done by computer
so that the experimenter remained blind to condition.
Separate assignments were conducted for male and female
participants to ensure that the conditions were balanced for

Results
Participants in each condition reliably selected the correct
corner or the geometrically equivalent corner more often
than chance (within-category: 65.6%, SE=3.4%, t(15)=4.63,
1

Two male participants, one from each condition, reported
deficient color perception. The analyses below include their data
because they each performed well above chance in the main task,
and because the patterns of significant effects were not affected by
the omission of their data.

282

p < .001; cross-category: 71.5%, SE=2.1%, t(15)=10.46, p <
.001). This demonstrates that both groups were sensitive to
the spatial layout of virtual environment while reorienting.2
As predicted by the categorical encoding hypothesis,
success in locating the correct corner was reliably greater
when the wall colors crossed a color boundary (55.1 ±
4.8%) than when they did not (42.6 ± 4.3%), t(30) = 1.948,
p < .05. This demonstrates that participants were more
likely to succeed at the task when the available features
were easier to distinguish categorically. Success rate was
not influenced by the sex of the participants.
It is possible that the benefit for the cross-category group
arose because the color distinction was easier to
spontaneously encode categorically from the first trial of the
experiment. Alternatively it might have resulted because
the cross-categorical distinction was easier to acquire over
the course of the experiment.
To compare these
possibilities, we compared performance on just the first
trial. Even for this trial, the cross-category group showed
marginally higher performance than the within-category
group (t(30) = 1.42, p =. 08). Performance by condition
across each four trial block of the experiment is depicted in
Figure 2. That we see the same general patterns from early
in the experiment indicates that the cross-category
distinction was easier to spontaneously classify. However,
this does not rule out the possibility that the cross-boundary
distinction was also easier to learn over the course of the
experiment.

A second way of quantifying success is by determining
whether participants accurately described the correct
strategy in the debriefing. That is, did the participant report
using the spatial arrangement of differentially colored
landmarks. Whereas 12 of the 16 participants in the crosscategory condition described using the correct strategy, only
5 of 16 in the within-category condition did, X2(1) = 6.149,
p = .0131. Indeed, 6 participants in the cross-category
condition reported arriving at the correct strategy on the
very first trial, compared to only 1 in the within-category
condition, X2(1) = 4.571, p = .0325. The validity of these
self-reports of strategy are supported by the performance
data presented in Figure 3, where participants are divided
into groups of those who reported immediately adopting the
strategy, those who said they adopted it eventually, but not
immediately, and those who did not discover the successful
strategy.

Figure 3: Success rate by self-report of correct strategy use.
Because individuals’ color boundaries may have been
variable, and to establish whether success was correlated
with the availability of a major color category, we analyzed
the color terms participants applied when asked to draw the
room and label the color of each wall. Whereas 8 of the 12
participants who identified the correct strategy in the crossboundary condition used mono-morphemic terms for both
wall colors (either “green” or “teal” and “blue”), only 1 of
the 5 successful participants in the within-category
condition did so. Thus, people who differentiated between
the colors of the two walls were far more likely to use at
least one multi-morphemic color term if the wall colors
were intended to be within a linguistic color category, as
was our intent, X2(1) = 4.571, p = .0196.
Though the availability of a basic color distinction is
likely to facilitate categorical encoding, it is clearly possible
to categorically encode the color distinction even when this
basic category is not available (e.g., “purply-blue” vs.
“greeny-blue”). Strikingly, all and only the participants

Figure 2: Success rate by condition by block (error bars
depict standard errors of the means)
2
Responses respected room geometry 68.6% of the time. This
rate is lower than that reported in earlier work with adults, which
hovers around 80%. The difference may reflect difficulty with
recovering spatial information in the virtual environment, possibly
due to the limited field of view and the fact that the room was only
viewed while seated in a chair at the center. Proactive interference
from earlier trials may have also degraded performance: we
included 16 trials where previous work with adults has used four or
fewer (Hermer-Velasquez et al 1999; Ratcliff & Newcombe 2008).

283

who reported the correct strategy also spontaneously
provided different color labels in debriefing. To delve more
deeply into this issue, and to further ensure that strategic
self-report was an accurate indicator of success, we
separately analyzed the performance of those individuals
who assigned multiple color labels (N=17) and those who
did not (N=15). Those who assigned multiple color labels
to the walls identified the correct corner 60.7 ± 3.7% of the
time and the rotationally symmetric corner 10.3 ± 3.6% of
the time. This ratio was significantly higher than chance
(t(16) = 7.91, p < .001). For individuals who did not assign
different color the correct corner was selected 35.4 ± 3.3%
and the symmetric corner 30.4 ± 2.9%. This was not
reliably better than chance (t(14) < 1). Thus there was no
evidence that individuals who did not assign distinct color
categories unconsciously followed an appropriate strategy.

would have been logically possible for participants to
encode the two colors categorically without using linguistic
categories. Namely, each wall might be classified as a
different category of blue without using a linguistic label to
reflect that difference.
It is possible that the availability of linguistic labels
enabled the colors to be coded categorically. Alternatively,
the categorical distinction may have caused a divergence in
linguistic forms. The present work does not settle this issue.
However, a number of considerations point to language as a
representational medium that supports the flexible use of
categorical information.
First, language is an a priori reasonable medium for
encoding categorical information because categorical
distinctions typically correlate with lexical distinctions.
Further, there is a broad consensus that linguistic labels can
have cognitive effects. For instance, a linguistic label can
both draw an individuals' attention to a particular conceptual
distinction, as well as provide an additional code for
maintaining a concept in memory (see e.g., Gentner &
Goldin-Meadow 2003 and Pinker 1994, 2007). It is
possible that adults have come to depend on language in
tasks where a categorical distinction must be coordinated
with other information in memory (here spatial locations).
Second, a number of empirical results support a direct
role of language in reorienting specifically. HermerVazquez, Moffet, and Munkholm (2001) found a correlation
between the age at which children begin to reorient
according to a non-geometric feature (a colored wall) and a
linguistic milestone –the age at which they begin to
spontaneously produce the spatial terms "left" and "right" in
referential descriptions. This raises the possibility that
linguisitic development underlies task success. More direct
evidence for the role of language in reorienting was reported
by Hermer-Vazquez, Spelke, and Katsnelson (1999). They
asked adults to perform a secondary distracter task for the
duration of the hiding, disorienting, and search phases of the
reorientation task. When the secondary task was a verbalshadowing task, participants ignored non-geometric features
and relied solely on the geometric layout. In contrast when
the secondary task was a non-verbal rhythm-shadowing
task, participants reoriented successfully. This indicates that
the disruption of verbal abilities impaired the use of nongeometric features to specify a spatial location.4

Discussion
The present experiment provides strong evidence that
adults rely on categorical properties for recalling the spatial
orientation of a room. Individuals were more likely to
exploit the arrangement of two distinctly colored walls
when the colors were tokens of different basic categories
than when they came from the same category. This was true
despite the fact that the within-category colors were highly
discriminable. Moreover, we found participants in the
within-category condition successfully used the color
distinction only when they explicitly coded the colors with
different labels. Analogously, participants in the betweencategory condition failed to reorient only when they coded
the colors identically.
Why is categorical encoding naturally employed in this
task? Encoding a potentially infinite continua with a finite
set of discrete categories likely eases the representational
burden in memory.
Note that our version of the
reorientation task may place a higher demand on memory
because the two colored walls cannot be viewed
simultaneously. As a result comparing the two colors has to
be performed successively. Though it may be
representationally more efficient to employ categorical
codes in this process, the categorical representation abstracts
away from the perceptual stimulus. This eliminates within
category differences and enhances between category
differences. If the reorienting task required attending to
differences between adjacently colored walls, it would
likely reduce the burden on memory, and hence reduce
reliance on categorical coding.

4

Ratcliff and Newcombe (2008) dispute that language plays a role
in human reorienting based on the fact that secondary spatial tasks
can also impair performance (see also Hupbach, Hardt, Nadel &
Bohbot 2007).
However, two considerations weaken this
argument. First, it may be that spatial distractor tasks disrupt the
representation of space necessary for reorienting. Thus a spatial
distractor task has little bearing on whether a verbal code is also
used in the task. Second, their distractor tasks may have had a
verbal component. Ratcliff and Newcombe used the Brooks lettertracing task with verbal responses. The verbal response required
for this task has been found to interfere with verbal cognition.
Indeed, this was one of Brooks' central results (1968).

The Role of Language
It should be emphasized that the use of linguistic labels did
not have to correlate perfectly with task success. For one
thing, a relative representation of the hues would have been
sufficient for reestablishing spatial heading.3 For another, it
3

It is worth noting than no participant generated color labels
containing morphemes with comparative properties (e.g., the “-er”
suffix or the adverb “more”).

284

Importantly, the question of whether adults’ use of
categorical information is mediated in part by language is
independent of the question of whether or not reorienting
relies on a modular architecture (geometric or otherwise)
and whether such a module is unique to humans. Though
some investigators have argued that language is the primary
representational system medium for combining information
from encapsulated cognitive domains (Carruthers 1998;
Spelke 2003), we believe that the available evidence is also
consistent with a more modest proposal. Namely that
language provides a default cognitive technology that can
aid memory and guide attention. Reliance on linguistic
codes may be more acute when tasks become more difficult,
as when information from multiple representational formats
must be combined. This does not mean that language is the
sole, or even primary, means for conceptual combination.

Hermer-Vazquez, L., Spelke, E., & Katsnelson, A. (1999).
Sources of flexibility in human cognition: Dual task studies
of space and language. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 3–36.
Hupbach, A., Hardt, O., Nadel, L., & Bohbot, V. D. (2007).
Spatial
reorientation:
Effects
of
verbal
and
spatial shadowing. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 7,
213–226.
Hupbach, A., & Nadel, L. (2005). Reorientation in a rhombic
environment: No evidence for an encapsulated geometric
module. Cognitive Development, 20, 279–302.
Huttenlocher, J., & Vasilyeva, M. (2003). How toddlers
represent enclosed spaces. Cognitive Science, 27, 749–766.
Learmonth, A., Nadel, L., & Newcombe, N. S. (2002).
Children’s
use
of
landmarks:
Implications
for
modularity theory. Psychological Science, 13, 337–341.
Learmonth, A., Newcombe, N. S., & Huttenlocher, J. (2001).
Toddler’s use of metric information and landmarks to
reorient. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 80,
225–244.
Munsell, A. H. (1912). A Pigment Color System and Notation.
The American Journal of Psychology 23: 236–244.
Newcombe, N. S. (2005). Evidence for and against a geometric
module: The roles of language and action. In J. Rieser, J.
Lockman, & C. Nelson (Eds.), Minnesota symposium on
child psychology. Action as an organizer of learning and
development (Vol. 33, pp. 221–241). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Newcombe, N. S, & Ratilff, K. (2008). Is language necessary
for human spatial reorientation? Reconsidering evidence
from dual task paradigms. Cognitive Psychology, 56, 142163.
Pinker S. (1994) The Language Instinct: How the mind creates
language. Harper Perennial Modern Classics, New York.
Pinker S. (2007) The Stuff of Thought: Language as a window
onto the mind. The Penguin Group, New York.
Spelke, E. S. (2003). What makes us smart? Core knowledge
and natural language. In D. Gentner and S. Goldin-Meadow
(Eds.), Language in Mind: Advances in the Investigation of
Language and Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Wang, R., & Spelke, E. (2002). Human spatial representation:
Insights from animals. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 376–
382.

Conclusion
We have presented evidence that the adult reorientation in a
familiar environment relies on categorical encoding of nongeometric features. The extent to which this ability is
enabled by linguistic codes and the mechanisms by which
children overcome an early insensitivity to categorical
features are open issues to be addressed in future research.

Acknowledgments
This work was conducted while the second author was
supported by an HHMI institutional grant awarded to
Swarthmore College.

References
Brooks, L. (1968). Spatial and verbal components of the act of
recall. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 22, 349–368.
Carruthers, P. (1998). Thinking in language: evolution and a
modularist possibility. In P. Carruthers and J. Boucher (eds.),
Language and Thought. Cambridge University Press
Cheng, K. (1986). A purely geometric model in rat’s spatial
representation. Cognition, 23, 149–178.
Cheng, K., & Gallistel, C. R. (1984). Testing the geometric
power of a spatial representation. In H. L. Rotiblat,
Cheng, K., & Newcombe, N. S. (2005). Is there a geometric
module for spatial orientation? Squaring theory
and evidence. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 1–23.
Fodor, J. (1983). Modularity of mind: An essay on faculty
psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gallistel, C. R. (1990). The organization of learning.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, Dedre and Susan Goldin-Meadow, ed. (2003)
Language in Mind: Advances in the Study of Language and
Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1994). A geometric process for
spatial reorientation in young children. Nature, 370, 57–59.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1996). Modularity & development:
The case of spatial reorientation. Cognition, 61, 195–232.
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Moffet, A., & Munkholm, P. (2001).
Language,
space,
and
the
development
of
cognitive flexibility in humans: The case of two spatial
memory tasks. Cognition, 79, 263–299.

285

