UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The use of familiarity in inferences: An experimental study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7w38h628

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Honda, Hidehito
Matsuka, Toshihiko

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The use of familiarity in inferences: An experimental study
Hidehito Honda (hito@muscat.L.chiba-u.ac.jp)
Toshihiko Matsuka (matsukat@muscat.L.chiba-u.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive & Information Science, Chiba University
1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba, 263-8522, Japan

Abstract
In the recognition heuristic (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002),
people’s knowledge of objects is defined as “recognized” or
“not recognized.” Thus the subjective knowledge levels for
recognized objects are regarded as identical. However, subjective knowledge levels for recognized objects can differ,
based on differences in their familiarity. In the current study,
we assume that subjective knowledge levels for recognized
objects differ in familiarity, and we examine effects of familiarity on inference. Results of an experimental study show
that participants infer on the basis of familiarity, and that participants adopt some inference strategies depending on the
situation.
Keywords: recognition heuristic; familiarity-based inference;
knowledge-based inference; fluency heuristic; ecological rationality

Introduction
Many researchers in the area of judgment and decision making have tried to clarify various heuristics people use in deciding and judging. For example, in the research project,
heuristics and biases program, many studies have shown
that people use several different heuristics (e.g., availability,
representativeness, anchoring and adjustment), and that reliance on these heuristics frequently results in biased judgments and decisions (cf. Gilovich, Griffin, & Kahneman,
2002; Kahneman, Gilovich, & Tversky, 1982; Kahneman &
Tversky, 2000). These studies have thus focused on the
drawbacks of heuristics, indentifying the conditions under
which the heuristics produce biases.
Recent research has also focused on another side of heuristics, their adaptive function. One of the most notable heuristics in this research stream is the recognition heuristic
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002). The recognition heuristic
has been proposed as one of the fast and frugal heuristics
(see Gigerenzer, Todd, & The ABC Research Group, 1999).
As applied to the binary choice problem, the recognition
heuristic is described as follows:
“If one of two objects is recognized and the other
is not, then infer that the recognized object has
the higher value with respect to the criterion.”
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002, p.76)
Consider a population inference problem such as “Which
city has a larger population, Kyoto or Chiba?” For this
problem, the recognition heuristic predicts that someone
who recognizes Kyoto but not Chiba should infer that Kyoto has the larger population.

According to Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002), inference based on the recognition heuristic is very simple because it is necessary to consider only a small amount of
information (i.e., whether an object is recognized or not).
Experimental evidence suggests that people actually use the
recognition heuristic in the proposed manner (e.g.,
Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002; Pachur & Hertwig, 2006;
Reimer & Katsikopoulos, 2004; Volz, Schooler, Schubotz,
Raab, Gigerenzer, & Cramon, 2006; Snook & Cullen,
2006).

Familiarity-Based Inference in Binary Choice
In most of the previous studies on the recognition heuristic,
people’s knowledge about objects has been classified as
“recognized” or “not recognized”. This implies that their
subjective levels of knowledge about the recognized objects
have been regarded as identical. However, this classification
might be too simplistic, because knowledge levels about
recognized objects can be different, rather than identical.
For example, although most Japanese can recognize both
Tokyo and New York, their knowledge levels about the two
cities are different: Most Japanese should know Tokyo better than New York.
In this paper, we regard the subjective knowledge levels
for recognized objects as unequal, and we examine the effect of these knowledge levels on inferences. Specifically,
we examine the effect of familiarity for objects. The familiarity means the subjective sense of how much one knows
about an object. For example, when one knows just the
name of an object, the familiarity would be very low. In
contrast, the familiarity would be very high when s/he has
many pieces of information about an object.
We think that it is very important to examine the effect of
familiarity on inferences, for the following two reasons. The
first is to provide additional clarification of the cognitive
processes of the recognition heuristic in terms of familiarity.
Recent findings by Pohl (2006, Experiment 2, see also Hilbig, Pohl, & Bröder, in press) imply that the familiarity of
recognized objects affects use of the recognition heuristic.
Using a binary choice task requiring a population inference,
Pohl found that in pairs in which one of two cities is recognized and the other is not (hereafter, we call this the recognized/not-recognized pair), the recognized city was inferred
to be more populous. This tendency was observed more
often when participants had knowledge about the city in
addition to recognition than when they merely recognized
the city. This result implies that familiarity influence the use
of the recognition heuristic. However, this finding does not

2353

fully clarify the effect of familiarity, because Pohl’ classification of recognized objects was either “mere recognition”
or “recognition plus additional knowledge.” Therefore it is
necessary to systematically examine the effect of familiarity.
The second reason to examine the effect of familiarity
on inference is to clarify the cognitive processes of inference in cases in which both of two objects are recognized
(hereafter, we call these the recognized/recognized pair).
Some heuristics have already been proposed for this case
(e.g., take the best heuristic, Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996;
fluency heuristic, Hertwig, Herzog, Schooler, & Reimer,
2008). However, compared to the research on the recognition heuristic, little research has explored the cognitive
processes of inferences in the recognized/recognized pairs.
By treating the subjective knowledge level about recognized
objects as familiarity, it is possible to examine the cognitive
processes of inferences in these cases. Further, it is possible
to compare differences in inferences between recognized/recognized pairs and recognized/not-recognized pairs.

these 30 cities. Twenty-five undergraduates were asked
whether they knew each of the 30 cities. The mean numbers
of recognized cities were 13.40 (SD=2.18) for List A and
8.16 (SD=3.18) for List B. From these results, we predict
that most of the pairs in List A will be recognized/recognized pairs. In contrast, List B will include some
recognized/not-recognized pairs.
In the measurement of familiarity, participants were
asked whether they knew each of the 30 cities presented in
the binary choice task, and if they knew the city, how well
they knew it.
Table 1. Two lists used in the experiment.
List A
List B
Yokohama-shi
Kawaguchi-shi
Osaka-shi
Machida-shi
Nagoya-shi
Kohriyama-shi
Sapporo-shi
Takasaki-shi
Kobe-shi
Tsu-shi
Kyoto-shi
Sasebo-shi
Fukuoka-shi
Hachinohe-shi
Hiroshima-shi
Matsumoto-shi
Sendai-shi
Hitachi-shi
Chiba-shi
Yamaguchi-shi
Niigata-shi
Takaoka-shi
Hamamatsu-shi
Imabari-shi
Kumamoto-shi Miyakonojo-shi
Okayama-shi
Ogaki-shi
Kagoshima-shi
Ashikaga-shi

Overview of the Present Study
In the present study, we investigate the effect of familiarity
on inferences. Based on the findings by Pohl (2006), our
hypothesis is that participants who are more familiar with a
city will infer that the city is more populous.
In order to examine this hypothesis, we conducted a binary choice task of population inference. Consider the situation in which cities A and B are presented, and city A is
more familiar than city B. Our hypothesis predicts that the
greater the difference in familiarity between two cities, the
more often the city A will be chosen as more populous.

Experiment
Method
Participants. Eighty one undergraduates (81 women) from
Japan Women’s University participated in this experiment
as a course requirement.
Tasks and Materials. We conducted two tasks, a binary
choice task of population inference and a measurement of
familiarity.
In the binary choice task, the question was “Which city
has a larger population?” Participants were presented with
two city names and answered the question. For this task, we
used two lists, Lists A and B (see Table 1). Each participant
was presented with all combinations (i.e., 105 pairs) for
both lists.
Lists A and B were constructed using the following procedure. In making List A, we first chose the most populous
cities (“shi”) from each of the 47 prefectures1 in Japan, then
selected top 15 cities from these 47 cities. The List B consisted in the same way as List A except that we first chose
the second most populous city from each of the 47 prefectures. We conducted a pilot study of recognition test for
1

The prefecture corresponds to the state in the U.S.

Procedure. The two tasks were conducted individually using a computer. Participants first performed the binary
choice task, followed by the measurement of familiarity. We
conducted the two tasks in the same order for all participants2.
In the binary choice task, participants were presented
with two city names on a computer screen and answered the
question by using the mouse to select a choice button on the
screen. In choosing a city, the participants could take as
long as they wished to respond. Half of participants received
pairs from List A first, and then pairs from List B. The other
participants were given the lists in the opposite order.
In the measurement of familiarity, participants were presented with a city name on a computer screen. When participants did not know a presented city, they used the mouse to
push the button representing “not recognized” on the screen.
When they knew the city, they reported their familiarity
using a scale on the screen. This scale was labeled “just
2
Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) and Pachur and Hertwig (2006)
reported that the order of two tasks, inference task and recognition
test, did not have a significant effect on responses. In the recognition test in Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) and Pachur and Hertwig (2006), participants were asked whether they knew each of
objects presented in inference task. We assumed that there were no
essential differences between the recognition test and the measurement of familiarity.

2354

know the name” on the far left and “know a lot about the
city” on the far right. The participants’ responses for familiarity were recorded over 100 points (1-100).
The two tasks took about 30 minutes to complete.

Results and Discussion
For each pair of cities, the two cities can be ordered by their
actual populations, and we name them accordingly. For example, if cities X and Y are presented, and the city X has a
larger population than city Y, we call city X the “larger
city,” and city Y the “smaller city.”
In the following analyses, we operationally define familiarity of a city based on participants’ responses to the measurement of familiarity. If a participant recognized a city,
familiarity for the city was defined as the corresponding
value in the measurement of familiarity. If the participant
did not recognize the city, familiarity was defined as 0.
In pairs in which neither city was not recognized, it can
be assumed that participants answered by guessing. Hence
we deleted the data of such pairs from the analyses.
Analysis of Aggregated Data. To conduct an analysis of
aggregated data, we calculated mean rates of the larger city
choice and mean differences in familiarity for each of the
105 pairs in Lists A and B. When we calculated the difference in familiarity, the familiarity rating of the smaller city
was subtracted from that of the larger city. Thus, a difference greater than 0 means that participants were more familiar with the larger city, and a difference less than 0 means
that participants were more familiar with the smaller city.
Figures 1 and 2 show the relationship between the mean
choice rates of the larger city and the mean differences of
familiarity for List A and List B.
To examine the effect of familiarity on population inferences, we proposed a model representing the choice rates
of the larger city on the log odds scale:

log

p MCL
= aX Mdiff + b
1 − PMCL

(1)

where PMCL represent the mean choice rate of the larger city,
XMdiff represents mean difference in familiarity, and a and b
denote free parameters for weight and intercept, respectively.
This model assumes that the choice rates shift depending on
the difference in familiarity. We assessed the fit of equation
(1) by regressing PMCL in log odds units on the difference in
familiarity. Table 2 presents the results of the regression
analyses, displaying regression coefficients for a, b, and R2.
The regression lines are shown in Figures 1 and 2 as a function of PMCL that is transformed from the equation (1).
These results indicate that for both lists, the familiarity
of cities influenced inferences about population. Specifically, the results suggest that participants who are more familiar with a city infer that the city is more populous. Therefore
the aggregated data support our hypothesis about the effect
of familiarity on inferences.
It should be noted that there was a substantial difference
in the estimated intercepts for the two lists. This difference

is noteworthy at the point where the difference in familiarity
is 0. At this point, the participant is equally familiar with
presented cities. Therefore, in a strict sense, if the participant makes an inference on population based on familiarity,
the choice rate for the larger city should be 50%. However,
the predictions of the choice rate at this point from the estimated models were 67.0% for the List A and 56.0% for the
List B.
These results imply that in responding to List A, participants used certain knowledge about cities’ populations, in
addition to familiarity. This possibility is reasonable based
on the characteristics of the cities in the two lists. List A
consisted of very famous cities, so the possibility is high
that participants could access the certain knowledge about
their populations. Previous studies have shown that when
participants can easily access certain knowledge about the
populations of recognized objects, they use it in making
inferences (e.g., Oppenheimer, 2003; Newell & Fernandez,
2006; Richter & Späth, 2006). Therefore the findings for
List A are consistent with those of the previous studies. On
the other hand, the possibility of accessing certain knowledge about populations might be rather low in responding
to the List B. In this case, participants would rely on the
difference in familiarity to infer the populations.

Figure 1. The relationship between the mean choice rates
of the larger city and differences in familiarity in List A.

Figure 2. The relationship between the mean choice rates
of the larger city and differences in familiarity in List B

2355

The third model is:
Table 2. Results of regression analyses for aggregated data.
R2
0.496
0.707
*p<.001
Analysis of Individual Data. Next, we analyze individual
data to examine two points that have not been clarified in
the aggregated data analysis.
First, the analysis based on aggregated data implies that
participants’ inference patterns shift between the two lists.
Individual data analysis can be explored in detail to examine
this shift.
Second, and more important, we can examine the difference between the inferences for recognized/not-recognized
pairs (in which participants can use the recognition heuristic) and those for recognized/recognized pairs. In the aggregated data analysis, inference patterns were analyzed based
on differences in familiarity. Thus this analysis did not distinguish the inference patterns for recognized/recognized
pairs from those for recognized/not-recognized pairs. The
literature on the recognition heuristic, however, has argued
that recognition has a special status, because when a person
does not recognize an object, s/he cannot use any cues in
inference (Pachur & Hertwig, 2006; Pachur, Todd, Gigerenzer, Schooler, & Goldstein, in press). Thus, the inference
patterns for recognized/not-recognized pairs might be different from those for recognized/recognized pairs. We examine this issue by proposing a model that distinguishes
recognized/recognized
pairs
from
recognized/notrecognized pairs in the individual data.
In the analysis of individual data, we carry out logistic regression analyses. We propose three models that represent
the choice rates of the larger city. The first model is:
List
List A
List B

log

a
0.065*
0.052*

b
0.707*
0.241*

PCL
= aX diff + b
1 − PCL

(2)

where PCL represents the choice rate for the larger city, Xdiff
represents the difference in familiarity, and a and b denote
free parameters for weight and intercept, respectively. This
model is basically the same as equation (1).
The second model is:

log

PCL
= aX diff + bX recog + c
1 − PCL

(3)

The unique aspect of this model is that the dummy variable
Xrecog is added. Xrecog is the variable for cases in which only
one of the two cities is recognized. When only the larger
city is recognized, Xrecog equals 1. In contrast, when only the
small city is recognized, Xrecog equals -1, and when both of
the cities are recognized, Xrecog equals 0. Hence Xrecog is an
operational representation of the recognition heuristic, such
that inference patterns in the recognized/not-recognized
pairs are different from those in the recognized/recognized
pairs. a, b, and c denote free parameters for weights and
intercept, respectively.

log

PCL
= aX recog + b
1 − PCL

(4)

This model assumes that a participant only considers recognition, and does not use the difference in familiarity in making inferences, suggesting that inference patterns in recognized/recognized pairs are constant. a, b denote free parameters for weight and intercept, respectively.
Using these three models, we conducted a logistic regression analysis. For List A, 75 of the 81 participants recognized all of 15 cities, 5 participants recognized 14 cities,
and one participant recognized 12 cities. There were thus
few cases in which the recognition heuristic could be applied to pairs in List A. Therefore we analyzed only recognized/recognized pairs, and regressed equation (2) on individual data for List A. For List B, the mean number of recognized cities was 10.71 (SD=2.32). This result shows that
List B included some recognized/not-recognized pairs. So
the three models, equations (2), (3), (4), were regressed on
individual data3.
The purpose of the analysis of List A is to explore
whether the model of equation (2) can explain the data. So
in this analysis, we first assessed goodness of fit of the
model using deviance (Agresti, 1996), and then examined
whether the effect of difference in familiarity was present in
the model using the likelihood ratio test (Agresti, 1996).
When the effect of difference in familiarity was significant,
we regarded the equation (2) as the best model for the data.
When the effect was not significant, we regarded the intercept model as the best model, suggesting that inference patterns are constant irrespective of difference in familiarity.
According to this procedure, we selected the best model for
each individual’s data. Table 3 shows the results of this
analysis.
These results indicate that more than 60% of the individual inference patterns are well explained by equation (2),
suggesting that the differences in familiarity influenced inferences. At the same time, the intercept model explained
more than 30% of individual inference patterns. All of the
estimated coefficients for the intercept were positive values,
indicating that these participants used certain knowledge
about population instead of the difference in familiarity. On
the whole, the results of the individual data analysis are
consistent with those of aggregated data analysis.
The purpose of the analysis of List B is to explore which
model can best explain the data. In this analysis, we followed the same procedure as in the analysis of List A, except that when more than one model showed a good fit, we
selected one model using the AIC. Table 4 presents results
of this analysis.
The results show that approximately 60% of the individual data were well explained by equations (2) and (3), indicating that familiarity influenced inferences. It is notable
that equation (3) explained almost 50% of the individual
3
3 of the 81 participants recognized all of the 15 cities. We regressed only equation (2) on data for these 3 participants.

2356

data. Furthermore, around 30% of the individual data were
well explained by equation (4), which represents the recognition heuristic in the strictest manner. These results indicate that inference patterns in the recognized/not-recognized
pairs are different from those in the recognized/recognized
pairs, and are not explained simply by the difference in familiarity.
Compared to the results for List A, the intercept model
did not well explain the individual data (only that of 1 out of
81 participants). As discussed above, the intercept model
assumes that participants use certain knowledge about population, beyond the difference in familiarity, when they infer.
This result therefore indicates that in responding to List B,
participants did not access certain knowledge about population, but based their inferences upon differences in familiarity or the recognition heuristic.
Taken together, the findings of the individual data analysis are as follows. First, participants actually rely on the
familiarity of cities when they make inferences about population.
Second, inference patterns in the recognized/notrecognized pairs cannot be simply explained by the difference in familiarity. This indicates that inferences in recognized/not-recognized pairs have unique features, as some
previous studies have claimed (e.g., Pachur & Hertwig,
2006; Pachur et al., in press).
Third, participants do not use a single inference strategy,
but adopt some strategies depending on the situation. In
particular, our findings suggest that when people have certain knowledge about population, they do not base their inferences on familiarity. Some researchers have argued that
people do not always use the recognition heuristic. Pachur
and Hertwig (2006) and Pachur et al. (in press) have
claimed that the recognition heuristic is used to make inferences under uncertainty, that is, when certain knowledge
about the criterion is not available. Given that inference
based on familiarity is a kind of heuristic, our findings provide empirical evidence for this claim.
Table 3. Results of analysis of individual data for List A.
Eq.
InterModel
N.S.
(2)
cept
N
52
25
4
%
64.2
30.9
4.9
Note. “N.S.” means none of the models can explain the data
well.

Table 4. Results of analysis of individual data for List B.
Eq.
Eq.
Eq.
InterModel
N.S.
(2)
(3)
(4)
cept
N
10
37
22
1
11
%
12.3
45.7
27.2
1.2
13.6
Note. “N.S.” means none of the models can explain the data
well.

Is it worth exploiting familiarity in making inferences?
So far, we have demonstrated that participants use familiarity in making inferences. As previously suggested, inference
based on familiarity can be assumed a kind of heuristic
strategy. In discussing heuristics, one of the most interesting
issues is whether or not a heuristic has an adaptive function.
Thus we ask if making inferences based on familiarity has
an adaptive function, or if it can result in irrational inferences.
Figure 3 shows the relationship between familiarity and
population for the 30 cities that were used in the experiment.
The figure shows that familiarity is correlated with population; that is, the more familiar participants are with the cities,
the more populous the cities are (r=.796, p<.001). This suggests that inferences based on familiarity have an adaptive
function, just as the recognition heuristic and the fluency
heuristic do. This function has been called ecological rationality (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002; Hertwig, et al., 2008).

Figure 3. The relationship between population and familiarity in 30 cities that were used in the experiment.

Conclusions
In the present study, we investigated the effect of familiarity
of objects on inferences. Participants used the familiarity of
objects in making inferences, and this use of familiarity has
an adaptive function, a form of ecological rationality. However, participants did not always make inferences on the
basis of the familiarity; they also used other inference strategies, such as the recognition heuristic or knowledge-based
inference. This shift of inference strategies can be explained
by situational factors in which participants were able to
access certain knowledge about the criterion in making inferences.
We point out that inference based on the familiarity of
objects is analogous to previously proposed heuristics such
as the recognition heuristic (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002)
or the fluency heuristic (Hertwig, et al., 2008; Schooler &
Hertwig, 2005). In particular, we think that the familiaritybased inference has many links to the fluency heuristic. The
fluency heuristic is described as follows:

2357

“If two objects, a and b, are recognized, and one
of two objects is more fluently retrieved, then infer that this object has the higher value with respect to the criterion.” (Hertwig et al., 2008,
p.1192)
Although we have not obtained empirical evidence, we predict that the greater the familiarity of an object, the more
fluently the object will be retrieved.
Hence, familiarity-based inference and the fluency heuristic will predict the same inference in the same situation.
More importantly, the cognitive processes of experiencing
familiarity or fluency would influence each other. In their
discussion, Hertwig et al. (2008) pointed out the possibility
that familiarity for objects is involved with processes of the
fluency heuristic. At this point, the differences between
these two inference strategies are not obvious, and this is a
limitation in the current research. Hence it is necessary to
clarify the relationship between fluency and the familiarity
for objects, and how these factors affect inferences.

Acknowledgments
This work was in part supported by the Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science KAKENHI (Grant No. 20700235)
and the Support Center for Advanced Telecommunications
Technology Research (SCAT).

References
Agresti, A. (1996). An introduction to categorical data
analysis. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. (1996). Reasoning the fast
and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P., & The ABC Research Group.
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Gilovich, T., Griffin, D. W., & Kahneman, D. (Eds.). (2002).
Heuristics and Biases. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of ecological rationality: The recognition heuristic. Psychological Review, 109, 75-90.
Hertwig, R., Herzog, S. M., Schooler, L. J., & Reimer, T.
(2008). Fluency heuristic: A model of how the
mind exploits a by-product of information retrieval.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1191-1206.
Hilbig, B. E., Pohl, R. F., & Bröder, A. (in press). Criterion
knowledge: A moderator of using the recognition
heuristic? Journal of Behavioral Decision Making.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982).
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (2000). Choices, values, and frames. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Newell, B. R., & Fernandez, D. (2006). On the binary quality of recognition and the inconsequentiality of further knowledge: Two critical tests of the recognition heuristic. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 19, 333-346.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2003). Not so fast! (and not so frugal!): Rethinking the recognition heuristic. Cognition, 90, B1-B9.
Pachur, T., & Hertwig, R. (2006). On the psychology of the
recognition heuristic: Retrieval primacy as a key
determinant of its use. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32,
983-1002.
Pachur, T., Todd, P. M., Gigerenzer, G., Schooler, L. J., &
Goldstein, D. G. (in press). Is ignorance an adaptive tool? A review of recognition heuristic research. In P. M. Todd & G. Gigerenzer & The
ABC Research Group (Eds.), Ecological rationality: Intelligence in the world. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Pohl, R. F. (2006). Empirical tests of the recognition heuristic. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19,
251-271.
Reimer, T., & Katsikopoulos, K. V. (2004). The use of recognition in group decision-making. Cognitive
Science, 28, 1009-1029.
Richter, T., & Späth, P. (2006). Recognition is used as one
cue among others in judgment and decision making.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 32, 150-162.
Schooler, L. J., & Hertwig, R. (2005). How forgetting aids
heuritic inference. Psychological Review, 112, 610628.
Snook, B., & Cullen, R. M. (2006). Recognizing national
hockey league greatness with an ingnorance-based
heuristic. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60, 33-43.
Volz, K. G., Schooler, L. J., Schubotz, R. I., Raab, M., Gigerenzer, G., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2006). Why
you think Milan is larger than Modena: Neural correlates of the recognition heuristic. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1924-1936.

2358

