UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Perceptual Organization of Point Constellations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2r20m21s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dry, Matthew J.
Lee, Michael
Navarro, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Perceptual Organization of Point Constellations
Matthew J. Dry (matt.dry@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U. Leuven,
Tiensestraat 102, B-3000 Leuven

Daniel J. Navarro (daniel.navarro@adelaide.edu.au)
Kym Preiss (kym.preiss@unisa.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA, 5005 Australia

Michael D. Lee (mdlee@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 3151 Social Sciences Plaza A,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA

from the environment. The constellation Cassiopeia is an
example, the Dipper is another. For ages people have seen
the same groups as units, and at the present time children
need no instructions to see the same units” (p. 141-142).
As noted by previous researchers (e.g., Compton &
Logan, 1993), while there is a large body of experimental
and phenomenological evidence suggesting that the Gestalt
organizational principles play an important role in early
visual perception little effort has been made to develop
formal models of the cognitive or perceptual processes
underlying these principles. In this paper we outline a
formal approach to describing the perception of structure in
constellation (and constellation-like) stimuli. The approach
is based upon Delaunay triangulation, a powerful measure
of relational structure. In the following sections we describe
Delaunay triangulation and outline the aims of the paper.

Abstract
In this paper we present observers with point patterns based
on 30 major star constellations and ask them to connect the
points to show the structure they perceive. The resulting
empirical structures had a high inter-rater reliability and a
high degree of overlap with constellation structures recorded
in star atlases, suggesting that the perception of structure in
point patterns is largely invariant across individuals. Further,
we demonstrate that the empirical structures correspond
closely with the structures developed in the field of relational
geometry. We discuss the results of the experiment in light of
previous findings and suggest a number of potential
approaches to formally modeling human performance on
clustering tasks.
Keywords: Gestalt organizational principles; visual
perception; relational structure; Delaunay triangulation;
perceptual organization; perceptual modeling.

Introduction

Delaunay Triangulation

One of the fundamental tasks of early visual perception is
the spatial organization of an image (e.g., Marr, 1982;
Ullman, 1984). Researchers from the Gestalt school (e.g.,
Koffka, 1935; Köhler, 1929; Wertheimer, 1938)
demonstrated that the organization of many visual stimuli
appeared to be dictated by a number of simple principles
such as relative proximity, similarity, good continuation,
and common fate. Figure 1a is a replication of one of the
examples given by Köhler (1929) as demonstration of
organizational structure based on the grouping-by-proximity
principle: specifically (all other things being equal)
elements with a greater relative proximity tend to be
grouped together. Hence, Figure 1a is generally seen as
being organized into two groups of three objects rather than
one group of two objects and one group of four objects (or
any other possible configuration).
Köhler suggested that this principle holds equally well for
more complex stimuli, citing the constellations in the night
sky as an ecologically plausible example. He noted that “If
on a clear night we look up at the sky, some stars are
immediately seen as belonging together and, as detached

Given any group of co-planar points it is possible to obtain a
cell structure that defines the regions within the plane that
are closer to each point than any other point. This is known
as the Voronoi tessellation of the point set, an example of
which is shown in Figure 1b. Joining the points in the set
that share common Voronoi edges gives the Delaunay
triangulation of the set, an example of which can be seen in
Figure 1c.
An important property of the Delaunay triangulation is
that it is a super-graph of a number of relational structures:
The Gabriel graph (Gabriel & Sokal, 1969) is the set of the
Delaunay edges that intersect with only one Voronoi edge.
The relative neighborhood graph (Toussaint, 1980)
connects points if no other point is closer to both of them
than their inter-point distance. A spanning tree is a structure
that connects all of the points in a set with n-1 edges and
contains no circuits. The minimum spanning tree is the
structure that minimizes the total length of the edges
connecting points (Zahn, 1971). Finally, two points are
joined as nearest neighbors if one of the points lies closer to
the other than to any other point within the set. Examples

1151

Figure 1. Replication of Köhler‟s (1929) demonstration of
the proximity principle (a), the Voronoi tessellation of a
random point set (b), and the corresponding Delaunay
triangulation of the random point set (c).
Examples of these sub-graphs are given in Figure 2. As can
be seen, the graphs are hierarchically nested: the nearest
neighbors are a subset of the minimum spanning tree, which
is a subset of the relative neighborhood graph, and so on, up
to the Delaunay triangulation.
Each of these measures has previously been considered in
research on structure detection. For example, Zahn (1971)
demonstrated that the minimum spanning tree could be used
to detect the presence of separate clusters of dots and
changes in dot density in random dot textures. Similar
demonstrations have also been made by Toussaint (1980)
using the relative neighborhood graph, minimum spanning
trees and Delaunay triangulation, and by Ahuja and
Tuceryan (1989) using Delaunay triangulation. In each of
these papers it was demonstrated that algorithms based on
the respective relational measures were able to detect the
presence of what Toussaint described as “perceptually
meaningful” structure.
It is important to note that these relational structures are
not merely a convenient geometric measure more suited to
computer/artificial vision than human vision. Rather, there
is a growing body of psychophysical, physiological and
theoretically motivated research suggesting that the human
visual system might be generating a Voronoi/Delaunay-like
representation at any early stage in visual processing via a
spreading activation or „grassfire‟ process (e.g., Dry, 2008;
Kovacs, Feher, & Julesz, 1998; T. Lee, Mumford, Romero,
& Lamme, 1998). As such, this form of representation
presents a psychologically plausible starting point for
developing a formal understanding of the processes
underlying perceptual organization.

Figure 2. Set of randomly distributed points with its
associated Delaunay triangulation and sub-graphs.

Method
Participants
12 observers (six male, six female) participated in the
experiment. The mean age of the participants was 28 years.
All of the participants were postgraduate psychology
students and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

Stimuli

Aims
The aims of this paper are twofold. First, we are interested
in empirically testing Köhler‟s suggestion that the
perception of structure in constellations is largely invariant
across observers. Towards this end we present an
experiment in which we asked observers to indicate the
structure that they perceive in constellation stimuli. Second,
we investigate the degree to which the empirical structures
can be described by Delaunay triangulation and its‟ subgraphs.

30 constellations were selected from the 48 originally
identified by Ptolemy (Toomer, 1984). The coordinates of
the constellations were taken from the Redshift 3 Desktop
Planetarium (RS3). The criteria for selection of a
constellation were that it should have 8 or more stars and a
structure that was not simply linear. The constellations were
flipped across the horizontal axis to minimize the likelihood
of the participants recognizing a constellation and
reproducing the structure from memory.
Each stimulus was comprised of 0.15 cm diameter black
dots presented on a 15 x 15 cm white field.

1152

Procedure
The stimuli were presented on computer monitors. The
participants were instructed to connect the points in a
stimulus to show the structure they perceive. They were told
that they could join any point to any other point that they
chose, and make as many or as few links as seemed
necessary, with the one provision that the final structure
should contain all of the points in the stimulus.
The participants created links between points by leftclicking on a point with the computer mouse. Then, while
holding down the mouse button, they drew a path by
dragging the mouse cursor to a subsequent point and
releasing the button, causing a straight line to be drawn
between that point and the previously visited point. By
right-clicking on a link to select it and then pressing the
„delete‟ key on the keyboard, the participants could undo
any links they had drawn. The participants were thus free to
connect the points in any order, to work alternately from
two points, or to work on several separated clusters of
points.
The stimuli were presented in a single test session. The
order of presentation for the stimuli was randomized across
the participants. Prior to the presentation of the
experimental stimuli the participants completed three
practice stimuli (with 8, 15 and 24 points). Following the
experiment the participants were debriefed regarding the
aims of the study. None of the participants reported
recognizing the stimuli as constellations.

Results
Inter-Rater Reliability
For each of the participants we obtained an n by n matrix of
ones and zeros detailing the links between the n points in
each stimulus. For example, a link between points 3 and 7
was indicated by a 1 in the third row and seventh column
(and seventh row and third column) of the matrix. Points
which were not linked had zeros in their corresponding
cells.
We measured the reliability of the participants‟ solutions
using split-half correlations between the upper triangles of
the link frequency matrices averaged over 10000 random
splits. The resulting coefficients gave mean r-values ranging
from .89 to .98, suggesting that there is a high degree of
overlap between the links chosen by the different
participants. This provides support for Köhler‟s claim that
the perception of structure in constellation-like stimuli is
largely invariant across individuals.

structures. Figure 3 shows two example stimuli with the
RS3 structure indicated by black lines and the empirical
structure indicated by white lines. The width of the white
lines indicates the frequency with which the participants
chose a given link (with thick lines indicating a higher
frequency than thin lines). As can be seen, there is a high
correspondence between the most frequently chosen
empirical links and the links present in the RS3 structure.
We employed a Bayesian approach to assessing the
likelihood of finding this degree of overlap by chance (see
Navarro, 2008). Briefly, this approach compares the relative
likelihoods of four competing explanatory models: M0 – the
empirical and RS3 structures are drawn from populations
with different link numerosities and locations); M1 – the
empirical and RS3 structures are draw from populations
with the same link numerosity but different link location; M2
– the two structures are drawn from populations with the
same link numerosity and location; and M3 – the two
structures are drawn from populations with different link
numerosities but the same link locations.
The need to consider both link location and numerosity is
obvious when one considers the possibility of an empirical
structure which connects each node to all other nodes: in
this case the overlap between the two structures would be
100%, but the empirical structure would also contain
numerous links that are not present in the RS3 structure.
The results of the analyses indicated that for each
constellation the most likely model was M2, with the next
most likely model being at least 1.24x104 times less likely.
In other words, the probability of the empirical and RS3
structures sharing by chance such a high degree of overlap
in number and location of structural links is highly unlikely.
Again, this result points towards the relative invariance of
the perceived organization of this class of stimuli.

Overlap Between Delaunay And Empirical
Structures
As mentioned in the Introduction, one of the aims of this
study was to investigate the degree to which the empirically
produced structures could be described by Delaunay

Overlap Between RS3 And Empirical Structures
The data also indicate that there is a high degree of overlap
between the links represented in the RS3 planetarium and
the links present in the structures generated by the
participants for the constellation stimuli. On average 79% of
the empirical links were also present in the RS3 structures,
and 80% of the RS3 links were present in the empirical

Figure 3. Example constellations with the RS3 structure
shown in black, and the aggregated empirical structure
shown in white.

1153

triangulation and its subgraphs. Taking an approach
analogous to precision/recall analyses in information
retrieval research, Figure 4 shows the proportional overlap
between the empirical links in the graph structures (y-axis),
and the graph links in the empirical structures (x-axis).
For the Delaunay triangulation links the data indicate high
recall and low precision: a high proportion of the empirical
links are Delaunay triangulation links ( X = 98%), but the
Delaunay structures also contain a high proportion of links
that are not present in the empirical structures ( X = 58%).
Conversely, Figure 4 indicates that nearly all of the nearest
neighbor links are present in the empirical structures ( X =
93%), but the empirical structures also contain numerous
links that are not nearest neighbors ( X = 53%).
Figure 4 suggests that the empirical structures are best
described by relative neighborhood graph or minimum
spanning tree links, with a close correspondence between
the proportion of graph links that are empirical links ( X =
83% and 86% for RNG and MST respectively) and
empirical links that are graph links ( X = 84% and 82% for
RNG and MST respectively). A qualitative inspection of the
empirical structures appears to confirm this result: the
participants tended to create structures closely resembling
minimum spanning trees, but with additional links
employed to close loops.
We employed the previously described Bayesian
methodology to determine the likelihood of this degree of
overlap occurring by chance. In regards to the overlap
between the empirical structures and Delaunay triangulation
and nearest neighbor graph structures the analyses indicated
that for each stimulus the most likely model was M3,
indicating that the empirical and graph structures had a high
overlap in terms of link locations, but (as could be expected
from Figure 4) the link numerosities appeared to be drawn
from different populations. In regards to the Gabriel graph
link structure the results of the analyses showed that 47% of
the stimuli were best described by M2 indicating a high
overlap between both the number and location of structure
links, with the remaining 53% of the stimuli best described
by M3.
Finally, in regards to the overlap between the empirical
structures and the relative neighborhood graph and
minimum spanning tree graph structures the analyses
indicated that for all 30 constellations the correspondence
was best described by M2, with the next most likely model
(which in each case was M3) being at least 3.01x1010 and
4.05x1010 times less likely for the relative neighborhood
graph and minimum spanning tree respectively. In other
words, the probability that the empirical structures would by
chance share such a high degree of overlap with the
minimum spanning tree and relative neighborhood graph
structures in terms of both number and location of structure
links is extremely low.
Nonetheless, Figure 4 also demonstrates that the links
present in the minimum spanning tree and relative
neighborhood graph structures are not sufficient to model
the empirical structures. Specifically, it can be seen that

Figure 4. Proportional overlap between graph and
empirical structure links for Delaunay triangulation (DT),
Gabriel graph (GG), relative neighborhood graph (RNG),
minimum spanning tree (MST), and nearest neighbors
(NN). Each data point represents one of the 30 stimuli.
there is a wide range in the degree of correspondence
between the graph and empirical structures, indicating that
in some cases the observers are employing Delaunay links,
but are not necessarily employing minimum spanning tree
or relative neighborhood graph links. This suggests that in
order to model the empirical structures it would be
necessary to employ the full Delaunay triangulation, but
with some means of restricting or biasing the links to lowerlevel neighbor relations (i.e., maintaining the recall, but
improving the precision).
Figure 5 indicates the plausibility of such an approach. If
the Delaunay neighbors are indexed ordinally (i.e., 1 st
nearest Delaunay neighbor, 2nd nearest Delaunay neighbor,
… kth nearest Delaunay neighbor) it can be seen that the
majority of the empirical links are captured by Delaunay
neighbors of order <= 5 (top panel). Furthermore, the
majority of the empirical links are first order neighbors (i.e.,
nearest neighbors), with the frequency of inclusion
decreasing as a function of neighbor order (lower panel).
It should be noted that for uniformly random distributions
of points the most prevalent number of Delaunay neighbors
is 6, with 5 and 7 neighbors being roughly three quarters as
prevalent. Given this it is unsurprising that the proportion of
high-order Delaunay neighbors present in the empirical
structures is low. Nonetheless, Figure 5 indicates that the
empirical links are not chosen with a uniform probability –
rather there appears to be a strong bias towards including
very low-order neighbors (i.e., 1st to 3rd nearest Delaunay
neighbors).

1154

Figure 5. The cumulative distribution function for the
proportion of empirical links that are 1st order Delaunay
neighbors through to 1st , 2nd, 3rd … and 10th order neighbors
(top panel), and the probability density function for the
proportion of empirical links that are 1 st order neighbors
only, through to 10th order neighbors only (bottom panel).
Individual stimuli are shown in gray, with the average
shown in black

Controlling For Familiarity
As has been indicated none of the participants reported
recognizing the experimental stimuli as constellations.
However, in order to control for the possibility that the
participants unconsciously reproduced the constellation
structures from memory we ran a control study (using the
same 12 participants from the current study) which
employed 30 random point patterns or „pseudoconstellations‟ which were matched to one of the 30
constellations in terms of numerosity and degree of
clustering as measured by R  ro re , where ro is the mean
nearest neighbor distance for the n points in the stimulus
and re is the expected mean for a uniformly random
distribution of n points. The results of the control study
provided the same pattern of results as those reported for the
constellation stimuli in terms of inter-rater reliability,
proportional overlap with Delaunay and Delaunay subgraph link structure. Given this we can safely assume that
any familiarity effects are either negligible or non-existent.
Furthermore, the control study provides an important
indication of the generality of the results of the constellation
experiment.

Discussion
The high inter-rater reliability and high degree of overlap
between the RS3 and empirical constellation structures
provide support for Köhler‟s suggestion that the perceptual
organization of constellation-like stimuli is relatively
invariant across individuals. Köhler and colleagues argued
that perceptual organization is driven by universal principles
or processes, citing phenomenological examples such as

Figure 1a as evidence. In this study we provide quantified
empirical evidence pointing towards the same conclusion.
The finding that the empirical constellation structures
were best described by minimum spanning tree or relative
neighborhood graph structure is analogous to the results of a
similar experiment reported in Pomerantz (1981) in which
participants were asked to join up the dots in semi-random
point patterns to show the structure that they perceived. As
with the current study the results indicated that the empirical
structures tended to be minimum spanning trees with a
small number of additional links closing loops or adding to
the overall symmetry of the structure.
Pomerantz noted that the participants‟ production of
structures corresponding closely to minimum spanning trees
could be interpreted as empirical evidence of the law of
Prägnanz (the minimum principle). In other words the
empirical structures tended towards the simplest possible
configuration of the point set in that they had close to the
minimum number of links needed to create a tree structure,
and came close to minimizing the overall length of the links
included in the structure. Furthermore, it was suggested that
the fact the participants generated these close-to-minimal
structures without prompting could be taken as evidence
that much of perceptual organization occurs in a bottom-up
fashion without reference to top-down processes based on
strategy or learning.
If this is indeed the case, then the results of these
experiments might provide insight into human performance
on difficult optimization tasks such as the visually presented
traveling salesperson problem (TSP). Solving a TSP
involves finding the shortest pathway through a set of N
cities that begins and ends at the same city. The number of
potential solutions to a TSP instance increases factorially as
the number of cities in the instance increases, such that for a
5 city instance there are 12 pathways, for a 10 city instance
there are 181,400 pathways and for a 15 city instance there
are 4x1010 pathways. Despite this apparent intractability
research has shown that human participants are able to
generate near-optimal solutions to TSPs in a timeframe that
is a close-to-linear function of problem size (e.g., Dry, M.
Lee, Vickers, & Hughes, 2006).
This finding might be explicable in terms of a bottom-up
process that is biased towards organizing visual stimuli such
that the resulting structure is simple or minimal. If the base
representation or initial clustering of a TSP is a minimal
structure (by virtue of the bottom-up process employed to
generate the representation), then producing a minimal
pathway via some form of top-down cluster joining heuristic
should be far more efficient than a path-finding heuristic
that works entirely from a top-down perspective seeking to
actively impose minimality on a raw stimulus.
The results of the current study provide some important
insights into formally modeling human performance on
perceptual clustering tasks. Firstly, the analyses indicate that
the empirical structures can be well described by grouping
heuristics based upon relative proximity alone. Specifically,
it was not necessary to employ more complex heuristics

1155

such as good continuation or symmetry in order to describe
the empirical structures. Nonetheless, the fact that the
participants were creating near-minimal structures with the
addition of extra links to close loops or add some form of
balance or symmetry to the structure suggests that some of
the remaining variance between the graph and empirical
structures might be accounted for by these additional
heuristics.
Secondly, the data in Figure 5 suggest that it might be
possible to simulate the empirical structures using a model
that links together neighboring points in a hierarchical
manner by initially forming clusters based on nearest
neighbor or low-level Delaunay neighbor links, and then
joining these clusters into a single structure. A similar
approach has been suggested in relation to modeling human
performance on the traveling salesperson problem (e.g., Dry
et al., 2006). Preliminary analyses have shown that this form
of approach is able to produce structures that have a high
degree of overlap with the empirical constellation structures
(mean r = .92)
There are a number of alternative previously published
models that have also been applied to the detection of
structure in dot stimuli using spatial filtering (e.g., Smits &
Vos, 1986) or some form of relational information (e.g.,
Caelli, Preston, & Howell, 1978; Pizlo, Salach-Golyska, &
Rosenfeld, 1997). Furthermore, Vickers, Navarro and M.
Lee (2000) suggested that the visual system might extract
structure from point sets by searching for transformations
(e.g., rotations, translations, etc) that generate an output that
is maximally symmetric with the original image, and
demonstrated that such an approach could produce a link
structure for the constellation Perseus that closely resembled
the structure present in star atlases. It would be highly
interesting to compare the performance of these different
models on the constellation task to determine which of these
approaches provides a better account of the processes
underlying human perceptual organization.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Douglas Vickers who first drew our
attention to the high overlap between constellation structure
and the Delaunay triangulation sub-graphs. DJN was
supported by an Australian Research Fellowship
(ARC grant DP-0773794.

References
Ahuja, N., & Tuceryan, M. (1989). Extraction of early
perceptual structure in dot patterns - Integrating region,
boundary, and component Gestalt. Computer Vision
Graphics and Image Processing, 48(3), 304-356.
Caelli, T. M., Preston, G. A. N., & Howell, E. R. (1978).
Implications of spatial summation models for processes of
contour perception: a geometric perspective. Vision
Research, 18, 723-734.
Compton, B. J., & Logan, G. D. (1993). Evaluating a
computational model of perceptual grouping by
proximity. Perception & Psychophysics, 53, 403-421.

Dry, M. J. (2008). Using relational structure to detect
symmetry: a Voronoi tessellation based model of
symmetry perception. Acta Psychologica, 128, 75-90.
Dry, M. J., Lee, M. D., Vickers, D., & Hughes, P. (2006).
Human performance on visually presented traveling
salesperson problems with varying numbers of nodes.
Journal of Problem Solving, 1(1), 20-32.
Gabriel, K. R., & Sokal, R. R. (1969). A new statistical
approach to geographic variation analysis. Systematic
Zoology, 18, 259-278.
Koffka, K. (1935). Principles of Gestalt psychology. New
York: Harcourt.
Köhler, W. (1929). Gestalt Psychology. New York:
Liveright.
Kovacs, I., Feher, A., & Julesz, B. (1998). Medial-point
description of shape: a representation for action coding
and its psychophysical correlates. Vision Research, 38,
2323-2333.
Lee, T. S., Mumford, D., Romero, R., & Lamme, V. A. F.
(1998). The role of the primary cortex in higher level
vision. Vision Research, 38, 2429-2454.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman and
Company.
Navarro, D. J. (2008). Bayesian tests for correlated binary
choices (Technical Note available online at
http://www.psychology.adelaide.edu.au/personalpages/sta
ff/danielnavarro/papers.html).
Pizlo, Z., Salach-Golyska, M., & Rosenfeld, A. (1997).
Curve detection in a noisy image. Vision Research, 37,
1217-1241.
Pomerantz, J. R. (1981). Perceptual organization in
information processing. In M. Kubovy & J. R. Pomerantz
(Eds.), Perceptual Organization (pp. 141-180). NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Smits, J. T. S., & Vos, P. G. (1986). A model for the
perception of curves in dot figures: The role of local
salience of "virtual lines". Biological Cybernetics, 54,
407-416.
Toomer, G. J. (1984). Ptolemy's Almagest: Springer-Verlag.
Toussaint, G. T. (1980). The relative neighborhood graph of
a finite planar set. Pattern Recognition, 12(4), 261-268.
Ullman, S. (1984). Visual Routines. Cognition, 18, 97-159.
Vickers, D., Navarro, D. J., & Lee, M. D. (2000). Towards a
transformational approach to perceptual organisation. In
R. J. Howlett & L. C. Jain (Eds.), KES 2000:
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
Knowledge-Based Intelligent Engineering Systems &
Allied Technologies (Vol. 1, pp. 325-328). Piscataway,
NJ: IEEE.
Wertheimer, M. (1938). Laws of organization in perceptual
forms. In W. Ellis (Ed.), A Source Book of Gestalt
Psychology. New York: Harcourt.
Zahn, C. (1971). Graph-theoretical methods for detecting
and describing Gestalt structures. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 20(1), 68-86.

1156

