UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Objecthood on Processing Efficiency

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1dv6k64k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kokinov, Boicho
Shahbazyan, Luiza

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Objecthood on Processing Efficiency
Luiza Shahbazyan (l.shahbazian@gmail.com)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria
Abstract
The term objecthood is used to convey the degree of image
regularity in terms of properties such as closure, symmetry
and parallelism. The notion of objecthood is evaluated in the
light of the existing psychological data on sensory-driven
biases of attentional selection.
Extending the biased
competition for selection framework, we tested if higher
objecthood of the image modulates its salience and exerts
influence on the efficiency of its processing. In a series of
three experiments, it is demonstrated that the presence of
closure significantly impacts processing efficiency of the
presented visual stimuli.
Keywords: vision; selective attention; saliency.

Introduction
Visual image regularities are important both for the
interpretation of the ambiguous visual flow and for the
guidance of selective attention resources for extensive
analysis. Current understanding of bottom-up saliency
underestimates the influence of these structural properties
on the selection process. Most theories and models propose
that regions compete for resources on the basis of their
visual conspicuity. The aim of this paper is to demonstrate
that it is the regularity of an image in terms of properties
such as closure, referred to as its degree of objecthood,
which determines its efficiency of processing and
consequent selection, than merely its visual distinctiveness.
Due to the limited capacity of the visual system, only part
of the information is selected for in-depth processing. It is
important to direct resources towards regions that are
potential figures because, first, usually they contain relevant
information, and second, figures have invariant
characteristics like shape, crucial for recognition, while the
shape of the background varies depending on the figure and
is meaningless (Rubin, 2001). It is generally accepted
(Niebur & Koch, 1996; Itti & Koch, 2001; Desimone &
Duncan, 1995) that selection operates on single features
such as color, size and orientation, but they are not bound in
any structure. The factor that guides attentional deployment
and bias the selection of a region is its distinctiveness,
defined by unique color, orientation or contrast, in
comparison to the entire scene.
Although probably there is strong correlation between
clusters of features and objects, we argue that what

differentiates figures and backgrounds are qualitative
differences. It has been extensively documented that the
visual system makes use of various data regularities to
constrain the possible combinations of elements and speed
up the segmentation of the visual field into objects. These
are the figural principles extensively investigated by Gestalt
psychologists: size, closure, orientation, and contrast,
symmetry, parallelism, convexity, meaningfulness (see
Palmer, 1999 for a review), and lower region (Vecera,
Vogel, & Woodman, 2002). They are highly unlikely to
occur by chance (Lowe & Binford, 1982), so they are
diagnostic for the presence of a figure in this location of the
visual field.
However, the issue of whether such figural principles
provide selection advantage and what is the mechanism that
underlies it, has been left unexplored. Desimone and
Duncan (1995) proposed that attentional selection is best
understood as competition between all objects in the scene
for cortical representation. Stronger, more salient stimuli
have competitive advantage over weaker ones because they
evoke more robust neural response. Although their account
is mainly concerned with the physical distinctiveness of the
stimuli, there is evidence that the degree of objecthood is
still another factor that determines competitive strength. In
the following section we will review behavioral data from
visual search and object-based attention paradigms that one
figural principle, closure, is associated with prioritized
processing. Then, in a series of three experiments, we will
examine further the nature and mechanisms of this
competitive advantage.
Visual search task is a kind of task that requires serial
scanning of a number of items for a particular feature. When
the search is efficient, the target feature captures attention,
the so-called pop-up, by virtue of its salience in comparison
to the other items and the time to report it does not depend
on the number of distractors (Treisman & Gelade, 1982).
There is evidence that targets with particular non-accidental
properties such as closure, pop out. Conci, Muller and
Elliott (2007) reported that when participants were
presented with search display that contains a target
consisting of four corner junctions grouped by closure, and
distractors containing the same four corner junctions but
arranged to be open or semi-closed, the search performance
for the target was unaffected by the number of distractors.

673

Similarly, Donnelly, Humphreys, and Riddoch (1991)
showed that a combination of closure and collinearity yield
flat search functions. Furthermore, Elder and Zucker (1993)
demonstrated that search for brackets pointing in at each
other among brackets pointing out is made easier if the
brackets are clearly part of the same object. However,
performance deteriorated when some of the distractors were
also closed. Taken together, these findings speak in favor of
the idea that items grouped by closure are more salient and
have some competitive advantage.
Another line of evidence that favors the idea of
objecthood as modulator of sensory-driven salience comes
from attention literature. The “same-object benefit” refers to
the faster and/or more accurate performance when two
target properties to be identified appear in one object than
when each of the properties appears in different object. This
object-benefit seems to be a function of the nature of the
region to which the target belongs. For instance, Marino and
Scholl (2005) explored the time and accuracy when subjects
compared targets that belong either to a cued rectangle or to
a cued group of lines grouped by collinearity (rectangles
that have their shorter borders removed). Although they
found same-object benefit, the magnitude was reduced in
the stimuli without closure.
Consistently, Watson and Kramer (1999) demonstrated
that violation of closure diminishes the object-benefit effect.
Subjects in these experiments viewed pairs of `wrenches' as
stimuli, and had to decide from extremely brief (50 ms.)
presentations whether the pair of wrenches contained both
an open-ended wrench and a bent-end wrench. It was
demonstrated that same-object benefit is obtained when the
wrenches are uniformly connected, but not when there is
discontinuity of color (the closure of the figure was
violated).
To explain this pattern of performance, Watson and
Kramer reside to Palmer and Rock’s (1994) notion of
uniform connectedness. The idea is that the entry level to
visual perception constitutes of connected regions with
homogenous properties such as contrast, color, texture, etc.
These representations can be aggregated into larger units by
principles of Gestalt grouping, or they can be decomposed
into parts. It was argued (Watson & Kramer, 1999) that
unless top-down factors induce a bias toward selection at a
higher level, object-benefit effects are obtained when sameobject targets belong to the same uniformly connected
(single UC) region, but not when they belong to different
single UC regions grouped into a higher order object
(grouped UC regions). This is because a single UC regions
involve a unified representation while shifting attention
between grouped UC regions require shift of the
representation as well which comes with a cost (Lamy &
Egeth, 2002) and attenuate the same-object benefit.
However, this line of reasoning assumes that grouping is
all-or-none phenomena and doesn’t take the strength of
grouping under consideration. It is plausible that the
reported performance is a result of lowered competitive
advantage of the object as a result of regularity violations of

closure and continuity. The fact that closure had graded
rather than all-or-none influence on object-benefit (Watson
& Kramer, 1999; Marino & Scholl, 2005) favors this
explanation. Comparison of the obtained magnitudes
supports the idea that the presence of more non-accidental
features is associated with greater magnitude of the same
object benefit. For instance, Law and Abrams (2002)
reported a same object benefit of 15 ms. when judging
elements on a same or two different dashed lines. In
contrast, realistic objects that contain much more
information in terms of objecthood, yield magnitudes of 70
to 90 ms. (Watson & Kramer, 1999; Atchley & Kramer,
2001).
Furthermore, Kimchi (2000) demonstrated that uniform
connectedness is not necessary characteristic of entry-level
objects because elements organized according to the Gestalt
laws of closure or/and collinearity are bound as early as the
uniformly connected regions. In a similar vein, Han,
Humphreys and Chen (1999) reported that Gestalt grouping
by proximity is as fast and efficient as grouping by uniform
connectedness.
To summarize, based on the review from visual search
and object-based attention, it seems that selection (selective
attention) is biased towards regions that are defined by
closure. A parsimonious explanation of these findings is that
these groupings are inherently more salient. For instance,
Roelfsema (2006) proposed that there are excitatory
connections between neurons that code features of the same
objects to ensure that they are co-selected for perception and
action. On the other hand, the connections between features
that are not grouped are inhibitory which degrades their
representations. So, while grouping strengthens the cortical
representation of the objects, segmentation weakens it.
Similarly, Carrasco and McElree (2001) reported that datadriven selection is mediated by accelerated rate of
processing information. Therefore, it seems that the saliency
of the strong objecthood regions resulted from their
increased processing efficiency. More specifically, elements
belonging to a group with stronger objecthood will
participate more rigorously in the operations of the system,
yielding accelerated rate of processing and biasing selection
towards them.
Although there is evidence that closure is processed
preferentially, none of the existing experiments have
explicitly tested the assumption that this sensory-driven bias
is a result of the stronger groups being processed more
efficiently than weaker groups. We carried out a series of
experiments that directly assess the validity of this proposal.
This hypothesis is based on the general cognitive
architecture DUAL where each group is represented by a
coalition of agents and the coalition may be stronger or
weaker. Depending on the strength of the coalition the
efficiency of processing (η) is changed and determines the
speed of processing of the information in that coalition
(Petrov & Kokinov, 1999). In Experiment 1 we tested
whether systematic alternation of closure will result in
attenuation of the object-benefit in two target judgments. In

674

Experiment 2 we assessed if the presence of closure will
affect the processing of a single target. In Experiment 3, we
pursue to explore further the nature of the representations
that mediate the sensory-driven bias.
Experiment 1
Based on the assumption that stronger objecthood yields
accelerated rate of processing, two equally separated targets
will be processed faster and more accurately when
embedded in figure with stronger objecthood. The paradigm
used is close to that employed in object-based attention
literature. However, instead of presenting two figures, we
presented a single one in order to explore the same-object
advantage as a function of the nature of the object. The
rationale is that altering objecthood by removing the
property of closure will impede the processing of the
targets.
Method
Design
The experiment used a within-subjects design. The
independent variable was the objecthood of the figure which
has two levels: strong (closed rectangle) and weak
(rectangle without closure). The dependent variables were
the RT and accuracy for speeded judgment of identity
similarity. There were 32 unique displays presented 7 times
each. All factors were counterbalanced and presented
randomly. The distance between the target dots was
identical in both conditions.
Stimuli
Stimuli were created after these used by Kimchi (2000) to
make sure they are bound sufficiently quickly. Two groups
of stimuli were designed for each condition. The strong
objecthood figure constitutes a rectangle of size 200x200
pixels. The weak objecthood constitutes a rectangle of the
same size from which an equal amount of contour (100
pixels) was removed around the corner junctions to prevent
grouping by closure. The fixation point and rectangles were
black on a white background. The target was a pair of dots
with diameter of 9 pixels that can be either same identity
(black/white) or different identity (black/white) that were
centered on two adjust sides of the figures (A and B in
Figure 1).

A
B
C
D
E
Figure 1: Examples of target stimuli: Weak (A) and strong
(B) objecthood condition in Experiment 1, weak (C) and
strong (D) objecthood condition in Experiment 2, strong (D)
and weak (E) objecthood condition in Experiment 3.
The fixation point was a cross which subtended about
0.5° x 0.5°. Each rectangle subtended about 9° x 9° with a
stroke of 0.1°. The target dots constitute a circle with
angular size of 0.45°. The black target dot was filled while

the white target dot had white center and black outline with
a stroke of 0.1°
Procedure
The subjects sat without head restrain approximately 60
cm from the monitor. Each trial began with blank screen for
500 ms. The fixation cross then appeared for 400 ms.,
followed by the target stimulus presented for 250 ms.
Afterwards, a mask appeared until the participant responded
(Figure 2).
Participants were instructed to perform a discrimination
task by pressing button 1 on the button box when the
identity of the two dots is the same and button 3 when the
identity is different. Subjects were asked to maintain
fixation throughout each trial and respond as fast as possible
while minimizing errors. There was one experimental block
of 224 trials selected randomly, different for each subject.

Figure 2: Sequence and timing of events in each trial:
blank screen, fixation, target stimulus, and a mask.
Apparatus
The experiment was designed and run using E-prime
Software (Version 1.1, Psychological Software Tools,
2002). A personal computer with Pentium III processor
controlled the stimulus display. Monitor resolution was
1024x768, screen refresh rate was 85 Hz.
Participants
The subjects were 6 female and 9 male naïve volunteers.
Their age varied from 19 to 29 years old. They were
recruited in the campus of New Bulgarian University, Sofia.
All reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Results and Discussion
Results are displayed in Table 1. Mean accuracy rates for
experiment 1 were: strong objecthood= .95, weak
objecthood=.88. There was significant effect of objecthood
[t(14)=8.45, p<.000]. Median RTs from correct trials were
calculated for each participant in each of the conditions:
strong objecthood= 422 ms. (SD=82), weak objecthood=441
ms. (SD=80). A paired samples t-test tested the effect of
objecthood with median RTs as a dependent variable. There
was significant effect of objecthood [t(14)=-1.17, p<.001].
Participants were significantly faster at judging the
similarity when the targets were embedded in strong
objecthood figure than in weak objecthood figure (422 ms.
vs. 441 ms.).
Although the experimental manipulation significantly
influences target processing, the results are ambiguous to
whether the facilitation in the strong objecthood condition is

675

due to the ease of shifting attention within a more strongly
grouped representation or to the general increase in
processing efficiency of the object-representing coalition.
We explored further this issue in Experiment 2.
Table 1: RT and accuracy for Experiments 1, 2, and 3.
The asterisk indicates statistically significant difference
p>.05 between experimental conditions.
Target
Strong Objecthood
Weak objecthood
M
RTs
% Correct

422*
95*

RTs
% Correct

310*
98

RTs
% Correct

304*
98

SD

M

Experiment 1
82
441*
88*
Experiment 2
78
322*
97
Experiment 3
63
315*
97

SD
80
80
60

Experiment 2
Lamy and Egeth (2002) argued that same-object
comparisons of two targets are facilitated because they
involve shifts of attention within single representation while
different-objects judgments also need shift of attention from
one representation to the other that results in higher
processing load and consequent decrease in performance.
We didn’t address the nature of comparisons between
groups, though one might argue that the worse performance
in the weak objecthood condition is due to slower shift
between the separate lines that are two separate
representations while the uniform rectangle is perceived as a
single representation and the shift comes at almost no cost.
However, this interpretation is not consistent with our
proposal of the mechanisms behind the competitive
advantage of strongly grouped regions. In our account, the
observed difference in performance is due to more general
increase in processing efficiency and therefore in the speed
of processing. More specifically, we expect that
performance will be better in the strong objecthood
condition even when the experimental task requires
identification of a single target.
The background figures were identical to Experiment 1
while the imbedded target was a single dot to rule out any
explanation of the results in terms of attentional shifts.
Method
Design
The independent variable was objecthood of the figure
which has two levels: strong (closed rectangle) and weak
(rectangle without closure). The dependent variables were
the RT and accuracy for speeded judgment of identity
(white vs. black). There were 16 unique displays presented
14 times each.
Stimuli

Same as in Experiment 1 except that only a single dot was
present as target (See C and D in Figure 1).
Apparatus and Procedure
Same as in Experiment 1.
Participants
The subjects were 12 female and 8 male naïve volunteers.
Their age varied from 20 to 27 years old. They were
recruited in the campus of New Bulgarian University, Sofia.
All reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Results and Discussion
Results are displayed in Table 1.Mean accuracy rates for
experiment 2 were: strong objecthood= .98, weak
objecthood=.97. There was no significant difference
between d’ values in the different conditions (p>.05).
Median RTs from correct trials were calculated for each
participant in each of the conditions: strong objecthood=
310 ms. (SD=78), weak objecthood=322 ms. (SD=80). A
paired samples t-test tested the effect of objecthood with
median RTs as a dependent variable. There was significant
effect of objecthood [t(19)=3.6, p<.003]. Participants were
significantly faster at discriminating the targets when the
targets were embedded in strong objecthood figure than in
weak objecthood figure (310 ms. vs. 322 ms.).
Although the results rule out any explanation of
objecthood benefit in terms of shifting attention, between
representations, there is still possibility that the results are
due to some alternative mechanism other than the
competitive advantage of the strongly grouped region. For
instance, if the elements in the weak condition were not
bound together, the higher RTs may be due to serial
exploration of each representation, or alternatively, some
crowding effect (Ehlers, 1936), that is the mutual inhibition
of elements when competing with each other (Desimone &
Duncan, 1995). In Roelfsema’s (2006) proposal, grouped
elements mutually excite each other while there is inhibition
between elements perceived as separate. So, while grouping
strengthen the cortical representation of the objects,
segmentation weakens it leading to worse performance.
Experiment 3 seeks to explore further if this pattern is due to
accelerated processing in terms of saliency of the stronger
group or to impeded processing of the weaker group due to
crowding effects. Additionally, it aims to clarify whether
any binding of the lines was present to affect performance.
Experiment 3
The purpose of Experiment 3 was to examine possible
alternative interpretations of Experiments 1 and 2. For
instance, except of the stronger objecthood condition
(uniform rectangle) in Experiment 1 and 2, the rest of the
conditions involved background figures formed of separate
lines arranged according to some grouping principle,
grouped uniformly connected regions in the terms of Palmer
and Rock (1994). In case of absent binding, it could be
argued that difference in performance is unrelated to the
objecthood of the figure. Rather, the competition between
the separate lines compromises the representation of the
target. To rule out this account, in Experiment 3 we

676

presented subjects with a single background line and
compare performance with that in the condition with the
uniform rectangle. If the difference in performance remains,
this would further confirm our interpretation in terms of
increased processing efficiency.
Method
Design
The independent variable was objecthood of the figure
which has two levels: strong (closed rectangle) and weak (a
single line). The dependent variables were the RT and
accuracy for speeded judgment of the dot identity (white vs.
black). 16 unique displays were presented 10 times each.
Stimuli
Same as in Experiment 2 except that the weak objecthood
condition was a single line (See D and E in Figure 1).
Apparatus and Procedure
Those reported in Experiment 1.
Participants
The subjects were 8 female and 12 male naïve volunteers.
Their age varied from 19 to 26 years old. They were
recruited in the campus of New Bulgarian University, Sofia.
All reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Results and Discussion
Results are displayed in Table 1. Mean accuracy rates for
experiment 3 were: strong objecthood=.98, weak
objecthood=.97. There was no significant difference
between d’ values in the different conditions (p>.05).
Median RTs from correct trials were calculated for each
participant in each of the conditions: strong objecthood=
304 ms. (SD=63), weak objecthood=315 ms. (SD=60). A
paired samples t-test tested the effect of objecthood with
median RTs as a dependent variable. There was significant
effect of objecthood [t(19)=3.0, p<.007]. Participants were
significantly faster at judging the identity of the targets
when the targets were embedded in strong objecthood figure
than in weak objecthood figure (310 ms. vs. 322 ms.).
The results support that existence of competitive
advantage due to stronger objecthood. Target was identified
more efficiently when embedded in a rectangle than in a
simple line. This is a very curious finding since the line
possesses 1/8 of the pixels of the rectangle. The data ruled
out any explanation of the results from experiment 1 and 2
in terms of crowding effects because even with a single
background line, the difference between the two conditions
remains.
Discussion
In three separate experiments it was demonstrated that
objecthood modulates target processing performance.
Although the data is inconclusive regarding whether
separate lines in the weaker objecthood conditions were
grouped at all, the almost identical magnitude of strong
objecthood benefit in experiment 2 and Experiment 3 (12
ms. vs. 13 ms.) favors this interpretation. It seems that the
other lines, besides the one that contained the target, were
not processed at all in Experiments 1 and 2, as one might
expect any deterioration of performance in comparison to
Experiment 3 due to the crowding effect. Unless the

elements are not grouped to collaborate with each other,
there is mutual inhibition and the degradation of the
representations of all of them (Chelazzi & Desimone, 1999).
In the terms of biased competition for attention account
(Desimone & Duncan, 1994), the goal (the target dot)
served as effective top-down bias to discard the irrelevant
information and process only the relevant that is the
elements that contained the target. Even though the
background figure itself was completely irrelevant to the
task, it seems that the dot is obligatory assigned to it.
This raises the interesting issue of what constitutes an
object for the selection process. The results of our
experiments are in agreement with Palmer and Rock (1995)
that the entry-level representations are uniformly connected
regions such as the rectangle and the single line. In fact, the
stimulus material was designed as such, so the dot is
unambiguously perceived as intrinsic part of the object and
both are presented at the same time to further strengthen this
impression which probably determines their obligatory
binding. On the other hand, as Watson and Kramer (1999)
noted, the grouping of the unconnected lines is optional and
depends on top-down influences such as strategic
advantage. For instance, Marino and Scholl (2005) found
object-based benefit for lines grouped by proximity, but
they used a predictive cue to bias attention to one group or
another, so the grouping was beneficial for performance and
may be induced by top-down pressure. Similarly, in visual
search tasks elements grouped by closure bias the selection
but there was top-down template for the target that could
have induced the grouping (Donnelly et al, 1991).
We designed the stimuli based on the findings of Kimchi
(2000) that connected and disconnected rectangles provide
comparable priming effects even at short presentations of 40
ms., indicating the presence of grouping. Although the study
employed control for priming induced by unorganized lines,
we failed to replicate the findings probably because the two
tasks tap different mechanisms. For example, Kimchi’s task
was shape judgment which may have induced strategic
grouping by task-driven pressure. In our case, the grouping
of elements was uninformative for the location of the target
as all the possible combinations were presented randomly,
so the top-down information that contains the task
description probably doesn’t contain any information about
the background figure that can induce higher-order binding
of unconnected elements.
Regarding our major hypothesis that objecthood affects
the saliency of a target and the efficiency of its processing,
the results from two different experimental tasks: color
naming and color discrimination, support it. However,
objecthood seems to be calculated on the basis of uniformly
connected regions when any top-down influence for higher
level grouping is absent. However, there are some
theoretical disagreements between Palmer and Rock’s
account and ours. For instance, they proposed that
uniformly connected regions gain the status of
representations after the figure-ground segregation is
finished. On the contrary, we argue that the computed

677

objecthood of the uniformly connected regions determines
figure-ground segmentation by increasing the bottom-up
salience of the more figure-like region. For instance, in our
account, the figural status of regions characterized by nonaccidental properties stems from their computational
advantage and earlier selection.
If this assumption is valid, one might expect that
attending purposefully to a region that is less figure-like,
will grant it a figural status as top-down selective attention
and bottom up-saliency trigger similar cortical mechanisms
(Plaux & Egeth, 2007). In fact, Baylis and Driver (1995)
reported such findings, but mere bottom-up capture of
attention by a cue with sudden onset is ineffective in
reversing natural figure/ground segmentation. In other
words, physical distinctiveness cannot override the
competitive advantage of the objecthood factors.
However, we did find that a background rectangle with
more pixels provided competitive advantage over a line and
this may be attributed to differences in visual
distinctiveness. If so, we would expect influence of salience
to enhance the processing of the target in conditions where
there were four lines in comparison to only one, which is
not the case. Though it might be that contrast of a region
accelerates its processing, it comes to play only when the
target is bound to this region. Further studies should control
for the number of pixels while varying the grouping factors.
In conclusion, the feature-based selection is unable to
explain why some properties such as closure bias the
selective process in a bottom-up manner. So, the proposed
approach seems fruitful to provide new insights into the
remarkable efficacy of the human visual system. Note,
however, that these are preliminary data and have to be
interpreted with caution. Additionally, more research is
needed to confirm that other grouping factors besides
closure, affect processing efficiency, so the construct of
objecthood can be further supported.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Project ANALOGY:
Humans – the Analogy-Making Species, financed by the
FP6 NEST Programme of the European Commission.
(Contr. No 029088).

References
Atchley P., & Kramer, A. F. (2001) Object and spacebased attentional selection in three-dimensional space.
Visual Cognition , 8, 1 – 32
Baylis, G.C., & Driver, J. (1995). One-sided edge
assignment in vision. 1. Figure–ground segmentation and
attention to objects. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 4, 140–146
Carrasco, M., & McElree, B. (2001). Covert attention
speeds the accrual of visual information. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 98, 5341-5436
Conci, M., Müller, H. J., & Elliott, M.A. (2007). Closure
of salient regions determines search for a collinear target
configuration. Perception & Psychophysics, 69, 32-47

Desimone R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms
of selective visual attention. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 18, 193-222
Donnelly, N., Humphreysm G. W., Riddoch, M. J. (1991).
Parallel computation of primitive shape descriptions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 17, 561-570.
Ehlers, H. (1936). The movement of the eyes during
reading. Acta Ophthalmologica, 14, 56–63.
Han, S., Humphreys, G.W., & Chen, L. (1999). Uniform
connectedness and classical Gestalt principles of perceptual
grouping. Perception & Psychophysics, 61, 661-674.
Itti, L & Koch, C. (2001). Computational modeling of
visual attention. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 194-203
Kimchi, R. (2000). The perceptual organization of visual
objects: A microgenetic analysis. Vision Research, 40,
1333-1347
Koch, C. & Ullman, S. (1985). Shifts in selective visual
attention: towards the underlying neural circuitry. Human
Neurobiology, 4, 219-227.
Lamy, D. & Egeth, H. (2002) Object-based selection: The
role of attentional shifts. Perception & Psychophysics, 64,
52-66.
Lowe, D. G., & Binford, T. O. (1982). Segmentation and
aggregation: An approach to figure-ground phenomena. In
Proceedings of the DA RPA IU Workshop (pp. 168-178).
Palo Alto, CA.
Marino A. C., & Scholl B. J. (2005) The role of closure in
defining the “objects” of object-based attention. Perception
& Psychophysics, 67, 1140 –1149.
Palmer, S. (1999). Vision Science: Photons to
Phenomenology. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Palmer, S.E. & Rock, I. (1994). Rethinking perceptual
organization: The role of uniform connectedness.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1, 29–55.
Petrov, A., & Kokinov, B. (1999). Processing Symbols at
Variable Speed in DUAL: Connectionist Activation as
Power Supply. In: Dean, T. (ed.) Proceedings of the 16th
IJCAI. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufman, p. 846-851.
Proulx, M. J. & Egeth, H. E. (2008). Biased-competition
and visual search: The role of luminance and size contrast.
Psychological Research, 72, 106-113
Roelfsema, P. R. (2006). Cortical algorithms for
perceptual grouping. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 29,
203-227
Rubin, N. (2001), Figure and ground in the brain. Nature
Neuroscience 4, 857-858
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature
integration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12,
97-136.
Vecera, S.P., Vogel, E.K., & Woodman, G.F. (2002).
Lower region: A new cue for figure-ground segregation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 131, 194205.
Watson, S. E., & Kramer, A. F. (1999). Object-based
visual selective attention and perceptual organization,
Perception & Psychophysics, 61, 31–49.

678

