UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The modifier effect: Default inheritance in complex noun phrases.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8cj5x1h0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hampton, James A.
Jonsson, Martin
Passanisi, Alessia

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The modifier effect: Default inheritance in complex noun phrases.
James A. Hampton (hampton@city.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, City University London, Northampton Square
London, EC1V OHB UK

Martin L. Jönsson (Martin.Jonsson@fil.lu.se)

Alessia Passanisi (alepassa81@hotmail.com)

Department of Philosophy, Lund University,
Kungshuset, Lundagard SE-222 22 Lund, Sweden

Department of Psychology, University of Catania,
95124 Catania , Italy

the head noun – since if they did, the generic properties
would have to be considered equally true of unmodified and
modified noun phrases. Instead they proposed that concepts
are combined by simple compositional rules. The prototype
of a concept needs to be distinguished from the concept
itself, which is an atomic representation pointing to a class
in the external world.
We have addressed the basis of CFGG’s interpretation of
their result in another paper (Jönsson & Hampton, 2008).
The present research set out to examine the modifier effect
with further empirical studies, three of which are reported
here. Given that this is a new phenomenon, we first
replicated the effect, with the same materials and design. In
further experiments we then explored the basis of the effect,
in order to throw further light on the processes involved.

Abstract
The modifier effect is the reduction in judged likelihood of a
generic statement (Apples are sweet) when the subject is
modified (Chinese apples are sweet). Connolly, Fodor,
Gleitman and Gleitman, (2007) argued that this effect
undermines the principle of default property inheritance in
conceptual combination. In a series of studies, we replicated
the effect and its interaction with modifier typicality. We
elicited justifications for the judgments, and found three
common accounts were given – pragmatics, knowledge-based
reasoning, and uncertainty about attribute inheritance. We
also showed that the mutability of a property for the subject
concept affected its judged likelihood when the concept was
modified, and that likelihood judgments were correlated
between modified and unmodified versions of sentences. It is
argued that contrary to the claims of Connolly et al., the
modifier effect provides clear evidence for the default
inheritance of prototypical properties in modified concepts.

Experiment 1

Keywords: Prototypes, Conceptual combination, Default
inheritance, Generics, Modifier Effect

The first experiment was a partial replication of CFGG’s
study.

The Modifier Effect

Method

Compositionality is the doctrine that the meaning of a
complex phrase in language should be composed only of the
meanings of its components and the syntax by which they
are combined. A critical question for the problem of
compositionality is the extent to which the complex concept
representing a complex noun phrase “inherits” the default
prototypical properties of the head noun concept.
Prototypical properties are those generic statements such as
“birds fly” or “crocodiles are dangerous” that may be
considered generally or typically true, even when there may
be known counterexamples (penguins or dead crocodiles).
By default inheritance is meant the notion that when a
complex concept is generated such as “Albino crocodile”,
all the properties associated with crocodile will be inherited
by the complex concept, except for those explicitly related
to the modifier (such as color in this case).
In a seminal paper, Connolly, Fodor, Gleitman, and
Gleitman (2007), (CFGG), showed that the judged
likelihood of such sentences was reduced when the subject
of the sentence was modified, even when the modifier was
carefully chosen as one which would not itself directly
affect the property. Moreover the effect was greater for
atypical modifiers. CFGG argued from these results that
complex concepts do not inherit the default prototypes of

Participants. Twenty-nine students at City University
London, participated for course credit.
Materials. Each booklet contained 40 target and 90 filler
sentences. All were simple declarative sentences, consisting
of a noun phrase and a predicate. Four versions of each
target sentence were constructed to give a total of 160
sentences (the same sentences used by CFGG). The head
noun could either be (a) unmodified, (b) modified by a
typical modifier, generally true of things denoted by the
head, (c) modified by an atypical modifier, not typically true
of things denoted by the head noun, or (d) modified by two
atypical modifiers, one of which was that used in condition
(c). For instance, for the noun “ducks” the following 4
sentences were constructed:
a) Ducks have webbed feet.
b) Quacking ducks have webbed feet.
c) Baby ducks have webbed feet.
d) Baby Peruvian ducks have webbed feet.
The unmodified sentences were all typically true. The
atypical modifiers in conditions (c) and (d) were chosen by
CFGG such that while they would form relatively novel and
unfamiliar phrases, yet they would still be compatible with
the predicates. As they put it, “the introduction of the
modifier does not necessitate a change in the applicability of
1
303

the predicate”. The target sentences were rotated across four
booklets so that each booklet contained 10 target sentences
with different head nouns for each of the 4 conditions. The
40 target sentences in each booklet were embedded
randomly in 75 filler sentences and an additional 15 filler
sentences appeared at the front of each list to avoid warmup effects. Filler sentences could be unlikely, moderately
likely, or highly likely.
Design and Procedure. Participants were randomly divided
into 4 groups, each receiving one of the four booklets. They
indicated the likely truth of each sentence using the numbers
1 through 10 (1 = very unlikely; 10 = very likely).

mean ratings, there was good evidence that the relative
strengths of properties for the head noun concepts were
inherited by the modified noun concepts – with the
exception of the Typically modified concepts. This pattern
of correlation is consistent with the hypothesis that
modifying the head noun with an atypical/unfamiliar
modifier has a general depressive effect on judged
likelihood of all properties. In order to explore the basis of
the modifier effect further, in Experiment 2 participants
were asked first to provide a comparative judgment of
whether the two sentences (N and MN) were equally likely
to be true or not, and were then asked to explain their
judgments for those cases where they said they were not.

Results

Experiment 2

Mean likelihood ratings. Table 1 shows that our results
were largely in line with those obtained by CFGG. The data
were submitted to ANOVA. The effect of modifier
condition was significant (Min F’(3, 198) = 17.83, p <
.001), and post-hoc pairwise comparisons between
conditions were all significant (p < .001) except for that
between the atypical and twice atypical modifier conditions.
Modification of the subject noun reduced judged likelihood,
and the effect was greater with atypical modifiers.

The second experiment had two aims. The first was to test
whether the reduction in likelihood would still be found if
participants made a direct comparison between the two
sentences. In Experiment 1 the same participant never
judged both modified and unmodified versions of the same
sentence. A stronger test of the modifier effect is to set the
two sentences side-by-side and ask people to judge whether
or not one was more likely, and if so which. This design has
the advantage of drawing to the participants’ attention the
explicit possibility that the two sentences are equally likely
(as would be predicted by simple default inheritance). The
design also allowed us to fulfill our second aim, which was
to explore reasons for the effect by asking participants to
justify their likelihood judgments. Unlike for single rating
judgments it was quite reasonable to ask for a justification
of a preference, as in “Why did you think this sentence was
more/less likely than that one?” Filler sentences were again
used to reduce response bias. So that giving justifications
did not influence the original decisions, participants made
all their judgments first, and were then unexpectedly asked
to revisit them and provide justifications.

Table 1: Mean likelihood ratings for Experiment 1
Sentence condition
Unmodified
Typically modified
Atypically modified
Twice atypically modified

Mean (SD)
8.31 (3.55)
7.51 (3.31)
6.59 (2.53)
6.27 (3.05)

Correlations. Having replicated the results of the earlier
study, we tested the hypothesis that, although rated
likelihood is reduced by a modifier, the relative rated
likelihood of different properties is still maintained. If a
modified concept inherits the default properties of the noun,
but with a general decrease in confidence, then there should
be a positive correlation between the judged truth of
properties for the unmodified noun N, and that for each of
the different modified noun phrases. If the correlation were
lacking, then that would clearly provide evidence against
default inheritance. Mean rated likelihoods for the sentences
in each condition were correlated across the 40 concepts.
(Estimated pooled reliability was 0.6). The Unmodified,
Atypically modified and Twice Atypically modified
sentences all correlated with each other with r(38) between
.41 and .45 (p < .001). Typically modified sentences had
lower, non-significant positive correlations with the other
three. There was therefore evidence that (with the exception
of the Typically modified sentences) the strength of a
feature for the noun prototype was predictive of its strength
for the modified noun phrase concepts.

Method
Participants. Forty students at City University London
participated for course credit or for a small payment.
Materials. Each booklet contained 42 target and 58 filler
sentence pairs. Pairs consisted of a sentence “N are P”
together with a second sentence “MN are P” in which M
was one of the 3 possible modifiers used in Experiment 1,
i.e. typical, atypical, and double atypical. The 40 sets of
materials from Experiment 1 were supplemented by 2 more,
to create a number that could be divided evenly over the 3
booklets. Target pairs were counterbalanced across the 3
booklets, and embedded in 58 filler sentence pairs. Fillers
used knowledge effects to render the modified sentence as
less likely for one third (e.g. “Malfunctioning white
radiators are warm”), to make it more likely for another
third (e.g. “Prison doors are made of metal”), and to leave
the two sentences possibly equally likely (e.g. “Green
feathered parrots are noisy”). The fillers thus ensured that
there were opportunities to use all three response options.
Design and Procedure. The first and last page of each

Discussion
Experiment 1 demonstrated the modifier effect to be
replicable and robust. In addition to the modifier affecting
2
304

interaction (Min F’(2, 158) = 8.73, p < .001) confirmed the
greater modifier effect seen in the atypical (34%) than the
typical modifier conditions (15%).
Justifications. Justifications were provided for 87% of
the requested cases. They were transcribed and classified by
two independent judges. (Any given justification could be
classified in more than one class.) Frequency by condition
for cases where the unmodified sentence was preferred (as
in the standard modifier effect) is shown in Table 2.

booklet contained instructions, and each page in between
contained 4 sentence pairs. Participants circled one of 3
response options, printed to the right of each pair; 1) “the
first sentence is more likely to be true”, 2) “the second
sentence is more likely to be true”, and 3) “the two
sentences are equally likely to be true”. At the end,
participants were instructed to go back and justify why they
answered in the way that they did, by writing a short
statement next to each item. They were asked only to justify
odd numbered sentences where they had stated that one of
the sentences was more likely than the other (even
numbered positions always contained fillers). A decision of
“equally likely” was taken to be a default judgment, not
requiring any further justification.

Table 2: Percent Justifications for preferring the
unmodified sentence in Experiment 2
Justification
Pragmatic
Knowledge
Uncertainty
Other

Results
Frequencies. Figure 1 shows the percentage of each
response by condition. The bottom black bars represent the
modifier effect – choosing the unmodified sentence as more
likely. The central gray bars represent responses of “equally
likely”. “Equally likely” was the most commonly chosen
option for all three conditions (60 - 69% of responses).
When not equally likely, the unmodified sentence was
selected as more likely 74% of the time for a typical
modifier, 95% of the time for a single atypical modifier and
93% for a double atypical modifier, thus replicating the
modifier effect and its interaction with modifier typicality.

2

3

8

Modified more likely

90%

Equally likely

80%

Unmodified more likely

70%
60%

62

60

36

37

Atypical

Double

69

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

23

0%

Typical

Atypical
42
20
18
20

2x Atypical
40
23
19
18

The key to the classification is as follows:
Pragmatic. N was preferred as more general, while MN
was seen as redundant. Example:
Flightless penguins live in cold climates
“All penguins live in cold climates and all penguins are
flightless so to make a distinction is arbitrary, just say
penguins live in cold climates”.
Pragmatic justifications, on the face of it, actually
provided a reason for selecting the “equally likely” response
– both flightless penguins and penguins in general live in
cold climates. In fact, participants sometimes added “so I
could also have said they were equally likely”. The
unmodified sentence was chosen solely on the grounds of
relevance. Pragmatic justifications were particularly
common for typically modified pairs (58%), but were also
very common for the other conditions (about 40%).
Knowledge. Knowledge of individuals in the modified
noun category led people to doubt the truth of the MN
sentence. Example:
Edible catfish have whiskers
“Edible catfish probably do not have whiskers still
attached, as they could not be eaten like this”,
Knowledge-based justifications were the second most
frequent type and indicated either that some of the
combinations were not sufficiently novel, or that people had
chosen to draw inferences from broader background
knowledge. They were more common in the conditions
using atypically modified sentences.
Uncertainty. General doubt was expressed about the
modified sentence. Example:
Storage shacks are made of wood
“Shacks tend to be made of wood but storage shacks may
not be”,
Justifications based on Uncertainty were of particular
theoretical interest in that they could be interpreted as
implying that people were not applying default inheritance
to the properties of the modified concept, as suggested by
CFGG. There were some 18-19% of these justifications in

Figure 1: Percent of responses for each condition
100%

Typical
58
8
1
33

Sentence modification condition

Since the 3 response proportions summed to 1, equally
likely responses were omitted, and a 2-way ANOVA was
run on response frequencies with factors of condition (3
levels of modifier), and response (2 levels: selecting the
unmodified vs. selecting the modified as more likely). The
significant main effect of condition (Min F’(2, 153) = 3.74,
p < .05) corresponded to the fact that there were fewer
preferences (in either direction) expressed in the typical
modifier condition than in the other two, meaning that the
“equally likely” response was significantly more frequent in
the typical modifier condition (69%) than in the others (6062%). The significant main effect of response (Min F’(1,55)
= 41.0, p < .001) confirmed that when a preference was
expressed it was more often for unmodified sentences (32%)
than for modified sentences (4%), and the significant
3
305

the properties of modified concepts. Specifically, it was
predicted that the more immutable a feature is for a concept,
then the more likely it is to be true of modified versions of
that concept.

the two atypical conditions, and hardly any in the typical
condition. They were distributed evenly across most items.

Discussion
As in Experiment 1 there was a modifier effect which was
greater for atypical modifiers. A striking difference from
Experiment 1 was that when participants directly compared
the relative likelihood of N and MN sentences, over 60% of
the time they judged them equally likely – even when the
modification involved two atypical modifiers. It is therefore
by no means automatic that modifiers must affect the
likelihood of properties. On most occasions people
considered the property’s likelihood to be unchanged,
consistent with default property inheritance. When a
preference was expressed however, it was almost always the
modified sentence that had the lower likelihood.
The most common justification for selecting the
unmodified sentence as more likely was on the basis of the
pragmatic implications of uttering each statement, in line
with Grice’s (1975) maxims of cooperative communication.
To utter the modified statement when one knew that the
more general one was also true would be to violate Grice’s
maxim of quantity (“Be as informative as you can”).
Participants were apparently sensitive to this kind of
consideration when they judged the sentences for relative
likelihood. What was striking here was that the pragmatic
explanation was the most frequently offered justification for
both typically and atypically modified sentences.
For the typically modified sentences, the pragmatic
justifications more or less exhausted the cases showing the
modifier effect. There was no evidence that properties of the
modified concept differed substantially from those of the
unmodified concept when the modifier was typical. For
typically modified sentences, there was also a number (8%)
of preferences expressed for the modified sentence as more
likely – usually justified in terms of knowledge. These
cases, working in the reverse direction from the normal
modifier effect, explain the low correlation between the
Typical modifier and the other conditions in Experiment 1.
For atypically modified sentences, two additional types of
justification were given. First, even though the modifiers
were chosen to be independent of the properties, around
20% of the justifications showed that participants had
thought of ways in which they might be related. Around
20% of justifications also referred to uncertainty regarding
the modified concept. This latter justification is consistent
with the notion of a general reduction in judged likelihood
applying to unfamiliar novel noun phrases.
To provide further evidence for default attribute
inheritance, Experiment 3 aimed to show that people
construct representations of modified concepts using
information derived from the prototypes for the
corresponding noun concepts (that is, that prototypes play
an important role in judgments concerning complex
linguistic expressions). Experiment 3 aimed to demonstrate
that a structural dimension of the properties of a prototype,
namely mutability, also affects judgments of likelihood of

Experiment 3
Mutability of a property for a concept relates to whether
that property can be readily changed without further
consequences for the concept (Sloman, Love & Ahn, 1998).
For example, it is easy to imagine a world in which all
ravens were white, but otherwise they were just the same. It
is harder to imagine a world in which ravens had no wings,
but were otherwise unchanged. Being black is thus more
mutable for ravens that having wings. According to most
accounts, mutability is based on a set of dependency
relations defined over the properties in a concept’s
prototype. More dependencies lead to less mutable
properties. If modified concepts do in fact inherit the default
properties of the concept prototype, then we can expect that
the mutability of properties would be the same for the
modified concept as for the unmodified concept. In addition
we expected that mutable properties would show a greater
modifier effect, having less support from the dependency
relations to other properties in the prototype.

Method
Participants. Seventy-two students at City University
London participated for a lottery ticket for a small prize.
Materials and Design. Based on pre-testing, 3 properties
for each of 33 concepts were selected, corresponding to
three levels of mutability. Mutable sentences (e.g. lambs are
white) were judged as easily imagined to be negated, while
central sentences (e.g. lambs are warm-blooded) were
harder to imagine as untrue. Categorical sentences (e.g.
lambs are mammals) were chosen as the strongest level of
immutability, on the assumption that moving a concept out
of its superordinate class would affect many of its
properties. Six sentences were constructed for each head
noun, with the noun either being modified with an atypical
modifier (e.g. inedible lambs) or left unmodified, and with
the property being mutable, central or categorical. Each
booklet contained 11 sentences at each level of mutability
(mutable, central or categorical). Items were rotated across
conditions, and each subject noun occurred only once in
each booklet. The 33 target sentences in each booklet were
randomly embedded in 33 filler sentences. Filler sentences
were chosen so that some were clearly true, others clearly
false, and others unclear. About half of the fillers had
modified subject nouns.
Procedure. Each participant was given a booklet,
comprising instructions and 3 pages of sentences. Each
sentence was rated on a likelihood scale from 1 to 10.

Results and Discussion
The mean likelihood judgments for modified
unmodified sentences are shown in Figure 2.
4
306

and

which participants justify their judgments. The first
important result to note from Experiment 2 was that the
majority (60% or more) of pairs of sentences in all
conditions were judged to be equally true. If one
additionally were to discount those responses where the
justification was either pragmatic or based on unintended
knowledge-based reasoning, the number of judgments that
showed a “pure” modifier effect was very small. For typical
modifiers, 8% of responses showed a modifier effect that
was not pragmatic or knowledge based. The equivalent
figure for the atypical modifier conditions was 14%. We
should therefore be wary of drawing strong conclusions
about the failure of default inheritance in modified concepts.
In support of default inheritance, we showed that the
degree to which likelihood judgments were affected by the
modifier was influenced by information contained in the
concept prototype in several ways. The studies showed that
the more atypical the modifier was for the prototype then
the stronger was the modifier effect. In addition the more
central the property was for the prototype, then the more
likely it was also to be considered true of the subset class.
Systematic patterns of attribute inheritance have been
reported elsewhere. For example, Hampton (1987)
demonstrated that in explicit conjunctions formed from
relative clause constructions (birds that are also pets, sports
that are also games), the judged importance of properties for
the conjunctive phrase was predictable from their
importance for each of the concepts separately. Our results
here generalize this notion of “importance” to judgments of
property likelihood.
In spite of the evidence for default inheritance, the
modifier effect still requires some explanation. Across all
the experiments, adding a modifier had a remarkably similar
effect of generally reducing likelihood judgments. And as
described above, there was still a residual 14% of cases in
Experiment 2 where the effect with atypical modifiers was
not explained in either pragmatic or knowledge-based terms.
How should the effect be explained?
The clear evidence for the modifier effect across all
experiments is inconsistent with a simple model in which
properties are inherited by complex concepts with their
likelihood unchanged. The best theoretical account of the
data is probably therefore one in which attributes are
inherited by default, but other factors can come into play
that, overall, tend to reduce their judged likelihood.

Figure 2: Mean ratings of truth in Experiment 3
Rated likelihood of truth
10
9
8
Mean rating

7
6

Unmodified

5

Modified

4
3
2
1
0
Category

Central

Mutable

Type of predicate

Comparing the filled and the striped bars, it is evident that
there was a modifier effect in each condition (confirmed
with Min F’(1, 70) = 34.4, p < .001). Comparing conditions,
as expected the mutable sentences were considered less true
than central, which were in turn less true that categorical
(Min F’(2, 140) = 38.9, p < .005). Correlation between rated
truth for a sentence when unmodified, and the same
sentence when modified was .47, indicating further evidence
for default inheritance of prototype structure in a modified
concept. Interestingly, there was no interaction between the
modifier effect and mutability (F<1).
We had expected that if the modifier was casting doubt on
a property, then the more secure people were in their belief
about the property, the less effect would be shown by
modification. Thus we expected people to be equally
confident that lambs are white and that lambs are mammals,
but we expected the atypically modified “inedible lambs” to
be more certainly mammals than white. In the event, this
interaction was not seen. (Two other experiments, not
reported here, have confirmed this lack of interaction.)

General Discussion
What are the implications of the modifier effect for
theories of prototype combination? CFGG argued that the
modifier effect was evidence that people do not take the
prototypical properties of the head noun concept as a default
for the complex concept. This claim is clearly at odds with
the findings presented here which showed very systematic
relations between the head noun prototype and the
properties judged likely to be true for the modified noun
phrase. Experiment 1 replicated CFGG’s study but showed
additionally that judgments of properties were correlated
between the modified and unmodified versions of sentences.
What is more or less likely for a noun concept is also more
(or less) likely for the modified noun concept, as would be
predicted if the modified noun inherits properties (and their
relative likelihoods) from the unmodified noun prototype.
In order to get a clearer picture of the basis of the effects,
Experiment 2 provided qualitative data on the ways in

The modifier effect and models of conceptual
combination
Having established that the modifier effect follows
systematic patterns consistent with the inheritance of
prototypical properties, but subject to additional constraints,
we turn in the final section to consider whether models of
conceptual combination might account for the effect. That
is, we reject the negative conclusions drawn by CFGG, (that
people do not use default inheritance), in favor of an attempt
to find an explanation for the systematic patterns of data that
have been shown. Unfortunately, current models of
5
307

sampling reliability. Suppose that the likelihood judgment is
made by assessing the probability that any randomly
selected member of the class will have the property, (for
example the probability that a randomly sampled zebra will
be fast). The modifier then restricts the broader class to a
smaller subset (e.g. Giant Namibian zebras). One reasonable
intuition might then be that although one’s best guess is that
Giant Namibian zebras should be just as likely to be fast as
zebras in general, the likelihood of that guess being wrong
is greater, the smaller the subset selected. Thus if there are
very few Giant Namibian zebras it is more likely that
Namibian zebras are not fast, than if most zebras are in fact
Giant Namibian. Put another way, the larger the subclass,
the more likely that the probability of finding the property in
the subclass is just the same as the probability of finding it
in the class itself, in the absence of any other knowledge.
In conclusion, the modifier effect presents a challenge to
models of prototype combination. We have provided
evidence that modified concepts do inherit prototypical
properties from their constituent concepts, and in ways that
are moderated by information within the concept prototype.
In the absence of models of conceptual combination that
speak directly to the question of property likelihood, three
suggestions have been made of how the modifier effect and
its interaction with typicality interaction may work –
through a generalized similarity principle, through
familiarity of typical modifiers introducing knowledgebased effects, or through reduced confidence when a
numerically small subset is identified by the modifier. We
suspect that more than one of these effects may in fact be at
work across different examples.

conceptual modification (e.g. Hampton, 1987, Smith et al,
1988) make no predictions about likelihood judgments.
They make predictions about how modification affects the
weight of different properties for judgments of typicality or
category membership, but it is not obvious how such
weights would translate into judgments of likelihood. While
for both models, addition of a modifier will attract weight
away from other properties in the prototype, this process is
not sensitive to typicality, so that the models do not provide
a good basis for explaining the effect.
Explaining the modifier effect. It is therefore necessary
to look elsewhere for an explanation of the effect, and its
dependence on typicality. We suggest three (speculative)
possibilities, based respectively on similarity, familiarity
and sample size. Developing a full account will need further
experiments beyond the scope of the present study, designed
to separate out these possible explanations.
One possibility would be to stipulate that confidence in all
properties is reduced as a function of the similarity between
the modified and unmodified concepts, borrowing the same
general similarity principle that has been applied to explain
inductive reasoning (Sloman, 1993). Atypical modifiers
would generate complex concepts with less similarity to the
original concept, and so the strength of the argument from
concept to sub-concept would be correspondingly weaker.
Calvillo and Revlin (2005) found that when properties are
projected to an atypical subset, there is also generally less
confidence in the concept being a subset of the concept. In
other words, not only is it less likely that Giant Namibian
zebras have stripes, but confidence in Giant Namibian
zebras actually being a kind of zebra is also reduced, as a
function of the atypicality of the modifier. The results of
Experiment 3 appear to support this account.
A second possibility is that the familiarity of the modified
concept determines the confidence with which the property
is judged to be inherited. The moderation of the modifier
effect by typicality can be readily explained this way.
Typically modified concepts such as striped zebras are very
familiar, while atypically modified concepts (Giant
Namibian zebras) are not. Familiar modified concepts
inevitably introduce knowledge effects, with consequent
unpredictable changes in property likelihood (Rips, 1995).
Typical modifiers may therefore generate no modifier effect
(beyond pragmatic considerations) simply because they are
already familiar concepts whose properties are known. It is
not possible to create a typically modified concept that is
not at least as familiar as the concept itself. In Experiment 2
we found that typical modifiers would also at times produce
sentences that were more likely than the unmodified forms.
Familiarity could also explain why the modifier effect
appears to be insensitive to mutability. If the atypical
modifier simple casts general doubt on the modified
concept, then one’s confidence in the inheritance of all
properties may be diminished, regardless of whether they
are mutable, central or categorical.
A third account of the typicality interaction would be to
suppose that participants were employing intuitions of

References
Calvillo, D. P. & Revlin, R. (2005). The role of similarity in
deductive categorical inference. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 12, 938-944.
Connolly, A. C., Fodor, J. A., Gleitman, L. R., & Gleitman,
H. (2007). Why stereotypes don't even make good
defaults. Cognition, 103, 1-22.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics (3rd edition, pp.
41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Hampton, J. A. (1987). Inheritance of Attributes in Natural
Concept Conjunctions. Memory & Cognition, 15, 55-71.
Jönsson, M. L. & Hampton, J. A. (2008). On prototypes as
defaults. (Comment on Connolly, Fodor, Gleitman and
Gleitman, 2007). Cognition, 106, 913-923.
Rips, L. J. (1995). The current status of research on concept
combination. Mind and Language, 10, 72-104.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. (1998). Feature
centrality and conceptual coherence, Cognitive Science,
22, 189-228.
Smith, E. E., Osherson, D. N., Rips, L. J., & Keane, M.
(1988). Combining Prototypes: A Selective Modification
Model. Cognitive Science, 12, 485-527.
6
308

