UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Emergence of Collective Structures Through Individual Interactions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76t8122s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Goldstone, Robert
Griffiths, Thomas
Gureckis, Todd
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Emergence of Collective Structures Through Individual Interactions
Moderator: Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN. 47405 USA

Thomas L. Griffiths (tom_griffiths@berkeley.edu)

Todd M. Gureckis (todd.gureckis@nyu.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA. 94720-1650 USA

Department of Psychology, New York University
New York, NY, 10003, USA

Dirk Helbing (dhelbing@ethz.ch)

Luc Steels (steels@arti.vub.ac.be)

Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
Chair of Sociology, in Modeling and Simulation
Universitätstrasse 41
8092 Zurich, Switzerland

University of Brussels (VUB), Brussels, Belgium
(and Sony Computer Science Laboratory, Paris)
AI Lab, 10G-725; Pleinlaan 2
B-1050 Brussels, Belgium

Keywords: Collective behavior; group behavior; emergence;
stigmergy; language evolution; communication.

The Emergence of Collective Structures
Cognitive scientists tend to focus on the behavior of single
individuals thinking and perceiving on their own. This is
natural because our own introspection provides us with
unique insight into this level. However, interacting groups
of people also create emergent structures that are not
intentionally produced by any individual. People participate
in collective behavior patterns that they may not even be
able to perceive, let alone understand. Social phenomena
such as rumors, linguistic conventions, the emergence of a
standard currency, transportation systems, the World Wide
Web, resource harvesting, crowding, and scientific
establishments arise because of individuals’ beliefs and
goals, but the eventual form that these phenomena take is
rarely the goal of any individual.
The purpose of this symposium is to integrate three
methods for exploring collective behavior: 1) experiments
bridging individual and group levels of behavior analysis, 2)
analyses of naturally occurring collective behavior patterns,
and 3) formal mathematical and computational models of
the emergence of collective patterns. Not all of the speakers
will be addressing all three of these methods, but together
we hope to form bridges between formal approaches to
group behavior and rich data sets.
The study of collective behavior is timely for several
reasons. First, as the following contributions attest, there
have been recent and important developments in the formal
modeling of collective behavior. Models in sociology,
economics, psychology, and anthropology have been
successful not only in predicting individual and group
behavior, but also in organizing theories, highlighting
idealized patterns, and determining what data should be
collected next. Second, there has been exciting recent
progress on empirical tools for measuring and manipulating

the collective patterns that people produce. Tools that allow
moderate sized groups of people to be connected together
via computers, calculators, cell phones, or clicker response
systems make it relatively easy for experimenters to collect
moment-by-moment data on the decisions of people as they
are influenced by the decisions of their peers. Third, a
parallel set of technological advances have radically
improved the harvesting of data from real-world sources.
Archival data available from on-line news groups, blogs,
social network services, chat groups, and topical
communities can effectively be used to explore naturally
occurring coalition formation, idea spread, and group
evolution.
The presenters will describe their own research on
collective behavior from diverse perspectives including
machine learning (Griffiths), psychology (Gureckis).
physics (Helbing), and robotics (Steels). Their presentations
will also connect with critical issues surrounding collective
behavior, including the questions of “Does group behavior
always reduce to individual behavior?,” “Is ‘group
cognition’ possible?,” and “What is the value of formal
modeling for understanding group behavior?”
The presenters represent different manifestations of the
growing realization across the social sciences that one of the
best ways to build useful theories of group phenomena is to
create working computational models of individuals and
their interactions, and to observe the global structures that
these interactions produce. These models benefit from the
advanced statistical tools and empirical methods that
cognitive scientists have developed for assessing the quality
of the fit between computational models and the world.
Conversely, modeling methods advance cognitive science
by providing a generative, proof-by-construction approach
to understanding social behavior. This mutually informing
relation between models and data reminds us that organized
behavior can be described at multiple levels, and that our
thoughts both depend upon and determine the social
structures that contain us as elements.

1004

Griffiths: The effects of inductive biases on the
creation of communication systems
Accounts of language evolution have tended to focus on two
kinds of forces that can change the structure of a language:
cultural transmission, and the goal of producing a shared
communication system. Both of these forces rely on
learning, as people need to infer the structure of a language
from the utterances of other people in both cases. However,
the effects of inductive biases – those factors that make
some languages easier to learn than others – have only been
explored in the context of cultural transmission. A
mathematical analysis of a simple model of the creation of a
communication system by Bayesian agents, and experiments
testing the predictions of this model in the laboratory with
human learners suggest that inductive biases can have a
strong influence on the creation of communication systems.

Gureckis: How you likely picked a name for
your child
A key assumption in cognitive science is that the decisions
of an individual ultimately reflect subjective utilities, or
values, that appraise the relative worth of different options.
However, in many cases, the utility of a choice may be
influenced by the choices and actions of others. In this talk,
we examine the interdependence between individual and
group behavior surrounding a somewhat arbitrary, real
world decision: selecting a name for one’s child. Using a
historical database of the baby names registered over the last
century, we find that naming choices are strongly influenced
by both the frequency of a name in the general population,
and by its ``momentum" in the recent past in the sense that
names which are growing in popularity are preferentially
chosen. We evaluate a number of formal models that detail
how individual decision-making strategies, played out in a
large population of interacting agents, can explain these
empirical observations. We argue that cognitive capacities
for change detection, the encoding of frequency in memory,
and biases towards novel or incongruous stimuli interact
with the behavior of other decision makers to determine the
distribution and dynamics of cultural tokens such as names.

Helbing: How Social and Collective Human
Behaviors are Born from Simple Individual
Interactions
While one often imagines collective action of humans to be
highly organized and sophisticated, collective human
behavior may also occur spontaneously and even without
the individual intention of a specific outcome. Examples are
self-organization phenomena in pedestrian crowds, but also
the response of people to fire alarms or the crossing of red
traffic lights by other people. These behaviors will be
illustrated by video recordings. It will then be shown, how
the observed phenomena can be understood by means of
simple mathematical models of human interactions in space.
Such models may also be transferred to collective decision-

making. Interestingly, when combining models of selfish
behavior with success-driven motion in space, one can find
a surprising outbreak of cooperation in situations, where
people are normally expected defect, such as the prisoner's
dilemma. This may explain the emergence of social
behavior and the fact that, in game-theoretical experiments
and in reality, people are found to cooperate more
frequently than predicted by currently established theories.

Steels: How language communities selforganize and maintain coherence
Over the past decade, a substantial body of work has
explored how a group of agents could self-organize
communication systems with similar properties as found in
human natural languages. The models have been tested both
in computer simulation and in experiments with physical
robots operating autonomously in a real world environment.
This talk discusses the main theoretical principles that have
emerged from this work, focusing in particular on the
question how coherent collective linguistic behavior may
arise. There appear to be four keys: (i) Linguistic interaction
is a cooperative problem solving process. The speaker
chooses conceptualizations and verbalizations that give the
highest possible chance of successful communication. The
hearer cooperates fully, filling in missing pieces through
inference and shared context. Speaker and hearer usually
have a way to establish whether the communication
succeeded and to repair it through non-verbal means (like
pointing) or additional communication. (ii) The
communication must be considered to be an open dynamic
system. Speakers are at any time allowed to invent new
words or constructions, to stretch the meaning and function
of existing materials, or to extrapolate them to new contexts.
Hearers pick up these innovations and add them to their own
inventories. (iii) Speaker and hearer must be able to take the
perspective of the other. This is necessary to conceptualize
properly what to say (as speaker) and to guess the meaning
of unknown words and constructions (as hearer). Speaker
and hearer use their own language system as a model of the
other partner and can use re-entrance: The speaker selfmonitors and the hearer attempts to interpret from the
viewpoint of the speaker. (iv) Speaker and hearer must
adapt their own conceptual and linguistic system as part of
each interaction. They track the success and failure they
have had with particular conceptual and linguistic elements
and this influences how they will communicate in the future.
It will be shown how the combination of these key elements
provably leads a group of agents towards a shared
communication system that remains adapted to their
communicative needs. The talk is illustrated with data and
video-clips from experiments with humanoid robots.

1005

