UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Theoretical perspectives on impairments in spoken language processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3jz1t99f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bishop, Dorothy
Eigsti, Inge-Marie
Kittredge, Audrey
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Theoretical perspectives on impairments in spoken language processing
Daniel Mirman
(mirmand@einstein.edu)

Audrey Kittredge
(akittre2@uiuc.edu)

Moss Rehabilitation Research Institute
1200 W. Tabor Rd., Philadelphia, PA 19141, USA

Beckman Institute, University of Illinois
405 N. Matthews Ave., Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Randi Martin
(rmartin@rice.edu)

Dorothy Bishop
(dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk)

Psychology Department, Rice University
P.O. Box 1892, Houston, TX 77251, USA

Dept. of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, UK

Inge-Marie Eigsti
(inge-marie.eigsti@uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut
406 Babbidge Rd., Storrs, CT 06269-1020 USA

Keywords: speech; language; individual differences; aphasia;
specific language impairment; autism; computational models.

empirical findings and provide new insights into the nature
of these impairments, which can improve remediation and
rehabilitation strategies.

Motivation

Response selectivity and aphasic spoken word
recognition

The primary goal of this symposium is to foster greater
collaboration between theoretical research on language
processing and research on impairments of spoken language
processing. Such collaboration has great potential to be
mutually beneficial for researchers on both sides. The study
of language delays and deficits provides a rich source of
data on language processing, thus providing novel
constraints on proposed theories of language processing.
Indeed, the study of language impairments has been critical
to the development of theories of reading, semantic
processing, grammatical processing, and other domains.
However, there has been comparatively little cross-talk
between research on impairments of spoken language and
theories of spoken language processing. This symposium
aims to close this gap by bringing a diverse set of experts on
impairments of spoken language processing to the Cognitive
Science Society audience, which has been a strong source of
development of theories of spoken language processing.
Conversely, development of language processing theories
that connect with data from impaired populations has the
potential to improve rehabilitation strategies. For example,
computational models of reading that account for
impairments of reading also provide models of remediation
in the case of developmental dyslexia (e.g., Harm,
McCandliss, & Seidenberg, 2003) and rehabilitation in the
case of acquired dyslexia (e.g., Welbourne & Lambon
Ralph, 2005). In contrast, models of spoken language
processing have not been systematically applied to the
domain of impairments and rehabilitation (with the notable
exception of Dell et al., 1997).
The talks in this symposium focus on empirical findings
from a diverse set of impairments of spoken language
processing and their possible theoretical implications. It is
hoped that the symposium will spur development of theories
of spoken language processing that can account for such

Daniel Mirman*, Eiling Yee, James Magnuson,
Sheila Blumstein
Neuromodulatory and cognitive control mechanisms have
been proposed to account for refractory/access semantic
deficits and sentence comprehension deficits in aphasia
(e.g., Gotts & Plaut, 2002). This talk will describe eyetracking data on the time course of spoken word recognition
in eight aphasic patients and 12 age-matched controls and
efforts to understand the underlying aphasic deficit using
simulations of variations of the TRACE model of speech
perception. A computational implementation of response
selectivity accounted for the pattern of differences. This
result suggests that variations in cognitive dynamics (i.e.,
neuromodulatory deficits) may account for a broader range
of individual differences than previously proposed.

Naming pictures and repeating words:
Analysis of aphasic production errors and
predictions from computational models
Gary S. Dell, Nazbanou Nozari, Audrey K.
Kittredge*, Myrna F. Schwartz
Aphasic individuals invariably have difficulty producing
words from meaning (e.g. the picture-naming task), but are
often better word producers when the imperative stimulus is
the auditory form of the word (the word repetition task).
This talk will review a model of lexical retrieval in
production, the interactive two-step model, and use the
model to generate predictions regarding the relation between
performance in picture naming and auditory word repetition
by impaired speakers. The predictions are tested with a
case-series analysis of patient naming and repetition error

35

patterns; specifically focusing on the effects of word
frequency. The effect of frequency on phonological errors in
repetition was at least as strong as in naming, demonstrating
that the lexical-to-phonological mapping, required for
naming, is equally influential in repetition.

Language development and mental
representation in autism spectrum disorders
Inge-Marie Eigsti
Individuals with autism spectrum disorders have systematic
impairments in language production and comprehension,
both early (e.g., 1-2-year delays in acquisition) and late
(e.g., grammatical judgment deficits in school-age
individuals) in development. This talk will describe on-line
assessments in two related studies of language in autism
spectrum disorders. First, to better understand the
interaction of executive processes such as working memory,
and an individual's ability to comprehend spoken utterances,
we describe a "common ground" study during which
participants' eye movements are tracked as they work with a
partner on a Tangram-style problem-solving task. Second,
we assessed individual representations of nonverbal
information, and how those representations inform or are
informed by a participant's own spoken language, in study
of co-speech gestures in discourse. Both the comprehension
and production studies share a common goal of informing
us about how the world is represented in spoken language,
and language itself can influence our representations of the
world.

Basic processes in short-term memory and
their role in language comprehension and
production
Randi Martin*, L. Robert Slevc, Loan Vuong
The critical relation between working memory and sentence
processing can be examined using evidence from braindamaged patients to draw inferences about normal cognitive
processing. This talk will focus on the contribution of
retention of item vs. order information to sentence
comprehension and the role of interference in sentence
comprehension. Findings from neurally intact individuals
suggest that the retention of item, but not order, information
is crucial to sentence processing and that interference is the
primary source of difficulty in comprehending or producing
sentences with long-distance dependencies. If so, then
patients with deficits in item retention, but not those with
deficits in order retention should have difficulty with
sentence comprehension. Also, the patients’ degree of
difficulty in resolving interference should relate to the
processing of long-distance dependencies. Data relevant to
these claims will be presented.

* denotes presenting author

Acknowledgements

Why is nonword repetition deficient in specific
language impairment?

The participants are grateful to the Neuro-Cognitive
Rehabilitation Research Network for providing partial travel
support to the symposium participants.

Dorothy V. M. Bishop

References

Children with specific language impairment (SLI) have
problems with oral language acquisition despite otherwise
normal development. One of the most reliable deficits seen
in children with SLI is difficulty in repeating polysyllabic
nonwords such as “blonterstaping”.
Gathercole and
Baddeley (1990) argued that this was evidence of a
impairment in phonological short-term memory that had
downstream effects on language learning. This talk will
present data from an electrophysiological paradigm in
which the participant listens passively to nonword
sequences, where a repeated standard such as “ba-bi-bu-be”
is occasionally replaced by a deviant sequence where the /b/
changes to /d/ on one syllable. The profile of mismatch
responses differs for people with good and poor nonword
repetition skills, but it is argued that the pattern of results is
not consistent with limited memory storage or rapid decay
of representations. Rather, the problem appears to be one of
encoding phonological information when successive
syllables occur at a rapid rate. This interpretation is more in
tune with theories that attribute SLI to difficulties in rapid
processing of auditory input than with classic short-term
memory accounts.

Dell, G. S., Schwartz, M. F., Martin, N., Saffran, E. M., &
Gagnon, D. A. (1997). Lexical access in aphasic and
nonaphasic speakers. Psychological Review, 104(4), 801838.
Gathercole, S. E., & Baddeley, A. D. (1990). Phonological
memory deficits in language disordered children: Is there
a causal connection? Journal of Memory and Language,
29(3), 336-360.
Gotts, S. J., & Plaut, D. C. (2002). The impact of synaptic
depression following brain damage: A connectionist
account of 'access/refractory' and 'degraded-store'
semantic impairments. Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral
Neuroscience, 2(3), 187-213.
Harm, M. W., McCandliss, B. D., & Seidenberg, M. S.
(2003). Modeling the successes and failures of
interventions for disabled readers. Scientific Studies of
Reading, 7(2), 155-182.
Welbourne, S. R., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2005). Using
computational, parallel distributed processing networks to
model rehabilitation in patients with acquired dyslexia:
An initial investigation. Aphasiology, 19(9), 789-806.

36

