UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thinking for action: The role of obligatory and prohibitory traffic sign information in driving
performance
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2nw2c8dp
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Bueno, Mercedes
Castro, Candida
Moreno-Rios, Sergio
et al.
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                   Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                        University of California

 Thinking for action: The role of obligatory and prohibitory traffic sign
                               information in driving performance
                                                   Javier Roca
                                            University of Granada (UGR)
                                                Mercedes Bueno
                                            University of Granada (UGR)
                                              Sergio Moreno-Rı́os
                                            University of Granada (UGR)
                                                 Cándida Castro
                                            University of Granada (UGR)
Abstract: Traffic users must combine the information provided by the signs with their own goals to decide on an
appropriate action. In the current experiment, the participants imagine they are driving a car at an intersection,
a T-junction. A destination goal (turn right or left) is then given. This goal might or might not be an allowed
manoeuvre, according to the message of the traffic sign displayed in each trial (it could be either an obligatory or
a prohibitory traffic sign pointing to the left or to the right). The participants were instructed to respond as to
where the car should go, according to the destination cued and the traffic sign displayed in that particular traffic
scene. We tested conditions in which a single sign (proposition) was presented: 2 traffic sign categories [obligatory
vs. prohibitory] and 2 manoeuvres [allowed vs. not-allowed]. The participants performance could be influenced by:
A) The difference between the information provided for the obligatory and the prohibitory traffic sign. (Which one
is better?) Our previous findings performing only judgment tasks showed that when only one sign is displayed, only
part of the information is explicitly represented: in the case of a prohibitory Sign Left is not allowed’, in the case
of an obligatory sign, Right is allowed’. Therefore, prohibition does not produce a slower reaction time; it depends
on the kind of manoeuvre performed. B) The congruency effect between traffic sign information and destination
cued, resulting in the fastest response time for the congruent conditions. According to the current results, deciding
where the car should go, taking into account the destination goal cued and the traffic sign message, makes it easier
to reason about what is possible or allowed. Thus, the obligation sign and the allowed manoeuvre have an advantage
over the prohibitory sign and the not-allowed manoeuvre
                                                          936

