UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Toddlers' Problem Solving: The Importance of Spatial Integration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8j7131qd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Greshmam, Lori
Kloos, Heidi

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Toddlers’ Problem Solving:
The Importance of Spatial Integration
Lori J. Gresham (greshalj@email.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology,
409A Dyer Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Heidi Kloos (heidi.kloos@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology,
409A Dyer Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Such performance discrepancy between violation-toexpectation tasks and search task has hampered the
enthusiasm for approaches that postulate core knowledge
(cf., Haith, 1998). How can we claim the existence of core
knowledge if children show evidence for such knowledge in
some contexts, but not in other contexts?
The current study takes a different approach. Rather than
worrying about whether children do or do not know
something about a certain concept, we look at general
principles of learning: What in the immediate context helps
children perform well, and what hinders successful
performance? For example, what helps children attend to
violations of the solidity principle in a looking task but not
in a search task?
Our assumption is that children attempt to link pieces of
information into a larger whole, even when it leads to
mistakes (cf., Kloos, 2007). For example, if two separate
objects move in synchrony back and forth, infants will
perceive them to be part of one unified object (e.g., Kellman
& Spelke, 1983; Johnson, 2001). Children are likely to link
the top and the bottom object into a connected unit.
Importantly, such integration may be affected by the spatial
distance between events – at least for young toddlers:
closer-together events may be more easily integrated than
events that are farther apart. Imagine, for example, a ball
moving across the diagonal of a plane, say from a front
corner to the back corner of a room. For adults, the
perception of whether the ball rolls to the back corner of the
room, or, instead rises to the top corner of the room is
affected by the motion of its shadow (Kersten, Mamassian,
Krill, 1997). If the shadow stays in close proximity of the
ball, we perceive the ball to move on the floor. But if the
shadow moves away from the ball, we perceive the ball to
rise to the top. Four-year-olds are affected by the same
visual illusion (Kloos, Srivorakiat, Odar, Cummins-Sebree
& Shockley, 2007). However, 3-year-olds cannot integrate
shadow and ball if the shadow moves away from the ball.
They are only able to successfully integrate the proximal
cue, but not the more distal cue (Kloos et al., 2007).
In addition to being a relevant factor for perception, is
spatial proximity a relevant factor in young children’s
problem solving? The current study seeks to answer this

Abstract
While young infants appear competent in some task contexts,
older toddlers often show difficulty with the same concepts.
They apparently fail to understand something that infants are
competent of. Such discrepancy in performance is puzzling,
but only if task performance is taken to reflect knowledge or
competency. The current study makes a different assumption:
Namely that task performance reflects the immediate
constraints of the task. We hypothesize that low performance
in a conceptually ‘easy’ task comes from a difficulty with
spatially integrating relevant pieces of information. To test
this hypothesis, we manipulated the degree of necessary
spatial integration in a task that was originally taken to
demonstrate toddlers’ difficulty with the concept of object
solidity. Indeed, toddlers performed better when task
constraints were present that minimized the degree to which
spatial integration was required. The results point to an
important problem in research that seeks to isolate a child’s
knowledge.
Keywords: toddlers; solidity; constraints;

Introduction
Even the youngest of infants seem to know something about
the physical world, about causal relations, about theory of
mind, and about the workings of a language (e.g., see
Bremner & Fogel, 2001 for a review). Take for example,
performance in a physics task. Four-month-olds not only
formulate expectations about moving objects that disappear
from view (e.g., Baillargeon, 1986), they act surprised when
one solid object apparently moves through another (Spelke,
Breinlinger, Macomber, & Jacobson, 1992).
Surprisingly however, toddlers fail to draw upon this
knowledge in a search task, though it appears to emerge
during infancy. For example, when asked to search for a ball
that has rolled behind a screen, toddlers cannot use the
principle of solidity to search for the ball. They are told on
repeatedly that the ball stops at the barrier, and their
attention is drawn to the portion of the barrier visible above
the screen. Yet, children under 3 years of age fail to search
for the ball at the barrier. Instead, they engage in a guessing
game, completely ignoring the cue of the barrier provided to
them.

118

Furthermore, 2-year-olds can – in principle – perform a
search task. For example, when an object was placed behind
one of the doors (in full view of the child) and the child was
then asked to retrieve the ball, they could easily open the
correct door (Berthier et al., 2000). Similarly, toddlers
search correctly when they can track the motion of the
rolling object through transparent patches of the screen
(Kloos, Haddad & Keen, 2006; Shutts et al., 2006).
Finally, 2-year-olds can reason in advance about how the
principle of solidity would affect the motion of the ball
barrier (Kloos & Keen, 2005). When the screen was
removed and children had to point to where the ball would
stop, they correctly predicted that the ball would stop at the
barrier. They were successful even when the direction of the
ball’s motion was changed, or when two barriers (rather
than just one) were placed on the ramp. Yet, as soon as the
screen occluded part of the ramp and barrier, children failed
to take into account the principle of solidity.

question for a task that investigates children’s thinking
about the principle of solidity.

Where is the ball?
Picture a path from left to right that is interrupted by a
barrier part way along its path. A ball rolls from left to right
and stops at the barrier. Now picture a large screen
positioned in front of the path and barrier. The screen is
opaque and has four adjacent doors along its lower part. The
task is to find the ball by opening one of the doors. Given
that the barrier protrudes above the screen, one simply needs
to open the door below the visible part of the barrier to find
the ball (see Figure 1).

The Problem of Integration

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the search-task
display with the visible portion of the barrier
protruding above the screen.

Why do children have difficulty to apply their knowledge of
solidity when asked to search for the ball by the barrier?
One possibility is that children fail to integrate the visible
portion of the barrier with the door right below it. Several
studies were conducted to test this possibility. For example,
in one experiment, the barrier was modified to hang over the
front of the screen, such that the entire front edge was
visible (Keen, Berthier, Sylvia, Butler, Prunty, & Baker,
2008). In this configuration, the barrier almost touched the
door that children should open, decreasing the spatial
distance between barrier and door. Yet the majority of
toddlers still searched at chance.
Similarly low performance was found when the screen
was transparent above the doors (revealing a larger portion
of the barrier) and the doors were painted in four contrasting
colors, each corresponding to a matching barrier (Kloos,
Haddad & Keen, 2006). To perform correctly, toddlers
simply had to link the barrier to the immediately adjacent
door of the same color. Eye tracking results showed that if
the child broke eye contact with the ball in motion to look at
the barrier, attempts were unsuccessful to locate the ball in
its final location.
Finally, even when the barrier was visible through a
window in the door, 2-year-olds performed at chance
(Shutts et al., 2006). Doors were used that had a window,
through which the barrier could be seen. The overlapping
proximity between door and barrier minimized the spatial
integration necessary. Yet, when no other cue was available,
children again failed to open the correct door.
Taken together, these findings further confirm that 2-yearolds pay little attention to the location of the barrier.
Toddlers perform poorly, even though they appear to know
that the barrier will stop the ball in its trajectory. And they
perform poorly, even when the spatial distance between
barrier and correct door is minimized. The current study
tests an alternative hypothesis, namely that children’s low
performance is a reflection of their difficulty with

This and similar tasks have been used repeatedly to
investigate whether children know that a solid object cannot
pass through another, and therefore that the barrier will stop
the ball in its trajectory (e.g. Berthier, DuBlois, Poirier,
Novak & Clifton, 2000; Mash & Keen, 2003; Hood, ColeDavies & Dias, 2003; Kloos & Keen, 2005; Shutts, Keen, &
Spelke, 2006). Across the board, findings show chance
performance in 2.0-year-olds, slightly above chance
performance in 2½-year-olds, and consistently successful
performance only in 3-year-olds. Rather than taking the
barrier into account, 2-year-olds apply a variety of strategies
to the search task, with no success: They search for the ball
at the location that was correct on the previous trial, they
open the same door across trials, or they show a bias for the
center most doors (Berthier et al., 2000; Hood et al, 2003;
Shutts et al., 2006).
These findings are puzzling because even 4-month-old
infants understand the principle of solidity. As mentioned
above, young infants look longer at a display if the principle
of solidity is apparently violated, that is to say, if a ball
apparently rolls through a wall. Why would toddlers fail to
show the same knowledge in the search task?
Subsequent research found that toddlers – like infants –
are surprised by events that apparently violate the principle
of solidity (Hood et al., 2003; Mash et al., 2006). Toddlers
were presented with the same door display. But rather than
asking children to open a door to find the ball, the two doors
adjacent to the barrier were opened for them. On physically
consistent trials, the ball was resting to left of the barrier.
And on physically inconsistent trials, the ball was either
missing altogether, or it was resting to the right of the
barrier, as if having passed through the barrier. Like infants,
toddlers indeed looked longer at physically impossible
events than the physically possible events.

119

integrating the barrier with the motion of the ball (rather
than with the door).

Method
Participants
Participants were toddlers (N = 13) between 25 and 40
months of age (M = 2.67 years, SD = 3.7 months). Of those
6 were girls and 7 were boys. Four additional children were
tested, but were excluded from the study because of
experimenter error (one child), or failure to meet
participation criteria (see Procedure).

Integration of Motion
To perform successfully in the search task described above,
children not only have to know about the importance of the
barrier in principle, they have to keep in mind that it
intersects the path of the ball even after their attention is
drawn away from the barrier to focus on the rolling ball on
the left of the screen. In other words, they have to keep in
mind that something static and distant (the portion of the
barrier protruding above the screen) has something to do
with the dynamic event (the rolling ball) that happens on the
bottom left of the screen. Young children might have
difficulty integrating the attention-grabbing motion of the
ball with a static cue above the screen, even if they know, in
principle, that the ball will come to a halt at the barrier
behind the screen. In other words, young children might
have difficulty integrating the invisible portion of the barrier
with the invisible motion of the ball.
To test this hypothesis, we devised a task in which the
barrier was made visible behind the screen without directly
showing it behind the screen. We took advantage of a
gestalt principle that two separate objects are perceived as a
unified object if they move in concert (e.g., Kellman &
Spelke, 1983; Johnson, 2001). Applied to the barrier behind
the screen, if children see a part of the barrier above and
below the screen, and the two parts of the barrier move
together back and forth, children are likely to perceptually
fill in gap between the two parts of the barrier and create a
representation of a barrier that intersects the path of the ball.
Figure 2 illustrates this principle. Unlike what was done in
previous studies, we attempted to integrate the barrier with
the ramp – and therefore to integrate the barrier with the
motion of the ball. We predicted that children will be able to
successfully search for the ball under this circumstance.

Apparatus
A ramp apparatus with a door screen was used; similar to
the one used by Berthier et al. (2000). The ramp was 75cm
long and at a slight incline to allow a ball to roll along its
full length. The ball was 4 cm in diameter and made out of
green foam. A small groove went lengthwise along the
center of the ramp to constrain the path of the ball. The
screen was an opaque wooden panel (56 cm long and 17 cm
wide) that was placed in front of the ramp at all times. It had
four doors (each 13.5 cm high and 9.5 cm wide), spaced 5
cm apart from each other. Each door had a knob on the
lower part and could be opened easily. Different from
Berthier et al, (2000), the ramp apparatus and screen was
integrated with a table (60 cm high) such that the area below
the ramp was open.
One of two walls was used to stop the ball as it rolled
down the ramp, a short wall (21.5 cm high and 11 cm wide),
and a long wall (25.5cm high and 11 cm wide). Each wall
had a notch (1.5 cm wide and 9 cm deep) that allowed it to
slide back and forth along the ramp and fall into a position
on the ramp. With the four-door screen in place, both walls
protruded 4 cm above the screen, and the long wall extended
4 cm below the screen.
The experimental program SuperLab was used to
randomize the location of the wall for every trial, and to
record what door the child opened first.
Procedure
Children were seated in a small chair in front of the ramp
table, within reaching distance of the doors. The screen was
always in front of the ramp. The experiment consisted of
three phases, presented in fixed order: the familiarization,
the short-wall phase, and the long-wall phase. The purpose
of the fixed order in experiment 1 was two fold: Firstly, we
wanted to maximize effect size. Secondly, we wanted to
prevent any learning by presenting the long wall first. Each
phase consisted of eight trials, presented in random order.
Children’s task was to “help find the ball” by opening one
of the doors. Feedback was given if the child opened the
wrong door, and children were allowed to search until they
successfully located the ball. However, only the first reach
was recorded. Within the eight trials of a phase, the barrier
was placed at each of the four doors twice.
During familiarization, the ball was held above one of the
doors and lowered directly downward by hand. The
experimenter then asked the child to open the door and
retrieve the ball. To be included in the final sample, children

Figure 2: Schematic illustration of the door apparatus when
the barrier was visible both above and below the screen,
and thus visibly intersected the ball’s trajectory.

Experiment 1
The purpose of this experiment was to investigate whether
toddlers – given adequate cues – can integrate relevant
pieces of information and show improved performance in a
task that typically pose serious issues in problem solving.

120

had to open the correct door on their first try on at least five
trials.
Following the familiarization phase, children were asked
to walk around to the other side of the table. They watched
as the experimenter rolled the ball along the ramp. Next, the
short wall was placed on the ramp in the path of the ball.
The experimenter demonstrated that the ball stops when it
hits the wall. The child then returned to the seat and the
short-wall phase started.
For each short-wall trial, the experimenter slid the short
wall along the ramp behind one of the four doors Children
were reminded that the “ball stops at the wall”, and the
visible portion of the wall was pointed out explicitly. This
was done to mimic previous studies that provided verbal
prompts and feedback (e.g., Kloos & Keen, 2005).
Finally, the short wall was removed and the long-wall
phase started. The experimenter placed the long wall on the
ramp and pointed out the visible portions of the wall both
above and below the screen. After the child acknowledged
that he or she could see both parts of the wall, the
experimenter slid the wall along the ramp to one of four
positions, rolled the ball, and asked the child to search for it.
Again, children were reminded on each trial that the ball
stops at the wall.

often during long-wall trials (M =.67, SD =.23) than during
the short-wall trials (M = .48, SD =.23), t(12) = 3.51, p <
.05. While search during both phases was above chance
(assuming chance probability of 0.25, short wall: t(12) =
3.24, p < .05), many more children performed above chance
in the long-wall phase than in the short-wall phase (7 vs. 1
children performed correctly in at least six out of the eight
trials, binomial probability p < .05). These findings indicate
that the long wall (and the tandem motion of the two visible
portions) did in fact allow successful integration of barrier
and ball motion. Our findings in the short-wall trials are
consistent with previous findings for this age group even
though these previous studies did not use the verbal prompt
before each trial (e.g., Berthier et al., 2000).

Experiment 2
Is it possible that children performed better in the long wall
trials due to training effects? The long-wall phase followed
the short-wall phase, and children might have performed
better in the second phase simply because they were getting
better over time. The purpose experiment 2 was to rule out
that the findings in experiment 1 reflect practice effects. In
experiment 2, children were never presented with the long
wall during trials. Rather, they were given eight
familiarization trials, eight short wall trials followed by
eight additional short wall trials. Any improvement in the
second set of short-wall trials would speak for training
effects.

Results and Discussion

Proportion of Correct Reaches

The proportion of correct reaches was calculated for each
child and each phase. Figure 3 shows the mean proportion
of correct reaches per phase, with chance performance being
0.25. During familiarization, when the ball was lowered
from above the screen, performance was at ceiling (M = .89
SD = .13).This was not surprising, given that children
merely had to follow the direction of the hand and open the
door directly below it (see also Participants)

Method
Participants
Participants were toddlers (N = 12) between 24 and 40
months old (M = 2.6 years, SD = 3.9 months). Of those, 6
were girls and 6 were boys. Two additional children were
tested, but were excluded from the study because of
experimenter error (one child), or failure to meet
participation criteria (see Procedure).

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50

Apparatus
The same apparatus was used in this experiment. However,
only the short wall intercepted the path of the moving ball.

0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
Short Wall

Procedure
The procedure was identical to experiment 1, except that
rather than switching to the long wall during the third phase;
the short wall was again used during the last eight trials.

Long Wall
Phase

Results and Discussion
Figure 4 shows the proportion of correct reaches per trial.
Again, children searched near ceiling during familiarization
(M =.85, SD =.13). And during the first set of short-wall
trials, performance did not differ from performance of shortwall trials in experiment 1 (M = .40 vs. M = .48,
respectively).
The important result pertained to children’s performance
during the first and second set of short-wall trials. A withingroup t- test revealed that performance during second set of

Figure 3: Proportion of correct reaches in Experiment 1,
separated by phase. Error bars represent standard errors of
the mean. Chance proportion is 0.25
The important result pertains to the difference between
short-wall and long-wall phase. A within-group t-test
revealed that toddlers searched correctly significantly more

121

the screen nearly 70% of the time. Experiment 2 ensured
that these findings were not due to simple learning effects.
One could argue that the long wall merely highlighted the
correct door: A barrier extending below and above the
screen might ease a spatial integration of the barrier and the
door behind which the ball can be found. However, previous
findings speak against this possibility. Despite rather
obvious measures of decreasing the spatial distance between
barrier and correct door, children’s search performance did
not improve (e.g. Keen et al., 2008; Kloos et al., 2006;
Shutts et al., 2006). Our results suggest, instead, that the
long wall highlighted the intersection of barrier and ramp,
and thus highlighted the principle of solidity for children. It
is possible that the lower portion of the long wall, in such
close proximity to the ramp, was enough to improve
performance. Future studies could address this issue by
dividing the short wall trials into separate upper wall and
lower wall conditions.
Note that nothing in the display gave away the answer
about the position of the ball. Our manipulation merely
made the intersection of ramp and barrier more obvious, and
as such potentially helped children apply their knowledge of
solidity to this task. However, it is also possible that the
highlighted intersection between barrier and ramp grabbed
children’s attention and led them to open the door at that
intersection, with little regard to the physical principle of
solidity. After all, the experimenter reminded the child on
every trial that the ball stops at the barrier. It was therefore
not necessary for children to independently employ any
physical knowledge about solidity. One might question why
the children were reminded that the ball stopped at the
barrier. Previous results reveal that this verbal prompt elicits
no improvement in performance (Kloos & Keen, 2005).
Further, the purpose of this study was not to explicitly test
children’s knowledge of object solidity. Therefore, our
results do not speak directly to the question of whether
toddlers know something about solidity, or whether they can
form expectations about hidden events.
Instead, our results underscore a fact that is often
overlooked: namely that performance is never merely a
reflection of the child’s knowledge. Our findings further
lend support to the argument that a child’s performance
reflects a conglomerate of constraints that operate in the
immediate task context, constraints that help or hinder
integration of the relevant pieces of information (e.g.,
Smith, Thelen, Titzer & McLin, 1999; Van Orden,
Pennington & Stone, 1990). Our findings show that
scaffolding the integration of the pertinent cues resulted in
remarkable improvement of performance.
It is possible that performance, whether that of a young
infant, toddler, or an adult, never demonstrates a certain
knowledge, or lack thereof. Instead, it demonstrates the
coordination of events, a coordination that is either mistaken
from the experimenter’s point of view, or it is appropriate.
Along the same lines, it is possible that even the violationof-expectation looking paradigms fail to demonstrate certain
knowledge (or the lack thereof). Instead, it might

Mean Proportion of Correct Reache

short-wall trials (M = .42, SD = .16) was not significantly
different from performance during the first set of short-wall
trials (M = .40, SD = .16), (t(11)= .67, p > .05). In fact, only
three children (25%) searched correctly more often during
the second than the first phase. In experiment 1, there were
nine children (70%) who improved from short-wall to longwall phase. In other words, there was no improvement
across trials that could result from feedback and
experimenter prompts. This suggests that improved
performance in experiment 1 during long-wall trials cannot
be explained with prolonged experience with the apparatus.
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
First 8 trials

Second 8 trials
Phase

Figure 4: Proportion of correct reaches per trial during
experiment 2, separated by phase. Error bars reflect standard
errors of the mean. Chance performance is 0.25.

General Discussion
Our study was set out to reconcile a puzzling incongruity
between a search task and a violation-of-expectation infantlooking task, both of which require seemingly similar
knowledge about the physical world. The knowledge that
underlies both types of tasks pertains to solidity, the
knowledge that solid objects take their own space in time,
and thus cannot pass through each other. Previous findings
show lower performance in the search task than in its
complimentary violation-of-expectation task: Children
appear surprised when the principle of solidity is violated,
but this knowledge does not guide their search.
Our hypothesis was that children’s success depends on the
degree to which integration of relevant pieces of
information is supported in the immediate task context. In
this task, we argued that the relevant pieces of information
pertained to (1) the trajectory of a ball rolling behind a
screen, and (2) a barrier intersecting that trajectory. In
support of our hypothesis, we manipulated the degree to
which the barrier was perceived to intersect the trajectory of
the ball. Indeed, 2-year-olds performed better in the
condition in which the barrier apparently intersected the
ramp (long-wall trials) than in the condition in which this
was not the case (short-wall trials). Our findings show that
two visible portions of the wall moving in tandem above
and below the screen were crucial for successful
performance. Toddlers search correctly for the ball behind

122

Mash, C., Keen, R., & Berthier, N. E. (2003). Visual access
and attention in two-year-olds’ even reasoning and object
search. Infancy, 4, 371–388.
Johnson, S.P. (2001). Visual development in human infants:
Binding features, surfaces and objects. Visual Cognition,
8, 565-578.
Shutts, K; Keen, R; Spelke, E.S. (2006) Object boundaries
influence toddlers’ performance in a search task.
Developmental Science. 9, 97–107.
Smith, L. B., Thelen, E., Titzer, R., & McLin, D. (1999).
Knowing in the context of acting: The task dynamics of
the A-Not-B error. Psychological Review, 106(2), 235260.
Spelke, E. S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J.,&Jacobson, K.
(1992). Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review, 99,
605–632.
Van Orden, G. C., Pennington, B. F., & Stone, G. O. (1990).
Word identification in reading and the promise of
subsymbolic psycholinguistics. Psychological Review, 97,
488-522.
.

demonstrate the degree to which scaffolding constraints
guide children’s attention to coordinate events in one way or
another. If so, it would be important to better understand the
kinds of the constraints that operate at different age groups –
rather than the kinds of knowledge that is present in
different age groups. For example, what is it that interrupts
successful coordination in a task in which the ball falls
(Hood, Carey & Prasada, 2000), rather than rolls, even
though both tasks used long-wall trials?

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Cathy Odar, Chris Erb, Adrienne Frazier,
and Kellana Hindert for their help with data collection. This
research was supported by grants from the National Science
Foundation (DRL # 723638) and the National Institute of
Health (1R03HD055324-01A2) to Heidi Kloos.

References
Berthier, N. E., DeBlois, S., Poirier, C. R., Novak, M. A., &
Clifton, R. K. (2000). Where’s the ball? Two- and threeyear-olds reason about unseen events. Developmental
Psychology, 36, 394–401.
Baillargeon, R. (1986). Representing the existence and the
location of hidden objects: Object permanence in 6- and
8-month-old infants. Cognition ,23, 21-41.
Bremner, G., & Fogel, A. (2001). Blackwell handbook of
infant development. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Haith, M.M. (1998). Who put the cog in cognition? is rich
interpretation too costly? Infant Behavior and
Development, 21(2), 167-179.
Hood, B. M., Cole-Davies,V.,&Dias, M. (2003). Looking &
search measures of object knowledge in pre-school
children. Developmental Psychology, 39, 61–70.
Hood, B.M., Carey, S., & Prasada, S. (2000). Predicting the
outcomes of physical events: two-year-olds fail to reveal
knowledge of solidity and support. Child Development,
71(6), 1540-1554.
Keen, R., Berthier, N., Sylvia, M.R., Butler, S., Prunty,
P.K., & Baker, R.K. (2008). Toddler’s us of cues in a
search task. Infant and Child Development, 17, 249–267.
Kellman, P. J., & Spelke, E. S. (1983). Perception of partly
occluded objects in infancy. Cognitive Psychology, 15,
483-524.
Kersten, D., Mamassian, P., & Krill, D. C. (1997). Moving
cast shadows induce apparent motion in depth.
Perception, 26, 171-192.
Kloos, H., Srivorakiat, L., Odar, C., Cummins-Sebree, S.,
Shockley, K. (2007). Evidence for "dumb" local-to-global
integration in children's judgments about motion.
Proceedings of the XXIX Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Kloos, H. (2007). Interlinking physical beliefs: Children’s
bias toward logical congruence. Cognition, 103, 227- 252.
Kloos, H., & Keen, R. (2005). An exploration of toddler’s
problems in a search task. Infancy, 7, 7–34.

123

