UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Towards a Computational Account of Context Mediated Affective Stimulus-Response
Translation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1nk7v021

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Haazebroek, Pascal
Hommel, Bernhard
Van Dantzig, Saskia

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Towards a Computational Account of Context Mediated Affective
Stimulus-Response Translation
Pascal Haazebroek (phaazebroek@fsw.leidenuniv.nl)
Saskia Van Dantzig (sdantzig@fsw.leidenuniv.nl)
Bernhard Hommel (hommel@fsw.leidenuniv.nl)

Cognitive Psychology Unit & Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Wassenaarseweg 52
Leiden, 2333 AK The Netherlands
Abstract
Affective stimuli can elicit fast and automatic responses. Traditional accounts assume a dual route mechanism with one
route underlying automatic processing and one route underlying controlled processing. Recent studies show that automatic
processes may be affected by top-down influences. To account for this interaction between automatic and controlled
processing, we present a computational model. In this model,
the cognitive representation of the task influences how stimuli
and responses are encoded. As a result, the model can perform fast, automatic (affective) stimulus-response translation.
This automatic processing is mediated by cognitive control.
Keywords: affective; stimulus-response compatibility; Simon
effect; task context; Ideomotor theory; action effect; Theory
of Event Coding; computational modeling; PDP.

Introduction
Affectively connotated stimuli, such as the crying face of
your baby child or the hungry eyes of a wild predator during
a sudden encounter on a safari trip, have the tendency to
elicit fast and strong responses: before you realize it, you are
caressing your child or running away from that tiger.
In order to account for these fast and automatic responses
to affective stimuli, LeDoux (1996) proposed a dual route
system. Within this system, the ‘low road’, associated with
the amygdala, automatically translates stimuli to responses.
In parallel with this subcortical pathway there is a ‘high
road’, associated with the cortical structures of the brain.
This pathway analyzes the stimulus in a more fine-grained,
but slower way. Together, these routes enable someone to
respond quickly to affective stimuli and to process these
stimuli in more detail in order to adjust behavior at a later
point in time. The ability to respond quickly to affectively
connotated stimuli clearly has advantages for survival.
Empirical findings suggest that affective stimuli can
automatically activate action tendencies related to approach
and avoidance (e.g., Chen and Bargh, 1999). Such automatic response tendencies are not restricted to affective
processing, but have also been found in studies on nonaffective stimulus-response translation. Stimuli may facilitate responses that share features (e.g., location) with the
stimuli. Such non-affective compatibility effects have also
been explained by dual route models. (e.g., Kornblum, Hasbroucq, & Osman, 1990). In these models, one route typically reflects the controlled processing of task relevant features (e.g., stimulus color) and the other route reflects the

automatic translation of task irrelevant features (e.g., stimulus location). Presenting a stimulus on a certain location
automatically primes - via the automatic route - the compatible response location, yielding a stimulus-response
compatibility effect known as the Simon effect (Simon &
Rudell, 1967).
However, both in affective processing and in nonaffective stimulus-response translation, there is evidence
that automatic action tendencies are not completely impermeable to top-down influences. Recent studies on affective
processing have demonstrated that automatic action tendencies are receptive to influences on a cognitive level, such as
task relevance (e.g., Lavender and Hommel, 2007; Rotteveel
and Phaf, 2004) and spatial reference frame of responses
(Markman & Brendl, 2005). In a similar vein, findings on
non-affective stimulus-response translation show that automatic translation depends on the exact task rule specification (Valle-Inclán & Redondo, 1998), stimulus coding, and
response coding (Hommel, 1993; for an overview see Hommel (2000a).
To account for various types of interaction between perception and action, including stimulus-response compatibility effects, Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, and Prinz
(2001) formulated the Theory of Event Coding (TEC). Most
notably, they proposed a level of common representations,
where stimulus features and action features are coded by
means of the same representational structures: ‘feature
codes’. Feature codes refer to distal features of objects and
events in the environment, such as distance, size and location, but on a remote, descriptive level, as opposed to the
proximal features that are registered by the senses. Second,
at this common codes level, stimulus perception and action
planning are considered to be similar processes; both involve activating and integrating feature codes into complex
structures called ‘event files’. Third, action features refer to
the perceptual consequences of a motor action; when an
action is executed, its perceptual effects are integrated into
an event file, an action concept. Following the Ideomotor
theory (James, 1890), one can plan an action by anticipating
the features belonging to this action concept. As a result,
actions can be planned voluntarily by intending their perceptual effects. Finally, TEC stresses the role of task context
in stimulus and response coding. In particular, feature codes
are “intentionally weighted” according to the action goal at
hand (Fagioli, Hommel, & Shubotz, 2007).

1012

According to TEC, actions are coded in terms of their effects, and compatibility effects may arise when there is congruence between a stimulus and an action effect. This was
demonstrated by Beckers, De Houwer and Eelen (2002).
During the first phase of their experiment, participants
learned that one particular action consistently resulted in a
negative effect (a mild electroshock) while another action
had no such consequence. In the subsequent test phase participants categorized affective words according to their
grammatical category (noun or verb). Participants responded
by performing the same two actions as used in the first
phase. Responses associated with a negative action effect
were performed faster in response to negative words than to
positive words, even though word valence was irrelevant for
the task at hand. Based on this finding, the authors concluded that action concepts in TEC include affective features. In order to account for their results, they suggest that
the affective connotations of both stimuli and action effects
are automatically represented on a semantic level, where
they interact and yield a compatibility effect.
In this paper we re-examine the findings of Beckers et al.
and discuss how their results can be reconciled with a more
task-oriented account (see also Hommel, 2000b). More specifically, we demonstrate how the cognitive representation
of the task biases the cognitive system to encode stimuli and
responses in terms of valence. As a result of this top-down
influence, the system automatically processes the (taskirrelevant) affective features of stimuli and responses, which
leads to an affective stimulus-response compatibility effect
In order to computationally specify the mechanisms proposed in TEC and to validate its principles and assumptions
by means of simulations, we are developing the HiTEC architecture (Haazebroek & Hommel, submitted). HiTEC is a
generic architecture that can be used to define more specific
computational models of human perception and action control and that can serve as a starting point for a novel control
architecture for cognitive robots in the PACO-PLUS project
(www.paco-plus.org).
In the following, we will first describe the HiTEC architecture in terms of its structures and processes. Next, we
show how a specific HiTEC model gives rise to the affective Simon effect as reported by Beckers et al. Finally, we
discuss how this approach compares to traditional dual route
accounts of affective stimulus-response translation.

HiTEC
The Theory of Event Coding provides a number of constraints on the structure and processes of the HiTEC architecture. First, we describe the general structure of HiTEC
and its representations. Next, we elaborate on the processes
operating on these representations, following the two-stage
model for the acquisition of voluntary action control (Elsner
and Hommel, 2001).

HiTEC’s Structure and representations

HiTEC is architected as a connectionist network model that
uses the basic building blocks of parallel distributed processing (PDP; Rumelhart, Hinton, & McClelland, 1986). In
HiTEC, the elementary units are codes which can become
associated. As illustrated in Figure 1, codes are organized
into three main systems: the sensory system, the motor system and the common coding system. Each system will now
be discussed in more detail.
Sensory System The primate brain encodes perceived objects in a distributed fashion: different features are processed and represented across different cortical maps (e.g.,
DeYoe & Van Essen, 1988). In HiTEC, different perceptual
modalities (e.g., visual, auditory, tactile, proprioceptive) and
different dimensions within each modality (e.g., visual color
and shape, auditory location and pitch) are processed and
represented in different sensory maps. Each sensory map is
a module containing a number of sensory codes that are
responsive to specific sensory features (e.g., a specific color
or a specific pitch).
Note that Figure 1 shows only those sensory maps relevant for our current modeling purposes: (complex) visual
shapes, tactile intensity and a proprioceptive direction map.
However, other specific models based on the HiTEC architecture may include other sensory maps as well (e.g., auditory maps, visual color map, etc.).
Motor System The motor system contains motor codes,
referring to proximal aspects of specific movements. Although motor codes could also be organized in multiple
maps, in the present version of HiTEC we consider only one
basic motor map with a set of motor codes.
Common Coding System According to TEC, both perceived events and action generated events are coded in one
common representational domain (Hommel et al., 2001). In
HiTEC, this is implemented in a common coding system
that contains common feature codes. Feature codes refer to
distal features of objects as opposed to the proximal features
coded by the sensory codes and motor codes.
Feature codes may be associated to both sensory codes
and motor codes and are therefore truly sensorimotor. They
can combine information from different modalities and are
in principle unlimited in number. Feature codes are not given but they evolve and change. In HiTEC simulations, however, we usually assume a set of feature codes to be present
initially, to bootstrap the process of extracting sensorimotor
regularities in interactions with the environment.
Feature codes are contained in feature dimensions. Feature dimensions may be enhanced as a whole. This makes
each feature code within such a dimension more sensitive to
stimulation originating from sensory or motor codes.

1013

Associations In HiTEC, codes can become associated, both
for short term and for long term. Short term associations
between feature codes reflect that these codes '
belong together in the current task or context’ and that their binding
is actively maintained in working memory. In Figure 1,
these temporary bindings are depicted as dashed lines. Long
term associations can be interpreted as learned connections
reflecting prior experience. These associations are depicted
as solid lines.
Event Files Another central concept in the theory of event
coding is the event file (Hommel, 2004). In HiTEC, the
event file is modeled as a structure that temporarily associates to feature codes that '
belong together in the current context’ in working memory. An event file serves both the perception of a stimulus as well as the planning of an action.
When multiple events are present in working memory,
choosing between these events (e.g., deciding between different action alternatives) is reflected by competition between the associated event files. This competition is computationally modeled by means of inhibitory associations between event files, depicted as solid lines with filled disk
ends in Figure 1.

HiTEC’s processes
How do associations between codes emerge? What mechanisms result of their interactions? And how do these mechanisms give rise to stimulus-response compatibility effects?
Elsner and Hommel (2001) proposed a two-stage model for
the acquisition of voluntary action control. For both stages,
we now describe how processes take place in the HiTEC
architecture. Next, we discuss how HiTEC allows for task
preparation and fast stimulus-response translation.
Stage 1: Acquiring Action – Effect Associations Feature
codes are perceptually grounded representations as they are
derived by abstracting regularities in activations of sensory
codes. However, associations between feature codes and
motor codes reflect acquired knowledge of action-effect
contingencies: motor codes mi are activated, either because
of some already existing action-effect associations or simply
because of network noise (cf. motor babbling behavior of
newborns). This leads to a change in the environment (e.g.,
the left hand suddenly touches an object) which is registered
by sensory codes si. Activation propagates from sensory
codes towards feature codes fi. Eventually, these feature
codes are integrated into an event file ei which acts as an
action concept. Subsequently, the cognitive system learns
associations between the feature codes fi belonging to this
action concept and the motor code mi that just led to the
executed motor action. The weights of these associations
depend on activation of the motor code and the feature code.
Crucially, this allows the task context to influence the learning of action effects, by moderating the activation of certain
feature codes. Due to this top-down moderation, task-

relevant features are weighted more strongly than taskirrelevant features. Nonetheless, this does not exclude taskirrelevant but very salient action effects to become involved
in strong associations as well.
Stage 2: Using Action – Effect Associations Once associations between motor codes and feature codes exist, they can
be used to select and plan voluntary actions. Thus, by anticipating desired action effects, feature codes become active. Now, by integrating the feature codes into an action
concept, the system can treat the features as constituting a
desired state and propagate their activation towards associated motor codes. Initially, multiple motor codes mi may
become active as they typically fan out associations to multiple feature codes fi. However, some motor codes will have
more associated features that are also part of the active action concept and some of the mi – fi associations may be
stronger than others. In time, the network will converge
towards a state where only one code mi is strongly activated,
which will lead to the selection of that motor action.
In addition to the mere selection of a motor action, feature
codes also form the actual action plan that specifies (in distal terms) how the action should be executed: namely, in
such a way the intended action effect features are realized.
This action plan is kept active in working memory, allowing
the system to monitor, evaluate and adjust the actual motor
action.
Task Preparation In reaction-time experiments, participants typically receive a verbal instruction of the task. In
HiTEC, a verbal task instruction can directly activate the
respective feature codes by means of verbal labels. The
cognitive system integrates these feature codes into an event
file that is actively maintained in working memory. When
the model receives several instructions to respond differently to various stimuli, different event files ei are created
and maintained for the various options. Due to the mutual
inhibitory links between these event files, they will compete
with each other during the task.
Stimulus-Response Translation When a stimulus in an
experimental trial is presented, its sensory features will activate a set of feature codes, allowing activation to propagate
towards one or more event files, already associated during
task preparation. Competition takes place between these
event files. Subsequently, activation propagates from event
files to action effect features and motor codes, resulting in
the execution and control of motor action.
Note that task preparation already sensitizes feature codes
both for the to-be-perceived stimuli and for the to-beplanned responses. Therefore, the cognitive system is biased
in perceiving stimuli and anticipating responses in terms of
these feature codes. When feature codes for expected stimuli
and anticipated responses overlap, stimulus-response compatibility effects can arise: when a feature code activated by

1014

the stimulus is also part of the event file of the correct response, planning this response is facilitated, yielding faster
reactions. If, on the other hand, the feature code activated by
the stimulus is part of the incorrect response, this increases
the competition between action events, resulting in slower
reactions.
A
Common Coding
System

fpos

fgo

s1

s2

s3

edown

eup

s4

s5

Shape

s11

fneg

s15

s12

Intensity

m1

s16

m2

Direction

Tactile

Visual

fdown

fup

Proprioceptive

Sensory System

Motor
System

B
Common Coding
System

fnoun

s1

s2

s3

fpos

fverb

s4

everb

enoun

s5

s11

s12

Intensity

Shape

Visual

Sensory System

Tactile

fneg

fdown

fup

s15

s16

m1

m2

Direction

Proprioceptive

Motor
System

Figure 1: Experiment 1 modelled in the HiTEC architecture. (A) Training phase. (B) Test phase.

Affective Stimulus-Response Compatibility
In this section, we discuss how the results of Beckers et al
(2002) could be replicated in a HiTEC model. In particular,
we show how the task preparation configures the cognitive
system to naturally yield the reported effects.

Experiment 1
The first experiment in Beckers et al. (2002) started with a
training phase, during which participants responded to a

‘go’ signal by performing one of two actions (moving a response key up or down). One of the actions was consistently
followed by a mild electroshock, whereas the other action
was never followed by an electroshock. By repeating the
actions many times, participants learned to associate them
with their consequences. The response that was associated
with the electroshock hence received a negative connotation, while the response associated with the absence of an
electroshock received a positive connotation. In the subsequent test phase, participants had to classify positive and
negative words according to their grammatical category
(noun or verb). They responded by performing the same
actions as in the training phase. Word valence, even though
irrelevant for the grammatical judgment task, influenced
response times. The ‘negative’ response (resulting in an
electroshock) was performed faster in response to negative
words than to positive words. In contrast, the ‘positive’ response (associated with the absence of a shock) was performed faster in response to positive words than to negative
words.
In HiTEC, the verbal instruction that one of the responses
yields an unpleasant electroshock will activate the valence
feature dimension. In addition, the system is primed to expect a visual ‘go’ signal. In response to this ‘go’ signal, two
actions can be performed. Therefore, two event files eup and
edown are created, associated with the fup and fdown feature
codes, respectively. Note that we assume that these feature
codes already exist, because the system has prior experience
with upward and downward motion. Together, these codes
and bindings form the task set for the training phase, as depicted in Figure 1.
During a trial of the training phase, a visual stimulus is
presented as the ‘go’ signal, which is registered by sensory
code s1. Activation is propagated towards fgo and to both
event files. The event files will start to compete. In the experiment by Beckers et al. participants were instructed to
randomly choose one of the responses. This is modeled by
adding random noise at the event file level, resulting in one
strongly activated event file. Subsequently, activation
propagates towards the fup and fdown feature codes and to m1
and m2, resulting in the selection of one the motor actions.
When m2 is executed, an electroshock is applied, which is
registered by the S12 tactile sensory code. As this was expected on the feature level (due to the task set based on the
verbal instruction), the shock is encoded as a strong activation of the fneg feature code in the valence feature dimension.
Now, action-effect learning takes place resulting in additional strengthening of m1 – fup and m2 – fdown associations
and the creation (and subsequent strengthening during subsequent trials) of m1 – fpos and m2 – fneg associations. It is
assumed that the absence of an electroshock will be coded
as fpos, the opposite of fneg.
During the test phase of Experiment 1, words are presented as stimuli. Clearly, there exist more than four words,
but in this task all words are either noun or verb and either

1015

positively or negatively valenced. Thus, for modeling purposes, it suffices to work with four word shapes, as depicted
in Figure 2.
When a word shape is presented, activation propagates
towards the feature codes fnoun and fverb depending on the
grammatical category of the word. Simultaneously, activation propagates towards the valence feature codes fpos and
fneg. Activation propagates from the grammatical category
feature codes towards the event files enoun and everb. This
results in their mutual competition and subsequent propagation of activation towards the fup and fdown and m1 and m2
codes. Because m1 and m2 are also associated with fpos and
fneg, the action-effect associations acquired in the train
phase, their activation is also impacted by activation propagated through the valence feature codes.
When a positive noun word is presented, activation will
subsequently propagate from s2 to fnoun to enoun to fup to m1
and from s2 to fpos to m1. As both pathways activate m1, this
results in faster action selection. When a negative noun
word is presented, activation will similarly propagate from
s4 through feature codes and event files to m1, but the ‘valence route’ will propagate activation through fneg to m2.
This hampers selection of the correct m1 motor action. For
negative verbs, the implemented task set results in facilitation of the selection of m2, and for positive verbs, selection
of m2 is interfered.
The overall result, thus, would resemble the findings of
first experiment of Beckers et al.: correspondence between
the irrelevant affective connotation of a word stimulus and
the affective valence of the action effect produced by the
required response result in faster performance than noncorrespondence.

Experiment 2
In a second experiment, Beckers et al. (2002) attempted to
increase the size of the affective congruency effect by making word valence more task-relevant. On the critical trials,
participants still responded to the grammatical category of
the words. The critical trials were interspersed with a valence judgment task, in which participants responded to the
valence of the words by saying ‘POSITIVE’ or
‘NEGATIVE’. Due to this manipulation, word valence was
made more relevant, not only in the intervening valence
judgment trials, but also in the critical trials. As a result, the
affective compatibility effect found in Experiment 2 was
larger than the effect found in Experiment 1, both numerically and in terms of effect size.
In HiTEC, during the critical, grammatical category
judgment trials in Experiment 2, the activation propagates
as in Experiment 1. During the valence judgment trials, affective word connotation is processed attentively resulting
in strong sensitization of valence features fpos and fneg.
As valence judgment trials and grammatical category
judgment trials are more or less alternated, this sensitization
will carry-over to the critical trials, resulting in a stronger

affective stimulus-compatibility effect, as reported by Beckers et al.

Discussion
We have introduced HiTEC’s three main interacting modules: the sensory system, the motor system, and the emergent common coding system. Crucially, because the model
uses common codes for stimulus perception and response
planning, stimulus-response compatibility effects follow
naturally. Subsequently, we argued that action effects may
include affective features, as has been suggested by Beckers
et al. (2002) and Lavender and Hommel (2007).
In our efforts to account for the results of Beckers et al.,
we stressed the role of task implementation for both stimulus and response coding. We showed how these codings
affect translation of both task-relevant and task-irrelevant
features. According to our account, affective information is
not extracted completely automatically, but is mediated by
task context. For example, in Experiment 1, although word
valence is considered task irrelevant, the valence dimension
is primed by the verbal ‘unpleasant’ task instruction accompanied by the actual action effect, the electroshock. As a
result, word processing is biased toward affective coding.
Under normal circumstances, enhancing feature dimensions for stimulus perception in order to translate quickly to
action features is a very efficient mechanism to control our
actions: the location of a cup is very relevant for the action
plan to grasp it. In this experimental setup, however, this
mechanism results in a stimulus-response compatibility effect.
In contrast to our model, traditional dual route models
stress the distinction between controlled and automatic
processing, thereby ignoring task context for the automatic
translation. We have shown that by assigning a task-set preparatory role to cognitive processes, the automatic route can
be cognitively controlled and fast at the same time.
Following this consideration, and in analogy to empirical
evidence in non-affective stimulus-response translation
(Hommel, 1993), it would be interesting to conduct an alternative version of Experiment 1 of Beckers et al. In this
alternative experiment, instead of an electroshock, a more
ambiguous action effect could be presented, such as a moderately uncomfortable auditory tone. Half of the participants
could be instructed that this tone is an ‘unpleasant tone’.
This instruction should yield the same results as the current
experiment. The other half of the participants could be told
that this is merely a ‘high tone’. In this case, we expect that
the affective stimulus-response compatibility effect will be
reduced, if not eliminated, because the task is not cognitively represented in terms of valence. As a result, word
processing is no longer biased toward valence coding.
Of course, in laboratory studies, task context is quite specific, which allows us to formalize it procedurally. In reality, there is typically not one specific task to solve. How-

1016

ever, the environment may prime certain feature codes,
based on our earlier experiences. This prepares us for particular stimuli we might perceive and actions we might have
to perform. For example, walking through a dark, narrow
alley primes our fearful anticipations of a sudden attack,
making us jump at the slightest sound. The moment we enter a specific circumstance, sets of associated codes are
primed. When we then actually perceive stimuli that resonate with these codes, the stimuli become cognitively represented in terms of these codes and are quickly translated
into responses as if they are triggered completely automatically. While the ability to automatically translate stimuli
into response tendencies is very useful in some contexts, it
may lead to slightly less useful side-effects when applied in
other domains: the automatic tendency to run away from a
tiger facilitates our survival in the bushes, but lets us make a
fool out of ourselves when applied in the movie theater.

Acknowledgments
Support for this research by the European Commission
(PACO-PLUS, IST-FP6-IP-027657) is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Beckers, T., De Houwer, J., & Eelen, P. (2002). Automatic
integration of non-perceptual action effect features: The
case of the associative affective Simon effect. Psychological Research, 66, 166–173.
Chen, M., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). Consequences of automatic evaluation: Immediate behavioral predispositions to
approach or avoid the stimulus. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 25, 215–224.
DeYoe, E. A., & Van Essen, D. C. (1988). Concurrent processing streams in monkey visual cortex. Trends in Neuroscience, 11, 219–226.
Elsner, B., & Hommel, B. (2001). Effect anticipation and
action control. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 27, 229–240.
Fagioli, S., Hommel, B., & Schubotz, R. I. (2007). Intentional control of attention: Action planning primes actionrelated stimulus dimensions. Psychological Research, 71,
22–29.
Haazebroek, P., & Hommel, B. (submitted). HiTEC: A
computational model of the interaction between perception and action.
Hommel, B. (1993). Inverting the simon effect by intention.
Psychological Research, 55, 270–279.
Hommel, B. (2000a). Intentional control of automatic stimulus-response translation. In Y. Rossetti & A. Revonsuo
(eds.), Interaction between dissociable conscious and
nonconscious processes. Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Hommel, B. (2000b). The prepared reflex: Automaticity and
control in stimulus-response translation. In S. Monsell &

J. Driver (eds.), Control of cognitive processes: Attention
and performance XVIII. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hommel, B. (2004). Event files: Feature binding in and
across perception and action. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 494-500.
Hommel, B., Müsseler, J., Aschersleben, G., & Prinz, W.
(2001). The Theory of Event Coding (TEC): A framework for perception and action planning. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 24, 849–937.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. New York:
Dover Publications.
Kornblum, S., Hasbroucq, T., & Osman, A. (1990). Dimensional overlap: Cognitive basis of stimulus-response compatibility—A model and taxonomy. Psychological Review, 97, 253–170.
Lavender, T., & Hommel, B. (2007). Affect and action: Towards an event-coding account. Cognition and Emotion,
21, 1270–1296.
LeDoux, J. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious
underpinnings of emotional life. New York: Touchstone.
Markman, A. B., & Brendl, C. M. (2005). Constraining
theories of embodied cognition. Psychological Science,
16, 6–10.
Rotteveel, M., & Phaf, R. H. (2004). Automatic affective
evaluation does not automatically predispose for arm flexion and extension. Emotion, 4, 156–172.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & McClelland, J. L.
(1986). A general framework for parallel distributed processing. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, and the PDP
Research Group (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing:
Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Simon, J., & Rudell, A. (1967). Auditory s-r compatibility:
The effect of an irrelevant cue on information processing.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 51, 300-304.
Valle-Inclán, F., & Redondo, M. (1998). On the automaticity of ipsilateral response activation in the Simon effect.
Psychophysiology, 35, 366–371.

1017

