UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Toward a Language-General Account of Word Production: The Proximate Units Principle

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3nw7k2sw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Chen, Jenn-Yeu
O'Seaghdha, Padraig

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Toward a Language-General Account of Word Production: The Proximate
Units Principle
Padraig G O’Seaghdha (pat.oseaghdha@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, USA

Jenn-Yeu Chen (psyjyc@mail.ncku.edu.tw)
Institute of Cognitive Science, National Cheng Kung University, TAIWAN

Abstract

syllable paradox, the fact that in English syllable
structure strongly constrains segmental errors but
syllables do not themselves comprise error units (Dell
1986), and by the need for flexible assembly in
languages that allow extensive resyllabification, that is,
departures from citation forms in connected speech
(Levelt et al., 1999).
Evidence from outside the Indo-European arena
however suggests that the Dell and Levelt models do
not generalize in their language-specific formats (see
e.g., Chen and Dell, 2006; Cholin, Schiller & Levelt,
2004, for discussion). In Chinese languages,
experimental and speech error evidence indicates that
syllables are primary phonological units, that is, that
they are explicitly selected in the first post-lexical step
of full phonological encoding (Chen, Chen & Dell,
2002; Chen et al., 2009). Likewise, in Japanese, the
mora, a unit smaller than the syllable but often
comprising more than one segment, figures
prominently in speech errors (Kubozono, 1989) and as
a planning unit (Kureta, Fushimi & Tatsumi, 2006).
These two examples are sufficient to suggest that the
existing models do not generalize widely in their
language-specific forms. To date, responses to this
challenge have emphasized accommodation to the
existing models (e.g., Chen et al 2002; Kureta et al.,
2006). We suggest here that for this reconciliation to
be satisfying it is necessary to develop models that are
defined not in terms of specific units but in terms of
their functions and relations. As a first step in this
direction we propose the proximate units principle.

Theories of language production are monolingual but
the world is multilingual. In the domain of word-form
encoding, it is clear that languages rely differentially on
different phonological units, challenging the generality of
the monolingual theories. To address this, we propose
the proximate units principle, which holds that the initial
selection of sub-lexical phonological units (syllables,
morae, phonemic segments, etc) is crucial both to
understanding language specific processing, and to
identifying what is language general in word production.
We define proximate units and the role they play in
speech planning and execution. The proximate units
principle is consistent with much of what is already
known about word form encoding across languages but
also makes new predictions and can bring greater clarity
to interpretations of experimental and speech error data.
Keywords: proximate units; word production; speech
planning; phonology; cross-linguistic analysis.

The Challenge of Generality
The two most widely endorsed models of word
production, those of Dell and Levelt, are grounded in
Germanic languages, English and Dutch respectively.
These models agree that word production hinges on
two primary kinds of units, words/morphemes
themselves, and phonological segments or phonemes.
By this we mean that words, or in some cases
sublexical morphemes, are first selected, and then the
phonological segments of these units are disbursed
and linearized. Intermediate units such as syllables are
either not represented at all in the retrieval of
phonological ingredients (Levelt et al. 1999), or are
only indirectly represented (Dell, 1986). In the Levelt et
al model, syllabification is engendered during the
linearization of phonemes. In the Dell model, syllable
structure is represented in the structural frame that is
retrieved with words and that guides linearization (see
also Sevald, Dell & Cole, 1995). These models
generalize quite well to other European languages,
though there are some variations in detail, as reflected
in speech error patterns, that remain to be explained
(e.g., Perez et al., 2007). Our goal here is not to
compare the Dell and Levelt models but rather to
emphasize their common conclusion that words and
segments are the key players in word form encoding.
This conclusion is motivated, respectively, by the

Proximate Units
Proximate units are the first explicitly selectable
phonological production units below the level of the
word or morpheme. These units vary crosslinguistically. Therefore, we propose the following
proximate units principle: Planning and execution of
word-form encoding is crucially dependent on the type
of the proximate units in a language.
For this proposal to be substantive, proximate units
must be clearly identifiable. We argue that they are
indeed identifiable, both by their immediate relation to
words, and because of their explicit status. This ease
of identification is aided by the fact that in production,
units do not merely subsist in an associative network,

68

Figure 1. A Generic Model of Word Production
When the word is scheduled for production, proximate units are retrieved in parallel and then selected
sequentially by assignment to linear positions. Arrows signify flow of activation. Button terminals signify
assignment of contents to structural positions. When the proximate units are suprasegmental,
additional phonological processes are needed prior to articulation.

Concept

Word

Proximate Units

Word-shape Frame
( )

P1

P2

__

PN
1

but must be coherently selected and sequenced in
order for speech to be possible. Application of this
strong constraint limits the viable accounts of
phonological encoding to those that satisfy criteria that
we elaborate in what follows. Variation in the type of
proximate phonological unit has implications for the
control of word production, and for the status of other
units, most importantly phonemic segments in cases
where they are nonproximate. These implications can
be traced out in tasks that engage planning, in speech
errors, in metalinguistic awareness, and in TOT states,
among other contexts. We first outline these
implications as corollaries of the proximate units
principle, and then elaborate on actual and potential
sources of evidence for our proposal under the
headings of Form preparation, Speech errors,
Advance planning, and Metalinguistic access.

__

__

2

N

Corollaries of the proximate units principle:
 A word comprises one or more proximate
phonological
units
that
are
retrieved
simultaneously and linearized sequentially (e.g.,
Levelt et al., 1999; O’Seaghdha & Marin, 2000).
See Figure 1.
 Proximate units can thus be wholistically missselected. Table 1 summarizes evidence that
proximate units feature prominently as speech
errors, and just as importantly that nonproximate units – such as syllables in Germanic
languages – do not.
 The claim that syllables are not proximate units
in some languages does not of course mean
that they are unimportant. All accounts agree
that syllabification is represented in the speech
output of Indo-European languages. Syllables
could be represented indirectly in the activation
levels of subsyllabic components, or structurally
(as in the original Dell, 1986, model), but neither

69









of these would qualify syllables for proximate
unit status. Likewise, the articulatory syllabary of
the Levelt et al model involves hypothetical
phonetic syllables that are engaged by
corresponding
assembled
phonological
syllables (Levelt et al., 1999; Cholin et al, 2004).
By definition, such units are nonproximate.
Proximate units, as the first sublexical units that
are selected during phonological encoding, will
necessarily be manifest in automatic activation
of phonology prior to selection (for example in
masked presentation of words; Chen, Lin &
Ferrand, 2003) or in advance phonological
activation of downstream words (Dell and
O’Seaghdha, 1992).
Additional steps are involved in segmental
encoding of multi-segmental proximate units.
For example, we have proposed for Mandarin
that a secondary stage of segmental encoding
follows selection and assignment of syllables
(Chen et al., 2009; see also Chen et al., 2002).
Proximate units are meta-cognitively accessible,
and may be default phonological components
for linguistically naïve speakers. More
specifically, proximate units are available left to
right in imagined or covertly rehearsed speech.
Thus the grain size of the most accessible
phonological units, for example, what may be
reported as a “word beginning”, is constrained
by the proximate units of a language.
Likewise, other things being equal, proximate
units will be salient in tip-of-the-tongue (TOT)
states. English speakers often report the first
segments of TOT words (e.g., Brown, 1991). In
contrast, we hypothesize that Mandarin
speakers are more likely to access whole
syllables than segments in failed word retrieval;
however, this may be difficult to test because
retrieval of a whole syllable will tend to trigger
release from the TOT state in a vocabulary that
is dominated by disyllables. The prediction may
be testable in Japanese where initial CV morae
comprise a smaller portion of many complex
words.

dependent measure is naming time. Benefits of the
shared component in the homogeneous conditions
show that participants can cash in their foreknowledge
of the shared component. In Germanic languages
such as Dutch (Meyer, 1990, 1991; Roelofs 2006) and
English (e.g., Damian & Bowers, 2003; Chen et al.,
2009), speakers benefit from knowing the onsets of
words, and there are further benefits of knowing
additional contiguous segments. In contrast, Chen et
al (2002) showed that whole syllables, but not the
initial consonants of disyllables, showed benefits in
Mandarin. Likewise, Kureta et al (2006) showed that
Japanese speakers benefited from knowing the first
morae of multi-moraic words (e.g., the /ta/ of ta.ba.ko)
but not the initial consonants of the words.
In newer work, Chen et al (2009) tested extensively
for initial consonant preparation in Mandarin. We
considered that obliviousness to shared onsets could
be inherent or alternatively a result of the need to
sequence the syllables of complex words. On this
basis, we tested simple monosyllables as well as
disyllables, but found no benefit in either case. Thus
even when the onsets were “there for the taking”,
Taiwanese speakers of Mandarin did not benefit from
homogeneity of onsets. In contrast, English speakers
showed clear benefits with monosyllables of equivalent
complexity (e.g., day, dough, dye, dew). Taken
together the various findings constitute strong support
for the proposal that proximate units are always
available to form preparation, but that segmental
components of larger proximate units are not.
Speech errors Another hallmark of proximate units is
their role in speech errors. Because proximate units
are selected for sequencing, they have the potential to
be miss-selected and so must appear as error units.
According to the syllable paradox, whole syllable
errors are extremely rare in English, whereas
segmental errors, constrained by syllable position, are
common (Dell, 1986). Whole syllable errors are well
documented in Mandarin (Chen, 2000).
For
Japanese, Kubozono (1989) provides evidence that
morae slip in speech errors. Kubozono’s analysis
does not exclude the possibility of syllable errors in
Japanese, but these errors may instead be interpreted
as multiple mora errors, just as multiple segment
errors in English may or may not coincide with a
syllable.
Segment errors also occur in Mandarin and
Japanese, but they may have different distributions
than in English. For Mandarin, we have proposed that
segmental spell-out is delegated to syllables, such that
after syllable selection (see Figure 1), the CV frame of
the syllable and its ingredients are linked in an
additional step. Because of their subordination to
syllables in advance planning, the range of segment
errors in Mandarin is predicted to be narrower than

Evidence
Form preparation Evidence from form preparation
experiments of cross-linguistic variation in the units
that speakers prepare, has played a significant part in
motivating the proximate units idea. In form
preparation experiments, participants are given small
sets of words that share a phonological component
(homogeneous conditions: e.g., day dough dye dew)
or do not (heterogeneous conditions: e.g., day pea rye
sow). They then produce the items of the set in
random order, repeatedly, under speeded instructions,
in response to associative or direct cues. The

70

Table 1. Occurrence of Error Types as a Function of Language/ Proximate Unit Combination
Language/ Proximate Unit

Syllable errors

English/
Phonemic segment
No

Mandarin/
Syllable
Yes

Japanese/
Mora
No

Mora errors

NA

NA

Yes

Segment errors

Yes

Yes

Yes

that of syllables, and also narrower than the range of
segment errors in English. In addition:
a) Mandarin syllables may move between words
(Chen, 2000)
b) Mandarin syllables may also be miss-selected
within words (Chen, 2000; O’Seaghdha et al., 2009)
c) In Mandarin, segments may move between
syllables within words as well as between words
(Chen, 2000; O’Seaghdha et al 2009).

course decline. In contrast, reduced speech rate
predicts a simple reduction in phonological segment
errors in English (see Dell, Burger & Svec, 1997). This
hypothesis illustrates how variation in proximate unit
deployment across languages may be used to refine
our understanding of the time-course of phonological
encoding.
Metalinguistic access Finally, we consider the
closely related issue of how linguistic variation in
proximate units impacts phonological awareness.
Consider first the status in form preparation. Here,
one may intuit that an English speaker who knows that
all words in a set begin with a particular consonant is
metalinguistically aware of that fact, and is therefore
able to deploy the corresponding segment. This in turn
saves time in producing the homogeneous words. In
contrast, it is far less clear what a Mandarin speaker
who knows a word begins with a certain syllable can
deploy.
A recent study by Oppenheim and Dell (2007)
suggests that the nature of the prepared content is not
as obvious as it may seem even in English.
Oppenheim and Dell tested for slips of the tongue in
inner speech and found that in contrast to overt
speech, there was no phonological similarity effect.
One may conclude from this that phonemes but not
subphonemic features are activated in inner speech.
Because form preparation is non-overt, one may
assume that preparation likewise does not fully
engage subphonemic features. But in that case, it
follows that preparation of a syllable in Mandarin or of
a mora in Japanese is even more abstract, and may
not extend to the phonemic level. Indeed the absence
of onset preparation benefits in Mandarin and
Japanese appears to suggest just this. Moreover, for
Mandarin, syllables must be specified for tone before
they are spoken, and so, when the tone is variable,
syllable preparation cannot be phonetic. Taken
together, these observations raise new questions
about the representation of prepared units in form
preparation and other contexts. They suggest that it
is possible to image or prefigure proximate units
without fully specifying their content.

Advance Planning The last claim about the ranges of
syllabic and segmental errors in Mandarin raises the
question of the activation of proximate units in
advance planning of larger stretches of speech such
as phrases and sentences. Because the majority of
phonological errors occur within phrases, the range of
immediately prearticulatory phonological planning may
be limited to phrasal units. However, in situations
where speakers plan whole sentences, there is
evidence that while the subject phrase is being
phonologically prepared ingredients of the object noun
phrase are also phonologically active (e.g., Dell &
O’Seaghdha, 1992). Even within a phrase of moderate
complexity, words are sequentially selected so that
phonological ingredients go from a waiting state of
activation prior to selection, to a ready state where
phonology is fully impleted prior to articulation.
Languages such as Mandarin in which proximate
syllable units differ from the segmental units called
immediately prior to articulation thus have the potential
to provide greater insight into the control of
phonological encoding than languages like English
where proximate and prearticulatory units are the
same. For example, as noted already, because
downstream phonology in Mandarin comes bundled in
syllabic packages, longer range errors will tend to be
syllabic, whereas near range errors will include more
segmental slips. More speculatively, there is more
time, opportunity, and perhaps need to preselect
segments as well as syllables in more deliberative
Mandarin speech. This predicts that the proportion of
phonological segment errors in Mandarin will increase
relative to syllable errors when speech is more
deliberative, although the overall error rate will of

71

Navigating between proximate unit systems

Acknowledgments

The evidence that languages vary substantially in
the configuration of sublexical phonological units has
implications for second language learning. Second
language learners therefore may provide important
insights into the fundamental processes of word
encoding. For example, the prominence of syllables in
Mandarin depends on systematic properties of the
language and cannot be transferred wholesale to
English. Thus, Mandarin learners of English are
obliged to adopt a segmental proximate mode. In a
recent study (O’Seaghdha et al, 2009), we asked
whether experience in English influenced the
bilinguals’ Mandarin word production in circumstances
where the English mode is applicable.
We tested Mandarin-English bilinguals of varying
fluency in a Mandarin form preparation experiment.
Recall that monolingual Mandarin speakers do not
show any onset benefit. For bilinguals, in contrast, we
found a clear onset benefit suggesting that the English
mode was engaged. Interestingly, the benefit was
shown even by less proficient speakers and did not
vary with English fluency level. This raises an
important theoretical question concerning proximate
units. One logical possibility is that the word production
architecture is highly adaptable allowing for a shift
from the syllabic to the segmental level in these
bilinguals. Alternatively, the adaptation shown in our
study is task specific and does not indicate substantial
alteration of the overall Mandarin-specific regulation of
phonological encoding. In the form preparation task,
knowledge of English provides an analog that allows
these speakers to direct attention to phonological
onsets. But in fully fledged speech, the demands of
fluent communication may preclude such flexibility.
Instead, the proximate syllabic units will manifest
themselves in speech errors, and other measures, just
as they do for monolingual speakers. Likewise, we
hypothesize that monolinguals and bilinguals will not
differ in single word masked priming where
metacognitive awareness is not engaged.

Supported by NIDCD grant R01DC006948 and by the
National Science Council of Taiwan. We thank TrainMin Chen, Alexandra Frazer, Jordan Knicely, and
Kuan-Hung Liu for contributions to this project.

References
Brown, A.S. (1991). A review of the tip-of-the-tongue
experience. Psychological Bulletin, 109, 204-223.
Chen, J.-Y. (2000). Syllable errors from naturalistic
slips of the tongue in Mandarin Chinese.
Psychologia: An International Journal of Psychology
in the Orient Special Issue: Cognitive processing of
the Japanese and Chinese languages II. 43, 15-26.
Chen, J.-Y., Chen, T.-M. & Dell, G. S. (2002). Wordform encoding in Mandarin Chinese as assessed by
the implicit priming task. Journal of Memory &
Language 46,751-781.
Chen, J.-Y., Lin, W.-C. & Ferrand, L. (2003). Masked
priming of the syllable in Chinese speech
production. Chinese Journal of Psychology, 45, 107120.
Chen, J.-Y. & Dell, G. S. (2006). Word form encoding
in Chinese speech production. In P. Li et al (Eds.).
The Handbook of East Asian Psycholinguitics. Vol 1:
Chinese. Cambridge University Press.
Chen, J.-Y., O’Seaghdha, P. G., Chen, T.-M., & Liu,
K.-H. (2009). Control of word production: Word form
preparation addresses syllables in Mandarin but
segments in English. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Cholin, J., Schiller, N. O. & Levelt, W. J. M. (2004).
The preparation of syllables in speech production.
Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 47-61.
Damian, M. F., & Bowers, J. S. (2003). Effects of
orthography on speech production in a formpreparation paradigm. Journal of Memory and
Language, 49, 119-132.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of
retrieval in sentence production. Psychological
Review, 93, 283-321.
Dell, G. S., Burger, L. K. & Svec, W. R. (1997).
Language production and serial order: A functional
analysis and a model. Psychological Review, 104,
123-147.
Dell, G. S. & O'Seaghdha, P. G. (1992). Stages of
lexical access in language production. Cognition, 42,
287-314.
Frazer, A. K., Knicely, J. L. & O’Seaghdha, P. G.
(2009, July). Expect the unexpected: Robust
planning processes in speech production. Poster
presented at the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.

Conclusion
The proximate units principle points to a fertile seam
of investigation in the cross-linguistic analysis of word
production and suggests a way to preserve languagegeneral theories in the face of linguistic diversity.
These investigations address not only immediate
processes of individual word production, but
coordination of sentence meaning and form in
advance planning of speech, interpretation of crosslinguistic speech error patterns, and the mental
representation of planned units.

72

Kubozono, H. (1989). The mora and syllable structure
in Japanese: Evidence from speech errors.
Language and Speech, 32, 249-278.
Kureta, Y., Fushimi, T., & Tatsumi, I.F., (2006). The
functional unit of phonological encoding: Evidence
for moraic representation in native Japanese
speakers. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 32, 1102-1119.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A. & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences 22, 1-75.
Meyer, A. S. (1990). The time course of phonological
encoding in language production: The encoding of
successive syllables of a word. Journal of Memory &
Language, 29, 524-545.
Meyer, A. S. (1991). The time course of phonological
encoding in language production: Phonological
encoding inside a syllable. Journal of Memory &
Language 30, 69-89.
Oppenheim, G. M. & Dell, G. S. (2008). Inner speech
slips exhibit lexical bias, but not the phonemic
similarity effect. Cognition, 106, 528-537.
O'Seaghdha, P. G. and J. W. Marin (2000).
Phonological competition and cooperation in formrelated priming: Sequential and nonsequential
processes in word production. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 26, 57-73.
O'Seaghdha, P. G., Wang, Y., & Schuster, K. (2009).
Syllables actuate word production in Mandarin
Chinese but not in English. Manuscript under
revision.
O’Seaghdha, P. G., Chen, J-Y, Chen, T-M & Su, J-J
(2009, May) Word production in Chinese-English
bilinguals exhibits an L2-to-L1 influence. Poster
presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association
for Psychological Science.
Pérez E, Santiago J, Palma A, O'Seaghdha P. G.
(2007) Perceptual bias in speech error data
collection: Insights from Spanish speech errors.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 36, 207-235.
Roelofs, A. (1999). Phonological segments and
features as planning units in speech production.
Language & Cognitive Processes, 14, 173-200.
Roelofs, A. (2006). The influence of spelling on
phonological encoding in word reading, object
naming, and word generation. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review 13, 33-37.
Sevald, C. A., Dell, G. S., & Cole, J. (1995). Syllable
structure in speech production: Are syllables chunks
or schemas? Journal of Memory & Language, 34,
807-820.

73

