UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unconscious Analogical Mapping?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2c51980c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Hristova, Penka

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unconscious Analogical Mapping?
Penka Hristova (phristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

participants’ awareness of the primed analogies was not
measured in any way. Schunn and Dunbar (1996) also
demonstrated priming of specific episodes and argued that
subjects were not aware that they were making analogies.
The role of analogy, however, was not well controlled in
this particular study. It is not clear whether participants
solved better the target problem because of priming of
useful relevant past knowledge or because of the specific
analogy that they were able to draw between the primed and
the target episode. Kokinov and Yoveva (1996) have shown
that presenting a seemingly irrelevant picture somewhere in
the environment may prime the use of some concepts during
the problem solving process, although participants reported
to be unaware of any relation between the contextual picture
and the target task. As in the previous two studies described
in this paragraph, this study fails to describe unambiguously
whether participants’ problem solving was facilitated by
priming of a relevant source for analogy-making or by just
priming of a useful concept or of a useful relation.
Spellman, Holyoak, and Morrison (2001) have
demonstrated relational priming but only under specific
conditions – when participants were explicitly instructed to
attend to the relations between the prime and the target pair
of related words. Although the explicit instructions indicate
a conscious rather than an automatic phenomenon, the
authors argued that the delay of 400 ms between the prime
and the target pair is too short for a strategic processing in
the lexical decision task (LDT) that they had used, which is
considered evidence for some degree of automaticity of the
phenomenon. That is why the authors argued for a mixed
automatic/strategic nature of the analogical priming found
in their study. Later on a number of linguistic studies found
evidence for relational priming with a sensicality task (a
task in which participants indicate whether the two words in
a pair make sense as a phrase (Gagne, 2001, 2002; Gagne et
al., 2005; Estes, 2003; Estes and Jones, 2006)). Participants
were not explicitly instructed that the same relation could be
held between two subsequent pairs. Thus, although the
inter-stimulus interval (i.e. the time between the prime and
the target pair) was usually 1s, the fact that relational
priming was obtained without specific and explicit
instruction clusters these studies with the ones that may
indicate the existence of some automatic processing. Still,
the sensicality task itself definitely draws the attention
toward the relations between the words in a pair and thus
ruins the unintentionality of the process.
Thus, overall, there is still no clear evidence for the
automatic nature of relational priming, which in turn casts
doubts on the possibility for an automatic analogical

Abstract
The paper explores the possibility for unconscious analogymaking. The first experiment demonstrates that people may
see different analogies when different relations are
unconsciously “highlighted” in the base. The second
experiment demonstrates that people unintentionally and
unconsciously start to establish a mapping between two
simple structures. Various points of view about analogymaking are discussed in light of these findings.
Keywords: analogy; unconscious; relational priming

Introduction
One way of thinking about analogy-making is that it is “the
very blue that fills the whole sky of cognition” (Hofstater,
2001). Indeed, many researchers in the field adopt this view
(Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., Kokinov, B., 2001). Analogy is
considered to be a fundamental human ability that takes part
in a number of automatic cognitive processes such as
perception (Hofstadter, 1995; Mitchell, 1993; French, 1995;
Petkov, Kiryazov, Grinberg, Kokinov, 2007), judgment
(Kokinov, Hristova, Petkov, 2004; Hristova, Kokinov,
2006), decision-making (Markman & Moreau, 2001;
Petkov, 2006), categorization (Medin, Goldstone, Gentner,
1993), memory (Kokinov & Petrov, 2001), etc. If analogymaking is so basic, it should at least partially be an
automatic cognitive process (Kokinov, 1998). Finally, the
interaction between top-down (i.e., conscious) processing
and bottom-up (i.e., unconscious) processing was
considered to be the key to analogy-making (Hofstadter,
1995; Mitchell, 1993; French, 1995; Kokinov & Petrov,
2001; Leech, Mareschal and Cooper, 2008).
Another way of thinking about analogy is that it is a
complex cognitive activity that requires mapping between
complex knowledge structures that should be integrated and
maintained in the working memory until processed and that
could only be sequentially processed in small pieces
(Hummel & Holyoak, 1997; Cho, Holyoak and Cannon,
2007). Recent neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that
relational integration and analogy-making involve frontal
brain areas (Bunge, Wendelken, Badre, Wagner, 2005;
Christoff, Prabhakaran, Dorfman, Zhao, Kroger., Holyoak,
2001; Green, Fugelsang, Kraemer, Shamosh, Dunbar, 2006;
Luo, Perry , Peng, Jin, Xu, Ding, 2003) , which are typically
considered to process thoughts we are aware of (Smith,
Keramatian, Smallwood, Schooler, Luus, & Christoff, 2006)
There are a few attempts to demonstrate implicit analogy
making through priming of analogical base. Kokinov (1990)
demonstrated that priming of a specific episode may
increase the likelihood of the corresponding analogies, but

655

mapping. The first experiment tries to help people see a
more difficult and nontrivial analogy by relational priming.
It demonstrates that the unconscious automatic relational
priming may help people find remote and highly original
analogies. The second experiment focuses on unintentional
analogies that people are not aware of. It tries to
demonstrate that not only analogy may be influenced
unconsciously but also that the whole analogy may remain
unconscious.

motorcyclehelmet

fly- window
mouse- hole

Experiment 1: Seeing Nontrivial Relations

coffeecaffeine
free
coffee
groommarriage
lover wardrobe

car–
seat belt

sunsolarium

Canewood

airplane
-airport
birdnest

spiritbottle
moneymattress

Deerhoof
guitarstrings

Procedure
Two tasks alternate within every trial: LDT and analogy
task. First, participants were asked to judge whether the two
strings of letters presented in the center of the screen are
words or non-words. This was the priming task, used for
priming of a nontrivial or an irrelevant relation to the
subsequent analogy task relation (figure 1). Second,
participants were asked to indicate whether the word pair,
presented in the lower left corner or the pair in the lower
right corner of the screen makes a better analogy with the
base word pair. Subjects replied by pressing the respective
button.

Method
Design
Within-subject design was used. Part of the target trials
were primed with nontrivial but relevant relations, the other
part was primed with other irrelevant relations. The
dependent variable was the number of nontrivial analogies
made in each experimental condition.
Between-subject counterbalancing: Items were betweensubject counterbalanced with the type of relational prime,
i.e. part of the analogy tasks were primed with nontrivial
relations, the other part – with irrelevant relations.

Each participant was presented with a random sample of
26 out of 52 trials that contains target analogies primed with
nontrivial relations, target analogies primed with another
relation and filler trials.

Stimuli
26 target analogy tasks, 26 priming word pairs that prime
nontrivial relations and 26 priming word pairs that prime
other irrelevant relations were designed. The analogy task
contained three word pairs. The base was always presented
in the center of the computer screen. Participants were
asked to decide whether the base is analogical to the word
pair “A” or to the word pair “B”. In fact, both “A” and “B”
were analogous to the base word pairs. One of the analogies,
however, was easier to find and in this sense, it was a trivial
one1. The other possible analogy was non-trivial and usually
a remote one (Table 1). The rest of the 26 analogy tasks
were fillers and were “primed” with pairs of two “nonwords”.

mouse – hole
lover-wardrobe

analogy task

##### ######
money-mattress

bird-nest

mask
(50ms)

prime

fixation
cross
(50ms)

Inter-trial
Interval
(1000ms)

Table1. Examples of analogy tasks which were used in
experiment 1. Each row is one analogy task. The first pair in
each row is the base word-pair. The second and the third
word pairs are the options “A” and “B” respectively. The
forth word pair primes the nontrivial relation, while the fifth
primes a relation irrelevant to the analogy.

Figure1. Diagram of the stimulus displays and the timing
of events in experiment 1.
Participants

analogy task
base

word pair
“A”

word
pair “B”

Prime word pair
Prime of Prime of
nontrivia irrelevan
l relation t relation

32 students from New Bulgarian University (13 women
and 19 men) took part as volunteers in the experiment. The
mean age of the participants was 20.66 ranging form 19 to
26 years.
Results

1

At least 10 out of 17 participants had chosen one of the word
pairs as analogous to the base in the pre-test. This was the analogy
that we consider to be easier and the trivial one.

656

The mean number of nontrivial analogies was calculated
for each participant and for every experimental condition.
People made more nontrivial analogies after priming of
nontrivial relations between the words in the base (0.2424)
than after priming of another relation irrelevant to the
This difference turned out to be
analogy (0.1760).
significant, tested with the Repeated Measures ANOVA:
F(1, 31) =5.318, p=0.028, ES=0.146 (figure 2).
Thus, we may conclude that our manipulation
successfully influenced the perception of the relations in the
base and as a result participants were able to find the harder
analogy. In support of this claim, response time for making
the nontrivial analogy (7 999ms) was significantly longer
than response time needed for making the trivial analogy (6
431ms): F (1,26)=15.144, p=0.001, ES=0.3682.
In addition, it seems that relational priming influenced
participant’s choice on the subsequent analogy task
completely unconsciously. During the debriefing interview
at the end of the experiment, just one participant declared
that he had found that some word pairs in the first task
shared similar relations to the word pairs in the analogy
task. Thus, overall, people were unaware that some
irrelevant factor has influenced their capability of making
interesting nontrivial and harder analogies.

Experiment2: Unintentional and Unconscious
Analogical Mapping
This experiment aims to demonstrate spontaneous
mapping between pairs of analogically related words. We
used the color-naming paradigm (i.e. a modified version of
the classic Stroop task), which turned out to be sensitive to
priming effects in general (Catena, Fuentes, & Tudela,
2002;Mari-Beffa, Estevez, & Danziger, 2000) and to
conceptual priming in particular (Pritchard & Neumann,
2004; Segal, Gemar, Truchon, Guirguis, & Horowitz, 1995).
This paradigm relies on the interference between the
predisposition to read a word that is semantically related
with an activated concept and naming the color of the ink of
the word. Green, A., Fugelsang, J. and Dunbar, K. (2006)
used the Stroop color-naming paradigm to demonstrate that
concepts of a common analogical relation are activated
when people find the analogy between two pairs of words
joined by this particular relation. For example, if people
decide that “gun” and “bullet” are analogical to “bow” and
“arrow”, naming of the ink of the word “shoot” was slower
than if people judged categorically, whether the “gun” and
the “bow” are weapons and whether the “arrow” and the
“bullet” are projectiles. This experimental result, however,
relied on the explicit instruction to find the analogy and on
the implicit measure of what was activated as a sequence of
the performed analogy. In contrast we would like to find
evidence for an unintentional mapping, rather than a
mapping between two entities that was explicitly suggested
to exist.

0.25
0.2
0.15
nontrivial rel

0.1

Participants were instructed to name the color of the ink
of a word presented simultaneously with another word on a
screen. One of the words in the pair was always colored in
red, blue or green color. Participants were asked to indicate
their answer by pressing a button with the respective color.
Half of the target trials were preceded by a pair of
analogically related words and the other half - by a pair that
did not share any analogical relation. All target pairs
possessed a red word that allowed to oppose relational
priming with recognition of the same color (i.e., red). The
rest of the trials were fillers.

irrelevant rel

0.05
0
m ean num ber of
nontrivial analogies

Figure 2. Mean number of nontrivial analogies per
condition. The white bar stands for the mean number of
nontrivial analogies that have been made after priming with
nontrivial relations, while the grey bar stands for the mean
number of nontrivial analogies made after priming with
irrelevant relations.

Method

This experiment, however, may not differentiate between
the two points of view described at the beginning of the
paper. Analogies could be sensitive to unconscious
contextual influences but still, the analogical mapping may
happen consciously. The second experiment tries to tackle
exactly this question.

Design
A mixed 2 (type of relational priming: priming of
analogical relation or priming of non-analogical relation) by
3 (Inter stimulus interval: 100ms/400ms/700ms) design. For
each participant half of the stimuli were preceded by pairs
that share an analogical relation and the rest - by pairs that
share another non-analogical relation. The dependent
variable was the RT for indicating the color of the word in
the pairs.
Between-subject counterbalancing: Items were betweensubject counterbalanced with the type of the prime (i.e.,

2
The analysis was run on the data from 27 participants who have
made both trivial and non-trivial analogies.

657

analogical/non-analogical) in order to control for a specific
pairing of the words. Half of the target word pairs preceded
by analogically related words as well as the other half of the
target word pairs preceded by non-analogically related
words were given for judgment to one part of participants
and the same target word pairs but preceded, respectively,
by non-analogically paired words and analogically related
words were given to the rest of the participants.
Within-subject counterbalancing: The inter-stimulus
interval (ISI) between the target and prime word pair was
varied on three levels: 100 ms; 400ms; 700ms.

Results
The correct reaction times (RTs) bellow 150ms and above
1800ms were not included in data analysis, resulting in
approximately 1% of discarded data. A 2 (priming of
analogical relation/priming of non-analogical relation) by 3
(100ms/400ms/700ms) Repeated Measures ANOVA was
carried out on RT. We found a main effect of the type of
priming (F (1. 36) = 5.150, p = 0.029, ES = 0.125) and of
the inter stimulus interval (F (2, 72) = 18.162, p = 0.000, ES
= 0.335). The interaction between the type of priming and
ISI did not reach significance: F (2, 72) = 1.048, p = 0.356.
Figure 3 shows the mean RTs for each experimental
condition. The only statistical difference between the types
of priming appeared for ISI of 700 ms: F (1, 36) = 4.671, p
= 0.037, ES = 0.115. Thus, although we found evidence for
unintentional and unconscious analogical mapping, it seems
that the effect needs time to be revealed.

Stimuli
A set of 60 target pairs of related words and 60 priming
pairs of analogically related words was designed. Examples
of target and priming stimuli are presented in table 2. One of
the words in the target pairs was always red and one of the
words in the analogically related word pairs was always
green. Hence, whenever a target pair with a red colored
word was presented, the proceeding pair contained a green
word. Since, participants were supposed to judge 30 target
pairs primed by 30 analogically related words and 30 target
pairs proceeded by 30 non-analogically related words
making a set of 60 red and 60 green words overall, the rest
of the 120 filler trials consisted of 80 filler pairs with a blue
word, 20 filler pairs with a red word and another 20 filler
pairs with a green word. Thus, the whole set of 240 word
pairs contained an equal number of red, green and blue
words.

760
740
720
700
680
660
640
620

orchestra
peace
corrosion
cardigan

Target pair
book
clover
bacteria
knob

400m sec
700m sec
analogical nonrelation analogical
relation

Table 2. Examples of priming and target stimuli that are
analogically related.
Priming pair
musician
dove
acid
button

100m sec

Figure 3. Mean RT in the six experimental conditions.
The black bars stand for the RTs of target word pairs that
were presented 100ms after the prime word pairs. The grey
bars stand for the RTs of target trials that were presented
400ms after the prime word pairs. The white bars stand for
RTs of target word pairs that were presented 700ms after the
prime word pairs.

library
luck
infection
door

Procedure
Participants were instructed to judge the color of a word
in a pair by pushing the respective button on a BBOX.

In the debriefing interview after the experiment 20 out of
37 participants reported that some words in a pair were
related while other were not, but none of them reported that
related word pairs followed analogically related word pairs.
Thus we may conclude that participants were left blind for
our experimental manipulation.
In summary, we found a significant delay of naming the
color of a word in a pair only after an analogically related
prime pair of words. In contrast to previous experiments that
demonstrate relational priming we succeeded to explore this
phenomenon within a completely automatic setting, i.e. by
means of the color-naming paradigm. Participants were
neither explicitly instructed to code relations between the
words in a prime pair (Spellman et al, 2001) nor asked to
judge the sense between two words in a pair (Gagne, 2001,
2002; Gagne et al., 2005; Estes, 2003; Estes and Jones,

Each trial started with a fixation cross presented for
100ms. Then a word pair with a colored word appeared and
remained on the computer screen till the participant did not
indicate its color. When the participant indicated his/her
choice the next word pair appeared on the screen after
100ms, 400ms or 700ms and remained there until the
respective button was pushed. Then next trial started after
an inter-trial interval of 1000ms.
Participants
37 students from New Bulgarian University (27 women
and 10 men) took part as volunteers in the experiment. The
mean age of the participants was 23.49 ranging form 19 to
53 years.

658

2006) but rather to judge the color of the word in a pair.
Moreover we found evidence for relational priming within
comparably short inter stimulus interval (i.e., 700 ms for
activation of the relation between 2 words) that allows
arguing for an automatic activation of an analogical relation.
Hence, it is possible and indeed probable that analogies start
without intention and once started, analogies are difficult to
be suppressed.

Reference
Bunge, S. A., Wendelken, C., Badre, D., & Wagner, A. D.
(2005). Analogical reasoning and prefrontal cortex:
Evidence for separable retrieval and integration
mechanisms. Cerebral Cortex, 15, 239–249.
Catena, A., Fuentes, L.J., & Tudela, P. (2002). Priming and
interference effects can be dissociated in the Stroop task:
New evidence in favor of the automaticity of word
recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 113-118.
Cho, S., Holyoak, K. J., and Cannon, T.D. (2007).
Analogical reasoning in working memory: Resources
shared among relational integration, interference
resolution, and maintenance. Memory & Cognition, 35
(6), 1445-1455
Christoff, K., & Owen, A. M. (2006). Improving reverse
neuroimaging inference: Cognitive domain versus
cognitive complexity. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10,
352–353.
Christoff, K., Prabhakaran, V., Dorfman, J., Zhao, Z.,
Kroger, J. K., Holyoak, K. J., et al. (2001). Rostrolateral
prefrontal cortex involvement in relational integration
during reasoning. NeuroImage, 14, 1136–1149.
Estes, Z. (2003). Attributive and relational processes in
nominal combination. Journal of Memory and Language,
48, 304–319.
Estes, Z., and Jones, L. L. (2006). Priming via relational
similarity: A copper horse is faster when seen through a
glass eye. Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 89-101.
French, R. M. (1995). The Subtlety of Sameness.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gagne´, C. L. (2001). Relation and lexical priming during
the interpretation of noun–noun combinations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 27, 236–254.
Gagne´, C. L. (2002). Lexical and relational influences on
the processing of novel compounds. Brain and Language,
81, 723–735.
Gagne´, C. L., Spalding, T. L., & Ji, H. (2005). Reexamining evidence for the use of independent relational
representations during conceptual combination. Journal of
Memory and Language, 53, 445–455.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., Kokinov, B., eds. (2001). The
Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Green, A., Fugeslang, J. and Dunbar, K. (2006) Automatic
activation of categorical and abstract analogical relations
in analogical reasoing, Memory and Cognition, 34 (7),
1414-21
Green, A. E., Fugelsang, J. A., Kraemer, D. J., Shamosh, N.
A.,&Dunbar, K. N. (2006). Frontopolar cortex mediates
abstract integration in analogy. Brain Research, 22, 125–
137.
Holyoak, K.J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory &Cognition, 15,
332-340.

Conclusion
The first experiment demonstrates how finding of
nontrivial analogies may be facilitated through a recent
exposure to a relation involved in such analogies. People
were able to find original solutions if they unconsciously
were facilitated to encode the right relations. This
experiment, however, does not “insist” on unconscious
analogies per se. It rather demonstrates that analogy making
may be influenced unconsciously from some extraneous
factors. Thus, both points of view on analogies set out at the
beginning of the paper may satisfyingly explain these results
since encoding of relations may be influenced
unconsciously, but the very process of analogy may still
remain conscious.
In contrast, the second experiment demonstrated
unintentional and unconscious analogical mapping. People
seem to start building analogies although they were neither
expected to do so nor explicitly instructed to attend to the
relations between stimuli. Moreover, people were
completely “blind” about this and were unaware that they
have started to make analogies between word pairs in our
experiment. What is clear is that analogical mapping may be
initiated automatically and hence, may unconsciously
influence our behavior. It could be, however, that analogical
mapping starts outside of our awareness but if it finishes we
became aware of this fact. Hence, in some circumstances we
may be conscious about the final product of analogical
mapping but not conscious about the very process of
analogy. This research could not disambiguate such
possibility, but still it empirically demonstrates that people
are able to start analogies spontaneously. This appealing
possibility strongly advocates the point of view that
compares analogy to “the very blue that fills the whole sky
of cognition” (Hofstater, 2001).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported financially by the
ANALOGY project (NEST program, contract 29088)
funded by the EC. I would like to express my gratitude to
B. Kokinov, I. Vankov and G. Petkov for their insightful
comments on this research and to D. Koceva for her
intensive work on the first experiment.

659

Hofstadter, D.(1995) Fluid Concepts and Creative
Analogies: Computer Models of the Fundamental
Mechanisms of Thought (together with the Fluid
Analogies Research Group), NY: Basic Books Mitchell,
M. (1993). Analogy-Making as Perception: A Computer
Model. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hofstadter, D. (2001) Analogy as the Core of Cognition. In
Dedre Gentner, Keith J. Holyoak, and Boicho N. Kokinov
(eds.) The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive
Science. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press/Bradford Book,
pp. 499-538.
Hristova, P. & Kokinov, B. (2006) A Common Mechanism
Is Possibly Underlying the Shift in Perceptual and
Conceptual Judgment Produced by Irrelevant Information,
In: Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Hummel, J. & Holyoak, K. (1997). Distributed
representation of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Kokinov, B. (1990). Associative Memory-Based Reasoning:
Some Experimental Results. In: Proceedings of the 12th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Kokinov, B. (1998). Analogy is Like Cognition: Dynamic,
Emergent, and Context-Sensitive. In: Holyoak, K.,
Gentner, D. & Kokinov, B. eds. Advances in Analogy
Research: Integration of Theory and Data from the
Cognitive, Computational, and Neural Sciences. NBU
Press, Sofia.
Kokinov, B., Bliznashki, S., Kosev, S., Hristova, P. (2007)
Analogical Mapping and Perception: Do these Processes
Interact with each other and How? In: Proceedings of the
29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ. , 1175-1181
Kokinov, B., Hristova, P., Petkov, G. (2004) Does Irrelevant
Information Play a Role in Judgment? In: Proceedings of
the 26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, (pp. 720-725) Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Kokinov, B. & Petrov, A. (2001) Integration of Memory
and Reasoning in Analogy-Making: The AMBR Model.
In: Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., Kokinov, B. (eds.) The
Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kokinov, B. & Yoveva, M. (1996). Context Effects on
Problem Solving. In: Proceedings of the 18th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ.
Leech, Mareshal and Cooper, (2008) Analogy as relational
priming: A developmental and computational perspective
on the origins of a complex cognitive skill, Behavioral
and Brain Science
Luo, Q., Perry, C., Peng, D., Jin, Z., Xu, D., Ding, G., et al.
(2003). The neural substrate of analogical reasoning: An
fMRI study. Cognitive Brain Research, 17, 527–534.
Mari-Beffa, P., Estevez, A.F., & Danziger, S. (2000). Stroop
interference and negative priming: Problems with

inferences from null results. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 7, 499-503.
Markman, A, Moreau, C. (2001). Analogy and Analogical
Comparison in Choice. In: Gentner, D., Holyoak, K.,
Kokinov, B. (eds.) The Analogical Mind: Perspectives
from Cognitive Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Medin, D., Goldstone, R., and Gentner, D. (1993). Respects
for Similarity, Psychological Review, 100, 254-278
Petkov, G. (2006). Modeling Analogy-Making, Judgment,
and Choice with Same Basic Mechanisms. In:
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on
Cognitive Modeling. Eds: Fum, D., Missier, F., Stocco,
A., Edizioni Goliardiche, pp. 220-225.
Petkov, G., Kiryazov, K., Grinberg, M., Kokinov, B. (2007).
Modeling Top-Down Perception and Analogical Transfer
with Single Anticipatory Mechanism. In: Proceedings of
the Second European Cognitive Science Conference.
Schunn, C.D. & Dunbar, K. (1996). Priming, Analogy, and
Awareness in complex reasoning, Memory and Cognition,
24, 271-284
Smith, R., Keramatian, K., Smallwood, J., Schooler, J.,
Luus, B. and Christoff, K. (2006) Mind-wandering with
and without awareness: An fMRI study of spontaneous
thought processes. Proceedings of the 28th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (Ed. R. Sun):
804-809. Vancouver: Erlbaum.
Spellman, B. A., Holyoak, K.J. and Morrison, R.G. (2001)
Analogical priming via semantic relations, Memory and
Cognition, 29, 383-393

660

