UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding 'love' and 'happiness' – the conceptual representation of abstract objects
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/85p5h2tn
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Author
Kjoll, Georg
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

 Understanding ’love’ and ’happiness’ the conceptual representation of
                                               abstract objects
                                                    Georg Kjoll
                                                  University of Oslo
Abstract: Understanding love and happiness the conceptual representation of abstract objects
   In this paper I propose an externalist account of words denoting abstract objects. I suggest that lexical items
potentially give access to a range of corresponding concepts (Sperber and Wilson 1998) which get their content from
standing in a constitutive relation to properties in the world (Fodor 1998). I argue that this relation can manifest
itself in a number of ways, and that deference (Putnam 1975) plays a role in mediating the link between concepts and
abstract objects, such as love, happiness and morality. I expand on this by introducing Sperbers (1997) distinction
between intuitive and reflective concepts, and suggest that even though concepts locked to moral and emotion
properties may be seen as reflective, they are likely to be constrained by an innate intuitive format. By tentatively
investigating cross-linguistic data, I explore some consequences of my view for representation, communication and
ontology.
   References
   Fodor, Jerry A. 1998: Concepts: where cognitive science went wrong. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
   Putnam, Hilary 1975: ’The meaning of ’meaning”. In Philosophical papers, volume 2. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press pp. 215-71.
   Sperber, Dan 1997: ’Intuitive and reflective beliefs’. Mind and Language, 12, pp. 67-83.
   Sperber, Dan and Wilson, Deirdre 1998: ’The mapping between the mental and the public lexicon’. In Language
and Thought. Carruthers, Peter and Boucher, Jill (eds) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press pp. 184-200.
                                                          2003

