UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Verbs are LookING good in early language acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2nv5c92w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Saffran, Jenny
Seidenberg, Mark
Willits, Jon

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Verbs are LookING Good in Language Acquisition
Jon A. Willits (wilits@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Mark S. Seidenberg (seidenberg@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Jenny R. Saffran (saffran@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract
Statistical learning is an important element of language
acquisition. A basic unresolved question is, what are the units
over which statistics are calculated? In a corpus study and
two infant behavioral experiments, we show that varying the
units that are used greatly affects learning. Using words as
units, nouns are easier to segment from continuous speech
than verbs. However, if a highly frequent morphological
element such as ING is also treated as a unit, noun-verb
differences disappear, in both corpus analysis and behavioral
studies. These results suggest that infants can compute
statistics over units other than words and syllables, and
theories of statistical learning need better accounts for why
some units are tracked and not others.
Keywords: Statistical learning; Language acquisition; Word
segmentation; Morphology; Distributional statistics

What Do Infants Count?
Studies of infants and young children have established that
statistical learning plays an important role in language
acquisition (see Saffran & Sahni, 2007, for a review). A
fundamental question for theories of statistical learning is,
what units are statistics computed over? Many statistics can
be derived from natural languages, a fact that could limit the
role of statistical processes in acquisition, as this could
make it more difficult for the language learner to figure out
what statistics to use. For researchers in the area, the
problem is to identify the units that are tracked and to
determine why these units are tracked why others are not.
The literature on statistical language learning in infants,
children, and adults has often focused on transition
probabilities within and between words (e.g. the probability
one unit will follow another). For example, Saffran, Aslin,
and Newport (1996) manipulated transition probabilities
between syllables within a word (which were high)
compared to probabilities between syllables at word
boundaries (which were low).
These statistical
heterogeneities provided a basis for identifying words in a
simple artificial language. Many subsequent studies have
focused on transition probabilities in both artificial and
natural languages. Research has also begun to look at other
types of dependencies, for example between non-adjacent
syllables or words. ]

All such experiments make assumptions about the units
over which infants encode statistics such as frequency and
transition probability. Syllables, for example, seem like
obvious units given their fundamental role in speech
production. Different units may be tracked at different
points in development. As the child’s vocabulary develops,
so does the possibility of tracking word-level statistics.
Moreover, statistical learning may occur at multiple levels
of linguistic structure simultaneously. Thus, the question as
to which units statistics are computed over is a central one.
The answer will affect the extent to which statistical
learning is implicated in acquisition.
We examined this question in the context of a puzzle in
the language learning literature. In an important study,
Jusczyk and Aslin (1995) found that 7.5-month-old infants
could identify nouns from fluent, continuous speech. They
played infants a two-minute corpus of typical, child-directed
speech that repetitively used the same two nouns, and found
during a test phase that infants discriminated between the
nouns that had been played and frequency matched nouns
that had not been played. However, in a later study using a
similar procedure, Nazzi et al. (2005) found that verbs were
not identifiable until between 13.5 and 17.5 months. Thus
nouns and verbs appear to differ in ease of learning.
This difference could be because of intrinsic differences
between nouns and verbs: verbs could be more complex
because they encode relations, the relations can involve ea
variety of different elements in a sentence, and these
relations can be expressed in a number of different syntactic
structures (Gentner, 2006). It is also possible that the
statistical properties of nouns and verbs differ, such that
whereas nouns can be identified based on the immediate
contexts in which they occur, verbs cannot. Identifying
verbs might then require the use of other information such
as syllabic stress which infants master at later ages than they
do transition probability (Saffran & Thiessen, 2003).
Our study investigated this idea, but with an important
twist: the learnability of nouns and verbs from statistical
information (the frequencies of words and the immediate
lexical contexts in which they occur) crucially depends on
assumptions about the units over which the child computes
such statistics. In particular, we examined the role of the
highly frequent bound morpheme: ING. Typically, ING is

2570

not treated as a unit. However, ING has many of the
properties of words thought to make them salient units. We
investigated whether infants’ abilities to segment nouns and
verbs from speech changed if the ING unit were taken into
account.
We present two types of data. First, we performed a
corpus study of noun and verb statistics. This analysis
indicates that when simple statistics are computed over
words, nouns are more easily classified than verbs using the
immediately adjacent units. However, the outcome changes
if the computation of these statistics treats ING as a separate
unit. ING occurs with high frequency in child directed
speech and attaches to many verbs. This predicts that if the
child is tracking ING in continuous speech, it should
facilitate extracting the base words to which ING is often
attached. In effect, by the same reasoning that led earlier
researchers to conclude that transition probabilities would
lead the infant to discover word boundaries, they should
begin identifying units like ING, which facilitate learning
verbs, making them more comparable to nouns with respect
to age of acquisition. We then tested this prediction in a
behavioral study with 7.5 and 9.5-month-old infants.

Corpus Study
In the corpus study we investigated noun-verb differences in
distributional structure in child-directed speech with two
primary purposes in mind: (1) in analysis 1, to replicate
previous studies of the distributional differences between
nouns and verbs; (2) in analysis 2, to see how these nounverb differences change as a function of what gets counted
as a unit when computing co-occurrence statistics.
A number of previous corpus studies have noted that
nouns are easier than verbs to grammatically categorize
based on their co-occurrence frames. For example,
Redington, Chater, and Finch (1998) created context vectors
for words in child-directed speech by computing the cooccurrence probability between a word and its adjacent
neighbors in speech. They then compared the co-occurrence
vectors of word pairs and used that similarity to try and
predict whether or not the words were in the same
grammatical category. For example, words like truck, card,
and hand all tend to co-occur with the same set of words
(like the and my), receive high similarity scores, and thus
have a high likelihood of being considered in the “same”
category compared to words like crawl and eat, which tend
to co-occur with many other words. Redington et al. found
that nouns were more easily classifiable than verbs based on
their co-occurrence vectors (90% accurate vs. 72%
accurate). Other corpus studies using different methods have
replicated this noun-verb difference. For example, Mintz
(2003) looked at the usefulness of frequent frames for
grammatical categorization (such as “the ___ is”), finding
that the 50 most frequent frames in child-directed speech are
sufficient for good grammatical categorization of the
intervening word, but that noun accuracy was much higher
than verb accuracy.
The previous work looking at the effect of co-occurrence
frames on the ability to grammatically categorize nouns and

verbs was done using traditionally defined words as cooccurrence units. In our study, we looked at whether treating
the highly frequent unit ING as a unit affected the ability to
grammatically categorize nouns and verbs, and whether it
made the difference between nouns and verbs go away.

Method
Corpus. The corpus was derived from the CHILDES
database of child-directed speech, using all samples of
speech directed to children 24 months of age and younger.
The samples were segmented into word units, and all
punctuation and pauses were replaced with a PAUSE unit.
In the first analysis, words were defined in the standard
way, resulting in a corpus with 10,730 unique units, and a
total corpus size of 1.207 million words. In the second
analysis, all words that ended in the suffix ING were split
such that the suffix was treated as a word-like unit, and the
root words’ spellings were normalized so that the root was
counted as the same as occurrences of the word without the
suffix. This resulted in a corpus with 10,551 unique units,
and a total corpus size of 2.219 million words.
Stimuli. We used 150 words, the 75 most frequent nouns
and verbs in child-directed speech according to the
CHILDES corpus. The use of the most frequent words was
done in order to facilitate making predictions about the
following infant behavioral experiments, which would also
use highly frequent words.
Statistics for Analysis 1. Our analyses were conducted in
the same manner as Redington, Finch, and Chater (1998).
First, we computed two, 10,730-element co-occurrence
vectors for each of the 150 target words. The first vector
was a record of the probability of each of the corpus’s
10,730 words preceding the target word in the corpus; the
second recorded the probability of those 10,730 words
following the target word. These vectors were concatenated
creating a 21,460-element vector for each of the 150 target
words. Next we computed the Pearson correlation for all
150-by-150 target pairs, as a measure of the distributional
similarity of each pair.
Similarity scores were used to predict the grammatical
category of the words (as either nouns or verbs), again in the
same manner as Redington et al. First, a similarity threshold
was chosen as a cutoff, such that similarities between word
pairs that were greater than the cutoff were predicted to be
of the same category, and similarities that are below the
cutoff were predicted to be of different categories. These
distributional similarity-based guesses were compared to
whether or not the actual pairs were both nouns, both verbs,
or were of different categories. These comparisons are used
to calculate signal detection measures: hits (guessed same
category, was same category), misses (guessed different,
was same), false alarms (guessed same, was different) and
correct rejections (guessed different, was different). The
signal detection measures are then used to calculate overall
accuracy as (hits / (hits + false alarms)) and completeness as
(hits / (hits + misses)).

2571

Statistics for Analysis 2. The statistics for analysis 2 were
the same as the previous analysis, except that the target
words’ vectors were only 10,551 elements long, reflecting
the smaller number of words in that corpus due to the
consolidation of the nouns’ and verbs’ different forms.

Results and Discussion
In analysis 1, the mean noun-noun similarity score was r =
0.82 (SE = 0.04), the mean verb-verb similarity score was r
= 0.73 (SE = 0.07), and the mean noun-verb similarity score
was r = 0.38 (SE = 0.18). Accuracy and completion scores
were for nouns and verbs were computed as described
above, and plotted in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Grammatical categorization accuracy and
completeness scores using 1-word distributional frames

was r = 0.38 (SE = 0.22). Accuracy and completion plots for
nouns and for verbs are shown in Figure 2.
This corpus study replicates previous work by Redington
et al. and Mintz, demonstrating a significant noun advantage
when using co-occurrence frames in order to guess the
grammatical category of a word. Except when at ceiling or
at floor, noun categorization was both more accurate (more
hits with fewer false alarms) and more complete (more hits
with fewer misses) than verbs. In analysis 2, this difference
goes away. There is no significant difference between noun
accuracy and verb accuracy, or noun completeness and verb
completeness, regardless of the cutoff that is used.
This shows that if ING is treated as a unit, it makes verbs
more similar to each other. It also makes most nouns less
confusable with verbs, since they very rarely occur with an
ING. In general, noun and verb transition probabilities have
different characteristics. When only words are considered,
nouns have more consistent transitions. This makes them
easier to classify and easier to segment. However, when
verbs occur in their ING frame, this makes them very easy
to classify, and this occurs often enough in child-directed
speech (around 15% of a verb’s occurrences) to make
general noun-verb differences disappear, assuming ING gets
treated as a separate unit.
The corpus study suggests that young infants have enough
exposure to verbs in ING form to use it as a grammatical
categorization cue. And because grammatical categorization
is relying on information very similar in nature to word
segmentation (namely, transitional probability statistics),
this difference may also impact infants’ ability to segment
verbs as easily as they can segment nouns. We test this
hypothesis in Experiments 1 and 2.

Experiment 1

Figure 2: Grammatical categorization accuracy and
completeness including ING
In analysis 2, the mean noun-noun similarity score was r =
0.78 (SE = 0.04), the mean verb-verb similarity score was r
= 0.75 (SE = 0.05), and the mean noun-verb similarity score

Previous research has found that 7.5-month-old infants can
segment nouns from fluent speech, but that infants cannot
segment verbs until 13.5 months. As we have shown in the
corpus study, this may be because the co-occurrence frames
for verbs are typically much less frequent and much less
consistent than for nouns.
In fact, in Nazzi et al.’s study showing that infants cannot
recognize verbs in fluent speech until 13.5 months of age,
the verbs and co-occurrence frames that were used were
quite low in frequency (such as “boss permits everyone”).
Nazzi et al. suggested that the reason infants have more
trouble with verbs is due to phonological and prosodic
factors. In English, most words are consonant initial and of
strong-weak stress, but that verbs often are not. They
manipulated these factors, and found this affected whether
infants were successful and 13.5 months vs. 17.5 months.
It is possible that infants’ difficulty in their study was due
to low familiarity with the target verbs (permit, discount,
import, and incite) compared to the high familiarity of
Jusczyk and Aslin’s target nouns (dog, cup, bike, and feet).
It is also possible that the difference was due to Nazzi et
al.’s relatively low frequency frames (“boss ___ everyone”).
However, our corpus analysis suggests that even if high
frequency verbs and verb frames are used, infants may still

2572

fail because distributional differences between typical nouns
and verbs are large, and that infants may be failing at these
early ages because they have not yet learned about typical
verb frames and are not yet good at using them to extract
verbs from fluent speech.
Experiment 1 tested this hypothesis. If infants’ failure to
segment verbs in Nazzi et al was due mainly to their use of
low frequency verbs and verb frames, then they should
succeed in Experiment 1, in which we used high frequency
verbs and verb frames. However, if they still fail, it could be
attributed to infants’ lack of knowledge about verb frames at
these young ages.

Method
Participants. We tested 24 American infants (12 males, 12
females) from English-speaking families, between the ages
of 9 and 10 months (with an average age of 39 weeks, 6
days; and with a range 37 weeks, 0 days to 42 weeks, 0
days). Eight additional infants were tested but not included
due to crying during the procedure.
Procedure. Infants were tested individually in a 2-meter x
2-meter soundproof booth while seated in their caregiver’s
lap. The caregiver was given headphones playing music so
that they could not hear the experimental stimuli and thus
could not influence the infant’s looking or listening to
particular sounds. The experiment was run using the
Headturn Preference Procedure.
The experimental procedure contained a familiarization
phase and a test phase. During the familiarization phase,
each infant heard 12 simple sentences, six using a single
verb, and another six using a second verb. The presentation
of the sentences was blocked by verb (all six sentences for a
particular verb were played in a row), with a pause of one
second between each sentence. The alternating blocks of six
sentences were repeated four times. The total duration of the
each block was approximately 23 seconds, and the total time
during familiarization was approximately 140 seconds. In
addition to hearing the sentences played during
familiarization, infants were also exposed to flashing lights
that were contingent on where they were looking. At the
beginning of the familiarization phase, a center light in front
of the infant flashed, and when the infant looked at it, a light
on either the left wall or the right wall (chosen randomly)
began to flash. Once the infant looked at the sidelight, it
continued to flash until the infant looked away for more
than two seconds, upon which the center light would begin
to flash and the sequence of events would repeat. This
process of light-flashing contingent on the infant’s looking
went on while the familiarization sounds played
continuously in the background. During the familiarization
phase the flashing lights and the sounds were not contingent
on one another.
After the 140-second familiarization period, the test phase
began. The test phase had 12 test trials. At the beginning of
each test trial, the center light started flashing, and when the
infant looked at it, a sidelight would begin to flash. When
the infant looked at the sidelight, one of four verbs (the two
verbs the infant heard during familiarization, and two “new”

verbs) began playing from a speaker mounted next to the
flashing light. The verb played repeatedly with a 600 ms
interval between each repetition until the infant looked away
from the flashing light for more than 2 seconds, or until a
maximum trial length (15 repetitions) was reached.
Materials and Design. The experiment used four verbs:
kiss, drink, give, and walk. Each infant was exposed to only
two of the four verbs during the familiarization phase, and
then they heard all four during the test phase. The verbs
were counterbalanced such that half the infants were
exposed to drink and give during familiarization, and the
other half were exposed to kiss and walk.
We chose the four targets by selecting verbs that were
similar to the nouns from Jusczyk and Aslin (1995) in terms
of infants’ typical level of comprehension and exposure to
the words. Measures of children’s comprehension were
obtained from the MacArthur-Bates Communicative
Development Inventory norms (Dale & Fenson, 1996).
Frequency in child-directed speech was measured by
obtaining frequency counts from all corpora in the
CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2004) directed at infants
12 months and younger.
For each verb, we used the CHILDES database to find the
six most frequent frames for each verb, using the same
method as Mintz (2003) and the previous corpus analyses.
An example of one of these frames is “to X it.” We used the
six frames to construct six sentences for each verb. We
varied the location of the verb in each sentence such that it
occurred once as the first word, once as the last word, and
four times at varying points in the middle of the sentence.
The verbs were the only words that were repeated more than
once in any of a verb’s six sentences, and the average
sentence and syllable length were kept the same for each of
the verbs’ sentences. We recorded the target verbs and
sentences, spoken in an infant-directed manner by a nativeEnglish-speaking adult. The individual verbs and the
sentences as a whole were standardized in volume using
Adobe Audition.
The design of the experiment was a thus 2 (verb
familiarity: familiarized during training vs. not familiarized
during training) x 2 (list 1 vs. list 2) mixed design, with the
list variable between-subjects and the verb familiarity
condition within-subjects. The dependent variable was the
amount of time the infant spent looking at a flashing light
while a verb was playing during the test phase.

Results and Discussion
A scatter plot of the looking times for Experiment 1 is
shown in Figure 3. The figure shows each participant’s
mean novelty preference: their looking time for unexposed
words minus the looking time for words they heard during
familiarization. There was not a significant effect or
interaction involving the list variable (all F’s < 1) so this
variable was removed from further analyses.
In Experiment 1, 9.5-month-old infants showed no
evidence of discriminating verbs they had been exposed to,
compared to the verbs they had not (F(1,23) = 0.60, p =
0.446). The verbs were all very high frequency, in high

2573

frequency frames, consonant initial, and of strong-weak
stress, and infants were still not able to segment the verbs
from fluent speech. This contrasts with other studies in
which infants were successful with high frequency nouns in
high frequency frames at 7.5 months.

Figure 3. Infants’ Novelty Preference in Experiment 1
There are several possible reasons for this result, such as
semantic or pragmatic factors (e.g., infant-directed speech is
more often using nouns in isolation and calling attention to
specific objects at the same time). However, it is still
possible that the difference is due to transition probability
differences between nouns and verbs. As the corpus study
showed, lexical verb frames are less diagnostic than lexical
noun frames overall, and thus lesser knowledge about verb
frames could be making it more difficult for infants to
segment verbs. The corpus study also suggests that using
inflectional forms like ING as units in computing transition
probabilities would ameliorate this difference. Doing so
would allow infants to make use of verbs’ most frequent and
most diagnostic frame. In Experiment 2 we tested this
hypothesis.

Procedure. The procedure for Experiment 2 was exactly the
same as for Experiment 1, with the exception of the training
materials, as described below.
Materials and Design. The same four target verbs were
used for Experiment 2 as for Experiment 1, and the test
phase was exactly the same (infants heard the root form of
the verb only). During the training phase, infants heard 12
sentences just as in Experiment 1, except that this time the
verbs occurred in a frame that included the –ing inflection,
such as “you X ing”. The exact frames were once again
chosen using the CHILDES corpus to identify the six most
frequent frames for the verbs when they were used in their –
ing form. Six grammatical sentences were constructed for
each verb using these frames.
The design for Experiment 2 was a 2 (age: 7.5-months vs.
9.5-months) x 2 (verb familiarized during training vs. verb
not familiarized during training) x 2 (list 1 vs. list 2) mixed
design, with the age and list variables between-subjects and
the verb familiarity condition within-subjects. The
dependent variable was again the amount of time the infant
spent looking at a flashing light while a verb was playing
during the test phase.

Results and Discussion
A scatter plot of the listening times for Experiment 2 is
shown in Figure 4. The figure again shows infants’ mean
novelty preference (e.g. their looking time for word to
which they were not exposed, minus their looking time for
the words to which they were exposed).

Experiment 2
7.5 and 9.5-month-old infants were tested to etermine if they
could segment verbs if frame was the most informative one,
which includes ING. If so, this would show that infants’
difficulty with verbs (in our Experiment 1, and in Nazzi et
al) was due to differences in transition probabilities between
nouns and verbs, and that when this difference is equalized,
the noun-verb difference is eliminated.

Method
Participants. We tested 48 American infants (24 males, 24
females) from English-speaking families. Half were
between the ages of 7 and 8 months (with an average age of
30 weeks, 6 days; and with a range 37 weeks, 0 days to 35
weeks, 0 days). The other half were between the ages of 9
and 10 months (with an average age of 39 weeks, 6 days;
and with a range 37 weeks, 0 days to 42 weeks, 0 days).
Thirteen additional infants were tested but not included due
to crying during the procedure.

Figure 4. Infants’ Novelty Preference in Experiment 2
There was not a significant effect or interaction involving
the list variable (all F’s < 1) so this variable was removed
from further analyses. There was also no significant effect
of age (F(1,47) = 0.85, p > 0.05) nor age-by-familiarization
interaction (F(1,47) = 1.45, p = 0.234). There was a main
effect of familiarization, such that the verbs to which the
infants had not been exposed were preferred during the test
phase (F(1,47) = 7.27, p = 0.009). Follow-up tests show that

2574

this difference was significant both for 7.5-month-olds (p =
0.006) and for 9.5-month-olds (p = 0.009).
Experiment 2 confirms the importance of units other than
words in computing statistics in early language learning.
Our corpus study suggested that treating morphological
elements like ING as units in statistical computations has a
large effect, eliminating the learnability difference between
nouns and verbs. Experiment 2 demonstrated that this
makes an important difference in infants’ word
segmentation. When verbs occur in the presence of ING, the
verb can be segmented at the same age as nouns can be.

General Discussion
The corpus analyses and behavioral experiments reported in
this article have important consequences for theories of
language acquisition that invoke statistical learning. Most
important is that the units that are used to calculate the
statistics have a major impact on what is learnable. When
high frequency morphemes such as ING do not get treated
as units in statistical calculations, nouns have a significant
advantage in terms of segmentation from fluent speech, and
are likely much easier to classify in terms of their
grammatical category and semantics. When high frequency
morphemes such as ING are counted as units, verbs are just
as easy to segment, and grammatically classify. Future work
will need to address the question of how units are
determined for different tasks at different ages. ING
appears to function as a unit because it exhibits statistical
properties similar to words.
Our research suggests that verb forms are not necessarily
segmented and learned later than nouns; some verbs can be
learned early if certain conditions are met. The infant must
be treating morphological frames such as ING as units; the
verb must occur frequently in this frame; and the verb itself
must occur with high frequency (in work not reported here,
infants could not use the ING frame to segment nonwords).
Other studies such as Nazzi et al. deviated from these
conditions and thus found learning for verbs to only occur at
much later ages. The factors they studied (effects of prosody
and phonotactic regularities) are relevant to how children
learn lower frequency words (consistent with a corpus
analysis of noun-verb differences by Monaghan, Chater, &
Christiansen, 2005). These kinds of information are clearly
very important for language learning and comprehension
(Johnson & Jusczyk, 2001), but may not come online until
infants are older (Saffran & Thiessen, 2003).
The present work also contributes to our understanding of
the onset of morphological learning. Principles that were
established in connection with the word learning/
segmentation problem extend to the identification of subword units such as ING. These units will eventually be
morphemes: units that have consistent phonological and
semantic content, which combine and recombine with other
units in systematic ways and are the basis of productivity in
the lexicon.
Our results also bear on the debate about whether or
infants use statistics or more formal, structured types of
knowledge during language acquisition. In an early reply to

Chomsky’s criticism of behaviorist approaches to language
learning, Osgood (1963) pointed out that many of
Chomsky’s statements about the limitations of statistical
approaches apply only if the level at which the statistics are
being computed is the word. Acknowledging that statistics
are computed at many levels, including subword, word, and
supraword, is likely to expand the range of language
learning phenomena that statistical learning can explain.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH grant R01HD47425. J.
Willits was supported by NIH Institutional Training grant
5T32HD049899 to the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

References
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28, 125-127.
Gentner, D. (2006). Why verbs are hard to learn. In K.
Hirsh-Pasek, & R. Golinkoff, (Eds.) Action meets word:
How children learn verbs (pp.544 564). Oxford
University Press.
Johnson, E.K. & Jusczyk, P.W. (2001). Word segmentation
by 8-month-olds: When speech cues count more than
statistics. Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 1-20.
Jusczyk, P. W., & Aslin, R. N. (1995). Infants’ detection of
the sound patterns of words in fluent speech. Cognitive
Psychology, 29, 1-23.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Mintz, T. H. (2003). Frequent frames as a cue for
grammatical categories in child directed speech.
Cognition, 90, 91-117.
Monaghan, P., Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005).
The differential role of phonological and distributional
cues in grammatical categorization. Cognition, 96, 143182.
Nazzi, T., Dilley, L. C., Jusczyk, A. M., Shattuck-Hufnagel,
S., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2005). English-learning infants’
segmentation of verbs from fluent speech. Language and
Speech, 48, 279-298.
Osgood, C. (1963). On understanding and creating
sentences. American Psychologist, 18, 735-751.
Redington, M., Chater, N., & Finch, S. (1998).
Distributional information: A powerful cue for acquiring
syntactic categories. Cognitive Science, 22, 425-469.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., & Thiessen, E. D. (2003). Pattern induction
by infant language learners. Developmental Psychology,
39, 484-494.
Saffran, J. R., & Sahni, S.D. (2007). Learning the sounds of
language. In M. Joanisse, M. Spivey, and K. McRae
(Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of Psycholinguistics,
Cambridge University Press.

2575

