UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual strength as the constraint condition in artificial grammar learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1m7738p7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dienes, Zoltan
Kiyokawa, Sachiko
Shigemasu, Kazuo
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual strength as the constraint condition in artificial grammar learning
Daisuke Tanaka (tanaka@rstu.jp)
Faculty of Regional Sciences, Tottori University
Koyama-cho-minami 4-101, Tottori City, Tottori 680-8551, Japan

Sachiko Kiyokawa (kiyo@isc.chubu.ac.jp)
Department of Psychology, Chubu University,
Matsumoto-cho 1200 Kasugai City, Aichi 487-8501, Japan

Ayumi Yamada (ayumi.yamada@gmail.com)
Human Innovation Research Center, Aoyama Gakuin University,
Shibuya 4-4-25, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150-8366 Japan

Zoltán Dienes (dienes@sussex.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex,
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9QH,UK

Kazuo Shigemasu (kshige@main.teikyo-u.ac.jp)
Department of Psychology, Faculty of Letters, Teikyo University,
Ootsuka 359, Hachioji City, Tokyo 192-0395, Japan

Abstract
Previous research using the chain of compound letters as
letter strings in artificial grammar learning (AGL) suggested
that visual saliency known as global precedence influenced
the extent of learning. In this study the luminance of letter
strings in the learning phase was manipulated to investigate
the effect of visual input on AGL regardless of top down
attention control. As a result, participants assigned to the low
luminance condition were not able to learn any grammar even
though they could percept letter strings in the learning phase.
This finding suggested that AGL is influenced by the visual
saliency from outer environment independently of top down
attention control. The results implied that AGL mechanism as
adaptive system is affected both by the top down selective
attention to acquire covariance sensitively and by the bottom
up visual saliency from the complex environment rather than
automatic processing system.
Keywords: Implicit learning; artificial grammar learning;
selective attention

Background
Implicit learning is a generic term used to refer to the
phenomena that observers can implicitly identify the
covariation between some variables when exposed to large
amounts of information in order to adapt to their
environment (Reber, 1989). Artificial grammar learning
(AGL) is known as the one of the most popular
experimental procedures in the realm of implicit learning
research. The typical procedure of the AGL experiment
comprises two phases. In the initial phase of the AGL
procedure, i.e., the learning phase, participants are exposed
to a series of letter strings that follow complex rules,
typically a finite-state Markovian rule system (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Artificial grammars used in this study. The
illustration on the top of the panel represents Grammar 1,
and Grammar 2 on the bottom. These can generate
“grammatical” letter strings connecting letters from state
1(S1) to outputs through some states (for example,
grammatical NVJTVT was generated from Grammar 1, S1S2-S3-S1-S2-S5). Grammar 1 was the same as that used in
Knowlton and Squire (1996), in terms of the abstract
structure. The two grammars did not have any common
chunks even in the abstract level.

1894

The participants are not informed about this at the time of
the experiment. In this phase, the participants are only
required to memorize or read the series of strings presented
on the computer screen in succession. After this phase, the
participants are informed about the existence of rules to
produce the series of strings presented in the learning phase.
In the subsequent phase, the participants are asked to select
grammatical strings from among those that violate the rules.
It is observed that they can correctly select novel
grammatical strings on more than chance level, although
they are unable to report the basis of their decisions.
With respect to the unconsciousness in implicit
learning, the issue about the relationship between learning
and attention are one of the central topics in this area
(French & Cleeremans, 2002). In the context of the AGL
procedure, Dienes, Broadbent and Berry (1991) investigated
the relation between AGL and divided attention using dual
task procedure and the influence of division of the resource
of attention was revealed. With respect to selective attention,
Tanaka, Kiyokawa, Yamada, Dienes, & Shigemasu (2008)
investigated the role of selective attention in AGL using
GLOCAL strings (Figure 2), which are chains of compound
letters(Navon, 1977). With respect to compound letters,
when different letters are represented in the local and global
levels for half a second or more, the two levels can mutually
interfere with each other indicating that attention to one
level still allows the processing of the to-be-ignored level
(e.g., Hibi, Takeda, & Yagi, 2002). Given the inevitable
input from the unattended level at seeing of these compound
letters, GLOCAL strings allow us to simultaneously present
two different strings. For instance, a GLOCAL string can be
read as one string using global letters (NVJTVJ in Figure 2),
whereas it can also be read as another string using local
letters (BYYFLB in Figure 2).

B
B
B B
B
B
B B
B
B
B
B B
B
B B
B
B
B

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y Y
Y
Y
Y Y
YY
Y
Y
YYYYY
Y

FFFFFFFFF
F
F
F
F
F
F

L
L
B
L
B
L
B
L
L
B
L L
L L
B
B
LL
B
B
BBBBB
L

Figure 2: The example of GLOCAL strings.

Since GLOCAL strings can be made to follow two different
AGs at the local and global levels, by manipulating
participants’ attention, we can examine whether the
structure of the unattended strings can be learned. The
results of their experiment revealed that the participants
only learned the grammar at the level to which they attended
given the interference from the unattended level.
In addition, Tanaka et al. (2008) showed that there
is asymmetry between the global and local levels. More
specifically, accuracy of learned grammar of the participants
assigned to the global attention condition was higher than

that of the participants assigned to the local attention
condition, despite the participants in both conditions were
equally able to write down letter strings at the attended level
in the learning phase. This asymmetry suggested that the
difference in visibility influences the extent they can
implicitly learn given global precedence (e.g., Navon, 2003).
Considering the global precedence as the effect
occurred in the preattentive stage of perception, the
difference in AGL performance between the levels of
GLOCAL strings suggested that the explanation of AGL
was applied to the framework of the perceptual load theory
(e.g., Lavie, 1995). Specifically, it is possible to consider
that AGL performance from high perceptual load input (i.e.,
the local level) would be lower than that from low
perceptual load input (i.e., the global level). Note that,
strictly speaking, the term “perceptual load” in this study is
different from its usage in the field of attention research
(e.g., Lavie, 2005). First, the target presentation time is
usually very short in attention research (e.g., 50–100 ms, in
Lavie, 1995). Furthermore, the perceptual load was
ordinarily manipulated with respect to the task-relevant
display size or the number of distractors. In fact, Lavie
pointed out that the reason for why much literature
supported the late selection view (vs. early selection view)
was that these studies used displays with usually no more
than two different items and these experimental situations
involved a low perceptual load (Lavie, 1995, p.452).
However, given the fact that global precedence at the
preattention stage of GLOCAL strings perception influences
AGL, it is possible to consider that the advantage of the
global attention condition in AGL was due to lower
perceptual load than local attention. Furthermore, although
the perceptual load was manipulated by the size of the
display or the number of distractors in general, such
conventional methods were inappropriate in the study of
GLOCAL strings. It was possible to distract subjective
viewing as compound letters by using distractors,
irrespective of the perceptual load, because subjective
viewing as compound letters was not constant, for instance,
it depended on the size of the letters (for review, Navon,
2003).
In this experiment the luminance of GLOCAL
strings was manipulated as the perceptual load. As a
rationale for this operational definition, it is assumed that
that attenuation of visibility based on the luminance change
requires more amount of the load to percept. Moreover, the
change in luminance had little influence in the structural
character of GLOCAL strings rather than the existence of
irrelevant stimuli. If the attenuation of visibility based on
the luminance influences the implicit learning, it provides
new findings about the restriction of implicit learning from
environment which is subjectively uncontrollable factor.
That is, it would be shown that the adaptive aspect of
implicit learning in addition to the automatic aspect (e.g.,
Nisbett, 2003; Reber, 1989). The main hypothesis was that
the perceptual load is a constraint factor for work of
selective attention in AGL. More specifically, in the low

1895

luminance condition it is more difficult to learn AG from
the attended information than in the high luminance
condition. In a similar reason, it was predicted that the
performance of the global attention condition is better than
that of the local attention condition. This was also based on
the motivation to replicate previous study.

Experiment
Method
Participant Forty undergraduates from Senshu University
participated in the experiment. The assignments pertaining
to the attention conditions and luminance of GLOCAL
strings were counterbalanced.
Stimuli The two AGs used in this experiment were identical
to those used in Tanaka et al. (2008) (Figure 1). Grammar 1
was the same as that used in Knowlton and Squire (1996), in
terms of the abstract structure. Grammar 2 was made with
the constraint that participants learned one grammar could
not accurately classify stimuli from the other grammar (in
detail, see Tanaka et al., 2008).
Eighteen grammatical strings were constructed
from each AG with a length of three to six letters. Two
types of GLOCAL strings were constructed from the strings
following the two AGs. One type of GLOCAL string
followed Grammar 1 at the global level and Grammar 2 at
the local level, and this was reversed for the other type of
GLOCAL string. Thus, these grammars were
counterbalanced across both the levels. GLOCAL strings
were presented as white uppercase letters against a black
background. Small letters were used in 12 pt MS Gothic
font. These GLOCAL strings were identical to those in
Tanaka et al being used. Seven small letters were arranged
vertically to obtain one large letter. Eight small letters were
arranged horizontally to obtain F, J, L, and X; nine, to
obtain B, N, T and Y; thirteen, to obtain V; and seven, to
obtain Z. The height of a letter on the screen was
approximately 3.2 cm and the width was approximately 1.8
to 3.0 cm. The distance between the display and the
participants was approximately 60 cm. Of all the
grammatical strings, those that could be judged by the
grammar extracted from the attended level of the GLOCAL
strings were categorized as “attended” grammatical strings,
and there were “unattended” grammatical strings by the
same token.
The luminance of GLOCAL strings was
manipulated as a factor of perceptual load. Specifically, the
luminance values of the image data of the GLOCAL strings
were reduced to half by MATLAB. These GLOCAL strings
with half luminance were named as the low luminance
GLOCAL strings, whereas the regular GLOCAL strings
were named as high luminance GLOCAL strings.
Twenty strings following each grammar used in the
test phase were composed of five or six letters. These were
not GLOCAL but regular letter strings. Half of these were
used in the learning phase and were referred to as “old”
grammatical strings. The remaining strings were not

identical to any of the strings presented in the learning phase
and were referred to as “new” grammatical strings. This
distinction in grammatical strings was aimed at clarification
of the extent of AGL. More specifically, the participants can
judge “old” grammatical strings correctly using memory
traces of presented strings, whereas they have to have some
abstract structure for “new” grammar strings. All these
grammatical strings were used to construct nongrammatical
strings that violated both the grammars by placing one or
two characters in nonpermissible locations. A constraint in
the nongrammatical strings was that they comprised the
same letters as the grammatical ones. For the above reason,
there were four types of grammatical strings used in the
learning phase, “old-attended,” “new-attended,” “oldunattended,” and “new-unattended.”
With regard to the dependent variable, the d’ based
on the signal detection theory was calculated to rule out the
influence of subjective bias (Stanislaw & Todorov, 1999).
The d’ at each condition was calculated by using hit rate for
grammatical strings and false alarm rate for non
grammatical strings. Thus the higher the d’ the better is the
performance of the participant.
Design A 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 mixed design was employed. The
first factor was luminance of the GLOCAL strings. The
participants were assigned to the high or low luminance
condition in the learning phase. The task and stimuli in the
test phase for both conditions were identical. The second
factor was global/local. The participants were instructed to
attend to the global or local level in the learning phase.
Luminance and global/local were between-participants
factors. The third factor was attended/unattended. Half of
the grammatical strings in the test phase could be judged
correctly on the basis of the grammar extracted from the
attended level of the GLOCAL strings, whereas the other
half could be judged correctly on the basis of the grammar
extracted from the unattended level. The fourth factor was
familiarity. This factor was based on whether or not the
grammatical strings had been presented before in the
learning phase. Attention and familiarity were withinparticipants factors.
Procedures During the learning phase, 18 GLOCAL strings
were presented on the display for 6 s, during which the
participants wrote down the strings at their attended level,
with each GLOCAL string being presented six times. A
mask stimulus comprising many “+” signs in the area where
the GLOCAL stings were intended to be displayed was
presented for 1 s during the interval of the GLOCAL strings
presentation. The difference between the high and low
luminance conditions was only in the luminance of
GLOCAL strings. The procedure in the two conditions was
identical to each other.
At the beginning of the test phase, the participants
were informed about the fact that each of the two levels of
the GLOCAL strings followed a set of rules. The
participants were required to judge whether or not each
letter string is grammatical.

1896

Table 1: Means and Standard errors for d’ for each condition.
Types of grammatical strings
Attended
level

Old-Attended

New-Attended

Old-Unattended

M

SE

M

M

Global
Local

0.875
0.614

0.152
0.091

1.051
0.771

Global
Local

0.770
0.387

0.188
0.186

0.645
0.369

SE

New-Unattended

SE

M

SE

High luminance condition
0.199
0.023
0.191
0.403

0.144
0.212

0.330
0.363

0.106
0.147

Low luminance condition
0.184
0.489
0.113
0.412

0.154
0.152

0.051
0.204

0.141
0.176

Note. M = mean d’, SE = standard error.

A presented string remained on display until each
participant pressed one of the two specific keys. Forty
grammatical and forty nongrammatical strings were
presented twice in a random sequence; in other words, the
participants had to provide answers for 160 strings. The
attended grammar was counterbalanced: half of the
participants were presented with GLOCAL strings that
followed Grammar 1 at the global level and Grammar 2 at
the local level in the learning phase. The other half, with the
second type of GLOCAL strings that followed Grammar 1
at the local level and Grammar 2 at the global level.
Moreover, half of them were instructed to attend to the
global level and the other half were instructed to attend to
the local level.

Results
Table 1 shows the means and standard errors of d’ of each
type of strings in each condition. At first, these d’s were
subjected to a 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 ANOVA with luminance
(high/low), global/local (attended to the global and local
levels in the learning phase), attended/unattended, and
familiarity (old/new).
The main effect of attended/unattended was
significant (F(1,36) = 21.09, η2 = .118, p < .001), indicating
that the d’ in the attended condition (mean = 0.686) was
higher than that in the unattended condition (mean = 0.284).
The interaction between attended/unattended and
global/local was significant (F(1,36) = 5.82, η2 = .0327, p
= .021). The interaction between luminance and familiarity
was also significant (F(1,36) = 6.52, η2 = .0221, p = .0151).
To clarify the effect of luminance, we conducted
two separate analyses by the luminance: the d’s were
subjected to a 2 × 2 × 2 ANOVA with respect to
global/local, attended/unattended, and familiarity.
In the high (regular) luminance condition, the
main effect of attended/unattended was significant (F(1,18)

= 23.97, η2 = .211, p < .001), indicating that the d’ in the
attended condition (mean = 0.829) was higher than that in
the unattended condition (mean = 0.280). The interaction
between attended/unattended and global/local was also
significant (F(1,18) = 4.51, η2 = .0397, p = .048). The main
effect and interactions related to familiarity factor were not
significant (Fs < 2.2). The results of the simple main effect
revealed that the effect of attended/unattended in the global
attention condition was significant (F(1,18) = 24.630, p
< .001), indicating that the d’ of the attended condition
(mean = 0.963) was higher than that of the unattended
condition (mean = 0.176). In the local attention condition,
the effect of attended/unattended was marginally significant
(F(1,18) = 3.847, p < .066), with the same pattern as that in
the global condition (mean = 0.694 in the attended
condition and mean = 0.383 in the unattended condition).
There were no significant differences in the effect of
global/local divided by attended/unattended conditions (Fs
< 2).
In the low luminance condition, the main effect of
familiarity was significant (F(1,18) = 4.773, η2 = .0311, p
= .042), indicating that the d’s in the old condition (mean =
0.515) were higher than those in the new condition (mean =
0.317). The main effect of attended/unattended was
marginally significant (F(1,18) = 3.58, η2 = .0513, p = .075).

Discussion
The results revealed that the luminance of GLOCAL strings
influences AGL. A four-way ANOVA revealed a
significant difference between related to the luminance.
Following two analyses with different luminance conditions,
the results of the three-way ANOVA in the high luminance
condition showed a pattern similar to that in Tanaka et al.
(2008). Specifically, the effect of attended/unattended was
significant, indicating that selective attention is important

1897

for AGL. Furthermore, global/local asymmetry was also
found. More specifically, the d’ in the global attention
condition was higher than that in the local attention
condition. This result is consistent with the fact that global
processing precedes local processing (i.e., global
precedence).
In contrast, the results in the low luminance
condition revealed a rather different pattern. Specifically,
there was no significant effect related to the
attended/unattended factor, whereas the effect of familiarity
was significant, suggesting that the participants could
encode and store even the unattended information under the
condition where they were not able to learn AG.
With respect to the difference between high and
low luminance conditions, this finding could be interpreted
as evidence that the effect of selective attention was
restricted by the strength of visual input. Thus, AGL needs
not only subjectively manipulatable top down attention and
subjective visibility (cf. episodic processing, Whittlesea &
Dorken, 1993), but also bottom up attention afforded by
some specific physical attribute and the perceptual load,
which is considered to be the source of implicit learning.
Moreover, it is possible to suppose that selective attention
in the AGL paradigm did not function to shut out
unattended information from the environment, but to ignore
to make a cognitive representation (cf. Moran & Desimone,
1985). Note that every participant could write down letter
strings from the instructed level of GLOCAL strings,
although some participants missed writing down a few
strings because of a few minutes’ absent-mindedness,
regardless of the experimental manipulation. Furthermore,
none of the participants in the low luminance condition
claimed that GLOCAL strings were too dark to see in the
learning phase. In other words, every participant could
convert the visual stimuli into motor action via mental
processing based on letter recognition. Thus, it is possible
to state that the attenuation of input in the low luminance
condition results in the disruption of AGL.
Given the assumption that the whole resource of
attention is constant, it could be interpreted as follows. The
participants in the low luminance condition tried to attend
to the specific level of GLOCAL strings by consuming
relatively more resource than that in the high luminance
condition. As a result, they failed to inhibit information
from the unattended level and failed to extract AG from
even the attended level of GLOCAL strings. This
explanation based on constant attention could be applied to
all the results of this study. For example, AGL performance
in the global attention condition was higher than that in the
local attention condition because (1) attending to the global
level was easier than attending to the local level and (2)
inhibiting irrelevant information from the local level was
easier than from the global level.
This finding was consistent with Reber’s (1967)
speculation in relation to perceptual learning and P. J. Reber
and Squire’s (1999) suggestion from the fact that patients
with Parkinson’s disease exhibited normal AGL. With

respect to the SRT task, some studies showed that SRT
learning was predominantly nonmotoric, for instance, SRT
learning can transfer from three fingers to one (Cohen, Ivry,
& Keele, 1990). Moreover, it is said that SRT learning can
occur in the task with observation alone (e.g., Remillard,
2003). It is certain that implicit learning abilities observed
in an SRT task are complex and composed of various
learning factors(e.g., motor learning and position learning).
AGL does not simply reflect the abstract structural
properties of stimuli but also the exact visual form of the
stimuli. In sum, although implicit learning needs
compulsive input from the external world, it is necessary to
enhance raw input to assign adequate amount of attention.
This assumption allows us to reconstruct the definition of
implicit learning as a result of active intention for
adaptation, although it could be beyond attention control as
subjective activity.
Furthermore, the main effect of familiarity in the
low luminance condition can be interpreted as evidence that
the unattended information of GLOCAL strings was
encoded inevitably. However, during the later process, the
unattended information might be suppressed as a redundant
one while the attended information is enhanced to make
useful representation for subjective adaptation in the novel
situation (c.f., Cock, Berry & Buchner., 2002; Jiang &
Leung, 2005). In contrast, there was no significant
difference about familiarity in the high luminance condition.
It can be interpreted as evidence that the participants
learned AG judged grammaticality using abstract
information from the attended level other than presented
strings themselves in the learning phase (cf. Pothos &
Bailey, 2000).
According to the framework based on the linkage
of resource in subsystems, it is possible to make the
following predictions. For example, apart from the active
inhibition system, if the perceptual load at the global level
of GLOCAL strings was relatively lower than that at the
local level, then the d’ of the attended and/or unattended
grammar in the global attention condition would be higher
than that in the local condition. In other words, it is possible
to assign a surplus resource to arbitrary subsystems. The
assumption that input attention and central attention are
inextricably linked may cause this ambiguity. Furthermore,
this theory included an implicit assumption that all finite
resources were assigned to every ongoing system, which the
experimenter assumed as an experimental procedure. Future
research is needed to resolve these problems for the
application of the findings of perceptual load theory to AGL
study.
The result of this study implies that AGL needs
active information processing while selective attention
plays the role of inhibition from an irrelevant input.
Moreover, irrespective of attention, the strength of the
visual input influences AGL. Implicit learning is an
adaptive system involving the factor of perceptual learning,
abstract structural learning, and motor skill learning as inner
mechanisms, sensitivity to inevitable input from

1898

environment, and subjective intention as a form of
consciousness.

References
Cock, J. J., Berry, D. C., & Buchner, A. (2002). Negative
priming and sequence learning. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 27–48.
Cohen, A., Irvy, R. I., & Keele, S. W. (1990). Attention and
structure in sequence learning. Journal of Experimental
Psyhcology,: Learning, Memory, and Cogntintion, 16,
17–30.
Dienes, Z., Broadbent, D., & Berry, D. (1991). Implicit and
explicit knowledge bases in artificial grammar learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 17, 875–887.
French, R. M., & Cleeremans, A. (2002). Implicit learning
and consciousness: An empirical, philosophical and
computational consensus in the making. Hove, UK:
Psychology Press.
Hibi, Y., Takeda, Y., & Yagi, A. (2002). Global
interferences: The effect of exposure duration that is
substituted for spatial frequency. Perception, 31, 341–
348.
Jiang, Y., & Leung, A. W. (2005). Implicit learning of
ignored visual context. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
12, 100–106.
Knowlton, B. J., & Squire, L. R. (1996). Artificial grammar
learning depends on implicit acquisition of both abstract
and exemplar-specific information. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 169–181.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary condition
for selective attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human, Perception, and Performance, 21,
451–468.
Lavie, N. (2005). Distracted and confused: Selective
attention underload. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 75–
82.
Moran, J., & Desimone, R. (1985). Selective attention gates
visual processing in the extrastriate cortex. Science, 229,
782–784.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of
global features in visual perception. Cognitive
Psychology, 9, 353–383.
Navon, D. (2003). What does a compound letter tell the
psychologist’s mind? Acta Psychologica, 114, 273–309.
Nisbett, R. (2003). The Geography of Thought: How Asians
and Westerners Think Differently. The Free Press: New
York.
Pothos, E. M. & Bailey, T. M. (2000). The importance of
similarity in artificial grammar learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 847–862.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 77,
317–327.

Reber, A. S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 219–
235.
Reber, P. J., & Squire, L. R. (1999). Intact learning of
artificial grammars and intact category learning by
patients
with
Parkinson’s
disease.
Behavioral
Neuroscience, 113, 235–242.
Remillard, G. (2003). Pure perceptual-based sequence
learning. Journal of Experimental Psyhcology,: Learning,
Memory, and Cogntintion, 29, 581–597.
Stanislaw, H., & Todorov, N. (1999). Calculation of signal
detection theory measures. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 31, 137–149.
Tanaka, D., Kiyokawa, S., Yamada, A., Dienes, Z &
Shigemasu, K. (2008). Role of selective attention in
artificial grammar learning. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 15, 1154–1159.
Whittlesea, B. W. A., & Dorken, M. D. (1993). Incidentally,
things in general are particularly determined: An
episodic-processing account of implicit learning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 227–248.

1899

