UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What our eyes can tell us about how an insight emerges?
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0jh820xj
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Schunn, Christian
Siegle, Greg
Wong, Tsunhin John
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

           What our eyes can tell us about how an insight emerges?
                                             Tsunhin John Wong
                                              University of Pittsburgh
                                               Christian Schunn
                                              University of Pittsburgh
                                                   Greg Siegle
                                              University of Pittsburgh
Abstract: Metcalfe & Wiebe (1987) demonstrated that problem solvers do not make reliable predictions about their
performance on insight problems. We are interested in detecting the temporal emergence of insight (aka Aha!) using
methods other than self-report. This study monitored pupillary motility and eyeblinks to track cognitive function
during noninsight and insight problem solving of Matchstick Arithmetic problems. As predicted, data suggested
that shortly before an Aha! solution for an insight problem, patterns of pupil dilation and eyeblinks were different
from those observed during a noninsight problem. An acute peak of pupillary dilation is observed at the time of
Aha! solution, and lower eyeblink frequency was observed before and after the insight moment. Results may reflect
problem-type differences in any of cognitive load, arousal, task strategies, or search heuristics preceding solution of
insight and non-insight problems.
                                                        3256

