UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What is the cause of left hemisphere lateralization of English visual word recognition? Preexisting language lateralization, or task characteristics?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1152n6nq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Cottrell, Gary
Hsiao, Janet

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What is the cause of left hemisphere lateralization of English visual word
recognition? Pre-existing language lateralization, or task characteristics?
Janet H. Hsiao (jhsiao@cs.ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
604 Knowles Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Garrison W. Cottrell (gary@ucsd.edu)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0404, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
Abstract

1973). Faces elicit a larger Event Related Potential (ERP)
N170 than other types of objects, especially in the RH (e.g.,
Rossion et al., 2003). Neuropsychological data also suggest
a link between RH damage and deficits in face processing
(e.g., Evans et al., 1995). In short, the RH lateralization in
face processing has been consistently reported.
Words are another type of visual stimuli that we have a
biased exposure to since our childhood, although slightly
later than faces. In contrast to faces, the processes of visual
word recognition in alphabetic languages such as English
have been shown to be lateralized to the LH. Data from
fMRI studies show a region inside the left fusiform area
(visual word form area, VWFA) responding selectively to
words (e.g., McCandliss, Cohen, & Dehaene, 2003). ERP
studies also showed that words elicit a larger N170 in the
LH than the RH (Rossion et al., 2003). A classical right
visual field (RVF)/LH advantage in reading English words
has been consistently reported, demonstrated first in
tachistoscopic recognition (e.g., Bryden & Rainey, 1963)
and subsequently in other word recognition tasks, including
lexical decision (Faust, Babkoff, & Kravetz, 1995) and word
naming (Brysbaert & d'Ydewalle, 1990). This phenomenon
has been argued to be linked to the LH superiority in
language processing, in particular phonological processing
(e.g., Voyer, 1996).
In contrast, the recognition of Chinese characters, a
logographic writing system, shows a left visual field
(LVF)/RH advantage in tachistoscopic recognition; this
effect has been argued to reflect the RH superiority in
handling holistic pattern recognition (e.g., Tzeng et al.,
1979; however, a recent study shows a decreased holistic
processing effect in Chinese character expertise, Hsiao &
Cottrell, 2009). In addition, similar to face perception,
experts in Chinese character recognition have a left side bias
in Chinese character perception, whereas novices do not
have this bias (Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009), suggesting the RH
involvement in Chinese character processing. As for
phonological processing, Weekes and Zhang (1999)
reported phonological priming effects on phonetic
compound recognition when the characters were presented
in the RVF but not LVF. In short, research in Chinese
character recognition has usually exhibited a LVF
advantage/bias for orthographic processing/perception and a
RVF advantage for phonological processing. fMRI and ERP
studies of Chinese character recognition have also exhibited

Visual word recognition in alphabetic languages such as
English has been shown to have left hemisphere (LH)
lateralization and argued to be linked to the LH superiority in
language processing. Nevertheless, Chinese character
recognition has been shown to be more bilateral or right
hemisphere (RH) lateralized and thus is a counterexample of
this claim. LH processing has been shown to have a high
spatial frequency (HSF) bias, whereas RH processing has a
low spatial frequency bias. Through computational modeling,
here we test the hypothesis that English word recognition is
lateralized to the LH and Chinese to the RH due to visual
characteristics of words instead of language lateralization. We
show that at least two factors may account for this dichotomy:
(1) Visual similarity among words: The smaller the alphabet
size is, the more similar the words in the lexicon are, and the
more the model relies on HSFs to distinguish words. (2) The
requirement to decompose words into letters in order to map
to phonemes during learning to read English: Mapping word
input to its constituent letters requires more HSF information
compared with mapping to its word identity. English has a
large lexicon size but only 26 letters, whereas Chinese has a
much smaller lexicon with a much larger “alphabet” (stroke
patterns). In addition, Chinese is a logographic system: stroke
patterns do not map to phonemes and thus no decomposition
is required. Hence, the lateralization of visual word
recognition in different languages may depend on visual
characteristics of words instead of the LH language
lateralization as previously thought.
Keywords: Connectionist modeling; visual word recognition;
hemispheric lateralization.

Introduction
Lateralization in face and visual word recognition
Faces are a type of visual stimuli that we have extensive
exposure to from birth. The processes of face recognition
have been extensively studied. For example, fMRI studies
have shown that an area inside the fusiform gyrus (fusiform
face area, FFA) responds selectively to faces, with larger
activation in the right hemisphere (RH) compared with the
left hemisphere (LH) (e.g. Kanwisher, McDermott, & Chun,
1997). Behaviorally, a left side bias in face perception has
been consistently reported: a chimeric face made from two
left half faces from the viewer’s perspective (left chimeric
face) is usually judged more similar to the original face than
one made from two right half faces (e.g., Gilbert & Bakan,

881

a more bilateral or RH-lateralized activation in the visual
system compared with English word recognition (e.g., Tan
et al., 2000; Liu & Perfetti, 2003).

recognition, the results showed a left side bias in both the
intermediate and late convergence models when the DFF
was applied, but not in the early convergence model. This
provides a testable prediction that a left side bias may also
be observed in object recognition once expertise is acquired
(cf. Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009).

Hemispheric modeling in face recognition
Why does the processing of faces, English words, and
Chinese characters involve different lateralization? This is a
fundamental question that goes to the heart of how and why
brain areas are recruited for different tasks. Hence it is of
great interest to examine how these stimuli, and the
computational processes that must be carried out upon them,
are similar and different. Because of the partial decussation
of the optic nerves, our visual system is initially vertically
split, and the two visual hemifields project contralaterally to
different hemispheres. To examine at which processing
stage this split information converges, we created a
hemispheric model of face recognition, aiming to account
for the left side bias in face perception (Hsiao, Shieh, &
Cottrell, 2008). In the model we incorporated several known
observations about visual anatomy and neural computation:
we used Gabor responses over the input image to simulate
neural responses of complex cells in the early visual system
(Lades et al., 1993). We then reduced the dimension of this
representation with Principal Component Analysis (PCA), a
biologically plausible linear compression technique (Sanger,
1989). With this level of abstraction, convergence of the
initial split may happen at three different stages: early, after
the Gabor filters at the input layer; intermediate, after
information extraction through PCA at the hidden layer; and
late, at the output layer (Figure 1). The task of the model
was to map each face image to its identity; in the output
layer each node corresponds to a face identity (i.e. a localist
representation). We also implemented a theory of
hemispheric asymmetry in perception in the model, Double
Filtering by Frequency (DFF, Ivry & Robertson, 1998),
which argues that information coming into the brain goes
through two frequency filtering stages: the first stage
involves attentional selection of task-relevant frequency
range, and at the second stage the LH amplifies high
frequency information, whereas the RH amplifies low
frequency information (cf. Monaghan & Shillcock, 2004).
Our results showed that the early convergence model
failed to show the left side bias, whereas the intermediate
and late convergence models showed the effect when the
DFF was applied. Thus, the combination of the spatial
frequency biases and the separate information extraction
(PCA) is sufficient to show the left side bias, but neither
alone can show the effect. This is consistent with the low
spatial frequency (LSF) bias in face identification, both in
humans and computational models (e.g. Schyns & Oliva,
1999; Dailey & Cottrell, 1999). The failure of the early
convergence model suggests that the initially split visual
input may converge at an intermediate or late stage, at
which at least a certain type of information extraction has
been applied separately in each hemisphere, either at or after
the lateral occipital area (Hsiao et al., 2008). We also
applied the model to Greeble recognition; similar to face

Figure 1: Hemispheric models with different timing of
convergence (Hsiao et al., 2008).

Hemispheric modeling in visual word recognition
Here we extend our hemispheric model (Hsiao et al., 2008)
to visual word recognition and examine under what
conditions the recognition of visual stimuli relies more on
high spatial frequencies/LH processing. We examine two
factors that may account for the LH lateralization in English
word recognition: (1) visual similarity among words in the
lexicon: the more letters the words share, the more similar
the words look visually; for example, to distinguish words
“talk” and “walk”, the visual system has to examine
specifically the first letter position, and thus may have to
rely more on high spatial frequencies. (2) The requirement
to decompose a word into letters in order to map them into
corresponding phonemes during learning to read. That is,
instead of mapping the input to its word identity, the visual
system has to map the word input to its constituent letter
identities; this mapping may require more high spatial
frequency (HSF) /fine-scale information compared with the
mapping from word input to its word identity.
Maurer and McCandliss (2007) proposed the
phonological mapping hypothesis to account for the
difference in ERP N170 lateralization between faces and
words: given that phonological processes are typically leftlateralized (e.g. Rumsey et al., 1997), specialized processing
of visual words in visual brain areas also becomes leftlateralized. Accordingly, they pointed out that the LH
lateralization in English word recognition may be related to
the influence of grapheme-phoneme conversion established
during learning to read, and this modulation should be less
pronounced in logographic scripts such as Chinese. Note
that in contrast to this hypothesis, here we do not assume the
lateralization of phonological processes; we simply examine
whether different mapping tasks require different spatial
frequency content. In addition, previous models in visual
word recognition usually use localist representations of
letters (e.g. Shillcock & Monaghan, 2001) or stroke patterns
(e.g. Hsiao & Shillcock, 2006a); here we bring the level of
the modeling closer to the anatomy of the visual pathways
in order to understand the underlying neural computation.

882

output node for the original word when the left chimeric
word was presented and when the right chimeric word was
presented (note that output activation ranged from 0 to 1).

Modeling and Results
Here we used the same hemispheric model proposed in
Hsiao et al. (2008) for face recognition, except that the input
stimuli were word images instead of faces or objects (Figure
2). In the model, the input image (135 x 100 pixels) was
first filtered with a grid (16 x 12) of overlapping 2D Gabor
filters (Daugman, 1985) in quadrature pairs at six scales and
eight orientations; the six scales corresponded to 2 to 64
cycles per word. Given the image width of 100 pixels, this
frequency range can be considered as the task-relevant
frequency range (the seventh scale would have 128 cycles,
which exceeded the width of the image). The first stage of
the DFF is implemented by simply giving this input to the
model. The paired Gabor responses were combined to
obtain Gabor magnitudes. Two conditions were created: in
the baseline condition, Gabor responses in different scales
were given equal weights; in the DFF condition, to
implement the second stage of the DFF, a sigmoid-shaped
weighting function was used to bias the Gabor responses on
the left half word (RH) to LSFs and those on the right half
word (LH) to HSFs (Figure 2). Since the early convergence
model failed in accounting for the left side bias in face
perception (Hsiao et al., 2008), and the late convergence
model performed worse than the intermediate convergence
model in the face tasks (when the DFF was applied), here
we used the intermediate convergence model. Thus, in the
input representation, the word image was split into left and
right halves; the perceptual representation of each half was
compressed into a 50-element representation (hence in total
there were 100 elements); this representation can be thought
of as corresponding to the lateral occipital region (i.e.,
structural representation of visual stimuli; analogous to
Occipital Face Area in face recognition). After PCA, for
each principal component, normalization was applied across
all images to equalize the contribution of each component in
the model. The hidden layer of the model had 20 units; it
can be thought of as corresponding to the fusiform area (i.e.
VWFA; analogous to FFA in face recognition).
To compare with the modeling of face recognition, here
we used images of palindrome pseudo-words (such as
“abccba”) as the stimuli; thus the two sides of the word
stimuli had the same amount of information towards the
word identity (like faces). In addition, we were able to make
“chimeric words” in the same way as “chimeric faces” by
taking the right and left halves and making mirror images of
them (see Figure 3). Thus the chimeric stimuli are different
due to the original left-right orientation of the letters, and
the left chimeric word matches the original on the left, but
not the right due to mirror inversion, and vice versa.
For the following simulations, we ran the model 80
times and analyzed its behavior with ANOVA after 100
epochs of training (their performance on the training set all
reached 100% accuracy). The training algorithm was
discrete back-propagation through time (Rumelhart, Hinton
& Williams, 1986), and the learning rate was 0.1. As in our
previous work, after training, the size of left side bias was
measured as the difference between the activation of the

Figure 2: Hemispheric model for visual word recognition.

Figure 3: Chimeric faces used in Hsiao et al. (2008), and
chimeric words used in the current study.

Visual similarity among words in the lexicon
We first examined how visual similarity among words in the
lexicon influences lateralization of visual word recognition.
To control for the differences between English and Chinese
orthographies, here we used only English letters and created
artificial lexicons with different alphabet sizes. We
controlled for the issue of the unbalanced nature of the
location of information in a word (see Hsiao & Shillcock,
2006a) by using 6-letter palindrome words. Each lexicon
had 27 words. In the first lexicon, the alphabet contained 3
letters: a, b, and c; thus, the 27 words in the first lexicon
were all possible combinations of the three letters (aaaaaa,
aabbaa, … , ccbbcc, cccccc). In this lexicon, words were
extremely similar to one another: each half of a palindrome
word only differed in one letter position from that of the
other palindrome words. If we increased the alphabet size to
4 (a-d), and randomly selected 27 words out of 64 possible
words, the words in the lexicon would be less similar to one
another compared with those in the first lexicon, since some
words may differ in more than two letter positions. If we
further increased the alphabet size and randomly selected 27
words out of all possible words, it would further decrease
the similarity among words in the lexicon. Thus, the larger
the alphabet size was, the less similar the words in the
lexicon were, leading to a greater reliance on word shape
than on letter identity. English has a large lexicon size
(about 20,000 base words for a university-educated native
speaker; Nation & Waring, 1997) but a small alphabet size:

883

only 26 letters, whereas Chinese has a much smaller lexicon
(about 4,500 characters for an adult native speaker) with a
much larger “alphabet” (i.e., more than 1,000 stroke
patterns; Hsiao & Shillcock, 2006b). Thus, compared with
Chinese characters, words in the English lexicon are
visually more similar to each other. Here we started from
the first lexicon, gradually increased the alphabet size to
make the artificial lexicon more Chinese-like, and examined
how this manipulation changed lateralization of the model.
For each simulation with a different lexicon, the
materials consisted of images of 27 different words (so there
were 27 output nodes). Two datasets were created: one for
training and the other for testing; the order of being the
training or the test set was counterbalanced across the
simulation runs. In either dataset, each word had four
images in different fonts (Figure 4), for a total of 108
training and 108 test images. In half of the simulation runs
the mirror images of the original images were used.

more and more on RH/LSF information. That is, the smaller
the alphabet size is, the more similar the words in the
lexicon are, and the more the model relies on high spatial
frequencies (i.e. LH lateralization) to distinguish words3.

Figure 5: RH/LSF preference in the models trained with
lexicons of different alphabet sizes and for different
mapping tasks. In word identity mapping, it showed that
the larger the alphabet size was, the more dissimilar the
words in the lexicon were, and the stronger the RH/LSF
preference the model had; after switching to letter
identity mapping, all the models showed strong LH/HSF
preference (*p < 0.01; **p < 0.001; ***p << 0.001).

Figure 4: Word images in different fonts

Requirement to decompose a word into letters

Figure 5 shows the results1. We defined the model’s
RH/LSF preference as the difference in left side bias size
between the DFF condition (i.e. when RH/LH were biased
to LSF/HSF) and the baseline condition (i.e. when no
frequency bias was applied2); this difference reflected the
real preference over LSF/HSF biased representation due to
the application of the DFF. The results showed that, when
the visual similarity among the words in the lexicon was
high, such as the lexicon that had only 3 letters (a-c), the
model showed a strong LH/HSF preference (F(1, 158) =
36.338, p << 0.001, ηp2 = 0.187). When we increased the
alphabet size to 6 (a-f), the model had a weaker LH/HSF
preference (F(1, 158) = 12.653, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.074).
When we increased the alphabet size to 7 (a-g) or 8 (a-h),
this preference disappeared. When we further increased the
alphabet size to 10 (a-j), the model started to have a weak
RH/LSF preference (F(1, 158) = 7.631, p < 0.01, ηp2 =
0.046; Figure 5). In another simulation, we further increased
the alphabet size to 26 letters, the model had a strong
RH/LSF preference (F(1, 158) = 24.810, p << 0.001, ηp2 =
0.136). Thus, the results showed that with decreasing visual
similarity among words in the lexicon, the model relied

Another major difference between English and Chinese is
that there is a quasi-regular letter-sound correspondence in
English, leading to phonics approaches to teaching reading,
whereas there is no such correspondence in Chinese. In
other words, instead of recognizing visual input of an
English word as a whole, we have learned to decompose
visual input of a word into its constituent letters/graphemes
and then map them to corresponding phonemes when
learning to read4. Here we explored the role of requiring the
networks to map a word image to letter identities instead of
to its whole-word identity. Compared with the mapping
from word images to word identities, this mapping to letter
identities may rely relatively more on HSF information/fine
details and thus may result in LH lateralization. The same
lexicons as the last section were used. To implement letter
identity mapping, in the output layer, instead of having each
node representing each word, we divided the output layer
into three slots: the first slot corresponded to the letter
identity in the first letter position (and the last since they
were palindrome words), the second slot was for the letter
identity in the second position, and the third slot was for the
third position (Figure 6).

1
Here we focus on examining the models’ preference over LSF or
HSF representations; we report and discuss the models’
generalization performance on the test set in different conditions
elsewhere. In general, the model generalized better with increasing
alphabet size (Word identity mapping average accuracy: a-c: 32%;
a-f: 84%; a-j: 90%; chance level was 1/27 =3.7%. Letter identity
mapping average accuracy: a-c: 54%; a-f: 79%; a-j: 89%).
2
In the baseline condition, none of the models showed any
significant left or right side bias.

3

In a separate simulation, we trained the model to recognize the 30
mirror-symmetric Chinese characters used in Hsiao & Cottrell
(2009). The results showed that the model had a strong RH/LSF
preference (p << 0.001). See Conclusion and Discussion.
4
Although Chinese phonetic compounds do have a phonetic
component that has partial information about the character
pronunciation, this decomposition, if any, is still much coarser than
that in English word recognition, since each phonetic compound
has only one phonetic component.

884

model was purely visual – to recognize constituent letters of
the word input.
The two visual factors we identified here are able to
account for the difference in lateralization between visual
word recognition in English and Chinese. English has a
large lexicon size (about 20,000 base words for a native
speaker) but a small alphabet size: only 26 letters, whereas
Chinese has a much smaller lexicon (about 4,500 characters
for a native speaker) with a much larger “alphabet” (more
than 1,000 stroke patterns). Thus, compared with Chinese
characters, words in the English lexicon are visually more
similar to each other; our results suggest that distinguishing
English words may require more HSF information
compared with distinguishing Chinese characters. In
addition, Chinese is a logographic system, in which stroke
patterns do not map to phonemes. Unlike English readers,
Chinese readers do not rely on grapheme-phoneme
conversion during learning to read, and thus there is no
requirement to decompose a character into its constituent
stroke patterns in order to read. Our results thus suggest that
English word recognition requires more HSF information
compared with Chinese character recognition due to its task
characteristics during learning to read. We are currently
working on the modeling with English and Chinese lexicons
in a realistic scale and examining their lateralization.
Note that our results do not rule out the possibility of the
influence of LH lateralized phonological processes on the
lateralization of visual word recognition. In an ERP study,
Hsiao, Shillcock, and Lee (2007) examined N170 amplitude
elicited by characters with their phonetic component on the
left or right. They showed that characters with their phonetic
component on the left (which is initially projected to the RH
when the character was centrally presented) elicited N170
with similar amplitude in the two hemispheres, whereas
characters with their phonetic component on the right
(which is initially projected to the LH) elicited larger N170
amplitude in the LH than that in the RH. This phenomenon
suggests that the LH lateralized phonological processing
may also influence the lateralization of visual word
recognition.
In summary, here we show that the lateralization of
visual word recognition in different languages may depend
on visual characteristics of words instead of the LH
language lateralization as previously thought; specifically, it
can be influenced by (1) visual similarity among words in
the lexicon, and (2) the requirement to decompose a word
input into its constituent letters/graphemes for graphemephoneme conversion during learning to read.

Figure 6: Output representation for the letter identity
mapping task.
The results showed that, in all simulations, the model
exhibited a strong LH/HSF preference (a-c, F(1, 158) =
24.486, p << 0.001, ηp2 = 0.134; a-f, F(1, 158) = 23.516, p
<< 0.001, ηp2 = 0.130; a-g, F(1, 158) = 52.353, p << 0.001,
ηp2 = 0.249; a-h, F(1, 158) = 58.945, p << 0.001, ηp2 =
0.272; a-j, F(1, 158) = 69.274, p << 0.001, ηp2 = 0.305;
Figure 5). The effect size measured by partial Eta squared
(ηp2) increased with the alphabet size of the lexicon. Thus,
compared with the word identity task, switching the task to
the letter identity mapping task significantly made the
model rely more on LH/HSF information.

Conclusion and Discussion
Here we applied our hemispheric model of face/object
recognition (Hsiao et al., 2008) to visual word recognition,
in order to examine the factors that may account for the
differences in lateralization in the processing of different
languages. Visual word recognition in alphabetic languages
such as English has been reported to lateralize to the LH,
and argued to be due to the LH lateralization of language
processes. Nevertheless, in Chinese character recognition, a
RH/LVF advantage is usually reported for orthographic
processing tasks (while a LH/RVF is shown for
phonological tasks). This thus provides a counter example
of this claim. Here we aimed to examine factors that may
influence lateralization in visual word recognition other than
the LH lateralization of language processes; specifically, the
influence of visual characteristics of the words in a lexicon.
We first examined the influence of visual similarity
among words in a lexicon. We created artificial lexicons
with the same number of words of the same length, but with
different alphabet sizes. We then trained the model to
differentiate words in the lexicons (word identity mapping).
We show that the smaller the alphabet size is, the more
similar the words in the lexicon are, and the more the model
relies on HSF/LH representations to distinguish words. We
then examined the influence of the requirement to
decompose words into letters/graphemes in order to perform
grapheme-phoneme conversion during learning to read. We
used the same artificial lexicons but changed the task from
word identity mapping to letter identity mapping. We show
that the letter identity mapping task requires more HSF
information compared with the word identity mapping task.
In contrast to the phonological mapping hypothesis (Maurer
& McCandliss, 2007), which argues that visual word
processing becomes LH lateralized due to the left-lateralized
phonological processes, our model did not use/assume any
phonological processes/representations; the task of the

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a McDonnell Foundation
grant to the Perceptual Expertise Network (I. Gauthier, PI)
and NIMH grant MH57075 to GWC.

885

Liu, Y., & Perfetti, CA. (2003). The time course of brain
activity in reading English and Chinese: An ERP study of
Chinese bilinguals. Human Brain Mapping, 18, 167-175.
Maurer U., & McCandliss, BD. (2007). The development of
visual expertise for words: the contribution of
electrophysiology. In E. L. Grigorenko & A. Naples
(Eds.). Single-Word Reading: Cognitive, behavioral and
biological perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
McCandliss, BD., Cohen, L., & Dehaene, S. (2003). The
visual word form area: expertise for reading in the
fusiform gyrus. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 293-299.
Monaghan, P. & Shillcock, RC. (2004). Hemispheric
asymmetries in cognitive modeling: connectionist
modeling of unilateral visual neglect. Psychological
Review, 111, 283-308.
Nation, P & Waring, R. (1997). Vocabulary size, text
coverage, and word lists. In Schmitt N, & McCarthy, M.
(Eds). Vocabulary: Description, Acquisition, Pedagogy.
New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 6-19.
Rossion, B., Joyce, CA., Cottrell, GW., & Tarr, MJ. (2003).
Early lateralization and orientation tuning for face, word,
and object processing in the visual cortex. Neuroimage,
20, 1609-1624.
Rumelhart, DE., Hinton, GE., & Williams, RJ. (1986).
Learning representations by back-propagating errors.
Nature, 323, 533–536.
Rumsey, JM., Horwitz, B., Donohue, BC., Nace, K.,
Maisog, JM., & Andreason, P. (1997). Phonological and
orthographic components of word recognition. A PETrCBF study. Brain, 120(5), 739-759.
Sanger, T. (1989). An optimality principle for unsupervised
learning. In Touretzky, D. (ed), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 1, pp. 11-19, San
Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann.
Schyns, PG. & Oliva A. (1999). Dr. Angry and Mr. Smile:
when categorization flexibly modifies the perception of
faces in rapid visual presentations. Cognition, 69, 243265.
Shillcock, RC. & Monaghan, P. (2001). The computational
exploration of visual word recognition in a split model.
Neural Computation, 13, 1171-1198.
Tan, LH., Spinks, JA., Gao, JH., Liu, HL., Perfetti, CA.,
Xiong, J., et al. (2000). Brain activation in the processing
of Chinese characters and words: A functional MRI study.
Human Brain Mapping, 10, 16-27.
Tzeng, OJL., Hung, DL., Cotton, B., & Wang, SY. (1979).
Visual lateralization effect in reading Chinese characters.
Nature (London), 282, 499-501.
Voyer, D. (1996). On the magnitude of laterality effects and
sex differences in functional lateralities. Laterality, 1, 5183.
Weekes, BS., & Zhang, BY. (1999). Chinese character
recognition in the left and right visual fields. Brain &
Cognition, 40, 269-272.

References
Bryden, MP. & Rainey, CA. (1963). Left-right differences
in tachistoscopic recognition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 66, 568–571.
Brysbaert, M. & d'Ydewalle, G. (1990). Tachistoscopic
presentation of verbal stimuli for assessing cerebral
dominance: Reliability data and some practical
recommendations. Neuropsychologia, 28, 443-455.
Daugman, J. G. (1985). Uncertainty relation for resolution
in space, spatial frequency, and orientation optimized by
two-dimensional visual cortical filters. Journal of the
Optical Society of America A, 2, 1160–1169.
Dailey, MN. & Cottrell, GW. (1999) Organization of face
and object recognition in modular neural network
models. Neural Networks, 12(7-8), 1053-1074.
Evans, JJ., Heggs, AJ., Antoun, N., & Hodges, JR. (1995).
Progressive prosopagnosia associated with selective
right temporal lobe atrophy: a new syndrome? Brain,
118, 1-13.
Faust, M., Babkoff, H., & Kravetz, S. (1995). Linguistic
processes in the two cerebral hemispheres: Implications
for modularity vs interactionism. Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology, 17, 171-192.
Gilbert, C. & Bakan, P. (1973). Visual asymmetry in
perception of faces. Neuropsychologia, 11, 355-362.
Hsiao, JH. & Cottrell, GW. (2009). Not all expertise is
holistic, but it may be leftist: The case of Chinese
character recognition. Psychological Science, 20(4),
455-463.
Hsiao, JH., Shieh, D., & Cottrell, GW. (2008). Convergence
of the visual field split: hemispheric modeling of face
and object recognition. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 20(12), 2298-2307.
Hsiao, JH. & Shillcock, R. (2006a). Hemispheric
differences emerge from perceptual learning: Evidence
from modeling Chinese character pronunciation.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 345-350).
Hsiao, JH. & Shillcock, R. (2006b). Analysis of a Chinese
phonetic compound database: Implications for
orthographic processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 35, 405-426.
Hsiao, JH., Shillcock, R., & Lee, C. (2007). Neural
correlates of foveal splitting in reading: evidence from
an ERP study of Chinese character recognition.
Neuropsychologia, 45, 1280-1292.
Ivry, R. & Robertson, LC. (1998). The Two Sides of
Perception. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J. & Chun, MM. (1997). The
fusiform face area: a module in human extrastriate
cortex specialized for face perception. Journal of
Neuroscience, 17, 4302-4311.
Lades, M., Vorbruggen, JC., Buhmann, J., Lange, J., von
der Malsburg, C., Wurtz, RP., & Konen, W. (1993).
Distortion invariant object recognition in the dynamic link
architecture. IEEE Trans. on Computers, 42, 300–311.

886

