UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What is Special about Children's Deontic Reasoning?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2hb2809s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Bucciarelli, Monica

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What is Special about Children’s Deontic Reasoning?
Monica Bucciarelli (monica@psych.unito.it)
Center for Cognitive Science and Department of Psychology, via Po 14, 10123 Torino ITALY
Abstract

The Mental Model Theory of Deontics

The assumption underlying the present investigation is that
comprehension and reasoning from deontic premises, as well
as comprehension and reasoning from factual premises,
depend on mental models, and these models predict what
conclusions individuals are likely to draw. Experiment 1 (48
children aged 9-11 years) confirmed the prediction that
children’s comprehension of deontic assertions, like their
comprehension of factual assertions, relies on models.
Experiment 2 (40 children aged 9-11 years) confirmed the
prediction that on the basis of the models it is possible to
predict developmental changes in the ability to reason from
pairs of deontic assertions. The results of the investigation run
against the existence of specialized mechanisms for
comprehension and reasoning from deontic matters.

The mental model theory (MMT) postulates that individuals
use the meaning of assertions and general knowledge to
construct mental models of the possibilities described by
factual assertions (Johnson-Laird, 1983; Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991). Each model represents a separate possibility.
Hence, a disjunction such as:
[1]
Either you receive a grade or else you receive a
comment, but not both
refers to two alternative possibilities that are represented in
two mental models. A conventional notation for models lays
out each of them on a separate row of a diagram. The two
models of the preceding disjunction are as follows:
You receive a grade
You receive a comment
Of course, real mental models are representations of the
state of the world, not sentences, which we use here for
convenience. MMT is based on a principle of truth, which
stipulates that mental models represent only what is true, not
what is false. Hence, the two models above represent the
possibilities in which the disjunction is true, and each of
them represents a clause from the disjunction only when it is
true in a possibility. Fully explicit models violate the
principle of truth by representing clauses both when they are
true and when they are false. Hence, fully explicit models of
the disjunction are as follows:
You receive a grade
¬You receive a comment
¬You receive grade
You receive a comment
The symbol ‘¬’ denotes negation, and so models represent
false propositions as true negations. MMT readily extends to
deontic assertions (Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird, 2005).
There are four main deontic relations, because they exhaust
the set of possible dyadic deontic relations: A permits B, A
obligates B, A prohibits B, Not A obligates B, where the
variables A and B take as their values phrases capturing
such propositions as, ‘you make a promise’, and ‘you do
what you say’. For example, the assertion Your making a
promise obligates you to do what you say, captures a
relation between a possibility (you make a promise) and
what it obligates (you do what you promise). MMT
postulates that such assertions of the form, A obligates B,
are consistent with three alternatives:
A
B
¬ A
B
¬ A
¬ B
where A and its negation refer to possibilities and B and its
negation refer to what is permissible, and where there is a
temporal constraint that B doesn’t occur prior to A. Hence,
when A occurs and, say, you make a promise, there is only
one state of affairs that is subsequently permissible – you do

Keywords: deductive reasoning; deontics; mental models;
development

Introduction
Deontic reasoning concerns what is obligatory, permissibile,
and impermissible. Many theorists propose that it depends
on special mechanisms (see, e.g., Chao & Cheng, 2000;
Cosmides, 1989; Cummins, 1996). In this paper, we propose
a contrasting theory, which is based on mental models, and
which postulates that the mental processes underlying the
comprehension of, and reasoning from, deontic propositions
(e.g., Children are obligated to go to school) are the same as
those for dealing with factual propositions (e.g. Children go
to school). The only important difference concerns the
content of the propositions: given a true factual proposition,
certain states of affairs are impossible; given a true deontic
proposition, certain actions or inactions are impermissible,
or, we sometimes say, deontically impossible. Alas, what is
deontically impossible is all too often factually possible:
individuals do not always do the right thing, or refrain from
doing the wrong thing. In other words, a counterexample to
a factual proposition shows that it is false, whereas a
counterexample to a deontic proposition shows that
someone has violated the principle it embodies, not that the
proposition itself is false. Likewise, the truth of a factual
proposition depends on the state of the world, whereas the
truth of a deontic proposition is a more complicated matter
depending on mores, customs, conventions, and much more
besides: one man’s meat is another man’s moral violation.
The theory of mental models claims, however, that both
factual and deontic propositions are represented in mental
models, which have appropriate annotations representing the
status of a model as factual or deontic, that the two domains
parallel one another both in terms of what tends to be
represented and what tends not to be represented, and that
they share a common underlying mechanism for reasoning.

544

what you say. But, you may do what you say even without
having made a promise (¬ A and B), or you may not do what
you say without having made a promise (¬ A and ¬ B). The
four underlying dyadic propositions can be realized in many
different sorts of sentence, e.g., if you make a promise then
you should do what you say, you should do what you say
because you promised, you promised and so it isn’t
permissible for you not to do what you say, and given that
you promised you must do what you say. Table 1
summarizes the sets of possibilities consistent with the four
basic deontic relations. As the table shows, an assertion of
the form, A permits B, has a weak interpretation consistent
with all four possibilities, but it usually carries an
implicature that B is not permissible without A, and in this
case, the assertion has a strong interpretation consistent with
only three possibilities. How do individuals interpret these
assertions? MMT assumes that individuals are likely to use
mental models, because the limited processing capacity of
working memory makes it hard to hold in mind the fully
explicit models in Table 1. Mental models represent only
salient states, and the analogue of the principle of truth for
deontic assertions is:
The principle of deontic mental models: The mental
models of A permits B represent that given A, B is
permissible; the mental models of A obligates B
represent that given A, only B is permissible; and the
mental model of A prohibits B represents that given A, B
is not permissible, but not-B is permissible.

A

Table 1: The semantics of four basic deontic relations
illustrating their permissible states for both weak
interpretations (+) and strong interpretations (*).
The permissible states given certain possibilities
The four
sorts of
assertion
A permits B
Not-a obli. B
A obligates B
A prohibits B

A B A B A B A B A B
A ¬B A ¬B
A¬B A¬B A¬B
¬A B ¬A B
¬A B
¬A B ¬A B
¬A¬ B ¬A¬ B
¬A¬ B ¬A¬B ¬A¬ B

+

*
+

*
+

*
+

*

B
. . .
where individuals make a mental footnote that the implicit
model cannot represent possibilities in which A occurs. As
a corollary, individuals can construct a model representing
that given A, not-B is impermissible:
A
¬B
where the italicised proposition (i.e.,¬B) is that one which is
impermissible The mental models of Not-A obligates B are
equivalent to those for A obligates B apart from the presence
of the negation of A. Finally, the mental models of A
prohibits B make most accessible that given A, B is not
permissible (cf. Evans & Twyman-Musgrove, 1998). If, say,
you are prohibited from exiting the room, then what you
must not do is to exit the room. One reason for this focus is
likely to be that children derive the meaning of prohibits
and its cognates from discovering that they are not allowed
to carry out certain actions. Hence, A prohibits B
accordingly has a single mental model in which B is not
permissible:
A
B
and these mental models of what is permissible:
A
¬ B
. . .
where individuals make a mental footnote that the implicit
model cannot contain instances of A. The mental models of
deontic premises predict very well the conclusions that adult
reasoners draw from them (Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird,
2005). Our aim, however, is to account for children’s
deontic reasoning, and so we propose a set of two principles
governing children’s reasoning in general:
1. The principle of limited working memory: Children
should tend to construct just a single mental model of
premises, and this tendency should be greater than the
analogous tendency of adult reasoners (see Bara,
Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird, 1995; Bara, Bucciarelli &
Lombardo, 2001; Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird, 1999).
2. The principle of multiple models: As children develop,
they are more likely to envisage alternative models of
the premises, and accordingly to respond that nothing
follows from them.

Experiment 1: Children’s Interpretations of
Deontic Assertions

Hence, the mental models of A permits B are as follows:
A
B
A
. . .
The first, and most accessible, model represents the state in
which A and B occur, and the second model represents the
state in which A occurs without B. In other words, a further
principle of the theory is that the absence is treated as
negation in those cases in which there is a contrasting model
in which the missing element is represented. The second
model, as we will see, distinguishes permission from
obligation. The third model denoted by the ellipsis is an
implicit model, i.e., it has no explicit content but represents
that there are other permissible states. Likewise, the mental
models of A obligates B are:

The aim of Experiment 1 was to understand what children
take deontic verbs to mean, so that we could then check the
prediction that their understanding predicts their reasoning.
Following the assumptions of MMT, we expected that
children would find, for each deontic verb, an interpretation
(i.e., mental model) more salient than others, and those
models would guide them in reasoning from premises
containing such deontic verbs. Also, we expected to find
that children would focus on impermissible states of affairs
when interpreting Prohibits as compared with the other
deontic verbs. This prediction, which derives from
considering that children deal with situations involving
prohibition since very early in their interactions with adults,

545

was yet confirmed by a former study on comprehension of
deontic verbs in adults (Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird, 2005).

Participants Pupils from primary and secondary schools in
Piedmont, Italy. There were 24 children in each of the
following age groups: 9-10 years (mean age: 9;7 years) and
11-12 years (mean age: 11;4).

Method We presented participants with four deontic
assertions of the form: A permits B, Not-A obligates B, A
obligates B, A prohibits B. There were eight different lexical
contents, which were rotated over the four sentences, so that
each participants encountered a particular content only once,
but each content occurred equally often with the four sorts
of assertions in the experiment as a whole.

Results Table 2 presents the percentages of the most
frequent interpretations made by the two age groups. The
children tended to make the predicted interpretations. Also,
the two groups of children did not differ in accuracy in their
global performance with the four verbs (Mann-Whitney test:
z=1.37, p=.17).

Procedure The participants were tested individually. The
instructions were as follows: ‘I’ll show you four assertions,
all concerned with one of the following verbs: permits,
obligates, prohibits. Your task is to consider each assertion
to be true and for each assertion to consider four states of
affairs, or situations. For each state of affairs judge whether
it is permissible or not permissible given the truth of the
assertion’. There was also a practice trial where the
experimenter presented the assertion ‘Bosses who are lazy
force employees to work hard’, and a sheet of paper laying
out the four cases:
Bosses who are lazy
Employees work hard
Bosses who are lazy
Employees do not work hard
Bosses who are not lazy Employees work hard
Bosses who are not lazy Employees do not work hard.
The experimenter invited the participant to judge whether
each of these descriptions referred to a situation that was
permissible or not permissible granted that the assertion was
true. The participants readily understood the task and
usually carried it out in the order in which the assertions
occurred, but they were allowed to complete the task in any
order that they liked. They then proceeded to the experiment
proper. They were presented one at a time with the four
typewritten sentences. The participants had to write down
the list of the four situations and to write next to each
situation whether or not it was permissible. Consider the
following example of a deontic assertion (translated from
the Italian) used in the experiment: ‘Those enrolled for
swimming are obligated to bring a lifebuoy’. The Italian
equivalent of ‘obligated’ is easy for children to understand.
Granted the truth of the assertion, three situations are
permissible: those enrolled for swimming bring a lifebuoy,
those not enrolled do bring a lifebuoy, and those not
enrolled do not bring a lifebuoy. What is not permissible is
for those enrolled not to bring a lifebuoy. The correct
answers are in Table 1. There was no constraint on the order
in which the participants carried out the task. If, as rarely
happened, the participants failed to list one of the four
situations, then the experimenter pointed out the omission.
With one exception in the 11 year old group, each
participant yielded a complete classification of all the
sentences. We scored each set of evaluations provided for
the 4 contingencies of each description. If a child listed as
permissible only the contingencies allowed by one of the
two logically correct interpretations (see Table 1), the child
got ‘correct’, otherwise the child got ‘incorrect’.

Table 2: Percentages of most frequent interpretations made
by children in Experiment 1 arranged vertically in each cell:
9 year olds at the top, 11 year olds at the bottom. e indicates
erroneous responses; the balances of percentages in any row
are responses made on fewer than 13% of trials.
The four
sorts of
assertion
A permits
B
Not-A
oblig. B
A oblig.B

A B A B
AB
A B A B A B
A ¬B A¬B A¬B
A ¬B A¬B A¬B
¬A B ¬A B
¬AB ¬A B
¬A B
¬A¬B ¬A¬B ¬A¬B
¬A¬B ¬A¬B

38
13

59
60
37
26

50
48
30
17

59
56

A proh. B

38
13

46
17

e

17

Table 3 presents the percentages of trials on which
participants started each listing with the state corresponding
to the mental model of the assertion in the permissible
condition. Children in the two groups tended to list first a
permissible situation (Binomial tests on the numbers of
participants starting with a permissible situation on more
than two of the four assertions were reliable for both age
groups, p always <.001). The one obvious exception to this
bias was the tendency for A prohibits B to elicit the
impermissible situation in which A occurs with B.
Table 3: The four deontic relations and the percentages of
states listed first by children in Experiment 1. The balance
of the percentages are states listed first on fewer than 13%
of trials. B or ¬B indicates that the state was listed as
impermissible; the other states were listed as permissible.
Deontic relations
A permits B
Not-A obligates B

A obligates B
A prohibits B

546

9 year old group
(N=24)
A B
83
¬A B
AB
A B
A B
A¬B
A B
A¬B

11 year old group
(N=23)
A B
74
A ¬B
13
46 ¬A B
61
25 A B
13
13
67 A B
70
17
67 A B
35
21 A B
39

Discussion Children tend to converge on the salience of a
model when interpreting each of the four deontic verbs. As
we assumed that models guide children’s reasoning, on
these bases we can predict the conclusions they will draw.
As we expected, when dealing with the verb Prohibit
children construct a model representing an impermissible
state of affairs. The same result, to our surprise, did not hold
for 11 year old children. But, as we’ll see in Experiment 2,
the predictions derived from these results lead us to predict
effectively the reasoning performance of the oldest group of
children with pairs of deontic premises involving Prohibits.
We have only a tentative explanation for this unexpected
result: models for deontic assertions represent what is
permitted or not within possible states of affairs. Eleven
year old children might be more likely to focus on
possibilities rather than on what is either permitted or not
within them. Thus, given an assertion in the form A
prohibits B, the model would be
A
B
which is the possible state of affairs, not yet annotated to
represent the fact that B is not permitted. Also, as a general
result, children tend to use the strong interpretation of each
deontic verb; the adult participants in the study by
Bucciarelli and Johnson-Laird (2005), instead, show the
opposite tendency and prefer the weak interpretation. This
difference between children and adults can be accounted for
by the principle of limited working memory and the
principle of multiple models.

4. Premises yielding more than one mental model with an
explicit content would elicit a greater variety of responses
than premises yielding only one mental model with an
explicit content.
This last prediction should hold especially for the 11 year
old group, who are capable, in principle, to construct more
than one mental model of the premises. Consider, as an
example of multiple model problem, the premises A permits
B, B prohibits C. On the basis of the models identified in
Experiment 1, we predict that children may construct the
following integrated representation:
A
B
¬C
which supports the logically incorrect conclusion ‘A
prohibits C’. Indeed, in order to draw the logically correct
conclusion it is necessary to construct an enriched
representation of the premises, namely:
A
B
¬C
…
where the implicit model (i.e., dots) mean that there are
other permissible states, not considered in the model. Only
this representation supports the correct conclusion ‘A
permits not C’. On the basis of the very same enriched
model, we also predict the logically incorrect conclusion
‘No valid conclusion’ (‘Nvc’).
Method The material consisted of the 16 pairs of premises,
resulting from the combination of the four deontic relations
investigated in Experiment 1 with the first and the second
premise in the pair. We used 16 triplets of lexical content
that we combined with the 16 problems in two different
ways, so that we obtained two experimental protocols. The
result of the assignments of the triplets to the problems are
problems concerning everyday matters. For example,
‘Those enrolled for swimming are obligated to bring the
lifebuoy. Those who bring the lifebuoy are permitted to dive
into the water’.

Experiment 2: Children’s Reasoning from Pairs of
Deontic Assertions
The participants in Experiment 2 were invited to draw
conclusions from pairs of deontic premises. We assumed
that, given a pair of deontic premises, children construct the
models detected through Experiment 1, and illustrated in
Table 3, and draw their conclusions from such models. In
particular, children construct integrated models of the
premises following the principles illustrated above. Also, we
know from Experiment 1 that Permits is the only verb for
which children claim that all the four states of affairs are
permissible (see Table 2). On the basis of this results we
formulated a third principle:
3. The principle of implicit models: children add an
implicit model to the model representation of A permits
B.
Through this principle we aimed at inserting in children’s
model representations the implicit model (i.e., dots). Our
predictions concerning the conclusions can be summarized
as follows:
1. Children should tend to draw those conclusions
corresponding to mental models.
2. Inferences depending on one mental model should be
easier than those depending on multiple mental models.
3. The premises with multiple models should also elicit
more ‘no valid conclusion’ responses than the latter
premises, especially in 11 year old group.

Procedures Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the two experimental protocols. Half of them were tested
with one protocol and half with the other one. The
participants were told that the experiment was about
reasoning. The key instruction was as follows: “Your task is
to read carefully the premises, and to try to draw a
conclusion. To draw a conclusion, you must relate the terms
that are not directly related in the premises. There might not
be any conclusion that has to be true given the premises, and
in which case you should say so”. Each participants dealt
with the problems in a different random order. They were
allowed to take as much time as they needed to make their
responses. Mean time for children 45-50 minutes.
Participants Forty children participated in the experiment,
with 20 in each of the following age groups: 9-10 years
(mean age: 9;7 years) and 11-12 years (mean age: 11;5). In
each age group, children were balanced by gender. They
were pupils from two primary and two secondary schools in
Piedmont, Italy.

547

Results Children in both age groups made more predicted
responses than unpredicted responses. The percentages of
responses predicted was 82% for 9 year olds and 93% for 11
year olds, and the mean number of predicted responses per
problem was 16.4 out of 20 for 9 year olds and 18.7 out of
20 for 11 year olds. Likewise, every problem yielded more
predicted responses than unpredicted responses. One model
problems were easier to solve than multiple model problems
for 9 year olds (a mean of 82% versus a mean of 38.9% of
correct conclusions, respectively: Wilcoxon test: z=3.65,
tied p<.0001), and the same result held for 11 year olds; one
model problems were easier to solve than multiple model
problems (a mean of 81% versus a mean of 26% of correct
conclusions, respectively: Wilcoxon test: z=3.87, tied
p<.0001). Further, a by-materials analysis shows that
multiple model problems yield a greater diversity of
responses than one-model problems in the 9 year olds group
(a mean of 3 versus a mean of 1.4, respectively: Mann
Whitney test: tied z= 2.90, tied p<.002), as well as in the 11
year olds group (a mean of 3 versus 2, respectively: Mann
Whitney test: tied z=2.70, tied p<.01). A comparison
between the performance of the two groups of children
revealed no increase with age in accuracy overall. Rather, 9
year olds (a mean of 8.40 correct conclusions over the 16)
performed better than 11 year olds (a mean of 6.95 correct
conclusions over 16: Mann-Whitney test: z=2.83, p<.003).
In particular, for 4 problems, the latter did better than the
former, 1 problem yielded a tie, and in the remaining 11
problems 11 year old children did worse, with a significant
deterioration with premises involving Prohibits. Such a
difference in performance can be explained if we consider
the results of Experiment 1; they showed that 11 year olds
were poorer than 9 year olds in interpreting Prohibits. And
indeed, in Experiment 2, the performance of the 11 year
olds was poorer than the performance of 9 year olds for the
7 problems involving Prohibits (a mean of 0.36 and 0.51
correct conclusions, respectively: Mann-Whitney test:
z=3.04; p<.004), but not for the other 9 problems: (a mean
of 0.48 and 0.51 correct conclusions, respectively: MannWhitney test z=1.36, p=.19). Also, we found that children in
the two age groups never draw ‘nvc’ responses to one model
problems. However, as predicted for multiple model
problems, 9 year olds drew few ‘nvc’ responses while 11
year olds drew several ‘nvc’ responses. Thus, children in the
oldest group showed evidence of not limiting themselves to
construct just one model of the premises.

problems: they tended to produce a greater number of
correct responses rather than ‘nvc’ responses. With one
model problems, however, children and adults have
comparable performances. May we conclude that children
develop in their ability to reason deontically as they grow
older? The answer is no, at least if we consider the
correctness of the conclusions that the oldest group of
children draw as compared with the youngest groups of
children. However, if we consider the type of erroneous
conclusions produced, especially to multiple model
problems, we can appreciate that they are based on more
sophisticated model representations of the premises. What
explains the nature of a reasoning development that can not
be appreciated in terms of accuracy but in terms of type of
erroneous conclusions? Our results suggest that the oldest
children are able to hold more models in mind and they are
able to consider more than the explicit mental model. Also,
our results are in line with the literature concerning
children’s reasoning from factual premises (see, e.g., Bara et
al., 2001; Barrouillet, Grosset & Lecas, 2000; Lecas &
Barrouillet, 1999; Markovits & Barrouillet, 2002).

General Conclusions
Does there exist a special mechanism dedicated to
comprehension and reasoning from deontic premises? Many
theorists (Chao & Cheng, 2000; Cheng & Holyoak, 1985;
Cosmides, 1989; Cummins, 1996) advance this idea in order
to justify the fact that individuals’ performance with the
hypothesis testing tasks devised by Wason (1966; 1968) are
facilitated by deontic contents (see, e.g., Cummins, 1996;
Kroger, Cheng & Holyoak, 1993). MMT proposes a
contrasting view according to which the beneficial effect of
the deontic content on these hypothesis testing tasks is to
make salient the false instances of a rule, namely what is
impermissible (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). And indeed,
the effect has been obtained also with factual (non-deontic)
material (see, e.g., Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird, 2001;
Sperber, Cara & Girotto, 1995; Staller, Sloman & BenZeev, 2000). In the perspective of MMT factual and deontic
reasoning depend on a general inferential mechanism. The
proposal of a unified mechanism for reasoning is advanced
also by mental logic theorists. In contrast with MMT, they
argue that individuals possess a mental logic made up from
formal rules of inference (e.g., Braine & O’Brien, 1998;
Osherson, 1974-6; Rips, 1994). The central idea is that
individuals construct a formal proof that a conclusion
follows from the premises. Each step in the proof depends
on a formal rule of inference. Errors may occur because
people fail to apply a formal rule correctly (Rips, 1994, p.
153). Errors should therefore be more likely with proofs that
call for a greater number of steps, or for more complex and
varied steps (ib., 1994, p. 386). Rips (1994, p. 322) argues
that individuals can make deontic inferences that do not
depend on familiarity with the domain, such as: It is
obligatory that P given Q. Therefore, it is permissible that P
given Q. He suggested that such inferences can be handled
in his system by the addition of modal operators akin to

Discussion The results of Experiment 2 globally confirmed
our predictions. On the basis of the models detected for the
four deontic relations in Experiment 1, and on the basis of
three assumptions on children’s reasoning, we were able to
predict both correct and erroneous conclusions for pairs of
deontic premises. The oldest group of children did not
reach, anyway, the accuracy that adults can reach in
reasoning from deontic premises. Adults in the study by
Bucciarelli and Johnson-Laird (2005) performed better than
the oldest group of children especially with multiple model

548

those proposed by logicians (see also Osherson, 1974-6).
However, as he pointed out, the extension of his system to
account for deontic reasoning would entail more than just
adding a few rules (Rips, 1994, p. 336). The main difficulty
for mental logic theories is to explain systematic errors in
reasoning without invoking rules of inference that are
invalid (an assumption with disastrous consequences, see,
e.g., Johnson-Laird & Savary, 2996). Alas, for such
theories, individuals of different ages make consistent
patterns of error, which can not be explained by assuming
random factors like a misinterpretation of the premises and
so on (see the results of Experiment 2). Within the
perspective offered by MMT comprehension and reasoning
from deontic premises rely on the same mental processes as
comprehension and reasoning from factual premises.
However, there is no need to postulate, as a unified
mechanism for reasoning, a mental logic. We construct
mental models of the possibilities described by deontic
assertions like we construct mental models of the
possibilities described by factual assertions. The mental
models for the deontic assertions, however, also capture the
relations between the possibilities and the states of affair
permissible within such possibilities. Both in the factual and
in the deontic domain we tend to represent only the models,
namely what is possible and what is permissible,
respectively. When we reason from both factual and deontic
premises we manipulate their models in order to reach our
conclusions. The models of a pair of premises may yield the
construction of one or multiple models of the premises. The
number of models does affect the difficulty of the problem,
both in the factual and in the deontic domain. What is
relevant within a developmental perspective is that children
differ from adults in the way they represent the meaning of
(factual and) deontic assertions, namely in the models that
they tend to construct from them. Also, children, as
compared with adults, have a poorer working memory
capacity. Hence, children differ from adults in the
conclusions they draw from (factual and) deontic premises,
especially from premises yielding multiple models.

Bucciarelli M. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1999). Strategies in
syllogistic reasoning. Cognitive Science, 23, 247-303.
Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001) Falsification
and the role of the theory of mind in the reduced array
selection task. Current Psychology Letters: Behavior,
Brain & Cognition, 4, 7-22.
Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2005). Naïve
deontics: a theory of meaning, representation, and
reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 50, 159-193.
Chao, S-J., & Cheng, P.W. (2000). The emergence of
inferential rules. The use of pragmatic reasoning schemas
by preschoolers. Cognitive Development, 15, 39-62.
Cheng, P. N., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning
schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: has
natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies with
the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-276.
Cummins, D. D. (1996). Evidence of deontic reasoning in 3and 4-year-old children. Memory & Cognition, 24, 823829.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Twyman-Musgrove, J. (1998).
Conditional reasoning with inducements and advice.
Cognition, 69, 811-816.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, and consciousness.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2006). How we reason. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Savary, F. (1996). Illusory
Inferences about Probabilities. Acta Psycholog., 93, 69-90
Kroger, K., Cheng, P.W., & Holyoak, K.J. (1993). Evoking
the permission schema: The impact of explicit negation
and a violation-checking context. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 46A, 615-635.
Lecas, J-F., & Barrouillet, P. (1999). Understanding
conditional rules in childhood and adolescence: A mental
models approach. Current Psychology of Cognition, Vol
18(3), 363-396.
Markovits, H., & P. Barrouillet, P. (2002). The development
of conditional reasoning: A mental model account.
Developmental Review, 22, 5-36.
Osherson, D. N. (1974-6). Logical abilities in children
(Vols. 1-4). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof: Deductive
reasoning in human thinking. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sperber, D., Cara, F., & Girotto, V. (1995). Relevance
theory explains the selection task. Cognition, 52, 3-39.
Staller, A., Sloman, S. A., & Ben-Zeev, T. (2000).
Perspective effects in nondeontic versions of the Wason
selection task. Memory & Cognition, 28, 396-405.
Wason, P. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.), New
horizons in psychology (pp. 135–151). Harmondsworth,
UK: Penguin.
Wason, P. (1968). Reasoning about a rule. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20, 273-281.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Regione Piemonte 2004
(Bando regionale per la ricerca scientifica, cod. A239).

References
Bara B., Bucciarelli M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1995). The
development of syllogistic reasoning. The American
Journal of Psychology, 108, 157-193.
Bara, B. G., Bucciarelli, M., & Lombardo, V. (2001). Model
theory of deduction: A unified computational approach.
Cognitive Science, 25, 839–901.
Barrouillet, P., Grosset, N., & Lecas, J-F. (2000).
Conditional reasoning by mental models: Chronometric
and developmental evidence. Cognition, 75, 237-266.
Braine, M. D. S., & O’Brien, D. P. (Eds.). (1998). Mental
logic. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

549

