UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What lies ahead in time? Temporal frames of reference in Germany and Sweden
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7bg9j50f
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)
Authors
Beller, Sieghard
Bender, Andrea
Rothe, Annelie
Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

   What lies ahead in time? Temporal frames of reference in Germany
                                                   and Sweden
                                                   Annelie Rothe
                                                 University of Freiburg
                                                  Andrea Bender
                                                 University of Freiburg
                                                  Sieghard Beller
                                                 University of Freiburg
Abstract: Time as an abstract domain is hardly tangible for us. So in order to think about time-related issues we
have to refer to spatial concepts or characteristics. At the moment there exist different theories about the spatial
conceptions used in time. In the presented study the theory of temporal frames of reference (t-FoR) builds the
theoretical framework. In order to test this specific model cross-culturally a short priming-experiment was conducted.
After spatial priming 149 German and 130 Swedish students were presented four target scenarios in the manner of
McGlone and Harding (1998): Next Wednesdays meeting has been moved forward two days. The results indicate
the applicability of the model and showed strong preferences for a specific t-FoR in each culture: Germans mainly
applied the intrinsic t-FoR whereas Swedish students used the absolute form. Because of such strong culture-specific
preferences new ways of spatial priming need to be discussed.
  Keywords: time, space, frame of reference, Germany, Sweden
                                                          2036

