UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why Is Ethnocentrism More Common Than Humanitarianism?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72z42376

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hartshorn, Max
Kaznatcheev, Artem
Shultz, Thomas

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why Is Ethnocentrism More Common Than Humanitarianism?
Thomas R. Shultz (thomas.shultz@mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology and School of Computer Science, McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue
Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada

Max Hartshorn (max.hartshorn@mail.mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue
Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada

Artem Kaznatcheev (artem.kaznatcheev@mail.mcgill.ca)
Department of Physics and School of Computer Science, McGill University, 3600 University Street,
Montreal, QC H3A 2T8 Canada
Abstract
A compelling agent-based computer simulation suggests that
ethnocentrism, often thought to rely on complex social
cognition and learning, may have arisen through biological
evolution (Hammond & Axelrod, 2006). From a neutral start,
ethnocentric strategies evolve to dominate other possible
strategies (selfish, traitorous, and humanitarian) that
differentiate patterns of cooperation with in-group and outgroup agents. We present new analyses and simulations to
clarify and explain this outcome by formulating and testing
two hypotheses for explaining how ethnocentrism eventually
dominates its closest competitor, humanitarianism. Results
indicate support for the direct hypothesis that ethnocentrics
exploit humanitarian cooperation along the frontiers between
ethnocentric and humanitarian groups as world population
saturates. We find very little support for the contrasting freerider-suppression hypothesis that ethnocentrics are better than
humanitarians at suppressing non-cooperating free riders,
although both hypotheses correctly predict a close temporal
relation between population saturation and ethnocentric
dominance.
Keywords: Ethnocentrism; humanitarianism; selfishness;
traitorousness; cooperation; defection; Prisoner’s Dilemma;
evolution; agent-based simulation; minimal cognition.

Introduction
Ethnocentrism, the tendency to favor one’s own group, is
implicated in a wide variety of important phenomena from
voting patterns to ethnic discrimination and armed conflict
(Chirot & Seligman, 2001; Kinder, 1998; van der Dennen,
1995). Many social scientists believe that ethnocentrism
derives from cultural learning and depends on considerable
social and cognitive abilities (Hewstone, Rubin, & Willis,
2002; LeVine & Campbell, 1972; Sherif, 1966). However,
this view is inconsistent with evidence that ethnocentrism is
common throughout a diverse range of animal (Keller &
Ross, 1998), plant (Dudley & File, 2007), and single-celled
species (Lenski & Velicer, 2000). Such evidence suggests
that ethnocentrism may have a basis in biological evolution
and that it requires fairly minimal cognition. The ability to
distinguish in- vs. out-group members and select different
behaviors based on that distinction may suffice.
A recent computer simulation with simple abstract agents
demonstrates that ethnocentrism can indeed originate

through evolutionary processes (Hammond & Axelrod,
2006). Agents could either defect against, or cooperate with,
other in-group or out-group agents, creating four possible
strategies: (1) a selfish strategy of universal defection, (2) a
traitorous strategy of cooperation with out-group, but not ingroup, agents, (3) an ethnocentric strategy of in-group
cooperation and defection against agents from different
groups, and (4) a humanitarian strategy of universal
cooperation.
From a neutral starting point, ethnocentrism evolved to
become the dominant strategy, eventually characterizing
about 75% of the population, a figure intriguingly close to
the incidence of in-group favoritism found in young
Canadian children (Aboud, 2003). Ethnically-fueled human
conflicts stretch far back into history, are still quite
common, and with the waning of the ideologicallymotivated cold war, are predicted to be the major source of
armed inter-group aggression through the foreseeable future
(Huntington, 1993; Kaufmann, 1996).
In this paper, we try to understand how and why
ethnocentrism is favored by evolution. First we describe the
original simulation that found cooperation to be largely
restricted to within-group interactions and then we propose
and test two hypotheses that might explain this pattern of
ethnocentric dominance.

The Original Simulation
Interacting agents in virtually any social situation have a
basic decision to make, namely whether to cooperate with
each other or not. Such interactions have been well
characterized in evolutionary game theory, where the
opposite of cooperation is usually termed defection. The
most common game used to study such interactions is the
Prisoner's Dilemma (PD). In PD games, two agents decide,
independently of the other’s decision, whether to cooperate
with or defect against the other. In relatively abundant
environments with some degree of specialization, the cost of
cooperating is less than the benefit of receiving another’s
cooperation. Table 1 presents the actual payoffs for PD
interactions in the original simulation (Hammond &
Axelrod, 2006), each payoff being computed as benefit

2100

minus cost for each agent. In this simulation, benefit (.03) is
three times as large as cost (.01).
The reward R for mutual cooperation is .03 - .01 = .02 for
each agent. Punishment P for mutual defection is 0 – 0 = 0
for each agent. The other two cells, in which one agent
cooperates and the other defects, have asymmetrical
outcomes. The cooperating agent gets the so-called sucker’s
payoff S 0 - .01 = -.01, and the defector receives the
temptation for defecting T of .03 – 0 = .03. PD games are
defined by the following inequality: T > R > P > S. Actual
numerical values can vary as long as this inequality holds.
Table 1: Characteristics of a PD game.

A Cooperate
A Defect
MeanB

B Cooperate
RA = .02
RB = .02
TA = .03
SB = -.01
.005

B Defect
SA = -.01
TB = .03
PA = .00
PB = .00
.015

MeanA
.005
.015

The marginal means in Table 1 reveal that individual
agents can do three times better by defecting than by
cooperating. The well known paradox of cooperation is that,
even though the optimal strategy for each individual agent is
defection, many agents cooperate (Axelrod & Hamilton,
1981). One particularly interesting explanation of this
paradox is that cooperation was selected through biological
evolution. The simulation shows that this cooperation is
strongly ethnocentric: agents largely restrict their
cooperation to members of their own group, who also
happen to be the agents with whom they are most likely to
interact (Hammond & Axelrod, 2006).
In the simulation, agents possess four simple traits: one of
four perceivable tags identifiable to themselves and others, a
strategy toward agents possessing the same tag (cooperate
or defect), a strategy toward agents with a different tag
(again, cooperate or defect), and a probability of
reproduction by cloning an offspring (initially set to .12).
The agents come to populate a 50 x 50 lattice, with each cell
containing at most one agent at a time. Agents do not move
and can only interact with agents, if any, in the four
neighboring cells. An agent has a chance, its reproductive
potential, to generate a clone into an empty neighboring
cell. All this creates a so-called viscous environment
allowing only local interactions. The edges of the lattice
wrap around to create a torus (donut) shape, to ensure that
each location has the same number of potential neighbors.
Each simulation starts with the lattice empty and runs for
2000 cycles, because stable evolutionary patterns arise well
before that point. Each evolutionary cycle has four phases:
immigration, interaction, reproduction, and death. In the
immigration phase, a new agent is created, with randomly
assigned traits for tag and strategy, and placed at a randomly
selected empty location somewhere in the lattice. In the
interaction phase, each agent's reproductive potential is first
set to the default value of .12. Then each agent interacts

with each of its neighbors (up to four) in a one-time PD
game in which each agent independently chooses to
cooperate or defect based on their own strategy and tag and
the tag of the other agent. If an agent cooperates, its
reproductive potential is reduced by cost and the
reproductive potential of the recipient agent is increased by
benefit, as in Table 1.
In a randomized order, each agent is given a chance,
based on its current reproductive potential, to clone an
offspring if an adjacent empty space is available. Any such
clone inherits the parental traits, with each trait (tag, ingroup strategy, out-group strategy) subject to a small
mutation rate (default value .005). Strategy traits can mutate
by switching values (cooperate to defect or vice versa). Tags
can mutate to any one of the three other tags with equal
probability. In the last phase, death, each agent has a chance
of expiring equal to the death rate (default value of .10),
which would result in removal from the lattice.
Hammond and Axelrod (2006) found that the average
proportions of the four strategies during the last 100 of 2000
evolutionary cycles were .08 selfish, .02 traitorous, .75
ethnocentric, and .15 humanitarian. This outcome was not
much affected by doubling and halving of the key
parameters, namely lattice size, number of cycles, number
of tags, and the benefit and cost of cooperation. Thus,
evolution of ethnocentrism is quite robust and not merely a
knife-edge phenomenon.
Whereas Hammond and Axelrod (2006) focused only on
the last 100 cycles, a follow-up simulation analyzed the
distribution of strategies during each evolutionary cycle,
testing for the statistically significant dominance of any
particular strategy in each evolutionary cycle (Shultz,
Hartshorn, & Hammond, 2008). Although the ethnocentric
strategy eventually came to dominate all 50 simulated
worlds, about one half of the worlds had an early stage of
prolonged humanitarian dominance.
An important feature of these simulations is the evolving
spatial clustering of agents possessing the same tag and
strategy. This is illustrated in Figure 1 for a world with a
smaller, 25 x 25 lattice (to better fit the available space),
plotted at the 250th evolutionary cycle. Tags are represented
here by different colors. Strategies are indicated by their
first letter: s for selfish, t for traitorous, e for ethnocentric,
and h for humanitarian. These evolving spatial clusters of
homogeneous strains are a function of an abundant and
viscous environment and small mutation rate. The clusters
are, in turn, critical in the evolution of adaptive strategies.
Essentially, agents produce offspring of the same kind in
neighboring locations, and fitter agents (i.e., those who do
well in PD interactions with their neighbors) are more likely
to reproduce, thus winning competitions for placing their
own offspring into empty spaces.

Hypotheses for Ethnocentric Dominance
In this paper, we attempt to understand why ethnocentrism
comes to dominate over its closest competitor –
humanitarianism. The direct hypothesis is that

2101

predominantly ethnocentric groups directly suppress groups
of predominantly humanitarian agents with whom they
come into contact. This is because humanitarians cooperate
across group lines while ethnocentrics do not. Thus, from
these interactions along the group frontier, humanitarians
receive the disadvantageous sucker’s payoff while
ethnocentrics receive the favorable temptation payoff (see
Table 1). The contrasting free-rider-suppression hypothesis
is that predominantly ethnocentric groups are uniquely
effective at suppressing groups of predominantly free riders.
The quintessential free riders are selfish agents who benefit
from receiving cooperation without incurring the cost of
giving cooperation, thus receiving the relatively high
temptation payoff when they interact with a cooperating
agent. Agents with traitorous strategies free ride within their
own group, but not across groups. Thus, in intergroup
interactions, ethnocentrics are less vulnerable to
predominantly selfish groups than humanitarians are,
essentially because ethnocentrics do not cooperate across
group boundaries like humanitarians do. Both ethnocentric
and humanitarian groups benefit from intergroup
cooperation from traitors, but ethnocentrics more so because
ethnocentrics do not cooperate with these traitors while
humanitarians do.
Hammond and Axelrod (2006) discussed similar
interaction dynamics for ethnocentric suppression of free
riders, but because these dynamics do not favor
ethnocentrics over humanitarians, they are not relevant to
our current concern with explaining how ethnocentric
strategies come to dominate over humanitarian ones. Both
ethnocentric and humanitarian groups would be equally
susceptible to free riders (whether selfish or traitorous)
inside their own group. Ethnocentrics and humanitarians
would both cooperate with these similar-looking free riders
but would not receive cooperation from them, thus incurring
the disadvantageous sucker’s payoff.
In this paper, we test our two hypotheses by eliminating
from 1 to 3 of the 4 possible strategies in order to better
isolate competitions between strategies, and by examining
patterns of correlations and partial correlations between
strategy populations in the full, four-strategy simulation.
The free-rider-suppression hypothesis predicts better
intergroup suppression of free riders by ethnocentrics than
by humanitarians and that this is responsible for
ethnocentric dominance. The direct hypothesis predicts that
suppression of free riders is irrelevant and that the key
factor is direct exploitation of humanitarians by noncooperating ethnocentrics. Both hypotheses predict a close
temporal coincidence of ethnocentric dominance with
population saturation because interaction between groups
increases as the world fills up.

Study 1: Timing of Ethnocentric Dominance
Here we assess temporal coincidence between population
saturation and the beginnings of the eventual separation of
the frequencies of ethnocentric and humanitarian strategies.
Both the direct and free-rider-suppression hypotheses

predict a close temporal relation between the beginning of
ethnocentric dominance and population saturation.
- - e e - e e e e e e s e t - e e e e - e - - - h
e e e e e e e e e e e s t t e e - - - e e s h h t
e - e e e h e e e e e - - t s s t - t e h h h t t
e e - e - e e e e e - e - t t s h - - - t - t t t
e - - s h e - - - - - e s s s s h h - s - - t t t
- t t s s t t - - t e - s s s s - h s - t - - t - - t - s s - - - - e e s - e - - - t t - - - t t
t - s - t t t h - - - - e t e t - t s s h h t t h s s s - h - h t t - - t t - t - e e h - - - t h
h s - s - - - h t - t - - t t t - t - s h - - - - - s - - - t - t e e e - t - - - - t s h - s s - - - - e s - - t t e e e - - - - - t h h h - e - - h h e s - t t - t e h - - - - s s - - - h e e
- - - e e s - - - t t t - t - - - t - e e - h e e e - - e e - e e e e e e e e - - e - e e h e e e
e - - e - e - e e e e e h e e e e e e e e e - e e
e s - - - e - - e e e h t e - e e - e - e e e - e
e - e e e e - - e e e h h e e e e e e e e e e e e - e - e - e e e e e e e e - e e e e - h e s e e
e e e e - e e e e - e e e h h h - e - - - s s - e e e e e e e e - - - - e - h - - - e - e e e e e
e e e e - e - e - - e e e e h e - - e - - e e e e
e e e e - - e e - e e e e - - e e - e - e e e e e
e e e - - e e - - e e e - - - h h e h e e e h - e e e e e e e - e e e h e - e e e e - e e e - h e

Figure 1: Strategies and groups in world 2 at 250 cycles
(Shultz et al., 2008).

Method
For this study, we reanalyze the 50-world simulation of
Shultz et al. (2008), recording the numbers of agents with
each of the four strategies and total world populations across
the first 1000 evolutionary cycles.

Results
Mean strategy frequencies across the 50 worlds are plotted
in Figure 2. Humanitarian strategies compete well with
ethnocentric strategies early on, but at about 300 cycles,
strategy frequencies begin to separate, with humanitarians
decreasing and ethnocentrics continuing to expand.
A similar plot of mean population sizes in this simulation
in Figure 3 reveals that this strategy split coincides with
saturation of world population. As world population (the
sum of all existing agents) saturates at just under 1600

2102

agents at about 300 cycles, humanitarians begin to drop off,
relative to ethnocentric agents.

Discussion
These results are consistent with both hypotheses, because
they both require interaction between adjacent groups. As
the world fills in, the different groups collide and compete
for the remaining space.

Study 3: Partial Strategy Sets
Here, in new simulations, we test every possible
combination of the four strategies independently. This
includes testing each strategy individually, all six strategy
pairs, and all four strategy triples. The idea is to see whether
certain strategies finish differently in the absence of other
strategies, and thus to highlight interaction dynamics that
can be missed with full four-strategy simulations. Here we
focus particularly on strategy combinations that include
either humanitarianism or ethnocentrism competing against
the free-rider strategies of selfishness and traitorousness.
The issue is whether ethnocentrism suppresses free riders
better than humanitarianism does, as predicted by the freerider-suppression hypothesis. In contrast, the direct
hypothesis does not predict such differences.

Method
Figure 2. Mean strategy frequencies in 50 worlds ±SE.

Figure 3. Mean population size in 50 worlds ±SE.

Study 2: Correlations between Strategies
With the data in Study 1, we computed correlations between
mean strategy populations across cycles both before and
after population saturation. Up to cycle 300, correlations are
uniformly highly positive because all populations are still
growing. After cycle 300, the correlation patterns become
more interesting. As predicted by both the direct and freerider-suppression hypotheses, the correlation between
ethnocentric and humanitarian strategies is highly negative
(-.992). Importantly, this correlation is unaltered after
partialling out correlations with selfish strategies and it
remains strongly negative (-.764) after partialling out
correlations with traitorous strategies.
Selfish strategies correlate with ethnocentric strategies at
.302 and with humanitarian strategies at -.285. Traitorous
strategies correlate with ethnocentric strategies at -.993 and
with humanitarian strategies at .982. Due to the high
degrees of freedom (698), all these correlations are highly
significant, p < .001.
The partial correlations suggest that the decline of
humanitarians is due to direct exploitation by ethnocentrics
and is not mediated by any humanitarian deficiencies in
suppressing selfish or traitorous agents, as predicted by the
free-rider-suppression hypothesis.

The simulations are identical to Hammond and Axelrod's
(2006) original simulation, except that immigration and
mutation are restricted so that all strategies fall within the
particular subset of strategies being tested. In every
evolutionary cycle, a new immigrant is created with random
in-group and out-group strategy traits. If these traits result in
a strategy that is disallowed, that agent is aborted and a new
agent is created with new random strategy traits. This
process is iterated until an immigrant with an allowed
strategy is created.
Mutations are treated in similar fashion. Offspring inherit
parental traits with each trait subject to a mutation rate of
.005. If a particular mutation produces an offspring with a
disallowed strategy, that mutation is ignored.
For each combination of allowed strategies, we record the
mean number of agents possessing each strategy over the
last 100 of 2000 cycles, and average those over 10 worlds.

Results
Regardless of which strategies are excluded, the final
frequency distribution of strategies nearly always obeys the
same ordering as in the original Hammond and Axelrod
(2006) simulation: ethnocentric > humanitarian > selfish >
traitorous. The one exception is in the simulation without
ethnocentrism (humanitarian-selfish-traitorous simulation),
where traitorous agents perform better than selfish agents.
Critical to the free-rider-suppression hypothesis is the
extent to which humanitarians thrive in the absence of
ethnocentrism. In simulations without ethnocentrism,
humanitarianism dominates in a manner similar to
ethnocentrism. Figure 4 plots the mean frequency of each
strategy in the ethnocentric-selfish-traitorous and
humanitarian-selfish-traitorous simulations. In those two
simulations,
humanitarians
perform
similarly
to
ethnocentrics by greatly outperforming both traitorous and
selfish agents. Although a 3x2 chi-square test of the
frequencies in Figure 4 is statistically significant, X2(2) =
73, p < .001, suggesting that ethnocentrics might suppress
traitors a bit more than humanitarians do, X2(1) = 72, p <
.001, this does not diminish the numbers of humanitarians

2103

agents, X2(1) = 78, p < .001. However humanitarians and
ethnocentrics do not differ from each other, X2(1) = 2.39, ns.
1600

Frequency

relative to ethnocentrics, X2(1) = 0.04, ns, or the numbers of
selfish agents when humanitarians or ethnocentrics are
included in the simulation, X2(1) = 2.45, ns. In short, in the
absence of ethnocentric strategies, humanitarians dominate
either traitorous or selfish agents about as effectively as
ethnocentrics do when humanitarian strategies are excluded.
1600
Frequency

Included strategy
1200

Humanitarian

800

Ethnocentric

Included strategy
Humanitarian

1200

Ethnocentric

800
400
0
Selfish

400

Humanitarian or Ethnocentric
Strategy

0
Traitorous

Selfish

Figure 6: Mean strategy frequencies in the humanitarianselfish and ethnocentric-selfish simulations.

Humanitarian
or
Ethnocentric

Strategy

Frequency

Figure 4: Mean strategy frequencies in the ethnocentricselfish-traitorous and humanitarian-selfish-traitorous
simulations.
Figure 5 plots the mean frequency of each strategy in the
humanitarian-traitorous
and
ethnocentric-traitorous
simulations. A 2x2 chi-square test on these strategy
frequencies is insignificant, X2(1) = .08, ns. Humanitarian
agents are just as effective against traitorous agents as
ethnocentric agents are.

1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Traitorous

Selfish

Humanitarian

Ethnocentric

Strategy

Figure 7: Mean frequencies of isolated strategies.

Discussion
1600

The results of these restricted strategy-set simulations
contradict the predictions of the free-rider-suppression
hypothesis. In contrast to the notion that humanitarians
cannot effectively suppress free riders, humanitarians do
just as well against selfish and traitorous agents as
ethnocentrics do. This is consistent with the contrasting
direct hypothesis in that the chief difficulty that
humanitarians have is in competing with ethnocentrics. It
seems that free riders do an effective job of suppressing
their own gene pool, essentially by not cooperating with
their own kind, including particularly their own offspring
and parents.

Frequency

Included strategy
1200

Humanitarian
Ethnocentric

800
400
0
Traitorous

Humanitarian or Ethnocentric
Strategy

Figure 5: Mean strategy frequencies in humanitariantraitorous and ethnocentric-traitorous simulations.

General Discussion
Figure 6 reveals an analogous finding for the
humanitarian-selfish and ethnocentric-selfish simulations. A
2x2 chi-square test on these strategy frequencies is
insignificant, X2(1) = .002, ns. Humanitarian agents are as
effective against selfish agents as ethnocentric agents are.
Finally, even in isolation, ethnocentrics and humanitarians
perform much better than selfish and traitorous agents, as
shown in Figure 7. The overall 4x1 chi-square for the
frequency of each strategy in isolation is highly significant,
X2(3) = 579, p < .001. Ethnocentrics and humanitarians both
do better than either selfish or traitorous agents, X2(1) > 128,
p < .001. Traitorous agents also perform better than selfish

Both the direct and free-rider-suppression hypotheses
correctly predict the temporal coincidence between
population saturation and the beginnings of ethnocentric
dominance over humanitarianism. Our correlation analysis
and restricted strategy-set simulations support the direct
hypothesis for explaining eventual ethnocentric dominance
over humanitarianism. Because these two strategies are
behaviorally identical when interacting within groups,
ethnocentrism's advantage must result from between-group
interactions. Along group borders, humanitarians cooperate
while ethnocentrics do not. This provides a slight
reproductive advantage for border-dwelling ethnocentrics,

2104

who obtain the benefit of humanitarian cooperation while
donating nothing across group lines. Ethnocentric agents are
thus more likely to succeed in competition for remaining
space along these borders.
Consistent with this direct hypothesis and against the freerider-suppression hypothesis, strongly negative correlations
between frequencies of ethnocentric and humanitarian
strategies remain that way after partialling out correlations
with free-rider strategies, either selfish or traitorous. The
dominance of ethnocentrism over humanitarianism does not
depend on the mediating effects of suppression of free
riders.
The free-rider-suppression hypothesis is also contradicted
by the finding that traitorous and selfish agents still perform
poorly in the absence of ethnocentrism. Ethnocentrics are
not any better than humanitarians at overcoming free riders.
Although ethnocentrics have the ability to suppress free
riders in neighboring groups, this potential may never be
strongly realized due to the self-limiting characteristics of
free riding.
In restricted-strategy-set simulations, when ethnocentric
strategies are disallowed, the final concentration of
humanitarians is similar to that of ethnocentrics in the full
four-strategy simulation. Moreover, concentrations of
selfish and traitorous agents remain more or less unchanged,
whether interacting with ethnocentric or humanitarian
strategies. Pointedly, in these restricted-strategy simulations,
selfishness and traitorousness fare poorly against either
humanitarian or ethnocentric strategies. Although it can be
hazardous to be humanitarian, this is mainly due to
exploitation by ethnocentrics rather than by free riders.
So what does limit free riders then? In this type of
abundant and viscous environment, free riders do a fairly
good job of limiting themselves. In our simulations run with
only selfish or only traitorous agents, the final number of
agents is about half that of simulations run with only
ethnocentric or humanitarian agents. Selfish and traitorous
groups reproduce at a lower rate because they most likely
produce offspring who likewise fail to cooperate with their
own kind. In addition, perhaps ethnocentric and
humanitarian groups suppress selfishness and traitorousness
indirectly by occupying space faster, thus leaving less room
for those free riders.
It is noteworthy that the cognition employed by our
simple digital agents is quite simple. The function in our
computer code that implements an agent’s decision to
cooperate or defect is written as a nested conditional that
takes account of whether the donor and recipient are
members of the same group and the donor’s strategies for
in-group and out-group interactions. If the donor and
recipient are in same group, then if the donor’s strategy is to
cooperate within its group, then the donor cooperates;
otherwise it defects. But if the donor and recipient are in
different groups, then if the donor cooperates outside of its
group, then the donor cooperates; otherwise it defects. There
is a separate function to compute whether the donor and

recipient agents are from the same group, in terms of
whether they possess the same tags.
Although relatively simple, this sort of nested conditional
action does not seem to be beyond the pale of what
contemporary cognitive science regards as cognition.
Furthermore, this research brings cognition into a social and
evolutionary context that should be interesting to explore
further.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant to TRS from the
Dean’s Excellence Fund, Faculty of Science, McGill
University and grants to TRS and AK from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.

References
Aboud, F. E. (2003). The formation of ingroup favoritism
and outgroup
prejudice in
young
children.
Developmental Psychology, 39, 48-60.
Axelrod, R., & Hamilton, W. D. (1981). The evolution of
cooperation. Science, 211, 1390-1396.
Chirot, D., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2001). Ethno political
warfare: Causes, consequences, and possible solutions.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Dudley, S. A., & File, A. L. (2007). Kin recognition in an
annual plant. Biology Letters, 3, 435-438.
Hammond, R. A., & Axelrod, R. (2006). The evolution of
ethnocentrism. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 50, 926936.
Hewstone, M., Rubin, M., & Willis, H. (2002). Intergroup
bias. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 575-604.
Huntington, S. P. (1993). The clash of civilizations?
Foreign Affairs, 72, 22-49.
Kaufmann, C. (1996). Possible and impossible solutions to
ethnic civil wars. International Security, 20, 136-175.
Keller, L., & Ross, K. G. (1998). Selfish genes: a green
beard in the red fire ant. Nature, 394, 573-575.
Kinder, D. R. (1998). Opinion and action in the realm of
politics. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske & G. Lindzey
(Eds.), Handbook of social psychology. Boston:
McGraw-Hill.
Lenski, R. E., & Velicer, G. J. (2000). Games microbes
play. Selection, 1, 51-57.
LeVine, R. A., & Campbell, D. T. (1972). Ethnocentrism.
New York: Wiley.
Sherif, M. (1966). Group conflict and co-operation: Their
social psychology. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Shultz, T. R., Hartshorn, M., & Hammond, R. A. (2008).
Stages in the evolution of ethnocentrism. In B. C. Love,
K. McRae & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1244-1249). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
van der Dennen, J. M. G. (1995). The origin of war.
Groningen, Netherlands: Origin Press.

2105

