ters. Concurrently, they heard a verbal description of one of
these pictures. The experiment was based upon the assumption that people spontaneously seek referents of the sentences
they hear (e. g. Altmann & Kamide, 1999; Trueswell, Sekerina, Hill, & Logrip, 1999).
The only way to distinguish the referent picture from the
distractor was on the basis of formal grammatical cues: noun
inflections and word order. The key information that was
needed to find the appropriate picture was coded in the noun
inflections, but these were not always available on the first
noun in the sentence. Given the results of Slobin and Bever
(1982), children as young as 2.5 years should show an abovechance performance at least in subject initial sentences, i. e.
those in which the word order and nominal inflection both
point to the same interpretation.
The stimulus sentences varied in two main dimensions:
placement of the ambiguous noun (initial noun ambiguous or
not) and the word order, as determined by nominal inflection
(subject-initial vs. object-initial). Because there are multiple
ways to construct a sentence with unambiguous initial noun,
and the design attempted to cover all possibilities, the number
of sentences with ambiguous and unambiguous initial noun is
unbalanced.
The first specific question concerns the interpretation of
non-canonical word orders. The picture descriptions in the
above task differed in whether they were subject-initial or
object-initial. The object-initial word order is not standard
in Czech, and it is reasonable to expect that OVS sentences
will be processed with more difficulty than SVO sentences.
There is evidence that non-canonical word orders are difficult
to process in adults (Scheepers & Crocker, 2004; Hyönä &
Hujanen, 1997; Ferreira, 2003). If children have problems
interpreting non-canonical sentences, they should look to the
target picture less frequently, and it should take them longer
to shift to the target picture. The non-canonical sentences
should be especially difficult for younger children. All differences between canonical and non-canonical sentences are
thus expected to be bigger in younger children compared to
older children and adults.
The second question is focused on sentences in which the
inflectional cue is not available on the sentence-initial noun
because this noun is case-ambiguous. People listening to this
kind of sentences are likely to interpret the initial noun as
the subject, based on the most common word-order pattern.
If the second noun is unambiguously marked for nominative
and thus implies object-first reading, these sentences result in
garden path (cf. Scheepers & Crocker, 2004). The question
is whether children will immediately assign the first noun as
the subject, and whether they will be able to revise this interpretation in object-initial sentences. Differences between
adults and children in this task would illuminate the differences between adults and children in the use of grammatical
information during parsing.

Method
Participants The participants in this study were 53
preschool children in the age range 30 to 71 months, and a
group of 20 adults. All children were monolingual Czech and
were from Prague or vicinity. They were recruited using fliers
placed in doctors’ offices or preschools and via on-line ads.
The parents received ca. $10 as a reimbursement for the time
spent with the lab visit. All children were typically developing without any major health or developmental problems, and
with normal or corrected vision.
The children were divided in two groups. The group of 5year-olds consisted of 26 children (9 girls), with mean age 59
months (range 48–71, SD=6). The group of 3-year-olds consisted of 27 children (15 girls), with mean age of 39 months
(range 30–47, SD=6). The group of adults consisted of volunteers and university students who received credit for their
participation.
Stimuli The whole experiment consisted of 18 trials. Of
those trials, 16 are directly relevant for the research questions
discussed in this paper (see Table 1); the remaining two focused on sentences without any inflectional cues. All trials
shared the same format. In each trial, participants were simultaneously presented with a pair of pictures. Both pictures
showed the same action involving the same cartoon characters, but the agent/patient roles of characters were inverted.
While watching the picture pair, participants heard a recorded
sentence with meaning matched to one of the pictures.
For each picture pair, there were four possible sentences
differing in the assignment of agent/patient roles and word
order. Two sentences matched each picture of the pair. These
two sentences differed in word order, with one being subjectinitial and the other being object-initial. All sentences involved animate participants, animals or humans, so that the
pictured events were approximately equally (un)likely (e. g.
“The fox is pushing a kitty” and vice versa). The four versions of each sentences were used to develop four protocol
variants.
Table 1: Stimulus sentences used in the experiment.
Condition
A
B
C
D
E
F

Stimulus structure
Sub junambig – Verb – Ob junambig
Sub junambig – Verb – Ob jambig
Ob junambig – Verb – Sub junambig
Ob junambig – Verb – Sub jambig
Sub jambig – Verb – Ob junambig
Ob jambig – Verb – Sub junambig

Count
4
2
4
2
2
2

Twelve items addressed the first research question, i. e.
compared the subject-initial (A,B) and object-initial (C,D)
unambiguous sentences. Four items examined the second research question, comparing sentences with initial
case-ambiguous noun that were disambiguated towards the
subject-initial (E) or object-initial (F) reading.

1359

Apparatus and Procedure A PC computer with dual
screen and speakers was used to present the pictorial and auditory stimuli. Two 19” LCD screens were placed on a table,
and a pair of speakers connected to the computer was placed
between the screens. The distance between midpoints of the
monitors was 68 cm and the participants viewed them from
the distance of ca. 1.25 m. The camera was situated behind
the table. We used SONY digital camera with PAL resolution
720 × 576 with 25 fps.
In each trial, the stimulus pictures appeared first; 2 s later,
the stimulus sentence presentation started. The picture disappeared 5 s after the sentence onset. The participants were
asked to point to the picture matching the presented sentence.
The pointing responses were not strictly required and if a
child failed to follow the instruction, she was not prompted
to. For this reason, the pointing data were not evaluated.
The stimulus presentation was controlled via PXLab script
(Irtel, 2007). Dual-head video card was used to synchronize the two-monitor presentation. The camera recordings
were synchronized with the experiment script by an alternative audio track. The script presented different signals into
each channel of the stereo signal. One channel presenting the
stimulus sentences was connected to the speakers. The other
channel contained short beeps marking the sentence beginning and the end of picture presentation; this signal was sent
to the camera’s audio input.

the start and end of the words in the audio recordings. We
used four time intervals: three corresponding to the words in
the stimulus sentence, and the fourth representing the 400 ms
interval after the end of the last word. To measure the gaze
behavior initiated during these time intervals, the gaze data
were shifted by 200 ms compared to the audio recordings.
The 200 ms delay was used as an estimate of the saccade
latency (e. g. Melcher & Colby, 2008).
The analyses of preferential looking data must take into
account the looking preferences of children before the beginning of the data presentation. Therefore, rather than comparing the looking data to the chance level of 50 %, the analyses
compared the probability of target picture fixation during the
sentence presentation against a baseline that was minimally
influenced by the sentence content. This baseline comprised
gazes initiated during the presentation of the first noun of the
target sentence, i. e. the video frames starting 200 ms after
the sentence onset and ending 200 ms after the first word offset. Analyses used planned orthogonal contrasts to compare
the results in the subject-initial condition on the second, third
and fourth intervals to the baseline, and in the object-initial
condition to the results in the subject-initial condition during
the same interval.

Coding Videotapes of the participants were digitalized and
coded frame-by-frame for gaze direction. For each trial,
6 seconds of the recording were coded, beginning 1 s before
the onset of the stimulus sentence. This provided 150 frame
codes per trial, i. e. 2400 per participant for the trials analyzed
here. For each frame, the observed gaze direction was coded.
Four codes were possible: left, middle (between the screens),
right, or other, which included gazes away from the screens
and frames where the gaze direction was not apparent, such
as during blinks. The data were coded by a research assistant
who also administered the experiments. The coder was thus
not totally blind to the content of the stimuli. However, the
audio track in the recordings did not contain the stimulus sentences, only the beeps marking the sentence onset and the end
of picture presentation. Therefore, the coder did not routinely
know which particular stimulus she was coding.

The proportion of 3-year-olds’ looks to the target picture during the baseline and the subsequent presentation intervals is
shown in the Figure 1 (top left). The graph suggests a small
increase in the proportion of looks towards the target picture
in the subject-first condition in the third interval.
The analysis revealed no significant difference between the
subject-first and object-first condition during the baseline period. In the subject-first condition, the probability of looks
towards the target during the second interval was not significantly different from the baseline. During the third interval, the probability was significantly higher (z = 3.667, p <
0.001). In the object-first condition, the probability of looks
towards the target picture during the second and third interval was significantly lower than in the subject-first condition (second interval z = −2.425, p < 0.05, in third interval
z = −3.012, p < 0.01). The results from 3-year-olds suggest
that the children have some ability to interpret sentences with
canonical subject-first word order but show no such ability
in the noncanonical object-initial sentences. Actually, the
significant difference between conditions on the second interval (gazes initiated during the second word) indicates that
children tend to shift away from the target picture after they
hear the first word in the sentence. Such a pattern indicates
that 3-year-olds rely primarily on word order and ignore the
inflectional cues. Overall, even though the results from the
youngest group of children show significant changes in looking behavior related to the sentences presented to children, the
changes are small and may reflect a successful performance
in a small portion of the group only.

Analysis The structure of Czech grammar makes it difficult to fit the complete data into a factorial design. A series of analyses was thus performed separately for each research question and each age group. In general, in the analysis we used binomial (logistic) mixed models with subjects
and stimulus sentences as crossed random factors (Baayen,
Davidson, & Bates, 2008). The binary dependent variable in
the models was the gaze direction toward the target picture.
The models estimated the probability of fixating the target
picture as a function of experimental condition and time interval.
For the analysis we used time units defined relatively to

Results
Unambiguous Sentences

1360

0.6

0.4

0.2

2

3

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

4

1

0.6

0.4

0.2

3

3

0.6

0.4

0.2

4

1

4

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1

Sentence segment

2

3

Sentence segment

2

3

4

Sentence segment

Percentage of looks to target picture

0.8

2

2

0.8

Sentence segment

Percentage of looks to target picture

Percentage of looks to target picture

Sentence segment

1

Adults
Percentage of looks to target picture

Percentage of looks to target picture

Percentage of looks to target picture

unambiguous

5-year-olds

0.8

1

ambiguous

Sentence-initial word

3-year-olds

4

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1

2

3

4

Sentence segment

Figure 1: Percentage of looks to target picture depending on the age group and sentence conditions. Subject-first sentences
marked with triangles and broken line, object-first with circles and solid line.
In five-year olds, the pattern of results is somewhat more
clear, as Figure 1 (top middle) suggests. There is no significant difference between the conditions during the first, baseline interval. In the subject-first condition, the probability
of looks towards the target increases in the second interval
(z = 4.396, p < 0.001) and remains significantly higher than
baseline during the third (z = 6.304, p < 0.001) and fourth
(z = 5.648, p < 0.001) intervals. In the object-first condition,
the proportion of looks towards the target picture is significantly lower than in the subject-first condition during the second (z = −3.966, p < 0.001) interval, and higher in the fourth
(z = 2.388, p < 0.05) interval with no difference in the third
interval. The pattern indicates that children rely on word order during the initial interpretation of sentences: the gazes
initiated during the second word tend to shift to the picture
in which the character mentioned sentence-initially plays the
agent role. However, 5-year-olds appear to differ from 3year-olds in that they switch their preference and look to the
correct target picture in the third interval with about the same
probability in the subject-initial and object-initial condition.
Compared to 3-year-olds, this reveals better ability of 5-yearolds to use inflectional cues and deal with non-canonical word
orders. The decrease in the second interval might be caused
by higher cognitive demands of processing a noncanonical
object-initial sentence.
In adults (see Figure 1, top right) there is no significant difference between both conditions in any inspected interval. In
the subject-first condition the probability of looks towards the

target picture increases in the second interval (z = 2.435, p <
0.05) and further increases during the third (z = 11.163, p <
0.001) and fourth interval (z = 13.850, p < 0.001). The performance of adults suggests that the inflectional cues present
in the first word of an unambiguous sentence are sufficient
to find the target picture. Although the object-first sentences
are less common and pragmatically marked in Czech, the results show that the adults use the inflectional cues and are not
mislead by the non-canonical word order.

Temporarily Ambiguous Sentences
The proportion of 3-year-olds’ looks to the target picture
while listening to the sentences with first ambiguous noun
is shown in Figure 1 (bottom left). The graph suggests the
overall performance decrease with no apparent trend towards
the target picture in both conditions.
The analysis revealed no significant differences in the baseline interval. In the subject-first sentences there was a significant decrease compared to the baseline during the second interval (z = −2.228, p < 0.05), but the difference is no longer
significant in the third and fourth interval. In the object-first
sentences, children looked towards the target picture more
frequently during the baseline, even though this difference
was not significant.
This nonsignificant advantage of object-first sentences was
preserved over the second and third interval but it changed in
the fourth interval. The proportion of looks towards the target
picture was lower than predicted by the remaining predictors

1361

(z = −2.111, p < 0.05) and the actual preference was almost
the same for the object-first and subject-first conditions.
The results indicate generally low performance in 3-yearolds when they are presented with an ambiguity in the
sentence-initial noun. This condition is probably too confusing and the case inflection on the sentence-final noun does
not help children to determine the target picture. There is no
evidence that 3-year-olds are capable of using word order or
case inflection to drive their sentence interpretation while listening.
The results of 5-year-olds (see Figure 1, bottom middle)
show almost a symmetrical pattern. In the subject-first condition there is a significant preference for the target picture starting in the second interval (z = 2.961, p < 0.01)
and further increasing in the third (z = 9.279, p < 0.001)
and fourth interval (z = 8.834, p < 0.001). The baseline
preference for target picture in the object-first condition is
significantly higher (z = 2.667, p < 0.01), but in the subsequent intervals it markedly decreases and is lower than
the preference in the subject-first condition (second interval
z = −8.594, p < 0.001, third z = −18.109, p < 0.001, fourth
z = −14.191, p < 0.001). The pattern of results in 5-yearolds suggests that the children use word order in the absence
of inflection. The nominative inflection on the sentence-final
noun does not appear to a change the interpretation within the
observed time, even though Figure 1 suggests a tendency to
shift towards the target in the fourth interval.
The results of adults suggest that both cue types are used
(see Figure 1, bottom right). In the analysis we observed
small but significant baseline preference for the target picture (z = 2.215, p < 0.05). In the subject-initial sentences
the probability of looks towards the target picture increases
in the third (z = 6.733, p < 0.001) and in the fourth interval (z = 7.483, p < 0.001). In the object-initial condition
the preference for the target picture decreases in the following intervals (in second interval z = −6.088, p < 0.001, in
third z = −10.123, p < 0.001). In the fourth interval the
difference between conditions is smaller but still significant
(z = −4.022, p < 0.001). The performance of adults shows
that after the initial ambiguity they use the word order cue,
but this assumption is revisited when they hear the third word
(the unambiguous noun) and finally they shift towards the target picture.

rather weak. The younger children shifted towards the incorrect pictures if the first word was in accusative: this would
suggest reliance on word order as the main cue, at least in
the initial stages of processing. Also, they showed some evidence of shifting towards the target picture while listening to
subject-first sentences with unambiguous initial noun, which
would suggest some sensitivity to word order. However, the
results from sentences with ambiguous initial noun are not
consistent with any useful strategy. This contrasts with offline studies that show evidence of sensitivity to grammatical
cues in children as young as 25 months (Slobin & Bever,
1982). The similarity of the pictures and the limited preview time in our study may have contributed to the confusion in children. However, comparing the present results with
typical preferential looking studies suggests some deficit in
the quick on-line processing (cf. Hirsh-Pasek & Golinkoff,
1996; Fernandes, Marcus, Nubila, & Vouloumanos, 2006;
Dittmar, Abbot-Smith, Lieven, & Tomasello, 2008). Apparently, young children around 3 years of age need time to process the grammatical structure of the incoming language.

Discussion

To summarize, children in the younger group in this study
showed no on-line sensitivity to formal grammatical cues under investigation. In five-year-olds and adults, both case morphology and word order play a role. When case cues are
available, they override word order, but this happens faster
in adults than in children. When case cues are not available, both adults and 5-year-olds use word order. However,
adults can change their interpretation very fast when confronted with the disambiguating inflection. Inflection is thus
a stronger cue in adults than in children, although it plays an
important role by 5 years of age. Word order is weaker in
adults but still strong in the absence of inflectional cues. This

The data presented in our study suggest that some reorganization takes place in the language processing system between
the child and adult age. Both adults and 5-year-olds are influenced by case inflection and word order but to a somewhat
different degree and at different points during the comprehension process. The results also suggest that 3-year-olds
have limited ability to process the grammatical structure of
sentences on-line, at least if they have to rely exclusively on
formal grammatical devices.
The effects of stimulus sentences on three-year-olds were

The data from 5-year-olds suggest good sensitivity to case
cues. In subject-initial sentences with unambiguous initial
noun, children start shifting to the correct picture while processing the second word in the sentence. This suggests immediate processing of the nominative cue. The object-initial sentences with unambiguous initial noun appear to be processed
more slowly, which indicates that processing non-canonical
word order is more difficult. On the contrary, adults appear
to rely on case forms exclusively and do not show any difference between sentences with subject-initial and object-initial
word orders. This is an interesting contrast with other studies that suggested problems with non-canonical word orders
(Ferreira, 2003; Scheepers & Crocker, 2004). The inflection
appears to be so strong for Czech adults that it overrides the
word-order heuristics.
In sentences with ambiguous initial noun, both adults and
5-year-olds initially interpret the first noun as the subject.
After listening to the disambiguating sentence-final noun,
greater percentage of adults than children shift to the target
picture, and the shift occurs faster in adults. The results suggest almost immediate effects of the linguistic input in adults.
In 5-year-olds, however, there is actually no evidence of recovering from the incorrect interpretation.

1362

pattern is consistent with other findings from studies based
on the competition model, especially with Sokolov’s (1988)
proposal that children first rely on cues that are highly available, and only later switch to highly reliable, such as case
inflection.
While the competition model offers good tools to characterize the children’s performance, the preference for word order in children might also be interpreted purely on a processing basis as a result of children’s limited ability to revise initial parsing commitments (cf. Trueswell et al., 1999). The
word order is the first available cue: while children are listening to the initial noun and retrieving it from the lexicon, they
can start constructing a syntactic structure for the sentence. It
is likely that by the end of the presentation of the first word,
a commitment has already been made to treat the word as the
sentential subject. This may be similar in children and adults,
but children take longer to revise the initial assignment. This
is especially apparent in temporarily ambiguous sentences,
but the delay in children’s shifts towards the target picture in
unambiguous sentences also points in this direction.
The interpretation based on incrementality of processing
is not, as such, in conflict with the competition model. The
authors of the model counted processing cost to the relevant
properties of grammatical cues (Bates et al., 1984), and other
features of the processing mechanism can be reflected in the
model as well. However, the interpretation emphasizes that
the strength and validity of grammatical cues is not a function
of linguistic input only but can be due to processing limitations at a particular developmental level. This view opens an
interesting area for further research: if the early preference
of word order in sentence interpretation is due to slow and
unreliable revisions, the difficulty with non-canonical word
orders should disappear in sentences where case is marked
pre-nominally.
Overall, the present experiment demonstrated that 5-yearolds, but not 3-year-olds, immediately use both word order
and case morphology to identify pictures that correspond to
auditorily presented sentences. Children around 3 years of
age show only weak evidence of grammatical knowledge
when confronted with reversible action pictures: it remains
open whether this is due to the lack of corresponding grammatical knowledge or to a difficulty in processing the pictures
and sentences in an on-line task. The performance of 5-yearolds reveals that revisions of initial parsing decisions in children take longer than in adults, but the basic grammatical cues
for interpreting transitive sentences are in place.

Acknowledgment
The study was supported by the Grant Agency of the
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, grant no.
KJB700250801 ”Processing of agreement and case forms in
children”.

References
Akhtar, N., & Tomasello, M. (1997). Young children’s productivity with word order and verb morphology. Develop-

mental Psychology, 33, 952-965.
Altmann, G. T., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: restricting the domain of subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247–264.
Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects
and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 390–412.
Bates, E., MacWhinney, B., Caselli, C., Devescovi, A., Natale, F., & Venza, V. (1984). A cross-linguistic study of
the development of sentence interpretation strategies. Child
Dev, 55, 341–354.
Bates, E., McNew, S., MacWhinney, B., Devescovi, A., &
Smith, S. (1982). Functional constraints on sentence processing: a cross-linguistic study. Cognition, 11, 245–299.
Dittmar, M., Abbot-Smith, K., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M.
(2008). Young german children’s early syntactic competence: a preferential looking study. Developmental Science,
11, 575–582.
Fernald, P. J., A and, Swingley, D., Weinberg, A., &
McRoberts, G. (1998). Rapid gains in speed of verbal processing by infants in the 2nd year. Psychological Science,
9, 72-75.
Fernandes, K. J., Marcus, G. F., Nubila, J. A. D., &
Vouloumanos, A. (2006). From semantics to syntax and
back again: Argument structure in the third year of life.
Cognition, 100, B10–B20.
Ferreira, F. (2003). The misinterpretation of noncanonical
sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 164–203.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (1996). The origins of
grammar: Evidence from early language comprehension.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hyönä, J., & Hujanen, H. (1997). Sentence parsing in finnish:
An eye fixation analysis. Quarterly journal of experimental
psychology, 50A, 841–858.
Irtel, H. (2007). PXLab: The Psychological Experiments Laboratory. Mannheim, Germany: University of
Mannheim. Available from http://www.pxlab.de.
Melcher, D., & Colby, C. L. (2008). Trans-saccadic perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 466–473.
Scheepers, C., & Crocker, M. W. (2004). Constituent order
priming from reading to listening: a visual world study.
In M. Carreiras & C. J. Clifton (Eds.), The on-line study
of sentence comprehension: Eyetracking, erp, and beyond
(pp. 167–185). Hove, England: Psychology Press.
Sgall, P., Hajičová, E., & Panevová, J. (1986). The meaning of the sentence in its semantic and pragmatic aspects.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Slobin, D. I., & Bever, T. G. (1982). Children use canonical
sentence schemas: a crosslinguistic study of word order
and inflections. Cognition, 12, 229–265.
Sokolov, J. L. (1988). Cue validity in Hebrew sentence comprehension. Journal of Child Language, 15, 129–155.
Trueswell, J. C., Sekerina, I., Hill, N. M., & Logrip, M. L.
(1999). The kindergarten-path effect: studying on-line sentence processing in young children. Cognition, 73, 89–134.

1363

