UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Word Order Doesn't Matter: Relative Clause Production in English and Japanese

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5tq1455r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
MacDonald, Maryellen
Montag, Jessica

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Word Order Doesn’t Matter: Relative Clause Production in English and Japanese
Jessica L. Montag (montag@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Maryellen C. MacDonald (mcmacdonald@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Abstract
Comparatively little is known about how semantic properties
(such as animacy) and syntactic properties (such as word
order) affect production of complex sentences. Relative
clauses were elicited using a picture description task that
manipulated head noun animacy in both English (which has
head-first relative clauses and Japanese (head-final relative
clauses). Participants of both languages produced more
passive relatives with animate than inanimate heads,
suggesting that a common underlying production constraint
motivates structure choice. Different proportions of passive
relatives with inanimate heads across languages suggest a role
for both cognitive constrains as well as language-specific
patters as factors that affect structure choice in language
production.
Keywords: language production; relative clauses; animacy;
cross-linguistic studies

Introduction
When turning thoughts into language, a speaker can
express a single non-linguistic idea with different lexical
choices (couch vs. sofa) and different sentence structures,
such as active sentences (The cat scratched the sofa) or
passive sentences (The sofa was scratched by the cat). In
many cases, speakers implicitly make structure choices in
order to make the planning and production process easier
(V. Ferreira & Dell, 2000). For example, speakers appear to
plan their utterances to allow more “accessible” or salient
nouns to be placed earlier in the utterance.
This
arrangement allows words that are more fully planned to be
uttered earlier, leaving more planning time for longer or
more complicated nouns later in the sentence. On this view,
syntactic structure of an utterance is not a deliberate
decision but is rather a consequence of these noun ordering
choices (Bock, 1982). Primed nouns (Bock, 1986, 1987)
and given versus new nouns in English (Bock & Irwin,
1980), Spanish (Prat-Sala & Branigan, 2000) and Japanese
(V. Ferreira & Yoshita, 2003) as well as animacy, with
animate nouns being more accessible than inanimate nouns
(F. Ferreira, 1994; McDonald, Bock & Kelly, 1993) have all
been identified as factors that affect noun accessibility and
therefore noun ordering of speakers’ sentence structure.
While it is clear that noun accessibility correctly predicts
active versus passive word order in simple sentences (Bock
1982, 1986, 1987; F. Ferreira 1994), relative clause
sentences such as (1-2) are interesting because the head
noun (ball, baby) is necessarily fixed as the first noun in

both active relative clauses (also called object relative
clauses, 1a and 2a) and also in passive relative clauses (1b,
2b). Thus, whereas structure choices between actives and
passives in simple sentences vary with the order of the agent
and patient nouns, in these relative clauses, the noun order
does not vary in the active and passive relative clause forms.
Thus any preferences for active vs. passive relative clause
forms that vary with animacy may not be ascribed purely to
noun ordering.
1a. Active: The ball (that) the woman is holding.
b. Passive: The ball (that is) being held by the woman.
2a. Active: The baby (that/who) the woman is holding.
b. Passive: The baby (that/who is) being held by the
woman.
Interestingly, there do appear to be effects of noun
animacy on relative clause structure. Gennari and
MacDonald (2009) used a phrase based production task and
found that both the animacy of the head noun and of the
agent of the action (e.g., woman) affected structure choice
in relative clauses, but they did not examine inanimate
headed relatives such as those in (1). Gennari and
MacDonald interpreted their animacy results in terms of
accessibility affecting assignment to grammatical roles. In
simple sentences, where more accessible nouns become
grammatical subjects and are thus uttered first, similar
accessibility constraints exist as in relative clauses and
similarly affect sentence structure by encouraging more
accessible nouns to assume the role of the grammatical
subject.
This animacy effect in relative clauses is particularly
interesting in light of Japanese which is grammatically very
different than English. Japanese is a head-final language,
which means that the head noun of a relative clause is the
final element of the relative clause. Thus, the head noun,
which as the sentential topic is arguably the most accessible
noun, is produced last.
Even with this profound structural difference, Japanese
object relative clauses can also occur as either active object
relative or passive relative clauses. As in English there is no
noun order change between the active and passive relative
clause forms, but unlike the English, examples in (1-2),
Japanese active and passive relative clauses have identical
order across all words of the relative clause. The only
difference between the active and the passive forms is the
case marker after the embedded noun (woman) and the
addition of the passive verb suffix. Some examples can be

2594

seen in (3), which are relative clauses describing the man
being thrown in a judo match, shown in Figure 1.
3a. Active: 

Onnanohito-ga nage-te-iru otokonohito
woman-NOM throw-Pres-Prog man
“The man (that) the woman is throwing”
3b. Passive:  


Onnanohito-ni nage-rare-te-iru otokonohito
woman-BY throw-Pass-Pres-Prog man
“The man being thrown by the woman”
We examine the effects of animacy in relative clause
production with both native English and native Japanese
speaking individuals. We used a modification of a picturebased production task (Gennari, Mirkovic & MacDonald,
2005) which allowed the same picture prompts to be used
for both languages. If speakers of different languages make
similar structure choices, it is possible that understanding
these particular choices will be a means toward
understanding structure choice and language production
more generally, independent of language-specific
idiosyncrasies. Experiment 1 tested English speakers, and
Experiment 2 used the same materials and method with
Japanese speakers. Comparing the production frequencies
of active and passive relative clauses of the two languages
will aid development of a theory that can account for the
data obtained for both English and Japanese object relative
clause sentences.

Experiment 1: English
The goal of this study was to examine the effect of animacy
on the production of English relative clauses in a picture
description task. We used a relative clause elicitation
method that was similar to the one developed by (Gennari,
et al., 2005) but modified the task to familiarize the
participants with the materials before conducting the
production phase of the experiment. This pre-training
encouraged all participants to use the same verb to describe
each picture. An effect of animacy comparable to that of
previous relative clause production studies would be
realized as more passive being produced with animate than
with inanimate head nouns.

Methods
Participants Eighteen undergraduates at the University of
Wisconsin, Madison participated in this experiment in
exchange for course credit in an introductory psychology
course. All were native speakers of American English.
Materials Twenty verbs that can each take both an animate
or inanimate grammatical object were selected. Color
pictures were created that illustrated each of these twenty
verbs. In each picture, there were two instances of that
particular verb, once acting upon an animate grammatical
object and once acting upon an inanimate grammatical
object. These grammatical objects were the target items in
the experiment. For example, the picture for the verb
‘throw’ (Figure 1) incorporated both a man being thrown

and a ball being thrown, and the animacy of these target
items was an independent variable of the experiment.

Figure 1: Test picture for verb “throw”
In addition to the twenty test pictures, there were 43 filler
pictures for a total of 63 trials. Fillers were included to
reduce strategic effects and structural priming (the repetition
of structure from one trial to the next).
To elicit relative clauses, spoken questions were recorded
that asked participants to describe a particular target person
or object in the picture.
For example, questions
corresponding to Figure 1 would be “Who is wearing
orange” for the animate ‘man’ target and “What is red” for
the inanimate ‘ball’ target. There is more than one man in
the picture and more than one ball, so the participants
needed to produce relative clauses to sufficiently
differentiate the target from the other items in the picture.
For the target item ‘man’ in this picture, a good response
would be “the man being thrown by the woman” or “the
man that the woman is throwing” because these responses
distinguish the target man from the second man in the
picture. For filler trials, participants were asked to describe
what a particular person was doing or identify a particular
object. While the test pictures and questions were created
such that participants needed to produce a relative clause
with a verb as their response to completely answer the
question, filler pictures and questions were created so that
participants had no reason to use a relative clause in their
responses. All spoken materials were recorded in a quiet
room by a native English speaker.
Procedure Participants first completed a pre-training task
designed to encourage them to use the specified verb
associated with each picture (for example, to use “carry” as
opposed to “hold” for a picture with carrying events) when
describing the pictures in the later task. Different verbs tend
to occur in active and passive sentences with different
frequencies so the verb pretraining was designed to limit the
effects of these verb-specific tendencies. In pretraining,
participants viewed only the segments of each test picture
that illustrated the verb. All participants saw both the
animate and inanimate uses for each verb so they would not
be able to anticipate their target when viewing the complete
picture in the main task. After two seconds of exposure, a

2595

verb describing the action appeared underneath the picture.
Participants were instructed to simply read aloud the word
underneath the picture. For filler pictures, participants
viewed a segment of picture containing a person or object
and a corresponding noun. The order of presentation was
randomized.
After completing the pre-training task, participants
performed the main task of the experiment. Detailed
instructions with a cover task were utilized to prompt
relative clause productions. Participants were told that the
experiment was about interpreting pictures, and that their
responses would be shown to a later group of participants
who would try to guess which pictures their responses
described. They were told that because colors or clothing
might be changed, or items in the picture might be
rearranged, describing the actions in which the people and
objects were taking part would be the best strategy to
employ in order to complete the task.
In each trial, a color picture appeared on the screen. After
three seconds, participants heard a question asking about the
target person or object in the picture. Participants were
instructed to answer the question by speaking into a
microphone. Each participant saw ten pictures with a
question about an animate patient (e.g., the man being
thrown in Figure 1) and ten pictures with questions about
inanimate themes (e.g., the ball in Figure 1). A different set
of participants saw the other half of the animate-inanimate
target pairs, so that participants saw each picture only once.
Test and filler trials were pseudo-randomized such that there
were always at least two filler trials between any two test
trials.

Results
The data consisted of participant productions on the twenty
test trials. Responses were coded for sentence type: active or
passive, in order to generate frequencies of production types
given the animacy of the target item. Trials were excluded
if a participant failed to produce a relative clause or failed to
include a verb in their response. For animate targets, 17%
of 180 trials were excluded for a total of 149 trials responses
included in the analysis. For inanimate targets, 23% of 180
trials were excluded for a total of 139 trials included in the
analysis. Of these trials, 134 (animate) and 115 (inanimate)
trials consisted of productions in which participants used the
verb prompted in pre-training. The pattern of data described
below did not change when relative clauses with the
“wrong” verb were included in the data set, so the reported
data includes these trials.
Participants produced almost exclusively passive
sentences when the target item was animate and both active
and passive sentence when the target item was inanimate.
For animate targets, 2.0% of coded responses were active
and 98.0% were passive. For inanimate targets, passive
structures were more common; 38.8% we active while
61.2% were passive.
This result confirms that the animacy of the target noun,
which would become the head of the produced object

relative clause, did in fact influence the structure of the
production. Even when the position of the animacymanipulated noun was fixed (the manipulated noun was
always the head noun) there was an effect of animacy on the
produced structure.

Discussion
In the presence of a fixed initial noun and in the absence of
a noun order change, participants reliably made structure
choices based on target (head) noun animacy.
This pattern of results is consistent with previous findings
(Gennari et al., 2005). Gennari and MacDonald, (2009)
argued that accessibility can account for these structure
choices, even though as relative clauses they are restricted
in word order. In the case of the inanimate head noun, the
accessibility of the head noun is driven by it being the topic
of the sentence (promoting a passive relative). This noun
competes with the accessibility of the embedded animate
noun, whose accessibility encourages it to take the role of
the grammatical subject (of an active object relative clause).
This causes both the active and passive construction to be
used. In the case of the animate head noun, neither is more
accessible than the other so there is no motivation to use an
active structure, hence the high proportion of passives.
An alternative account is that two animate nouns (woman
and man) both make plausible thematic agents and are more
similar to each other than an animate and an inanimate
noun (man and ball) so production is aided by further
distinguishing the animate nouns. It is possible that
increasing the distance between the nouns in these sentence
aids planning and helps keep the agent and the theme noun
separate.
Smith and Wheeldon (2004) found that
semantically interfering elements tended to move later in a
sentence. A passive relative clause structure would allow
the two animate noun phrases to be placed farther apart than
an active structure in English. However, in Japanese, the
active and passive relative clauses do no differ in word
order, and so any effects of animacy in Japanese relative
clauses could not be attributed to word order strategies. We
tested this hypothesis in Experiment 2

Experiment 2: Japanese
In Japanese, all word order remains the same between
active and passive relative clause sentences so investigating
production in Japanese is an opportunity to investigate
planning processes that do not necessarily drive noun
ordering. If production frequencies of Japanese are similar
to those of English, the motivation to choose the passive
over the active construction should be able to be accounted
for by single cause that is compatible with the data obtained
for both English and Japanese object relative clause
sentences. If, however, frequencies of active and passive
constructions are not similar across languages it is likely
that different cognitive processes are underlying structure
choices in both languages.

2596

across languages (t(34)<1), but with inanimate heads, more
passives were produced in English than in Japanese
(t(34)=2.62, p=0.013).

Methods
Participants Eighteen native speakers of Japanese
participated. This sample included university students and
community members. The mean age was 27.6 (SD=7.1)
and mean number of years in the United States was 3.2
(SD=3.7). All participants were paid for their participation.

Discussion

Materials and Procedure All materials and methods were
identical to those used in the English study, with the
exception that all printed and spoken materials were
presented in Japanese and participants were tested by an
experimenter who was fluent in Japanese. Audio materials
were recorded by a native speaker of Japanese.

Results
Responses were coded or eliminated in the same way as
they were in English. For animate targets, 25% of 180 trials
were excluded for a total of 135 responses included in this
analysis. For inanimate targets, 39% of 180 trials were
excluded for a total of 110 trials included in the analysis.
(Of these utterances 94 animate and 85 inanimate trials
contained the pre-trained verb.) It is unclear why the
exclusion rate was somewhat higher in Japanese than in
English.
Similar to English participants, Japanese participants
produced almost exclusively passive relative clauses when
the target item was animate and a mix of active and passive
relatives when the target item was inanimate. For animate
targets, 0.7% of productions were active and 99.3% were
passive. For inanimate targets, 69.9% were active while
30.1% were passive.
English and Japanese Passive Productions
English

Proportion Passive

1

Japanese
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

The Japanese data underscore the finding in the English data
that speakers’ structure choices cannot be accounted for
simply by noun ordering driven by accessibility. While
there is room for accessibility as a partial explanation for the
data because speakers did in fact produce different
structures with animate and inanimate head nouns,
accessibility alone would predict similar rates of passive
productions with inanimate heads in both English and
Japanese, which is not the case.
The Japanese data also contradicts the assumption that the
passive structure is chosen to physically separate and thus
ease production of similar nouns. Japanese speakers made
similar structure choices as the English speakers in the
absence of any word rearrangement.

General Discussion
In both English and Japanese, head noun animacy had an
effect on relative clause structure choices.
In both
languages, speakers produced almost exclusively passive
relative clauses with animate head nouns and a mix of active
and passive relative clauses with inanimate nouns. Further,
with inanimate head nouns, English speakers produced more
passive relative clauses than did Japanese speakers.
In order to understand the reasons for the structure
choices made by speakers of both languages, it is important
to consider both similarities and differences in structure
choices. The English-speaking and Japanese-speaking
participants’ productions both showed a main effect of head
noun animacy on produced structure but the two languages
differed in the relative frequencies of active and passive
productions for the inanimate heads. Understanding the
motivations behind the structure choices made by English
and Japanese speakers will aid the understanding of how
semantic factors (such as animacy) interact with syntactic
properties (such as head direction) in language production.
Below we discuss possible explanations for these crosslinguistic similarities and differences.

0

Animate

Similarities: Animacy Effect

Inanimate

Figure 2: English and Japanese production frequencies
Both English and Japanese utterances showed an animacy
effect; production frequencies of active and passive
sentences differed by target (head) noun animacy.
However, the nature of this effect was not identical in the
two languages (F(1,68)=7.33, p<0.01). While in both
English and Japanese animate head nouns yielded almost
exclusively passive relatives, the proportions of active and
passive sentences produced for inanimate heads differed
across the two languages. Figure 2 shows that proportions
of passives produced with animate heads did not differ

In both English and Japanese, head noun animacy affected
the proportion of active and passive sentences produced.
There are several potential explanations for this
phenomenon.
Semantic Interference Animate headed object relative
clauses with animate agents (as in 2a) are more difficult to
comprehend than object relatives with inanimate heads (1a)
in English (Traxler, Seely & Morris, 2002; Gennari &
MacDonald, 2008) and Dutch (Mak, Vonk & Schriefers,
2002). Gennari and MacDonald, (2008) attributed this
difference to semantic indeterminancy; the animate head
affords more potential continuations of the sentence. Our

2597

data, as well as Gennari and MacDonald’s (2009), show that
speakers almost never produce this difficult structure. It is
possible that the semantic similarity between the two
animate nouns also causes difficulty for the speaker as well.
Animate nouns pairs that are similar to each other and can
both act as reasonable agents in a sentence (a girl can kiss a
boy and a boy can kiss a girl) may be more easily confused
and thus more difficult to plan. English speakers might
differentiate the two nouns by moving them physically
farther apart in the sentence by employing the passive to a
greater degree with two animate nouns than with nouns of
mismatching animacy. Alternatively, this interference could
reduce the accessibility of the agent of the action, and a
passive structure would allow this noun to appear later in
the sentence than in an object relative clause.
This explanation is less satisfying in the Japanese case
because word order does not change between active and
passive sentences. Speakers are clearly not “separating”
noun combinations that are difficult to plan. However,
though word order does not change, the sentences are by no
means identical; the case marker on the first noun (the agent
of the action) differs, and it is possible that the semantic
interference between two nouns could vary with their case
marking. Thus it may be that both English and Japanese
speakers are responding to planning difficulty from
semantic similarity in different ways—changes in word
order in English and changes in the case marking in
Japanese, where no word order changes are permitted.
There is some work suggesting that case markers affect
relative clause processing (Ishizuka, 2005), suggesting that
case marking could modulate interference and planning
difficulty. This account is highly speculative, as there is no
independent evidence to date on the role of case marking in
interference, or even that semantic interference is the source
of planning difficulty in animate headed relative clauses.
Pragmatics of animate and inanimate nouns Another
possible explanation for the animacy effect is that animate
and inanimate nouns are generally spoken about differently,
and different types of messages lead to different structure
choices. This view is very similar to the one offered in
Gennari and MacDonald (2009) but rather than
animacy/accessibility affecting relative clause structure
directly in Gennari and MacDonald’s view, animacy affects
structure in simple sentences, and these patterns prime
structure choices in relative clause sentences.
Pragmatically, speakers talk about and focus on animate
and human things more than inanimate things. For
example, speakers are more likely to use active sentences
when describing animate subjects with action verbs, as
demonstrated in the preference of The girl carried the
computer over The computer was carried by the girl.
However, passive sentences are produced more often with
theme-experiencer verbs to maintain the animate entity as
the subject. For example, The boy was delighted by the
cupcake is preferred over The cupcake delighted the boy (F.
Ferreira, 1994). Passive preferences for inanimate patients

or experiencers in main clauses may promote similar
structure choices in relative clauses.
In the inanimate condition, the topicalization of the
inanimate head noun (e.g., ball) encourages a passive
sentence (The ball that was thrown by the man), while the
tendency to maintain animate items as the grammatical
subject (as they are in simple sentences) encourages active
productions (The ball that the man threw).
These
conflicting forces bring about a combination of active and
passive productions. In the case of two animates, the
topicalization of the animate head noun (man) encourages a
passive production (The man that was thrown by the
woman). In this case, both “woman” and “man” are equally
animate, so simple sentences show no tendency toward
making a particular one the subject, so there is no push
toward an active sentence.
This explanation can account for the effect of animacy on
produced structures in both English and Japanese. However,
it requires evidence of structural priming from simple
structures to relative clauses, and that evidence is currently
lacking.

Differences: Inanimate Productions
The inanimate heads yielded a mix of structures in both the
English and Japanese studies here, but the passives were
predominant in English and active object relatives were
more common in Japanese There are a number of possible
explanations for this difference.
Active/Passive baseline If there is structural priming from
main clauses to relative clauses, then the different
proportions of active and passive productions in relative
clauses in English and Japanese might be due to different
frequencies of active and passive constructions in simple
sentences in these languages. Though we know of no
controlled study comparing production choices in simple
sentences in the two languages, there are some suggestions
that base rates of passives may be different in English and
Japanese. For example, Japanese often allows subjects
(agents) to be dropped in active sentences, whereas English
speakers must use a passive (e.g. the man was thrown) to
drop the agent. This means that many messages that would
be expressed with the passive construction in English in fact
appear in the active construction in Japanese (Fujii, 2008).
It is possible that in main clauses, the use of active in
Japanese, where a passive would be used in English,
increases the overall frequency of actives in Japanese
relative to English. These patterns from main clause
sentences may then be reflected in relative clause sentences.
A simple picture description task could provide insight
into whether or not patterns of frequencies of active and
passive main clauses match those of relative clause
sentences in English and Japanese.
Priming We have invoked structural priming in several
explanations above, but it is not necessarily the case that
priming effects would be equally strong in both English and

2598

Japanese. The word order differences between structures
could affect the degree of structural priming in English and
Japanese. There is some evidence that priming is facilitated
in sentences with similar structural configurations (Traxler,
2008), so the structural similarity of the active and passive
constructions in Japanese could promote more priming
among the inanimate headed constructions. Alternatively,
priming tendencies from main clauses may affect relative
clauses. Further priming studies could determine whether
structural differences in English and Japanese might affect
the degree of structural priming or even the role of animacy
in structural priming.
Conclusions There are many potential explanations for both
the similarities and the differences seen in the English and
Japanese production data. The alternatives presented here
are plausible but largely untested, owing to the general
shortage of production studies of complex sentences, and
the shortage of production studies comparing the two
languages.
The available data do suggest that despite the enormous
differences in relative clause word order in the two
languages, speakers of English and Japanese make the same
structural choices for animate headed relative clauses. This
finding suggests that production choices cannot stem solely
from pressures to choose different word orders (such as
moving the agent to the end of the clause). Production
choices in relative clauses likely reflect both cognitivelymotivated production demands such as accessibility as well
as language-specific constraints faced by the speaker. In
gaining a better understanding of the choices speakers make
when producing utterances, we can better understand how
more general message-based factors and language-specific
factors conspire to shape speakers’ choices.
This understanding of speaker choices is also important
for language comprehension, including potential differences
in comprehension patterns between English and Japanese.
Gennari and MacDonald (2009) have argued that the reason
animate headed object relatives are hard in English is due to
their rarity. Speakers and writers who want to convey a
message of this type avoid active object relative structures
and instead use a passive. They found that comprehension
difficulty for object relative clauses with several different
verb types and animacy configurations were well correlated
with production patterns. Thus it is possible that crosslinguistic production differences will offer insight into
cross-linguistic comprehension patterns as well.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NIH grant R01HD47425. J.
Montag was supported by NIH Institutional Training grant
5T32HD049899 to the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

References
Bock, J. K. (1982). Toward a cognitive psychology of
syntax: Information processing contributions to sentence
formulation. Psychological Review, 89, 1-47.

Bock, K. (1986). An effect of the accessibility of word
forms on sentence structures. Journal of Memory and
Language, 26, 119-137.
Bock, J. K. (1987). Meaning, sound and syntax: Lexical
priming in sentence production. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12, 575-586.
Bock, J. K. & Irwin, D. E. (1980). Syntactic effects of
information availability in sentence production. Journal
of Verbal Memory and verbal Behavior, 19, 467-484.
Ferreira, F. (1994). Choice of passive voice is affected by
verb type and animacy. Journal of Memory and
Language, 33, 715-736.
Ferreira, V. S. & Dell, G. S. (2000) Effect of ambiguity and
lexical availability on syntactic and lexical production.
Cognitive Psychology, 40, 296-340.
Ferreira, V. S. & Yoshita, H. (2003). Given-new ordering
effects on the production of scrambled sentences in
Japanese. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 32, 669692.
Fujii, Y. (2008). The asymmetrical relationship between the
active and passive voice: Implications for teaching
Japanese-to-English translation of specialized scientific
texts. The Linguistics Journal, 3, 40-74.
Gennari, S. P. & MacDonald, M. C. (2008). Semantic
indeterminancy in object relative clauses. Journal of
Memory and Language, 58, 161-187.
Gennari, S. P. & MacDonald, M. C. (2009). Linking
production and comprehension processes: The case of
relative clauses. Cognition, 111, 1-23.
Gennari, S. P., Mirkovic, J. & MacDonald, M. C. (2005)
The role of animacy in relative clause production. Paper
presented at the 17th Annual CUNY Conference on
Human Sentence Processing, College Park, Maryland.
Mak W. M., Vonk, W., & Schriefers, H. (2002). The
influence of animacy on relative clause processing.
Journal of Memory & Language, 47, 50-68.
McDonald, J. L., Bock, K. & Kelly, M. H. (1993). Word
and world order: Semantic, Phonological and metrical
determinants of serial order. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
188-230.
Prat-Sala, M. & Branigan, H. P. (2000). Discourse
constraints on syntactic processing in language
production: A cross-linguistic study in English and
Spanish. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 168-182.
Ishizuka, T. (2005). Processing relative clauses in Japanese.
UCLA Working Papers in Linguistics, 13, 1-23.
Smith, M. C. & Wheeldon L. R. (2004). Horizontal
Information Flow in Spoken Sentence Production.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory
and Cognition, 30, 675-686.
Traxler, M. J. (2008). Structural priming among
prepositional phrases: Evidence from eye movements.
Memory and Cognition, 36, 659-674.
Traxler, M. J., Seely, R. E. & Morris, R. K. (2002).
Processing subject and object relative clauses: Evidence
from eye-movements. Journal of Memory and Language,
47, 69-90.

2599

