UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Words as Tools and the Problem of Abstract Word Meanings

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/58m9n8rp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Borghi, Anna M.
Cimatti, Felice

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Words as Tools and the Problem of Abstract Word Meanings
Anna M. Borghi (annamaria.borghi@unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, Viale Berti Pichat 5
40127 Bologna, Italy

Felice Cimatti (felice.cimatti@tin.it)
Department of Philosophy, Cubo 18C, Ponte Pietro Bucci
87030 Arcavacata di Rende (CS), Italy

Abstract
This paper proposes an extension of existing embodied views
of cognition in order to account for the linguistic experience
and its complexity. We claim that embodied views should be
extended in order to consider not only language grounding but
the social and normative aspects of language as well. Motor
resonance mechanisms based on mirror neurons are a
necessary but not sufficient component of this. We will argue
that words cannot be conceived of as mere signals of
something but also as tools that allows us to operate in the
world. On this basis, we formulate a theoretical proposal that
addresses one of the critical problems embodied views face:
the problem of the so called “abstract concepts”. Our proposal
extends embodied views assuming two simultaneous
cognitive sources for word meanings; an individual one, the
embodied individual experience, and a socially embodied one.
While for words having a concrete referent labels are
“attached” to concepts formed on the basis of sensorimotor
individual experience, the same situation does not hold in the
case of meanings of abstract words. In the latter case the
cognitive source is still embodied, but primarily in the use of
the social word/tool. Thus abstract words represent a means to
collect a variety of sparse bodily and situational experiences.
Keywords: concepts; meanings; sensorimotor grounding;
social grounding; language and society.

Introduction
We are accustomed to consider words and sentences as a
medium through which we indirectly refer to objects and
actions in the world. The experience of these things and
actions are what we are interested in during the use of words
and sentences. Here we claim that words are not mere signals
of something. On the contrary, we propose that words and
sentences must be intended as things/tools of direct
experience; in the use of words and sentences a kind of
experience of its own is carried out (Austin, 1962). In
particular, following Wittgenstein, we conceive the words of a
language as a set of tools; each word acts as a specific tool
that allows the user to specify a kind of activity: «Think of the
tools in a tool-box: there might be a hammer, pliers, a saw, a
screw-driver, a rule, a glue-pot, nails and screws. − The
functions of words are as diverse as the functions of these
objects. (And in both cases there are similarities). Of course,
what confuses us is the uniform appearance of words when
we hear them spoken or when we meet them in script and
print. Words in their application are not presented quite so
clearly. Especially from a
philosophical perspective»
(Philosophical Investigations, I, § 11; perhaps we could

critically say that the same problem is presented to us
especially in the study of psychology or neurology of
language). We assume that all forms of human cognition are
based on bodily experiences; this implies that we also
consider the so called “abstract” forms of cognition as forms
of bodily experience. The point we want to establish is that
such “abstract” forms of cognition are mediated by the words
of natural languages. We argue that an “abstract” form of
cognition is only possible through the mediation of a specific
modal entity, that is, the sound or the gesture that expresses a
word. But this is not the whole story. Namely, words are
embodied not only because we utter them and accompany
them with gestures, but also because they are real extensions
of our body, they are tools that allow us to act and operate in a
social context (Clark, 2006a, 2006b; Mirolli & Parisi, in
press). We think that such an assumption can help us to solve
at least one of the classical problems that afflict every
embodied theory of language, namely the problem posed by
the meaning of so called abstract words, such as freedom, or
God. In particular, we are interested in showing that a
comprehensive bodily theory of human cognition has to
simultaneously take into account the following elements: 1.
bodily individual sensorimotor experiences; 2. the language
we communicate in while growing up in a human community;
3. the precise uses of our natural language and how this
impacts on our cognitive activities and thus in everyday life.
Limits of embodied cognition views on word meanings
According to embodied theories of language and the
simulation view, in order to understand and correctly use the
word “bicycle” one needs to recruit the same sensorimotor
system involved while experiencing a bicycle. Language
comprehension entails a mental simulation of the situation
described through language; thus words guide action,
activating online “simulations” that help us to interact with
objects and entities in the environment (Gallese, 2007;
Zwaan, 2004). The neural substrate for this idea of
simulation resides in the recent neurophysiological
discovery, in the F5 area of the premotor cortex of monkeys
and in humans, of two kinds of visuomotor neurons:
canonical and mirror neurons (for a review see Rizzolatti &
Craighero, 2004). Many studies support a link between the
mirror neuron system and language processing.
Despite the impressive amount of evidence collected in
the last years (for reviews see Barsalou, 2008; Borghi, 2005;
Fischer & Zwaan, 2008; Martin, 2007; Pulvermüller, 2005),

embodied views of concepts and language still have a series
of problems to face. Here we will focus on two of these
problems.
a. The social nature of language. We claim that embodied
theories of cognition have not sufficiently considered the
embodied and social experience of being exposed to
language, and the impact this experience has on individual
cognitive activities. The discovery of mirror neurons and of
motor resonance phenomena has contributed to shed a new
light on the role of social aspects of cognition (Gallese,
2007). However, in our opinion this should be
complemented by an analysis of how conventional and
mainly non individual (psychological) aspects of language
may impact on cognition. This research should be further
supported by an analysis of how words can be seen as tools
and as types of “affordances”. With this claim we do NOT
intend to suggest that research on language has not had any
focus on social aspects. Many studies, in particular in the
fields of anthropology and cognitive linguistics, have
underlined the importance of social use in language (e.g.,
Tomasello, 2005; Moll & Tomasello, 2007; Clark & Krych,
2004 ; Clark & Brennan, 1991; Pickering & Garrod, 2004).
Additionally, in the last number of years within the field of
embodied robotics the issue of social situatedness and of
social and communicative aspects of language has been a
focus of attention (e.g., Lindblom & Ziemke, 2003; Puglisi,
Baronchelli & Loreto, 2008; Steels, 2006). It is surprising
that this interest for social aspects of language is still not
widespread in the field of cognitive neuroscience of
language. This is probably also due to an empirical fact: the
majority of the studies of cognitive neuroscience focuses on
language comprehension rather than on dialogue. However,
we believe it is important to emphasise an argument in
favour of an appreciation of both the embodied AND social
experience of being immersed in a linguistic world.
b. Abstract words and logical elements of language. It is
still unclear how embodied theories can develop a complete
account designed to explain the meaning of abstract words
and logical elements of language. As detailed below, we
believe this issue cannot be solved by collecting further
experimental evidence. Rather, through reframing some
aspects of the current embodied theories in order to solve
this issue.

Our Proposal
Words as social things / tools In order to try to find a
possible solution for these problems, we propose an
extension of existing embodied theory of language. We feel
that a thorough embodied theory of language not only needs
to take into account individual and grounded experience, but
specifically human embodied experience which is the
experience of being embedded in a social context/world
made of specific social entities, the words of our ordinary
languages. The main idea is to consider words and sentences
as things/tools we use in our ordinary life experience. More
specifically, the idea is to consider words and sentences as
social things/tools.

To us the main problem with the existing embodied
theory of language is that they do not fully account for the
social aspect of language. We believe that the discovery of
mirror neurons has greatly contributed in highlighting the
social aspects of the linguistic experience. However, even if
mirror neurons might well represent the basis for our social
linguistic experience, we think this is probably not the
whole story.
Namely, notice that when we speak about the social
character of language we are not only relying on the motor
resonance phenomena induced by mirror neurons; we are
also referring to the specific human experience of a precise
class of things (words and sentences, for example, but also
moral rules and the like) that are known as normative
things. We can use a normative thing in a competent way
only if we take into account the social rule of use that
regulates it. Whereas a usual thing is something that we can
use individually, as if each of us was a lonely Robinson
Crusoe. By comparison, a normative thing is something
whose use is either correct or incorrect. We define a use as
correct if it respects the social norm that regulates such a
use; it is incorrect when it violates such a rule. This implies
that a normative thing is used by individuals but through a
norm that it is not individual in its very nature. A normative
thing can be used only when following a social rule. The
force of this social rule exceeds the power of each
individual that follows such a rule (Durkheim, 1895). We do
not intend to claim that this normativity is limited to words.
Rather, some kind of normativity can be extended to the use
of artefacts as well, and it can be more generally extended to
various forms of procedural knowledge. Namely, our
idiosyncratic experiences are not reflected in the way in
which we use words, nor in the way we use artefacts. In
some respects, words and artefacts can be equated. Consider
for example the way we use a handle to open a door. In
certain respects the way each of us represent the concept of
the word ‘handle’ is not relevant, as we all must converge in
using the handle in an appropriate way, i.e. in a way that
allows us to open a door, that is, the socially correct way to
use the handle.
The main difference between a mirror neurons based
theory and a norm based theory is that in the first case there
is no possibility (if the observer’s brain is healthy) that the
resonance between the two brains (actor and observer) does
not occur; in the second case, on the contrary, such a
possibility is always present. A norm is a rule that I can
follow, but it is a perfectly admitted move not following the
rule. While a mirror neurons based relation only admits the
establishment of some kind of resonance between the
organisms who participate in such relation (if the organisms
are healthy), in the norm case there is no logical restriction.
From this point of view mirror neurons are necessary but
not sufficient for developing the thorough theory of
language we are looking for. Mirror neurons neurologically
explain how a resonance between different individuals can
be established. While I perform some gestures, you can
bodily ‘understand’ them without any explicit or conscious

thought about them. Surely this is an important and basic
form of social connection between individuals, but the
normative connection we are thinking of is quite different
from this one. A mirror neurons based theory is not a social
relation in the previous sense, just because it is automatic,
and you cannot avoid being involved in the physiological
consequences that it causes. A word is a material/modal
thing but is also a social and normative thing. If we add this
social and normative component to the usual embodied
theory of language we can begin to solve the problem of
abstraction. A word is a tool we make things with; but while
the word is a modal entity, it allows us a productive form of
activity, for example thinking. The character of language
activity is linked to the normative and social character of
language. This allows us to use words even when the
situations where we have learned to use them do not occur.
Synthesis of the proposal To resume, we are looking for a
thorough embodied theory of language; we think that in order
to develop such a theory we need: a. an embodied theory of
human individual experience; b. an embodied theory of
human collective action modulated by mirror neurons system
and the like; c. an embodied theory of language as a social
fact (Saussure, 2006), which allows us entering in contact
with other people on the basis of social norms; d. a theory of
how experiencing language as a social fact impacts individual
cognition.

Our Proposal and the Problem of Abstract
Words Meanings
In light of the proposal we have presented, the notion of
meaning of abstract words (MAWs) can be reframed. Being
able to provide a compelling explanation of abstract word
meanings is a major challenge for embodied theories.
However, we believe that in order to account for MAWs, an
extension of embodied theories is necessary. Namely, MAWs
cannot be fully explained by simply assuming that they are
grounded in sensorimotor systems. Rather, we propose to
consider the forms of cognitive activity usually defined as
abstract thinking as particular forms of bodily activity
mediated by linguistic social tools, i.e. words or gestures. In
this framework, the very distinction between the meaning of
concrete and abstract words could be rephrased as a
distinction between a more individually grounded form of
cognition versus a more socially grounded form of cognition.
In both cases there is a necessary normative/social component
in the constitution of the lexical meaning. In our proposal the
distinction between concrete and abstract words is not based
on two different mental processes, but it is a consequence of
their different context of acquisition. A word like “bottle” is
grounded in the individual/social sensorimotor experience,
while a word like “fantasy” is grounded in the
social/individual sensorimotor experience. In both cases the
meaning of the words have a sensorimotor grounding, and
both kinds of words are actions, that is, they are things we do
with words.

Overall, the evidence pertaining the grounding of abstract
word meanings is still not sufficient. However, the main
problem is not only the scarcity of evidence collected until
now, but the fact that it is hard to imagine how far this
evidence can be extended.
Embodied accounts assume that abstract word meanings,
such as concrete ones, are grounded in sensorimotor system.
Within this general framework, three different explanations
of abstraction have been proposed (see a review in
Glenberg, Sato, Cattaneo, Riggio, Palumbo & Buccino,
2008). The most classical explanation is based on metaphors
(e.g., Lakoff & Johnson, 1999; Gibbs, 2003). The theory
describes that image-schemas derived from sensorimotor
experience can be transferred to experience which is not
truly sensorimotor in nature. Evidence in favour of this
view, though compelling, is confined to domains that are
quite specific (e.g., Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002), and it is
difficult to imagine how far a mechanism based on
metaphorical mapping can be extended. A second view is
more radically action-based. The idea is that during
comprehension of abstract words the motor system is
recruited. Evidence in favour of this view is mainly based
on compatibility effects. In a number of studies, Glenberg
and collaborators found evidence in favour of the ACE
(action sentence compatibility effects) with both concrete
and abstract transfer sentences, utilising both behavioural
and TMS methods (Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Glenberg et
al., 2008; Glenberg, Sato & Cattaneo, 2008). According to a
third view, proposed by Barsalou et al. (Barsalou, 2003;
Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings, 2005), abstract concepts
differ from concrete ones as they derive from simulations of
internal states rather than of external ones. Feature listing
tasks demonstrate that abstract concepts rely on
introspective and on situational and contextual information
more than concrete ones. Overall, we believe that current
evidence on abstract concepts, though compelling, risks to
refer only to a subset of phenomena without being able to
account for the whole phenomenon of abstraction.
To clarify: by saying this we do not intend at all to adopt
an anti-empirical attitude. Rather, we believe many
behavioural and brain imaging data should be collected, but
we propose to adopt a different theoretical framework,
which should be tested through a variety of experiments. In
this paper we simply present a theoretical proposal which
should be tested empirically, further developed and, where
evidence makes it necessary, revised.
The present proposal, though in keeping with Barsalou’s
view, is somewhat more radical, because it extends
embodied views assuming two simultaneous cognitive
sources for developing a thorough theory of word meanings;
an individual one, the embodied individual experience, and
a socially embodied one. This second source is located
outside the individual mind, in the particular language
everyone uses in formulating his/her internal “verbal
thoughts” (Vygotskij, 1934). And the presence of this
second source is crucial in particular for MAWs (but it is
still necessary for MCWs). While we could construe the

embodied concept BOTTLE without any help from language
(as many other non human animals can do), the same
situation does not hold in the case of “God”. In the case of
“God” the cognitive source is still embodied, but not only in
the individual experience, but primarily in the use of the
social word/tool “God”. (Consider, however, that even in
the case of “bottle” the fact of being exposed to and using a
certain label influences our way of conceiving of bottles.)
The existence of words like “God”, that do not presuppose
any pre-existing concepts, possibly lays down our ancient
prejudice that each word has to be grounded in some
physical referent. Thus we probably can give up the
necessity to consider words as mere signals of something
different, i.e. referents of objects or entities in the world.
According to our proposal the so called “grounding
problem” should not only be considered as the problem of
how to attach words to things, but also as the problem of
what we do with words, because words are actions.
Two interesting consequences follow from this view, that
might lead to new research lines:
a. the proposal helps to highlight the variable and cultural
dependency of our word use rather than its universal aspects
(e.g. Davidoff, Davies & Robertson, 1999; Gentner &
Goldin-Meadow, 2001; Gilbert, Regier, Kay, & Ivry, 2008;
Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi, & Wang, 1999). Namely, a
word like “God” is part of a particular semantic/action
network, while the Italian word “Dio” is part of a different
semantic/action network of words. The two semantic/action
networks will obviously have many similarities and
overlapping areas, but they will also have idiosyncratic
aspects and differences that reflect the differences between
the specific communities that have used those words. In
keeping with this view, few recent studies, from an
embodied perspective have demonstrated that languages
influence the way in which we organize categories. For
example, Boroditsky and collaborators have shown that the
different spoken languages influence not only abstract
concepts but even perceptual categories, such as colour ones
(Winawer, Witthoft, Frank, Wu, Wade, & Boroditsky, 2007;
for further evidence on colour and animals see also Gilbert,
Regier, Kay, & Ivry, 2006; Gilbert et al., 2008).,
b. different mechanisms might underline the construction
of meanings of concrete and of abstract words (MCWs and
MAWs). 1. In the case of MCWs, sensorimotor experience
can precede the linguistic experience, and linguistic labels
contribute in constraining the boundaries of grounded
categories. Therefore, when we hear or read a linguistic
label, we “ground” it by activating the multimodal
experience related to the object or entity it refers to (the
conceptual referent). This grounding mechanism is
obviously not sufficient to explain the richness of language,
and to explain in particular its social aspects. However, in
keeping with embodied theories we claim that the process of
building concrete concepts might start from the
sensorimotor rather that from the linguistic experience, even
if the linguistic experience might play a role in shaping it. 2.
As to MAWs (e.g., “freedom”, “truth”), the mechanism

could be the opposite. It is primarily the linguistic
experience that helps us in collecting a variety of bodily
states, internal and external experiences, etc. These bodily
states and introspective experiences emerge and are
recognized once they are named. This naming typically
takes place in a social context. It is possible that such a
mechanism extends to emotions as well (Cimatti, in press
a), even if more research is required and a more fine grained
analysis of the differences between MAWs would be
necessary.
This view can explain a number of empirical findings.
Firstly, it is able to account for the longer response times
typically necessary for processing abstract rather than for
concrete words. This can reflect the “construction”
necessary to build online abstract word meanings.
Secondly, it can help to explain why, even if in feature
listing tasks MAWs elicit properties that greatly differ
across speakers, in quality of speakers we do converge on
common definitions of abstract terms. Thirdly, it can help to
explain why MAWs are acquired by children much later
than concrete ones. For example, it has been demonstrated
that concrete and abstract concept nouns definitions
displayed a shift in their developmental trend (see for
example McGhee-Bidlack, 1991). One could object that this
depends on the higher complexity of abstract compared to
concrete word meanings. But this objection would leave the
question open, of why abstract word meanings are more
complex than concrete ones. Fourth, our proposal can help
to account recent results on Mode of Acquisition (Wauters,
Tellings, Van Bon & Van Haaften, 2003), which
demonstrate that in the first grades acquisition is mainly
perceptual, later it is mainly linguistic. Consider that the
hypothesis of different acquisition mechanisms does not
imply the existence of a dichotomy between meanings of
abstract and concrete words. The existence of definitional or
nominal terms, such as “aunt” or “bachelor”, as well as the
fact that many concrete words, such as “ring”, are rich in
abstract associations, clearly highlight how slippery,
complex, and unclear this distinction is. To clarify: along
with the embodied cognition view, we claim that abstract
word meanings are grounded exactly as concrete ones.
However, departing from embodied views and extending
them, we believe that the kind of grounding might differ,
because the role of social/linguistic experience is more
crucial for the acquisition of the meaning of words like
“truth” than of the meaning of words such as “pencil” and
“dog”.

Conclusion
We endorse a fully embodied theory of cognition and
language. The basic tenet of any embodied theory is to
assume that every form of human cognition has an
embodied basis. More specifically, according to the radical
embodied theory we endorse, all forms of cognition are
grounded in our sensorimotor system and are constrained by
the kind of body we have and by its relationship with the
particular environment in which our species has evolved and

in which we currently inhabit. Such a theory presents an
obvious and well known problem: the existence of the so
called abstract word meanings, as those articulated in
English by words like “freedom”, “God”, and the like. We
feel that in order to try to solve this problem an extension of
classical embodied theory is necessary. In this paper we
have proposed how such an extension could take place
without assuming any non embodied source of cognition.
Along with many others we suppose that in any language
there are words, like the English word “bottle”, that express
a pre-existing non linguistic individual and embodied
concept. The story can not be so simple, however. Namely,
the very fact of using the word “bottle” certainly influences
the way individuals conceive bottles. Thus, children’s preverbal concept of bottles changes once they have learned the
word “bottle” – for example, it might become easier for
them to categorize bottles and to distinguish between
objects which are bottles and objects which are not. In fact
we believe that the formation of the concept BOTTLE is
influenced by the social world “bottle”, even if the influence
of language is less strong for BOTTLE than in the formation
of the concept FREEDOM. In other words, the distinction
between pre-verbal concept and linguistic concept (i.e. the
linguistic meaning) is probably not sufficient to correctly
describe the way human cognitive system develops, and it is
certainly not adequate for meanings of abstract words.
Namely, compared to words like “bottle”, things are even
more complicated with words like “freedom” and “God”
which do not have a concrete referent, and therefore it is
more difficult to think of their embodied basis. What is the
problem here?
How can we have experiences
corresponding to non existing entities? We propose this
solution: we can have experience of the apparently abstract
entity GOD (that actually does not exist and there is no need
of postulating its existence) only through the use of that
particular modal thing that is the English word “God”. If I
am able to use such a word in the appropriate contexts my
mind is later able to make internal experience of God. The
trick all lies in the double nature of particular things that are
words: at one side they are normal things we make
experience of with our senses: we hear them, we see them
on a printed page or in the gestures of someone else, we feel
them when we articulate them through our tongue and lips
or hands. On the other side they are social entities, whose
value is external to us, as it lies in the social set of rules that
regulates them. In this way we can explain why mutual
comprehension is possible, because we do not communicate
to each other our private concepts, on the contrary we all
use the same things, i.e. words, as a public and objective
means of relationship. Think of a word as a tool, for
example a hammer. My hand is different from yours, maybe
I have a prosthesis, but if I want to hammer a nail in the
wall I only have to follow the same rule: that is, the use of
the hammer is the same between us despite the individual
differences in the form of our hands. In the very same way a
social word does standardize the different concepts of our
own minds.

In our proposal we also suggest that this social nature of
words might have an impact on individual cognition, and
that this impact might have a different weight for meanings
of abstract and for concrete words. For word meanings
having a concrete referent labels are “attached” to concepts
formed on the basis of sensorimotor experience. Whereas
for meanings of abstract words the experience of language
might represent a powerful means to collect a variety of
sparse bodily and situational experiences. According to the
present proposal the uneasiness that any embodied theory of
cognition feels when explaining meanings of abstract words
can be mitigated (and perhaps solved) by stressing the social
nature of language and its impact on cognitive activity.
Our proposal is still an embodied theory of cognition, that
is, a theory of human cognitive activity based on body
experience; our point is that we have to consider social
experience too as a typical human embodied experience.
Embodied experience is not closed inside the boundaries of
our body. The social linguistic experience is an embodied
experience too.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Marco Mazzeo, Marco Mirolli, Domenico Parisi,
Giovanni Pezzulo, Paolo Virno, and people of the EMbodied
COgnition (EMCO) group (www.emco.unibo.it) for useful
discussions on this topic and to Kate Burke for editing the
English text. A special thank to Giulia Baroni, Art Glenberg
and Marco Tullio Liuzza for comments on an earlier draft.
This work was supported by the European Community,
project ROSSI: Emergence of communication in RObots
through
Sensorimotor
and
Social
Interaction
(www.rossiproject.eu). The order of the authors is
alphabetical.

References
Austin, J. (1962). How to Do Things with Words. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Barsalou, L.W. (2003). Abstraction in Perceptual Symbol
Systems. Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society, B,
358, 1177-1187.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded Cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Barsalou, L.W. & Wiemer-Hastings, K. (2005). Situating
abstract concepts. In D. Pecher & R. Zwaan (eds.).
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action
in memory, language, and thought (pp. 129-163). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Borghi, A.M. (2005). Object concepts and action. In D.
Pecher & R.A. Zwaan (Eds). Grounding Cognition: The
role of perception and action in memory, language, and
thinking. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of body
and mind in abstract thought. Psychological Science, 13,
185-188.

Cimatti, F. (in press a). Dentro il corpo, fuori del corpo. La
biologia artificiale delle emozioni. Bollettino Filosofico
del Dipartimento di Filosofia dell’Università della
Calabria.
Cimatti, F. , (in press b). Concetto e significato. Saussure e
la natura umana. Histoire, Epistemologie, Langage.
Cimatti, F. (2007). Il volto e la parola. Per una psicologia
superficiale. Macerata: Quodlibet.
Clark, A. (2006a). Material
Symbols. Philosophical
Psychology, 19, 1-17.
Clark, A. (2006b). Language, embodiment, and the
cognitive niche. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10, 370374.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. A. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L.B. Resnick, J.M. Levine, & S.D.
Teasley (Eds.). Perspectives on socially shared cognition
. Washington: APA Books.
Clark, H. H. & Krych, M. A. (2004). Speaking while
monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of
Memory and Language , 50(1), 62-81.
Davidoff, J., Davies, I., Roberson, D.(1999). Colour
categories in a stone-age tribe. Nature, 402, 604.
Durkheim, É. (1895). Les règles del la méthode
sociologique. Paris : Alcan.
Fischer, M. & Zwaan, R. (2008). Embodied Language: A
Review of the Role of the Motor System in Language
Comprehension. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 61, 825-850.
Gallese, V. (2007). Mirror neurons and the social nature of
language: The neural exploitation hypothesis. Social
Neuroscience.
Gentner, D., Goldin-Meadow, S. (2001) (Eds.). Language in
mind: Advances in the study of language and thought.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gibbs, R.W.(2003). Embodied experience and linguistic
meaning. Brain and Language, 84, 1-15.Gilbert, A.L.,
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Ivry, R.B. (2006). Whorf
hypothesis is supported in the right visual field but not the
left. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,
103, 489-494.
Gilbert, A.L., Regier, T., Kay, P., Ivry, R.B. (2008). Support
for the lateralization of the Whorf effect beyond the realm
of color discrimination. Brain and Language, 105, 91-98.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M.P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9,
558-565.
Glenberg, A.M., Sato, M., & Cattaneo, L. (2008). Useinduced motor plasticity affects the processing of abstract
and concrete language. Current Biology, 18, 7, R1-R2.
Glenberg, A.M., Sato, M., Cattaneo, L., Riggio, L.,
Palumbo,D. & Buccino, G. (2008). Processing Abstract
Language Modulates Motor System Activity. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61, 905919.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999) Philosophy in the flesh.
Basic Books.

Malt, B.C., Sloman, S.A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Martin, A. (2007). The representation of object concepts in
the brain. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 25–45.
McGhee-Bidlack, B. (1991). The development of noun
definitions: a metalinguistic analysis. Journal of Child
Language, 18, 417-434.
Mirolli, M., & Parisi, D. (in press). Towards a Vygotskyan
Cognitive Robotics: The role of language as a cognitive
tool. New Ideas in Psychology.
Moll, H., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Cooperation and human
cognition: the Vygotskian intelligence hypothesis.
Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society, B,362, 369648.
Pickering, M.J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Towards a
mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27, 169-190.
Puglisi, A., Baronchelli, A., & Loreto (2008). Cultural route
to the emergence of linguistic categories. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Science, 105, 7936-7940.
Pulvermüller, F. (2005). Brain mechanisms linking
language and action. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6,
576–582.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169-192.
Saussure F. de (2006). Notes préparatoires pour le cours de
Linguistique générale 1910-1911. Cahiers Ferdinand de
Saussure, 58, 83-292.
Steels, L. (2006). Experiments on the emergence of human
communication. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 347349.
Tomasello, M. (2005). Constructing a language. A usagebased theory of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Vygotskij, L.S. (1934). Myš lenie i reč’ Psichologičeskie
Issledovanija. Moskva-Leningrad.
Wauters, L.N., Tellings, A.E.J.M., Van Bon, W.H.J., & Van
Haaften, A.W. (2003). Mode of acquisition of word
meanings: The viability of a theoretical construct. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 24, 385-406.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M., Wu, L., Wade, A., &
Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal effects of
language on color discrimination. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science, 104,7780-7785.
Wittgenstein, L. (2001). Philosophical Investigations. The
German Text, with a Revised English Translation,
translated by G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing.
Zwaan, R. (2004). The immersed experiencer: Toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In B.H.
Ross (ed.), Psychology of learning and motivation, vol.44.
New York: Academic.

