UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Words and meaning: How the lexical encoding of technical concepts contributes to their
mental representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6td9j0kr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Jucks, Regina
Paus, Elisabeth

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Words and Meaning: How the Lexical Encoding of Technical Concepts
Contributes to their Mental Representation
Elisabeth Paus (paus@paed.psych.uni-frankfurt.de)
Goethe University, Institute of Psychology, Senckenberganlage 15
60325 Frankfurt, Germany

Regina Jucks (jucks@paed.psych.uni-frankfurt.de)
Goethe University, Institute of Psychology, Senckenberganlage 15
60325 Frankfurt, Germany

(embedded in complex theories). Accordingly, specialist
concepts are at risk of being subjectively understood
differently, dependent on the reader’s training and the term’s
function, context, and usage (Bromme, Rambow, &
Nückles, 2001). As findings in research on medical
expertise show, the conceptual meaning underlying a
technical term is differently specified by experts and
laypersons: whereas experts know the complex specialist
knowledge that is encapsulated by technical terms (Schmidt
& Boshuizen, 1992), laypersons may have a rather vague or
erroneous understanding of what technical terms mean
(Gittelman, Mahabee-Gittens, & Gonzales-del-Ray, 2004).
Everyday language does not bear the same risks.
Although the meaning underlying the term “man” may be
represented differently between interlocutors in everyday
communication, the shared meaning suffices for successful
communication (“The man is standing on the street.”). The
word “man” simply represents what it refers to: a man. In
the very apt words of Gertrude Stein (1999): “Rose is a rose
is a rose is a rose”.
In the context of technical terms, the underlying meaning
and the interlocutors’ mental representations may differ. For
example, a medical doctor talking about “migraine” may be
referring to different aspects than a layperson (Jucks &
Bromme, 2007). Concepts are the central components of
thinking. Thus, the terms chosen to encode specialist
concepts may be assumed to impact the connotation and
complexity transmitted to the recipient. When references
touch the core of concepts, differences in representation
may become relevant (the vagueness of the linguistic
surface).
In everyday German, many words of Latin or Greek
origin – particularly those introduced into German over the
last 400 years – have synonyms of German origin. Thus, in
his categorization of technical terms in German, Bromme
(1996) differentiates between everyday language terms in
specific linguistic usage and loan words borrowed from
classical or modern scientific languages. Laypersons
recognize the need for a deep and thorough understanding of
technical terms, particularly those with a Latin or Greek
origin. However, experts and laypersons may fail to
recognize that technical terms on the threshold to everyday
language have different meanings in the specific field and in
general (e.g., Schorling & Saunders, 2000).

Abstract
Some specialist concepts can be encoded either with words of
Greek or Latin origin or in everyday language terms. These
synonyms are expected to indicate to the same underlying
meaning. This study investigates whether the origin of
technical terms influences their mental representation as well
as subjective feelings of knowing. The linguistic encoding of
specialist concepts can be assumed to impact the connotation
and complexity transmitted to the recipient. As expected,
everyday language technical terms (ELTT) were perceived to
be more easily defined, more familiar, and more easily
accessible than technical terms of Greek and Latin origin
(GLTT). Consequently, participants estimated ELTT to be
better understood. However, there was no specific effect of
encoding on the difference between subjective and objective
learning
parameters.
Theoretical
and
practical
implementations for communication in learning contexts are
discussed.
Keywords: lexical encoding; technical terms; explanatory
knowledge; mental representation; feeling of knowing

Introduction
The widespread use of new media (Goldberg, Russell, &
Cook, 2003; MacArthur, 2006) provides laypeople with
almost unrestricted access to specialist information from a
multitude of fields. For instance, readers looking for health
information on the internet are likely to come across words
such as “serotonin” or “transmitters.” The presentation of
knowledge is influenced by the selection and usage of
appropriate specialist vocabulary. Technical terms can be
considered the “building blocks of knowledge”; they form
the core of its content.
In general, words may be more or less complex.
Complexity can be defined in terms of the following
features (Nückles & Bromme, 2002): Firstly, a more
complex word is related to many other words. Secondly, a
more complex word integrates many different aspects and,
thirdly, it can be described on different levels. The last
feature, in particular, implies that complex words can be
used more or less specifically. A word can be described by
its intension (defining features of the word) and/or its
extension (concepts related to the term that share the same
features) (Weingartner, 1973). Bromme, Rambow, and
Wiedmann (1998) emphasize that specialist concepts are
mostly both extensionally wide-ranging (a term applies to
many different reference objects) and intensionally rich

496

Laypersons base their perceived comprehension of a text
on surface characteristics such as the frequency of technical
terms. They overestimate what they are able to understand.
Research in the domain of text comprehension has shown
that laypersons often have problems recognizing that they
have failed to understand the content of a text correctly
(illusion of knowing, Glenberg & Epstein, 1985; Glenberg,
Wilkinson, & Epstein, 1982).
Whereas Glenberg and colleagues concentrated on how
people deal with newly learned content, the study we
present in this paper focuses on subjective evaluations of
existing knowledge. It has been shown that laypersons tend
to overestimate their understanding of texts including
technical terms encoded in everyday language. Laypersons
were asked to compare the comprehensibility of two
versions of a text in which the key specialist concepts were
encoded either in everyday language or in loan words. As
expected, the version using loan words was judged to be
less comprehensible (Clark, Weinberger, Jucks, Spitulnik, &
Wallace, 2003). Furthermore, when asked to anticipate the
knowledge of others, people tend to overestimate the
generality of their own knowledge (overestimation
hypothesis; see, e.g., Bromme et al., 2001; Hayes & Bajzek,
2008).
The extent to which people overestimate their knowledge
depends on the type of knowledge concerned. Being able to
explain the meaning of a certain term usually presupposes
not only knowledge of facts, but also more complex patterns
of knowledge – so-called explanatory knowledge (Rozenblit
& Keil, 2002). Research has shown that people tend to
overestimate their level of this kind of knowledge, in
particular (illusion of explanatory depth, Mills & Keil,
2004).
Several factors influence subjective knowledge estimation
(Rozenblit & Keil, 2002): In contrast to simple nomination
or description of knowledge contents, explanations are
complex hierarchical systems with no explicit starting or
end points. Thus, there is no explicit criterion for evaluating
the completeness and correctness of a given explanation.
Moreover, the quality of an explanation is defined in terms
of conclusiveness and traceability, two attributes that are
difficult for a layperson to estimate. Furthermore,
explanations of technical terms are reproduced less
frequently then, for example, facts or stories; therefore, it is
hard for laypersons to estimate their expertise. Finally,
laypersons often acquire their knowledge in a specific
context. Even if a term is understood correctly in that
context, this does not automatically imply that it will be
reliably understood and that it can be explained in other
contexts. When a layperson is asked to assess his or her
subjective comprehension of a term, this judgment is not
usually based on strong evidence. All of these factors affect
laypersons’ subjective estimations of their knowledge of
technical terms.
How else can lexical encoding be expected to impact the
ability to gauge one’s knowledge correctly? One approach
that highlights the dissociation between subjective

knowledge estimations and objective knowledge indications
is feeling of knowing research (FOK, e.g., Koriat & LevySadot, 2001). According to this approach, persons have a
feeling of whether or not knowledge contents are familiar to
them, even if they cannot recall them at that particular
moment. Koriat and Levy-Sadot (2001) introduced two
models to explain FOK: the cue familiarity model and the
cue accessibility model. The cue familiarity model
postulates that the FOK estimation is determined by the
familiarity of the term itself. The cue accessibility model
postulates that it is determined by the accessibility of
information relating to that term (whether or not that
information is correct being largely irrelevant). The FOK
literature focuses on the ability to recall knowledge of facts
(e.g., recall of a name). However, the models can also be
applied to estimations of knowledge of technical terms with
more comprehensive underlying knowledge structures. Both
the perceived familiarity of technical terms and the
accessibility of related information can be expected to
influence subjective estimations of knowledge (Rozenblit &
Keil, 2002).
As previously mentioned, many specialist concepts can be
encoded in either everyday language or in loan words. For
laypersons, the perceived familiarity of ELTT can be
assumed to be higher, given that these are also used in
general and colloquial language. The term Zuckerkrankheit
(literally, “sugar disease”), for example, is listed in medical
encyclopedias (Häcker & Stapf, 2004), but also used in
everyday discourse, mostly without explicit knowledge of
its medical specifics. As such, laypersons are more familiar
with this term than with its technical synonym Diabetes.
Koriat and Levy-Sadot (2001) showed that the models of
cue familiarity and cue accessibility, originally thought to be
mutually exclusive, are in fact interconnected. If a term is
perceived to be highly familiar, information relating to it is
expected to be more easily accessible. Based on the cue
accessibility model, it can therefore be predicted that
information relating to an ELTT is also more accessible for
laypersons than is information relating to a GLTT.
In this study, we examine the extent to which the lexical
encoding of a specialist concept influences its mental
representation. We tested the following hypotheses:
(I) Technical terms of Greek or Latin origin (GLTT)
are more clearly categorized as specialist
concepts than are everyday language technical
terms (ELTT).
(II) ELTT are perceived to be more easily defined than
GLTT.
(III) ELTT are judged to be more familiar than GLTT.
(IV) Information relating to ELTT is more easily
accessible than information relating to GLTT.
According to Koriat and Levy-Sadot (2001), information
relating to a term is more easily accessible if the term is
perceived to be familiar. Consequently, FOK should be
stronger for ELTT than for GLTT. Koriat and Levy-Sadot
(2001) postulate that FOK is influenced solely by the
number of associations activated and not by the accuracy of

497

those associations. Therefore, we expected participants to
produce longer – but not more accurate – explanations for
ELTT than for GLTT. Moreover, we are interested in the
accuracy of FOK judgments. First, we expected participants
to overestimate their knowledge concerning the underlying
meaning of specialist terms in general. Additionally, based
on the idea that FOK is higher for ELTT, but that objective
explanations of these terms are not of better quality, we
predicted participants’ confidence judgments to be even less
accurate when concepts were encoded in ELTT.
(V) FOK is higher for ELTT; therefore, the
explanations produced for ELTT will be longer
(but not of higher quality) than those produced for
GLTT.
(VI) Knowledge concerning the meaning of specialist
terms is overestimated; therefore, FOK judgments
are less accurate for ELTT.

their ELTT synonyms were not presented simultaneously,
potentially influencing the evaluation. In version A, the
order of words (9 GLTTs and 8 ELTTs) was randomized. In
version B, the respective synonyms were presented in
parallel order.
First, the participants were asked to rate 6 items for each
of the 17 terms on a 5-point scale (agree strongly – disagree
strongly) to evaluate the terms’ categorization, familiarity,
perceived comprehension, and definitional context. Second,
the participants’ objective knowledge of the terms was
assessed through two open questions (for a detailed
description of all variables, see the Dependent Measures
section below).
Finally, demographic data were obtained: age, gender,
degree program, number of semesters studied, occupational
and educational qualifications, knowledge of foreign
languages, and whether German was the native language.

Method

Table 1: Examples of technical term pairs

Participants and Design

ELTT
Zuckerkrankheit
(“sugar disease”)
Kleinhirn
(“little brain”)
Unternehmensführung
(“company leadership”)
…

Participants in this first data collection within an ongoing
study were 23 psychology students (17 female, 6 male) at
the University of Frankfurt with a mean age of 25.57 years
(SD = 3.09). Of the 23 participants, 18 were German native
speakers, 2 had spoken German as their second native
language since childhood, and 3 had spoken German for
more than 5 years. The independent variable “encoding of
technical terms” was conceptualized on two levels:
“everyday language” versus “foreign language.”

GLTT
Diabetes
Cerebellum
Management
…

Procedure
Data were collected in a lecture room at the University of
Frankfurt. Version A was randomly distributed to 11
participants; version B to 12 participants. The participants
completed the questionnaires without any time constraints.
An investigator was present throughout data collection to
answer questions.

Material
Selection of Technical Terms 17 technical terms of
Greek or Latin origin were selected and matched with
everyday language synonyms (see Table 1). Based on the
entries in technical encyclopedias (Häcker & Stapf, 2004;
Hildebrandt, 2004; Wilpert, 2001; Woll, Vogl, & Weigert,
2000), all term pairs were defined as synonyms encoding
the same underlying concepts. Terms were selected
according to the following criteria: First, both terms in each
pair of synonyms had separate entries in the technical
encyclopedias specified. To avoid ambiguity, we ensured
that the terms selected could be explicitly assigned to one
technical area. Terms included in a dictionary of foreign
words were categorized as GLTT (Knauf & Lörcher, 2004;
Wahring, 2007; Wermke, Klosa, Kunkel-Razum, &
Scholze-Stubenrecht, 2001). We also checked that all terms
featured in the major German-language spelling dictionary,
the Duden (Wermke, Kunkel-Razum, & ScholzeStubenrecht, 2004); this applied to all but one of the terms.
The 17 pairs of synonyms comprised 5 from the field of
medicine, 4 from psychology, 4 from business
administration, and 5 from German language and literature
studies.

Dependent Measures
A survey was developed to access mental representation
and feeling of knowing. Items measuring definitional
context and subjective estimation of comprehension were
formulated in such as way as to ensure that participants’
responses referred to explanatory knowledge (Rozenblit &
Keil, 2002).
Mental Representation. The first dependent variable,
mental representation, reflected the categorization,
definitional context, familiarity, and accessibility of the
terms.
Categorization. Participants were asked to judge whether
or not each term was technical.
Definitional Context. Participants’ perception of the
definitional context in general was assessed by the item
“needs to be explained to be understood.” Two items
assessed the range of the definitional context, i.e., whether a
term can “be described on several levels” (Nückles &
Bromme, 2002). A low defining context was operationalized

Questionnaire Construction Two versions of the
questionnaire were constructed to ensure that GLTTs and

498

by the statement “can be explained in a few words”; a
higher defining context by the statement “needs to be
understood well to be explained.”
Familiarity. Participants were asked to rate their
perceived familiarity with each term. Based on the cue
familiarity model (Koriat & Levy-Sadot, 2001), this item
allows us to examine whether participants indeed judged
ELTT to be more familiar.
Accessibility. Participants were asked to note down all
terms they could think of that related to each term given.
According to the cue accessibility model (Koriat & LevySadot, 2001), the accessibility of terms can be determined
by the number of related terms identified.

were mixed. There was no difference for the first item,
representing a low defining context, F(1,17) = 0.282, ns; the
mean value for all participants was M = 3.66, SD = 0.41.
However, for the second item, representing a high defining
context, there was a main effect, F(1,17) = 5.31, p < 0.05,
ηp2 = .25, with higher endorsements of the item for GLTT
(M = 3.57, SD = 0.51) than for ELTT(M = 3.11, SD = 0.80).
Univariate analysis revealed a main effect of encoding on
familiarity, F(1,17) = 3.59, p < 0.05, ηp2 = .18, as well as on
accessibility, F(1,17) = 4.40, p < 0.05, ηp2 = .22, of technical
terms. As predicted, ELTT were rated to be more familiar
(M = 4.71, SD = 0.70) than GLTT (M = 4.35, SD = 0.83) as
well as more easily accessible (M = 3.02, SD = 1.12) than
GLTT (M = 2.31, SD = 1.31).

Feeling of Knowing. The second dependent variable,
feeling of knowing (Koriat & Levy-Sadot, 2001), was
assessed in two ways:
Subjective Estimation of Comprehension. Participants
were asked to rate their perceived comprehension of the
terms.
Explanations of specialist terms. The participants were
prompted to explain each specialist term as follows: “What
does the term XY mean? Please give a brief explanation.”
The number of words used to explain each term was
ascertained. The completeness and the correctness (i.e.,
quality) of participants’ answers were assessed by two raters
(following the definitions in the technical encyclopedias
used). The raters also took into account whether and how
participants illustrated the concepts by providing examples.
Interrater reliability for the quality of explanations of ELTT
(K = 0.95, p < .001) and of GLTT (K = 0.95, p < .001) was
satisfactory.

Feeling of Knowing
In line with the findings of higher familiarity and
accessibility of ELTT, there was a main effect for the
subjective estimations of comprehension, F(1,17) = 5.52,
p < 0.05, ηp2 = .26, with ELTT being rated as better
understood (M = 4.60, SD = 0.72) than GLTT (M = 4.11, SD
= 1.02). Furthermore, a main effect emerged for length of
explanation, F(1,17) = 3.87, p < 0.05, ηp2 = .20, with more
words being produced to explain ELTT (M = 10.76, SD =
3.63) than GLTT (M = 9.01, SD = 3.00). Explanations of
ELTT were also of better quality (M = 2.82, SD = 0.69) than
explanations of GLTT (M = 2.36, SD = 0.74), F(1,17) =
6.11, p < 0.05, ηp2 = .28. Furthermore, we examined
accuracy of FOK judgments for specialist terms in general
as well as the effects of condition on accuracy of FOK
judgments in particular. A MANOVA revealed a main
effect for encoding of specialist terms, F(2,16) = 7.31, p <
0.05, ηp2 = .31. Furthermore, there was a main effect for
understanding, with participants rating their comprehension
of specialist terms subjectively higher than it objectively
was, F(2,16) =266.02, p < 0.001, ηp2 = .94. However, no
interaction effect emerged between encoding of specialist
terms and understanding, F(2,16) = 0.02, ns.

Results
Unless otherwise indicated, analyses were performed
using SPSS and the statistical assumptions were met. For all
further statistical analyses, we used the aggregated means of
participants’ responses for each term. We were thus able to
compare the term pairs directly.

Discussion
Mental Representation

Overall, the empirical findings supported our hypotheses
concerning the impact of the linguistic encoding of
specialist concepts on different aspects of their mental
representation and perceived comprehension.

A multivariate analysis yielded a large main effect of type
of encoding on mental representation, F(1,17) = 5.23, p <
0.05, ηp2 = .74, (following Cohen, 1988, we interpreted the
effect sizes as follows: ηp2 < .06 represents a small effect,
.06 < ηp2 > .13 a medium effect, and ηp2 > .13 a large effect).
Univariate analysis showed a main effect of encoding on
categorization, F(1,17) = 26.71, p < 0.001, ηp2 = .63, with
GLTT being more clearly categorized as technical terms (M
= 4.27, SD = 0.81) than ELTT (M = 2.82, SD = 1.02).
A further univariate analysis revealed a main effect of the
item “the term needs to be explained to be understood,”
F(1,17) =12.67, p < 0.05, ηp2 = .44, with the need for
explanation being rated higher for GLTT (M = 4.06, SD =
0.77) than for ELTT (M = 3.07, SD = 0.99).
Results for the two items “can be explained in a few
words” and “needs to be understood well to be explained”

Mental Representation
Our findings show that GLTT are more clearly
categorized as technical terms than are ELTT. Furthermore,
the GLTT were perceived to be less easily defined.
Although ratings of a low definitional context were equal
for both types of encoding, a main effect was found for high
defining context. In other words, people are better able to
recognize that the connotation and complexity transported
by terms can vary for GLTT terms than for ELTT terms.
Based on the cue familiarity and cue accessibility models
introduced by Koriat & Levy-Sadot (2001), we
hypothesized that ELTT would be rated as more familiar

499

and – provided that this was indeed the case – would be
more easily accessible. Our findings confirmed these
hypotheses. However, it remains unclear which additional
factors – beyond word origin – contribute to these results.
One explanation may be frequency of word use: Because
people use ELTT more often (e.g., in private conversations),
or are at least repeatedly exposed to these terms by diverse
media in everyday life, they are more present, and people
are thus more likely to think that they know their deeper
meaning. Future research should also investigate the role of
phonological familiarity, i.e., whether the sounds used in
ELTT terms are more familiar and therefore more easily
encoded.

Summary
In summary, the findings of this study serve two
purposes:
(I) They place the FOK model within a broader frame of
reference. Whereas most recent studies on FOK have
investigated the retrieval of knowledge of facts, our
results indicate that the processes underlying FOK can
be transferred to terms that transport more complex
knowledge contents (e.g., explanatory knowledge;
Rozenblit & Keil, 2002).
(II) Our findings provide insights into the usage of words
in texts and lectures, for example. The results of this
study indicate that the lexical encoding of specialist
concepts, as well as the context in which they are
embedded, influences people’s estimations of their
knowledge. When ELTT are used in specialist
contexts, laypeople may not be aware of the deeper
meaning underlying a term. However, using GLTT
may complicate or even hinder understanding. Hence,
research investigating the specific contexts in which
each kind of encoding makes sense is warranted.

Feeling of Knowing
Given that ELTT are judged to be more familiar and are
more easily accessible, we expected their subjective
comprehension to be higher. Additionally, because
comprehension of a technical term can be represented by
how well people think they can explain its underlying
meaning, we compared the number of words generated to
explain each term. This approach is based on the idea that a
person might think they have to produce more words to
explain a term that seems to be more familiar. Our findings
support our hypothesis that ELTT are perceived to be better
understood and revealed that participants – in accordance
with their subjective FOK – were able to produce more
words in explanation of ELTT. However, in contrast to our
predictions, the quality of explanations of ELTT was in fact
higher than that of GLTT. People may be more confident
about their knowledge of ELTT and therefore dare to write
down everything they know, but more critical of their
knowledge of GLTT, such that their writing is inhibited.
Finally, our results show that people tend to overestimate
their knowledge concerning the meaning of specialist terms
in general. However, whereas findings concerning text
comprehensibility confirm an influence of lexical encoding
on perceived comprehension (Clark et al., 2003), the results
of this study show no effects. This finding can be interpreted
as follows: In measures of text comprehensibility, perceived
comprehension of specialist terms mainly becomes relevant
in reference to the understanding of the whole sentence –
influenced by several other features. In contrast, in our
study, we focused exclusively on the comprehension of
specialist terms without a textual embedding. The context in
which a technical term is used seems to crucially influence
the effect of encoding on the accuracy of comprehension
judgments. In a textual context, guessing the (superficial)
meaning of terms may be facilitated. As a result,
comprehensibility of the whole text is often overestimated.
In contrast, when people focus on their subjective and
objective understanding of specialist terms per se, they
might reflect their specific knowledge more in detail (see
above). In conclusion, further research can benefit from
embedding technical terms in more realistic settings, such as
learning scenarios at university, to declare their specific role
in regard to comprehension judgments.

Our findings need to be replicated in larger samples of
participants from different social backgrounds. Further,
more technical terms from different technical areas need to
be investigated.
Another field influenced by the encoding of technical
concepts is (computer-supported) collaborative learning.
Virtual discourse plays an important role in knowledge coconstruction in these learning environments (Häkkinen &
Järvelä, 2006; Mäkitalo, Weinberger, Häkkinen, Järvelä, &
Fischer, 2005). When communicating virtually or face-toface, learning partners tend to use recently introduced
words; in other words, they adapt linguistically to each other
(Jucks, Becker, & Bromme, 2008). This alignment of
terminological vocabulary between the interlocutors during
communication is called lexical alignment (Pickering &
Garrod, 2004). As shown in this study, the meaning
transported by a technical term may depend on its encoding.
Using the same technical terms in collaborative learning
situations may therefore hold the risk that meaning is
exchanged only on a superficial level, and that the
underlying deeper meaning is not discussed: ELTT may fail
to transport the complexity of the underlying meaning,
whereas GLTT may imply a level of expert knowledge that
does not exist.
To conclude, the linguistic encoding of specialist concepts
plays a pivotal role in individual knowledge representation
and can thus be expected to influence learning engagement
and processes.

References
Bromme, R. (1996). Fachbegriffe [Specialist concepts]. In
G. Strube (Ed.), Wörterbuch der Kognitionswissenschaft
[Dictionary of foreign words in the cognitive sciences] (p.
184). Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.

500

Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(1),
34-53.
MacArthur, C. A. (2006). The effects of new technologies
on writing and writing processes. In C. A. MacArthur, S.
Graham, & J. Fitzgerald (Eds.), Handbook of writing
research (pp. 248-274). New York: The Guilford Press.
Mäkitalo, K., Weinberger, A., Häkkinen, P., Järvelä, S., &
Fischer, F. (2005). Epistemic cooperation scripts in online
learning environments: Fostering learning by reducing
uncertainty in discourse? Computers in Human Behavior,
21, 603-622.
Mills, C. M., & Keil, F. C. (2004). Knowing the limits of
one’s understanding: The development of an awareness of
an illusion of explanatory depth. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 87(1), 1-32.
Nückles, M., & Bromme, R. (2002). Internet experts’
planning of explanations for laypersons: A Web
experimental approach in the Internet domain,
Experimental Psychology, 49(4), 1-13.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27, 169-225.
Rozenblit, L., & Keil, F. (2002). The misunderstood limits
of folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth.
Cognitive Science, 26, 521-562.
Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A. (1992).
Encapsulation of biomedical knowledge. In D. A. Evans
& V. L. Patel (Eds.). Advanced models of cognition for
medical training and practice (pp. 265-282). New York:
Springer.
Schorling, J. B., & Saunders, J. T. (2000). Is “sugar” the
same as diabetes? A community-based study among rural
African-Americans. Diabetes Care, 23(3), 330-334.
Stein, G. (1999). Geography and plays. Mineola, NY:
Dover.
Wahrig, G. (2007). Fremdwörterbuch [Dictionary of foreign
words]. München: dtv.
Weingartner, P. (1973). A predicate calculus for intensional
logic. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 2, 220-303.
Wermke, M., Klosa, A., Kunkel-Razum, K., & ScholzeStubenrecht, W. (2001). Duden – Das Fremdwörterbuch
[Dictionary of foreign words]. Mannheim: Brockhaus.
Wermke, M., Kunzel-Razum, K., & Scholze-Stubenrecht,
W. (2004). Duden – Die deutsche Rechtschreibung
[German-language spelling dictionary]. Mannheim:
Brockhaus.
Wilpert, G. (2001). Sachwörterbuch der Literatur [Literary
encyclopedia]. Stuttgart: Alfred Körner Verlag.
Woll, A., Vogl, G., & Weigert, M. (2000).
Wirtschaftslexikon [Economic encyclopedia] (9th ed.).
München: Oldenbourg.

Bromme, R., Rambow, R., & Nückles, M. (2001). Expertise
and estimating what other people know: The influence of
professional experience and type of knowledge. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 7 (4), 317-330.
Bromme, R., Rambow, R., & Wiedmann, J. (1998).
Typizitätsvariationen bei abstrakten Begriffen: Das
Beispiel chemischer Fachbegriffe [Variation in typical
characteristics of abstract terms: The example of chemical
specialist terms]. Sprache & Kognition, 17, 3-20.
Clark, D., Weinberger, A., Jucks, R., Spitulnik, M., &
Wallace, R. (2003). Designing effective science inquiry in
text-based computer supported collaborative learning
environments. International Journal of Educational
Policy, Research and Practice, 4(1), 55-82.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioral sciences. Mahaw, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gittelman, M. A., Mahabee-Gittens, E. M., & Gonzales-delRey, J. (2004). Common medical terms defined by
parents: Are we speaking the same language? Pediatric
emergency care, 20, 754-758.
Glenberg, A. M., & Epstein, W. (1985). Calibration of
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 11(1-4), 702-718.
Glenberg, A. M., Wilkinson, A. C., & Epstein, W. (1982).
The illusion of knowing: Failure in the self-assessment of
comprehension. Memory & Cognition, 10(6), 597-602.
Goldberg, A., Russell, M., & Cook, A. (2003). The effect of
computers on student writing: A meta-analysis of studies
from 1992 to 2002. Journal of Technology, Learning, and
Assessment, 2(1), 52.
Häcker, H., & Stapf, K. H. (2004). Dorsch Psychologisches
Wörterbuch [Psychological encyclopedia]. Göttingen:
Hans Huber.
Häkkinen, P., & Järvelä, S. (2006). Sharing and constructing
perspectives in web-based conferencing. Computers &
Education, 47, 433-447.
Hayes, J. R., & Bajzek, D. (2008). Understanding and
reducing the knowledge effect: Implications for writers.
Written Communication, 25 (1), 104-118.
Hildebrandt, H. (2004). Pschrembel – Klinisches
Wörterbuch [Clinical encyclopedia] Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter.
Jucks, R., Becker, B.-M., & Bromme, R. (2008). Lexical
entrainment in written discourse – Is expert’s word use
adapted to the addressee? Discourse Processes, 45, 497518.
Jucks, R., & Bromme, R. (2007). Choice of words in doctorpatient communication: An analysis of health-related
internet sites. Health Communication, 21(3), 267-277.
Knauf, J., & Lörcher, U. (2004). Fremdwörterbuch
Wirtschaft [Dictionary of foreign economics terms].
Wiesbaden: Gabler.
Koriat, A., & Levi-Sadot, R. (2001). The combined
contributions of the cue-familiarity and accessibility
heuristics to feeling of knowing. Journal of Experimental

Acknowledgments
The authors are thankful to Lena Opitz, Stefanie Diener, and
Franziska Thon for their support with data collection and
analysis and to Susannah Goss for English language editing.

501

