UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Young Children’s Number-Word Knowledge Predicts Their Performance on a Nonlinguistic
Number Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/54n1m3ws

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Negen, James
Sarnecka, Barbara W.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Young Children’s Number-Word Knowledge Predicts Their Performance on a
Nonlinguistic Number Task
James Negen and Barbara W. Sarnecka
{jnegen, sarnecka}@uci.edu
Department of Cognitive Science, 3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92617 USA

Abstract
The present study investigated the link between number-word
learning and changes in the child’s attention and memory for
implicit number information. 71 children (ages 2-2 to 4-9)
were asked, without number words, to replicate sets of 1 to 4
objects. Children’s performance on the set-replication task
was correlated with cardinal number-word knowledge,
independent of age, and also independent of target set size
(e.g., ‘three’-knowers did better than ‘two’-knowers on all set
sizes, not just on sets of 3). Analysis of the children's
vocabulary scores suggests that the differences are not due to
general language development. Findings suggest that numberword learning is closely tied to the development of
nonlinguistic numerical cognition.
Keywords: cognitive development; number cognition;
attention; memory; language and thought; knower-levels;
numerals; early childhood; preschool; cardinality; number
development; language acquisition

When we look at sets of 1 to 4 items, we can see how many
there are, even without verbal counting. People track small
numbers of objects through a process called parallel
individuation (see Feigenson, Dehaene & Spelke, 2004 for
review). This is done by mentally representing each object
separately (i.e., representing three objects by forming three
mental symbols), and does not rely on having a single
symbol (e.g., the number 3) to represent the whole set’s
cardinality.
The parallel individuation system is already present in
infancy, and has been demonstrated in several different
research paradigms. For example, Wynn (1992a) showed
babies a display in which 2 dolls went behind a screen, one
at a time. Then the screen was lowered to reveal either 1 or
2 dolls behind it. Babies looked reliably longer (indicating
surprise or curiosity) at the unexpected outcome of 1 doll
than at the expected outcome of 2 dolls. Babies also
succeeded with 2–1=1 (≠2). Similar results are found using
up to 3 items, using habituation tasks (e.g., Starkey &
Cooper, 1980; Feigenson, Carey & Spelke, 2002), as well as
tasks where babies reach into a box to search for an object
(e.g., Feigenson & Carey, 2003; 2005), or crawl toward the
larger of two sets (e.g., Feigenson, Carey & Hauser, 2002).
Thus, there is convergent evidence that human infants can
attend to, remember, and perform some numerical (or at
least numerically relevant) computations over small sets of
individuals.
These tasks draw on attention and memory resources that
are still developing, and infants do not perform perfectly.
For example, in the crawling paradigm, infants failed (i.e.,

they chose the smaller reward) about 20% of the time
(Feigenson, Carey & Hauser, 2002). This task seems
trivially easy for older children and adults. The question is,
what developmental changes make it easy? Presumably, one
thing that develops is the child’s ability to attend to and
remember the number of objects in each set.
Another thing that develops is language—both language
in general, and language about numbers in particular.
Starting around 2 years of age, children learn the numberword list, usually in the context of counting (see Fuson,
1988 for review). Between about 2 and 4 years old, they
gradually learn the cardinal meanings of the first few
number words, one at a time and in order (e.g., Briars &
Siegler, 1984; Condry & Spelke, 2008; Frye, Braisby,
Lowe, Maroudas & Nicholls, 1989; Fuson, 1988; Le Corre
et al., 2006; Sarnecka & Carey, 2008; Sarnecka & Gelman,
2004;
Sarnecka, Kamenskaya, Yamana, Ogura &
Yudovina, 2007; Sarnecka & Lee, in press; Slusser &
Sarnecka, 2007, 2009; Wynn, 1990, 1992b). This requires
more than just reciting the number words in order; it
requires that children connect the number words to sets of
the correct cardinality.
The term ‘knower-level’ is often used to refer to a child’s
progress on this front. The child starts out as a pre-numberknower, and then becomes a “one”-knower when she learns
that “one” means 1. After the “one”-knower level comes the
“two”-knower, “three”-knower, (and for some children
“four”-knower) levels. After reaching the “three”- or
“four”-knower level, the child achieves a conceptual
breakthrough by figuring out the cardinal principle of
counting (Gelman & Gallistel, 1978). The child is then a
cardinal-principal-knower (often abbreviated CP-knower).
Procedurally, the cardinal principle says that when you
count a set of items, the last number word you say denotes
the cardinality of the whole set. Conceptually, this principle
means that the cardinal meaning of any number word is
knowable from the word’s position in the list (e.g., the
seventh word in any count list, in any language, means 7.)
Thus, CP-knowers (including adults) can use verbal
counting to find the set size associated with any number
word.
What is the relationship between number-word
knowledge and numerical cognition? One study found that
some minimal number-word knowledge is needed for
children to make ordinal judgments (Brannon & Van de
Walle, 2001). Other studies have found a connection
between number-word knowledge and the ability to

2998

recognize numerical equivalence (Mix, Huttenlocher &
Levine, 1996; Mix, 1999a, 1999b, 2008a, 2008b). The main
goal of the present study is to see if number-word
knowledge is also related to attention and memory for
number information.
The present study examines the relations among several
aspects of development: (1) the learning of cardinal
meanings for individual number words; (2) the development
of attention and memory for small-number information, as
well as object-type and color information; and (3) the
development of general vocabulary.

Method
Participants
Participants included 71 monolingual, English-speaking
preschoolers with a mean age of 3 years, 7 months (range
2;2 to 4;9) Children were recruited at preschools in and
around Irvine, California. Three additional children (ages
2;4, 2;5 and 4;0) began the study but quit after completing
fewer than half the trials. These children’s data were
excluded.

Procedure
Give-N Task The purpose of this task was to determine
what number-word meanings each child knew (i.e., to
determine the child’s knower-level.) A bowl of 15 identical
rubber toys was used. The experimenter began the game by
bringing out a stuffed animal (e.g., a lion), a plate, and a
bowl of 15 small identical rubber toys (e.g., toy bananas).
The experimenter said to the child, “In this game, you’re
going to give something to the lion, like this [experimenter
pantomimes putting an item on the plate and sliding it over
to the lion]. I'm going to tell you what to give him."
Instructions were of the form, "Can you give the lion TWO
bananas?"
All children were first asked for one item, then three
items. Further requests depended on the child’s earlier
responses. When a child responded correctly to a request,
the next request was for a higher number. When she
responded incorrectly to a request, the next request was for a
lower number. The requests continued until the child had at
least two successes at a given N (unless the child had no
successes, in which case she was classified as a pre-numberknower) and at least two failures at N+1 (unless the child
had no failures, in which case she was classified as a
cardinal-principle-knower).The highest numeral requested
was "six."
A child was credited with knowing the meaning of a
given number word if she had at least twice as many
successes as failures for that number word. Failures
included either giving the wrong number of items for a
particular word “N”, or giving N items when some other
number was requested. Each child's knower-level
corresponds to the highest number she reliably generated.
(For example, children who succeeded at “one” and “two,”
but failed at “three” were called “two”-knowers.) Children

who had at least twice as many successes as failures for
trials of "five" and "six" were called cardinal-principleknowers. (Because parallel-individuation-based ‘subitizing’
only works up to 3 or 4 items, children who succeed at set
sizes 5 and 6 must do so by counting and correctly applying
the cardinal principle.)
Set-Replication Task This task tested the child's attention
to number and memory for number information, in a context
where no number words were used.
The experimenter began the first block of trials (called
‘copying’ trials) by bringing out two different stuffed
animals (e.g., a bunny and an anteater), two bowls with
identical sets of 20 toys each, and two plates. An animal, a
plate and a bowl of toys were placed in front of each person.
The experimenter introduced the task as follows. “Now
we’re going to play a copying game. I will give something
to the anteater, like this … (the researcher takes a single
item from the bowl, puts it on his plate, and slides it over to
his stuffed animal) … and you give something to the bunny.
You copy me and make your plate just like mine.” At this
point, most children obliged by placing an item on their
plate and sliding it over to their animal. If the child did not
immediately do so, the experimenter encouraged her (e.g.,
“Go ahead. Now you give something to the bunny.”) After
the child had imitated the experimenter by giving an item to
the animal, the test trials began.
In the test trials, the experimenter produced the target set
and left it sitting on the table in full view while the child
attempted to copy it. After the child produced her set and
slid it over to the animal, the experimenter asked the followup question, “Is your plate just like mine?” Children who
answered ‘no’ were asked to fix it (e.g. “Oh. Well, can you
fix it so it’s just like mine?”) This happened on less than 1%
of trials. At the end of each trial, the items were returned to
the bowl.
The second block of trials (called ‘remembering’ trials)
was like the first block except that only one stuffed animal,
plate and bowl of toys were used. The experimenter
introduced these trials by saying: “Now we’re going to play
a remembering game. I will give something to the bunny,
like this (experimenter demonstrates) and you try to
remember what I gave the bunny. OK? (Experimenter then
returns the items to the bowl and puts the plate in front of
the child.) OK, now it’s your turn. You give the bunny
something, and try to make yours just like mine was.” After
the child’s response, the experimenter followed up, “Is your
plate just like mine was?” In both blocks, children were not
specifically instructed to count the items in the target set,
but were allowed to continue if they started spontaneously.
Each child was given a total of 32 trials (16 ‘copying’
trials followed by 16 ‘remembering’ trials). Each of these
blocks was divided into four sub-blocks of 4 trials each,
presented in randomized order. Each of the 8 sub-blocks
used a different set of stimuli, consisting of 20 small rubber
toys. These sets were of four types: (a) homogenous (e.g.,
20 green airplanes), (b) mixed color (e.g., 10 yellow buses

2999

and 10 blue buses); (c) mixed type (e.g., 10 orange boats
and 10 orange fire engines); and (d) mixed color and type
(e.g., 5 red cars, 5 blue cars, 5 red trucks and 5 blue trucks).
Each sub-block included four trials: One trial each of set
sizes 1, 2, 3 and 4, using an order from one of two pseudorandom lists. Items within each target set were homogenous,
even when the bowl of items was not (e.g., from a set of 5
red cars, 5 blue cars, 5 red trucks and 5 blue trucks, the
experimenter might place 3 red cars on the plate.)
Vocabulary Assessment After early testing showed a link
between number-word knowledge and number replication
(see Results, below), an assessment of general vocabulary
was added. Vocabulary was assessed using the picture
vocabulary subtest from the Woodcock Johnson-Revised
(Woodcock & Johnson, 1985). 26 children completed this
assessment.
Order of Tasks Half of the children completed Give-N
first, then the Set-Replication task. The other half completed
the first (‘copying’) block of Set-Replication trials first, then
the Give-N task, then the second (‘remembering’) block of
Set-Replication trials. The vocabulary assessment was
always given at the end, after the second (‘remembering’)
block of Set-Replication trials. Testing was typically spread
over two test sessions, not more than two weeks apart. If
Give-N was done in the first session and then more than one
week elapsed before the second session, Give-N was
repeated at the end. This happened 10 times; in all but two
cases, the child’s knower-level remained the same. In those
two cases, the child’s second Give-N score was one knowerlevel higher than the first score, and the later (higher)
knower-level was used.

(excluding 5 children that did not complete at least half of
both types of trials). However, further analyses showed no
effect in terms of relationship to other variables; in
subsequent analyses, data from the ‘copying’ and
‘remembering’ trials were merged.
Participants’ mean score from the Woodcock Johnson
Picture Vocabulary Test was 22.69 (standard deviation
4.37). The Woodcock-Johnson norming data indicate that a
score of 22 is typical for a child of 4 years, 7 months; our
participants were somewhat younger than this (mean age 3
years, 7 months). Thus, language development in these
participants was slightly accelerated, relative to the national
norm.

Correlations
The measures to be compared were number replication,
type/color replication, number-word knowledge, age and
general vocabulary. Among these five measures, there were
several independent correlations. We present these one by
one.
Number Replication and Number-Word Knowledge
Number replication performance was correlated with
number-word knowledge when controlled for age (r(69) =
.64, p < .01), type/color replication performance (r(69) =
.65, p < .01) and vocabulary (r(24) = .64, p < .01). In other
words, children who knew more number-word meanings did
a better job of replicating the number of items in the target
set (see Figure 1). This was true even though such small set
sizes do not require verbal counting.

Results
Each child was assigned a knower-level, based on
performance in the Give-N task. Of the 71 children who
participated, there were 7 pre-number-knowers, 8 “one”knowers, 15 “two”-knowers, 9 “three”-knowers, 7 “four”knowers, and 25 cardinal-principle-knowers.
A ‘number replication’ score was calculated from the SetReplication Task. For this score, the child’s response was
marked correct if she correctly replicated the number of
items in the target set. A separate ‘type/color replication’
score was also calculated, which reflected the child’s choice
of the correct type and/or color of items, on trials where
there was a choice between two types of object, two colors,
or both. These measures were independent of each other; a
trial could be scored ‘correct’ for number but ‘incorrect’ for
type/color or vice-versa. The mean score for number
replication was 63% correct (standard deviation 25%); the
mean score for type/color replication was 49% correct
(standard deviation 27%).
Initial analyses showed that children had higher number
replication scores in the ‘copying’ trials than the
‘remembering’ block by a mean of 9% (standard deviation
19%), T(65) = 3.64, p < .01 in a paired-sample test

Figure 1: Knower-level and Number Replication
Performance.
Children who knew more number-word meanings not
only made fewer errors; they also made smaller errors. We
found this by calculating a root mean square of children’s
errors (the number of items the child gave, minus the
number in the target set, excluding correct answers). This
measure was negatively correlated with knower-level, r(69)
= -.66, p < .01.
At first pass, one might expect that number-word
knowledge would predict better number replication

3000

performance only for the set sizes the child could name (i.e.,
“one”-knowers would perform well only on sets of 1;
“two”-knowers would perform well on sets of 1 and 2, etc.).
However, this was not the case. Number replication
performance was actually correlated with knower-level at
each target set size, from 1 to 4, r(69) = .50, .62, .64, .66,
ps < .01. In addition, there was no interaction of knowerlevel with set size, F(15,195) = 1.51, p = .10. This means
that, for example, “three”-knowers outperform “two”knowers, not only on sets of 3, but also on sets of 1, 2 and 4
(see Figure 2).

Figure 2: Knower-level and Number Replication
Performance broken down by target set size.
Number Replication and Type/Color Replication
Number replication performance was correlated with
type/color replication performance, controlling for age and
knower-level, r(69) = .62, .52, ps < .01. In other words,
children who did a better job of replicating the number of
items in the target set also did a better job of replicating the
type and color of items in the target set.
Number Replication and Age Number replication
performance was correlated with age, controlling for
number-word knowledge and type/color replication
performance, r(69) = .27, p = .026; r(69) = .49, p < .01. In
other words, older children did a better job of replicating the
number of items in the target set. This third correlation to
number replication performance, however, was weaker than
the first two, Z(69) = 2.81, 2.61, ps < .01.
Knower-level and Vocabulary Knower-level was related
to vocabulary when controlled for each of the other
variables of interest: age (r(24) = .65, p < .01), number
replication performance (r(24) = .39, p = .048), and
type/color replication performance (r(24) = .57, p < .01). In
other words, children’s knowledge of number-word
meanings is related to overall vocabulary. However,
vocabulary is not related to number replication performance
when controlled for knower-level, r(24) = .24, p = .23. In
other words, number replication is not related to vocabulary

development in general, but to number-word knowledge in
particular.
No significant correlations were found among the
measures of age, number-word knowledge and/or
type/color replication performance when number replication
performance was controlled. This suggests that number
replication performance links the other three variables
together, with age being the weakest of the three influences.

Discussion
The present study examined the relationship between a
child’s understanding of cardinal number-word meanings
and her attention/memory for number information in an
implicit (non-number-word) numerical task. The implicit
task asked children, without using number words, to
replicate a set of 1, 2, 3 or 4 items, either while looking at
the set or from memory. The study also measured the child’s
accuracy at replicating the type or color of objects in the
target set, and (for some children) included a measure of the
child’s vocabulary.
Results indicate that a child’s attention/memory for
number information is closely related to her knowledge of
cardinal-number-word meanings. In other words, children
who know the meanings of more cardinal number words did
a better job of replicating the number of objects in the target
set.
Children who did well at replicating the number of items
also did well at replicating the type and color of those items.
Older children also performed better than younger children,
although age was a much weaker predictor of performance
than number-word knowledge or type/color replication
performance. Children who knew more words in general (as
measured by the vocabulary assessment) also tended to
know more number-word meanings (as measured by the
Give-N task). However, a child’s vocabulary score did not
predict her number replication performance when numberword knowledge was controlled. In contrast, number-word
knowledge did predict number replication performance
when vocabulary was controlled.
The most striking of these results is the correlation
between cardinal number-word knowledge and number
replication performance. At the same time as the child is
learning the cardinal meaning of each number word, her
attention and memory for implicit number information is
improving. Somewhat surprisingly, we found that
performance improved on all set sizes—not only the set
sizes the child could name. Moreover, children who knew
more number-word meanings tended to make smaller errors
as well as fewer errors. When they did not replicate the
number of items in the target set, they still gave a number
that was closer to the correct number than children with less
number-word knowledge.
We also found a correlation between number-word
knowledge and vocabulary development: the children who
knew more number words simply knew more words overall.
But there was no effect of vocabulary score on numberreplication performance when number-word knowledge was

3001

controlled. Thus, improvements in the child’s attention and
memory for numbers are specifically related to numberword knowledge, not to overall language development.
Age was a relatively weak predictor of performance.
Older children did replicate set sizes better than younger
children, but number-word knowledge mattered far more
than age. And when it came to replicating the type and color
of items in the set, age did not matter at all.
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the present
findings, from a theoretical point of view, was the
continuous nature of improvement in number replication
performance. Intuitively, we might expect children to
perform better on the set sizes whose number-word labels
they know. But we found that children improved at all set
sizes, with each number-word they acquired. For example, a
child who knows that “three” means 3 is not only better at
replicating sets of 3 objects, but also at replicating sets of 1,
2 or 4 objects than a child who only knows “one” and
“two.” In other words, cardinal number-word learning is
linked to better attention and memory for cardinal number
information overall, not only for cardinalities the child can
name.
Another interesting finding was the link between number
replication and type/color replication. In other words,
children who were more successful at copying/remembering
the number of items in the target set were also more
successful at copying/remembering the type and color of
items. Yet, only number performance was related to
number-word knowledge. Because the experimental setup
required children to handle both types of information
simultaneously, this effect may indicate a sharing of mental
resources. It could be that as the child’s ability to encode
and recall number information improves, resources might be
freed up for handling type and color information. An
interesting direction for future studies would be to replicate
the present study with additional measures of common-noun
and color-word knowledge, analogous to the measure of
number-word knowledge used in the present study.
The limitation of the present study is that all data are
correlations; the directions of causality remain unknown. It
is possible that all of the developmental changes described
here are driven by maturational improvements in attention
and memory. Just as children grow taller over time, they
develop better attention and memory resources. These
resources might allow children to handle number
information as well as type/color information better, and
also to learn number-word meanings.
However, a careful examination of the data suggests that
the attention/memory improvement is local or specific to
number in some sense. If the improvement affected every
domain of cognition equally, then increases in number-word
knowledge would be equally correlated with improvements
in number performance and type/color performance. But in
fact, the link is only between number-word knowledge and
implicit number performance.
Perhaps a more promising explanation comes from the
idea of expert memory. Studies with chess experts have

famously shown that familiarity with a particular domain
allows people to encode and recall information from that
domain more effectively (e.g., Holding, 2002; Ericsson,
2005). It’s possible that between the ages of 2 and 4 years,
children gain ‘number expertise’ in the same way that chess
masters gain chess expertise. This ‘number expertise’ may
contribute to better attention and memory for numerical
information, which in turn allows children to learn numberword meanings, and simultaneously frees up cognitive
resources to handle type and color information.
Another possibility is that number-word learning itself
drives improvements in number replication performance.
Frank, Fedorenko and Gibson (2008) described this type of
language-on-thought effect as follows: "Rather than altering
underlying representations, languages instead help their
speakers accomplish difficult or intractable cognitive tasks
by providing abstractions which allow for the efficient
storage and processing of information." It's possible that
number-word learning helps children encode and recall
implicit number information more efficiently. This is
consistent with the idea that preverbal infants have
inefficient, implicit representations of numbers and use
number language to create efficient, explicit replacements
(e.g., Le Corre & Carey, 2007).
This explanation, however, requires a view of numberword acquisition that is less discrete and more continuous
than the view usually associated with the knower-levels
framework. The present study found that “three”-knowers
were better at attending to and remembering sets of even 1
item than “two”-knowers were. If this is occurs because of
number-word learning, then a “three”-knower must
somehow know “one” better than a “two”-knower knows
“one”. It's not clear what the nature of this difference would
be.
The present study makes it clear that small-number
processing has a place in the discussion about number
language and number concepts. On the one hand, preverbal
infants and nonhuman primates can track up to 3 or 4
individuals. On the other hand, when children learn the
words for these small set sizes, their performance clearly
improves. Future research will be needed to describe how
this works in greater detail.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NIH grant 446840/23624 to
Barbara W. Sarnecka.

References
Brannon, E. M. & Van de Walle, G. A. (2001). The
development of ordinal numerical competence in young
children. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 53-81.
Briars, D., & Siegler, R. S. (1984). A featural analysis of
preschoolers' counting knowledge. Developmental
Psychology, 20, 607-618.
Condry, K. F., & Spelke, E. S. (2008). The development of
language and abstract concepts: The case of natural

3002

number. Journal of Experimental Psychology –General,
137(1), 22-38.
Ericsson, K. A. (2005). Recent advances in expertise
research: A commentary on the contributions to the
special issue. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(2), 223241.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S., Hauser, M. (2002). The
representations underlying infants' choice of more: Object
files versus analog magnitudes. Psychological Science,
13(2), 150-156.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S. (2003). Tracking individuals via
object-files: Evidence from infants' manual search.
Developmental Science, 6(5), 568-584.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S. (2005). On the limits of infants'
quantification of small object arrays. Cognition, 97(3),
295-313.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S., and Spelke, E. (2002). Infants'
discrimination of number vs. continuous extent. Cognitive
Psychology, 44, 33-66.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., Spelke, E. (2004). Core
Systems of Number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8,
307-314.
Frank, M. C., Fedorenko, E., & Gibson, E. (2008, July).
Language as a cognitive technology: English-speakers
match like pirahã when you don't let them count.
Presented at The 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society in Washington D.C.
Frye, D., Braisby, N., Lowe, J., Maroudas, C., & Nicholls, J.
(1989). Young Children's Understanding of Counting and
Cardinality. Child Development, 60, 1158-1171.
Fuson, K. C. (1988). Children's counting and concepts of
number. New York: Springer- Verlag.
Gelman, R. & Gallistel, C. R. (1978). The Child’s
Understanding of Number. Oxford: Harvard University
Press.
Holding, D. (1992). Theories of chess skill. Psychological
Research, 54(1), 10-16.
Le Corre, M., & Carey, S. (2007). One, two, three, four,
nothing more: An investigation of the conceptual sources
of the verbal counting principles. Cognition, 105, 395438.
Le Corre, M., Van de Walle, G., Brannon, E. M., Carey, S.
(2006). Re-visiting the competence/performance debate in
the acquisition of the counting principles. Cognitive
Psychology, 52(2), 130-169.
Mix, K. S., Huttenlocher, J, & Levine, S. C. (1996). Do
preschool children recognize auditory-visual numerical
correspondences? Child Development, 67, 1592-1608.
Mix, K. S. (1999a). Similarity and numerical equivalence:
Appearances count. Cognitive Development, 14, 269-297.
Mix, K. S. (1999b). Preschoolers’ recognition of numerical
equivalence: Sequential sets. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 74, 309-332.
Mix, K. S. (2008a). Children’s equivalence judgments:
Crossmapping effects. Cognitive Development, 23, 191203.

Mix, K. S. (2008b). Surface similarity and label knowledge
impact early numerical comparisons. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 26, 13-32.
Sarnecka, B. W., & Carey, S. (2008). How counting
represents number: What children must learn and when
they learn it. Cognition, 108(3), 662-674.
Sarnecka, B. W., & Gelman, S. A. (2004). Six does not just
mean a lot: Preschoolers see number words as specific.
Cognition, 92, 329-352.
Sarnecka, B.W., Kamenskaya, V. G., Yamana, Y., Ogura,
T., & Yudovina, J.B. (2007). From grammatical number
to exact numbers: Early meanings of “one," “two,” and
“three” in English, Russian, and Japanese. Cognitive
Psychology, 55, 136-168.
Sarnecka, B. W. & Lee, M. D. (in press). Levels of Number
Knowledge in Early Childhood. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology.
Slusser, E. B., & Sarnecka, B.W. (2007, April). When do
young children connect number words to discrete
quantification? Poster presented at the biennial meeting
of the Society for Research in Child Development,
Boston, MA.
Slusser, E. B., & Sarnecka, B. W. (2009, April) Partial
meanings of number words. Poster to be presented at the
biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Denver, CO.
Starkey, P. and Cooper, R. G. Jr. (1980). Perception of
numbers by human infants. Science, 210, 1033–1035.
Woodcock, R., & Johnson, M. B. (1985). WoodcockJohnson revised. Itasca, IL: Riverside.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36(2), 155-193.
Wynn, K. (1992a). Addition and subtraction in human
infants. Nature, 358(6389), 749-750.
Wynn, K. (1992b). Children’s acquisition of number words
and the counting system. Cognitive Psychology, 24(2),
220-251.

3003

