UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Computational Model of Counterfactual Thinkin: The Temporal Order Effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6pn5c2gk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Walsh, Clare R.
Byrne, Ruth M.J.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Computational Model of Counterfactual Thinking:
The Temporal Order Effect
Clare R. Walsh (cwalsh@tcd.ie)
Psychology Department, University of Dublin, Trinity College,
Dublin 2, Ireland

Ruth M.J. Byrne (rmbyrne@tcd.ie)
Psychology Department, University of Dublin, Trinity College,
Dublin 2, Ireland

Abstract
People generate counterfactual alternatives to reality
when they think about how things might have happened
differently, 'if only…'. There are considerable
regularities in the sorts of past events that people
mentally undo, for example, they tend to mentally undo
the most recent event in an independent sequence.
Consider a game in which two contestants will win
£1000 if they both pick cards from the same color suite.
The first player picks black and the second red and they
lose. Most people spontaneously undo the outcome by
thinking, if only the second player had picked black. We
describe a computational model that simulates our theory
of the mental representations and cognitive processes
underlying this temporal order effect. The computer
model is corroborated by tests of the novel predictions of
our theory: it should be possible to reverse the temporal
order effect by manipulating the way in which the
winning conditions are described.

Counterfactual Thinking
When people reflect on past events, they tend to think
not only about the events that actually happened but
also about how those events might have happened
differently. This tendency to construct imaginary
alternatives to reality is called counterfactual thinking
(e.g., Kahneman & Tversky, 1982). For example, if
your car breaks down and you are late, you might think
that you would have been on time if you had had the
car serviced or if you had taken the train.
Counterfactuals have been studied in philosophy
(e.g., Lewis, 1973; Stalnaker, 1968), psychology (e.g.,
Kahneman & Miller, 1986) and artificial intelligence
(e.g., Costello & McCarthy, 1999; Ginsberg, 1986).
Counterfactual thinking has been implicated in many
aspects of cognition and emotion. It may play a role in
formulating counterexamples in reasoning (JohnsonLaird & Byrne, 1991) and in formulating sub-goals in
problem-solving (Ginsberg, 1986). Counterfactuals
may allow us to learn (e.g., Roese, 1994). The sorts of
counterfactuals that are useful to people may also be
useful to learning algorithms in artificial intelligence

systems (Costello & McCarthy, 1999). Counterfactual
thinking has also been linked to a range of emotions
and social judgements, including blame and regret, both
in the laboratory and in real-life settings.
Yet little is known about the mental representations
and cognitive processes that underlie the generation of
counterfactuals. Our goal in this paper is to describe a
computational model that simulates a theory of the
processes underlying counterfactual thinking and some
experimental results that corroborate this theory.
Psychological studies of the sorts of counterfactuals
that people generate indicate considerable regularities,
despite the infinite number of ways that past events
could have happened differently (e.g., Kahneman &
Miller, 1986). People are more likely to undo
exceptional than routine events (e.g., Kahneman &
Tversky, 1982), actions than inactions (e.g., Byrne &
McEleney, 2000), controllable than uncontrollable
events (e.g., Girotto, Legrenzi & Rizzo, 1991; McCloy
& Byrne, 2000) and the first event in a causal chain
(e.g., Wells, Taylor & Turtle, 1987). In this paper we
will focus on one important factor that influences the
mutability of an event, that is, its temporal order in
relation to other events, to which we now turn.

The Temporal Order Effect
Research has shown that when a series of events are
independent of each other, people tend to mutate the
most recent event (Byrne, Segura, Culhane, Tasso &
Berrocal, 2000; Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990;
Spellman, 1997). Consider a game in which two
individuals are given a shuffled deck of cards, and each
one picks a card from their own deck. If the two cards
they pick are of the same color (i.e., both red or both
black), each individual wins £1,000. Otherwise, neither
individual wins anything. John goes first and picks a
red card from his deck; Michael goes next and picks a
black card from his deck. Thus the outcome is that
neither individual wins anything (from Byrne et al,
2000). Participants tend to undo the second event, e.g.,
if only Michael had picked red too, when they are asked

to imagine that one of the card selections came out
differently so that the players won, and this finding has
been termed the temporal order effect. In addition, the
second player, Michael, is usually expected to
experience more guilt and to be blamed more by John.
This effect has also been demonstrated in a number of
practical situations, such as in judgements of fairness in
an exam context (Miller and Gunasegaram, 1990) and
in ranking team performance in a league (Sherman &
McConnell, 1986
One possible explanation is that causality is assigned
by the relative change in probability before and after an
event (Spellman, 1997) although this account cannot
explain the shift in focus which arises when an explicit
alternative to the first event is provided (Byrne et al,
2000). An alternative explanation is that the first event
in an independent sequence may be relatively
immutable because it is presupposed (Miller &
Gunasegaram, 1990), acting as a background against
which later events are perceived (Sherman &
McConnell, 1996), and playing an important
contextualising role in constructing a mental
representation of a factual situation (Byrne et al., 2000).
Our aim is to explain why the first event is presupposed
or perceived as immutable, and to do so, we will focus
on the mental representation not only of the facts, but
also of the counterfactual alternatives to the facts.
People may understand the card scenario by
constructing a set of mental models (Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991), that is, mental representations that
correspond to the structure of the world, and their
models may represent certain aspects of the factual
situation explicitly:
John red
Michael black
Lose
where ‘John red’ represents ‘John picked a red card’,
‘Michael black’ represents ‘Michael picked a black
card’, and ‘Lose’ represents the outcome (Byrne et al.,
2000). They may generate their counterfactual models
by mutating aspects of the factual model. The fully
explicit set of models is as follows:
Factual:
John red
Michael black
Lose
Counterfactual: John red
Michael red
Win
John black Michael black
Win
John black Michael red
Lose
where separate possibilities are represented on separate
lines of the diagram, and the models may be annotated
to keep track of their epistemic status (Byrne & Tasso,
1999; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). The temporal
order effect indicates that people construct just a subset
of the possible counterfactual models:
Factual:
John red
Michael black
Lose
Counterfactual: John red
Michael red
Win
...
where the three dots represents an implicit model which
may be fleshed out to be more explicit if need be. Our

aim is to explain why people construct this
counterfactual model more than others.

TempCounterFacts: A Computational
Model of the Temporal Order Effect
We will describe a computational model, called
TempCounterFacts, which simulates the primary tenets
of our theory of the mental representation and cognitive
processes underlying the temporal order effect in
counterfactual thinking (see Walsh & Byrne, 2001, for
details). The program is written in LISP and it takes as
input a set of facts about the card selection game (e.g.,
John picked red and Michael picked black) and a
description of the winning conditions (e.g., if they both
pick red or both pick black they win) and it generates a
counterfactual alternative about how the outcome could
have turned out differently (e.g., they would have won
if Michael had picked red).
We suggest that the counterfactual context, that is,
the representation of the conditions leading to a
counterfactual outcome, such as the conditions under
which a contestant would have won or lost a card game,
can in themselves provide an explicit alternative to a
factual event. This possibility has not been explored
systematically before. Our suggestion is that people
imagine a counterfactual scenario by changing their
model of the facts to fit with their model of the winning
conditions. They may select the first element of the
factual model, e.g., John picks red, and find a match
for it in the winning models. They may consider only
this model as a possible counterfactual and conclude
that if Michael had picked red they would have won.
We suggest that the generation of a counterfactual
alternative is driven not only by the ‘bottom-up’ facts
of the actual situation but also by ‘top-down’
expectations derived from the counterfactual context.
The program consists of three suites of functions.
1: Representing Facts and Counterfactual Context
The program begins by constructing a representation of
the facts in a FactModel:
Factual: John Red Michael Black Outcome Lose
It also takes as input a set of winning conditions and it
constructs the Counterfactmodels or set of models of
the winning conditions:
John Red Michael Red Outcome Win
John Black Michael Black Outcome Win
These initial models represent the conditions under
which the protagonists can win. Because of working
memory constraints people may represent as little
information as possible (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). For example, they may not explicitly represent
the conditions under which the protagonists can lose
(Byrne, 1997).

The program constructs models for different
conditions which may be specific events, e.g., 'John
picks a red card' or not, e.g., 'both players pick a red
card'. It accepts four connectives: and, or (unspecified
disjunction), ori (inclusive disjunction) and ore
(exclusive disjunction).
2: Matching Facts and Counterfactual Context
The program attempts to match the FactModel to the
set of CounterfactModels. It selects the first fact, e.g.,
John picked a red card, and it attempts to find a match
for this event in the CounterfactModels. If an explicit
match is found then it selects this model. If not, then it
looks for a model which contains the negation of the
first fact, e.g., John picks not-red. In the current
example, it finds a match in the first model of the
CounterfactModels:
John Red Michael Red Outcome Win
Once a match is found the program checks to see if the
selected model is fully explicit, that is, it contains
explicit information about both card selections. If the
selected model is not fully explicit then the program
fleshes out the models to be explicit (for details on
fleshing out models and other technicalities, see Walsh
& Byrne, 2001.)
The program then compares the FactModel and the
selected CounterfactModel. If they match entirely then
the FactModel is a winning instance. If there is only
one item that is different then it uses this model to
generate a new CounterAlternative model. If there is
more than one difference, then the program continutes
to search through the remaining CounterfactModels to
find one which is more similar to the FactModel. In this
way, the program ensures that minimal changes are
made (see, e.g., Byrne, 1997).
3: Generating a Counterfactual Alternative
Once a counterfactual model has been selected, the
program identifies the events in this model which are
different from the FactModel. In the current example, it
is Michael’s card. It then generates a new
CounterAlternative model by taking the FactModel and
replacing the FactModel events with the
CounterfactModel events, i.e., Michael picked Black is
replaced with Michael picked Red. It describes the
newly constructed CounterAlternative by generating a
counterfactual conditional of the following form:
If it had been the case that: (Replaced event)
then it would have been the case that:
(Outcome Win).
The program simulates the temporal order effect, that
is, it mutates the second event, when it is given the
scenario in the current example, which is typical of
scenarios used in such studies. However, the program
also produces a novel reversal of the temporal order

effect when it is given certain descriptions, as we will
now describe.
Performance of the model on novel descriptions
We tested the performance of the model on several
novel scenarios, with different sorts of winning
conditions and different sorts of facts (see Walsh &
Byrne, 2001, for full details). For example, we gave the
model descriptions of a card game in which the winning
conditions required the players to pick different colour
cards and the fully explicit set of models for the
winning conditions were as follows:
John Red Michael Black
Win
John Black Michael Red
Win
In each case, we presented the program with the same
facts, i.e., John picks a black card and Michael picks a
black card and they lose, and it produces the
FactModel:
Factual: John black Michael Black Outcome Lose
We varied the way in which we described the winning
conditions. Given the following ‘black’ disjunction, to
describe the winning conditions:
If one or the other but not both pick a card from a
black suit, each individual wins £1,000
the program constructs the following initial models:
John Black
Win
Michael Black Win
and produces the temporal order effect. When one of
the CounterfactModels contains an explicit match for
the first fact, as in the models of the ‘Black’ disjunction
the program selects this model. If it is not fully explicit
then the program fleshes it out, relying on the footnotes
to indicate how to do so. The program compares the
fleshed out model to the FactModel and if the second
event is different, as it is in the example, then the
program uses this event to generate a new
CounterAlternative model and to produce the
counterfactual conditional:
If it had been the case that: (Michael not-Black)
then it would have been the case that:
(Outcome Win).
Given instead the following ‘red’ disjunction, to
describe the winning conditions:
If one or the other but not both pick a card from a
red suit, each individual wins £1,000
The program produces the following initial models:
John Red
Win
Michael Red
Win
and it produces a reversal of the temporal order effect,
that is, it constructs a counterfactual scenario that
undoes the first event rather than the second event.
When the CounterfactModels do not contain an explicit
match for the first fact, as in the models of the ‘Red’
disjunction, the program selects instead a model which
contains the negation of the first fact, John picks notblack (which in the binary context of the color card

game, the program recognises as red). It repeats the
same process described above, however in this case it is
the first event which is different in the FactModel and
CounterfactModel. As a result, this event is used to
generate the CounterAlternative model and the
conditional:
If it had been the case that: (John Red)
then it would have been the case that:
(Outcome Win).
The winning conditions are identical in both
descriptions, and the facts are identical, but the
description differs. As a result, the program constructs
different sorts of initial models. The program simulates
the assumption of the model theory that reasoners
rarely construct a fully explicit set of models and their
initial set of models makes some information explicit
and some implicit (see Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991).
One novel prediction of our theory is that it should be
possible to reverse the temporal order effect if the way
in which the winning conditions are described ensures
that people construct an initial model that does not
contain an explicit match to the first event. We turn
now to some experimental results that corroborate this
novel prediction.

Experimental Results on Temporal Order
We constructed a scenario based on the color card
scenario (from Byrne et al., 2000). In a series of
experiments, the facts of the players’ selections
remained the same: John goes first and selects a black
card, Michael goes second and the card that he selects
is also black, and the outcome is that both players lose.
The winning conditions were also identical in each of
the experiments: the players would win if they each
picked different cards. We varied the description of
these winning conditions (see Walsh & Byrne, 2001,
for details). The experiments test our predictions that
people hold this counterfactual context in mind from
the outset and they use it to help them construct an
appropriate counterfactual model.
In one experiment, we described the winning
conditions as a disjunction of red cards:
If one or the other but not both pick a card from a red
suit, each individual wins £1,000
and we compared it to a control description designed to
eliminate the temporal order effect (see Walsh &
Byrne, 2001 for details). In the experiment, the facts
were that John picked black and Michael picked black
and so they both lost. The two descriptions referred to
exactly the same set of winning conditions, but for the
'red' disjunction, people cannot readily match the fact
about the first player, John picked black, to their
explicit thoughts about how the players can win.
Instead the availability of an explicit alternative to the
first fact, should lead them to mutate the first fact.

We tested 148 undergraduate students from different
departments in the University of Dublin, Trinity
College in several large groups. They took part
voluntarily and were randomly assigned to the control
or 'red' disjunction condition in a between subjects
design. (Five participants were eliminated because they
failed to follow the instructions.) Participants
completed the following counterfactual mutation task:
Please complete the following sentence. John and
Michael could each have won £1,000 if only one of
them had picked a different card, for instance if...
followed by several other related tasks (for details see
Walsh & Byrne, 2001).
As our theory predicts, and as our cognitive model
simulates, the ‘red’ disjunction reversed the temporal
order effect. As Table 1 shows, the results indicated
that for participants who mutated a single event, more
mutated the first event (40%) than the second event
(24%), and this difference was reliable (binomial n =
61, z = 1.79, 1-tailed p < .04), whereas when the same
set of winning conditions were described in the control
condition, the temporal order effect was eliminated. In
the control condition, as many participants mutated the
first event (32%) as the second event (36%, binomial n
= 32, z = .18, p = .86), as we had expected (see Walsh
& Byrne, 2001, for further details).
Table 1: The percentages of mutations in Experiment 1
Control
Disjunction
(n = 47)
(n = 96)
____________________________________________
Mutations
First only
32
40
First and then Second
15
24
Second only
Second and then First
Neither

36
2
15

24
1
11

The experiment provides the first demonstration that
the typical temporal order effect can be reversed, that
is, participants mutate the first event in the sequence,
rather than mutating the second event. The reversal
depends not on the facts or on the nature of the winning
conditions but on the way the winning conditions are
described. Our explanation is that this description
makes some information explicitly available in the
mental models that reasoners construct, and renders
other information implicit in the representation. An
alternative to the first player’s choice was made
explicitly available and as a result, the temporal order
effect was reversed.
Is it possible that the results show simply that the
temporal order effect does not occur when the players

must pick different cards? The original temporal order
effect may be an artifact of the constraint that both
players must choose the same card. However in a
further experiment in this series, we ruled out this
possibility (see Walsh & Byrne, 2001). We showed that
the temporal order effect can be observed even when
players must pick different cards. We used the same
scenario as described in the experiment here except that
we changed the conditionals. We described the winning
conditions as a disjunction of black cards:
If one or the other but not both pick a card from a
black suit, each individual wins £1,000
Participants given this ‘black’ disjunction exhibited
the standard temporal order effect. For both the 'red'
and the 'black' disjunction conditions, the facts were the
same: Both players picked black. The winning
conditions were also the same (the contestants would
have won if they picked different colored cards). The
logical form of the description was the same, in that it
was an exclusive disjunction. The only difference was
in the reference to the color of the suit, black or red.
This small difference in wording created a large
difference in mutation patterns: mutations of the first
event versus mutations of the second event. Our
explanation is that reasoners represent the winning
conditions not in a fully explicit set of models but in an
initial set of models that makes some information
explicit and keeps some implicit. We have called this
mental representation of the winning conditions, the
counterfactual context.

General Discussion
This paper provides one of the first computational
simulations of counterfactual thinking. The model
simulates our theory of the mental representations and
cognitive processes that underlie counterfactual
thinking, in the domain of the temporal order effect.
One widely held view is that the mental representation
of the facts are important in the generation of
counterfactual alternatives. Our model makes use not
only of the representation of the facts, but also of the
representation of the winning conditions, which we
have called the counterfactual context. It constructs
representations that make some information explicit
and leave other information implicit.
The program simulates the robust temporal order
effect. However, our theory also led to a novel
prediction about the reversal of the temporal order
effect. In a series of experiments, we corroborated the
predictions (see Walsh & Byrne, 2001). Our
experiments showed that the temporal order effect can
be reversed, eliminated or observed. The experiments
provide the first demonstration that the temporal order
effect can be reversed and that the nature of the

description of the winning conditions can influence the
mutability of events.

Acknowledgements
We thank Phil Johnson-Laird, Mark Keane, Orlando
Espino, David Mandel, Rachel McCloy and Alice
McEleney for their advice. The research was supported
by Enterprise Ireland, the Irish Council for the
Humanities and Social Sciences, and Dublin
University. Some of the results were presented at the
International Conference on Thinking in Durham, 2000.

References
Byrne, R. M. J. (1997). Cognitive processes in
counterfactual thinking about what might have been.
In D. L. Medin (Ed.). The psychology of Learning
and Motivation, Vol 37. San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Byrne, R. M. J. & McEleney, A. (2000). Counterfactual
thinking about actions and failures to act. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition.
Byrne, R. M. J., Segura, S., Culhane, R., Tasso, A., &
Berrocal, P. (2000). The temporality effect in
counterfactual thinking about what might have been.
Memory and Cognition, 28, 264-281.
Byrne, R. M. J. & Tasso, A. (1999). Deductive
reasoning with factual, possible and counterfactual
conditionals. Memory and Cognition, 27, 726-740.
Costello, T., & McCarthy, J. (1999). Useful
Counterfactuals. Electronic Transactions on the Web.
Under Submission.
Ginsberg, M. L. (1986). Counterfactuals. Artificial
Intelligence, 30, 35-79.
Girotto, V., Legrenzi, P., & Rizzo, A. (1991). Event
controllability in counterfactual thinking. Acta
Psychologica, 78, 111-133.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991).
Deduction. Hove, UK: Erlbau.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory:
Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological
Review, 93, 136-153.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation
heuristic. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky,
(Eds.), Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and
biases
(pp. 201-208). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Oxford: Blackwell.
McCloy, R. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2000). Counterfactual
thinking and the controllability effect. Memory &
Cognition.
Miller, D. T. & Gunasegaram, S. (1990). Temporal
order and the perceived mutability of events:
Implications for blame assignment. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1111-1118.

Roese, N. J. (1994). The functional basis of
counterfactual thinking. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 66, 805-818.
Sherman, S. J., & McConnell, A. R. (1996).
Counterfactual Thinking in Reasoning. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 10, 113-124.
Spellman, B. A. (1997). Crediting causality. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 126, 323-348.
Stalnaker, R.C. (1968). A theory of conditionals. In N.
Rescher (Ed.), Studies in logical theory. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Walsh, C. and Byrne, R.M.J. (2001). A computational
and experimental investigation of counterfactual
thinking. Manuscript in submission.
Wells, G. L., Taylor, B. R. & Turtle, J. W. (1987). The
undoing of scenarios. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 53, 421-430.

