UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Activating Verb Semantics from the Regular and Irregular Past Tense

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/51t213sj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Longworth, Catherine E.
Randall, Billi
Tyler, Lorraine K.
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Activating Verb Semantics from the Regular and Irregular Past Tense.
Catherine E Longworth (cat@csl.psychol.cam.ac.uk)
Billi Randall (bjr22@cam.ac.uk)
Lorraine K Tyler (lktyler@csl.psychol.cam.ac.uk)
Centre for Speech and Language, Dept. Exp. Psychology, Downing Site, Cambridge, CB2 3EB, UK.

William D Marslen-Wilson (william.marslen-wilson@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge, CB2 2EF, UK

Abstract
Theoretical accounts of the processing of inflectional
morphology make implicit, untested assumptions about
the activation of verb semantics from inflected verbs.
This research used semantic priming to investigate the
extent to which regular and irregular past tense forms
activate verb semantics, in comparison to the verb stem.
The results show that past tense forms activate verb
semantics to the same extent as verb stems and without
differences due to verb regularity. These results provide
constraining data for models of inflectional morphology.

Introduction
Research on the mental representation and processing
of inflected words has focused on the type of
underlying processing system required to account for
our ability to produce and comprehend regularly and
irregularly inflected words. The English past tense in
particular has formed an important test case for such
research. It provides a sharp contrast between the
productive regular past tense and a limited set of
irregular forms. Theoretical accounts divide into those
suggesting that all inflected forms, both regular and
irregular, are stored using associative memory (e.g.
Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986) and those proposing
that the predictability of the regular past tense allows us
to compute the inflected forms from their verb stems
using symbolically based rules (e.g. Pinker, 1991).
Such accounts focus primarily on the processing and
representation of the regular and irregular past tense as
phonological forms, tending to neglect the important
issue of how these forms contact their underlying
semantic and syntactic content. Nonetheless, they
incorporate assumptions, explicit or implicit, about how
these inflected forms map on to their semantics. Pinker
has suggested that the regular past tense is not stored in
its own right but computed using symbolic rules,
whereas the irregular past tense is stored independently
of its stem (Pinker, 1991). Comprehension of the
regular past tense is assumed to require rule-based
decomposition into stem and inflection. This process
may delay semantic activation relative to the irregular

past tense, which is not assumed to require rule-based
processing.
The related account proposed by Marslen-Wilson and
Tyler (1998) explicitly postulates that the regular and
irregular
past
tense
activate
the
semantic
representations of their verb stems through different
routes. The morphophonologically complex regular past
tense is parsed into its stem and affix in order to access
stem semantics, whereas the irregular past is recognised
as a full form, which must subsequently be mapped
onto verb semantics assumed to be stored at the level of
the lexical entry.
Strict full-listing accounts (Butterworth, 1983)
suggest that all past tense forms are stored in memory,
with semantic representations presumably stored
independently of their verb stems. Activating such
representations would not be delayed by rule-based
processing, and would not be expected to differ
according to morphological complexity or verb
regularity.
Parallel-distributed processing models (Joanisse and
Seidenberg, 1999; Plunkett and Marchman, 1993;
Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986) have assumed that
both the regular and irregular past tense activate
semantic units associated with their verb stems. In
common with strict full-listing accounts, the fact that
the regular and irregular past tense have differing
degrees of phonological and orthographic similarity to
their stems is not assumed to entail differential
processing. However, if a mapping is less consistent (as
in irregular forms) this may lead to slower or less
efficient activation.
It can be seen that although these accounts focus on
the consequences of the variable predictability of past
tense form from its associated verb stem, they
inevitably make theoretical assumptions about the
activation of verb semantics from inflected forms as
well. Typically one would use semantic priming to test
assumptions relating to the organisation of semantic
representations or the time course of its activation.
However, research using semantic priming has tended
to use concrete nouns and/or uninflected verbs. This is
because morphologically simple words are assumed to

be the paradigmatic forms associated with semantic
information, and semantic priming is thought to reflect
either activation spreading between their semantic
representations or a reactivation of shared properties of
these representations. Morphological priming, on the
other hand, uses complex words as primes, targets or
both, and is a form of repetition priming. It is thought to
reflect the reactivation either of an underlying
morpheme (Marslen-Wilson, Tyler, Waksler and Older,
1994) or of shared semantic and form units (Plaut and
Gonnerman, 2000), depending on the theoretical
account. As such, the task is used to explore lexical
representation and access.
What would be expected if verbs in the past tense
were used as semantic primes? Ultimately they must
contact verb semantics since the presence of verb
inflection is a normal part of language comprehension.
However, all accounts, except perhaps strict full-listing
theories, assume that verbs in the past tense are
processed as modified forms of their stems, as
inflectional morphology does not change word meaning
or form class. The stem is viewed as the most basic
form of a verb and assumed to be associated with its
semantic representations. Inflected verbs are assumed to
be phonological modifications of the verb stem.
So how do these modified forms map on to the verb
semantics associated with their stems? How long does
this process of mapping take? If semantic priming is the
facilitation of responses due to a semantic relationship
between morphologically simple words will there be
any semantic priming from the past tense at all?
Alternatively there might be priming when the modified
form maps onto verb semantics, but the delay due to
this processing might reduce the degree of facilitation
in comparison to that from the verb stem. Perhaps the
greater similarity of form between the regular past tense
and associated verb stems will speed up mapping onto
verb semantics via the stem. This could lead to more
semantic priming from the regular past than the
irregular.
These questions were addressed by the following
experiments using verb stems and their past tense forms
as semantic, rather than morphological, primes. The
motivation for this research was not to adjudicate
between theories postulating one or more processing
routes for inflectional morphology. Rather the aim was
to provide evidence about the activation of verb
semantics from inflected forms, in order to constrain
currently untested assumptions implicit in these
theories.

Experiment 1: Intramodal auditory
semantic priming.
Morphological priming with auditory presentation of
both past tense primes and verb stem targets has shown

facilitation of lexical decision responses to targets
following regular and irregular past tense primes
(Marslen-Wilson and Tyler, 1997). It seemed prudent to
begin our investigation of semantic priming from the
past tense with auditory presentation of both primes and
targets.
Rather than simply using regular and irregular past
tense forms as semantic primes, a within-item design
was selected so that each verb prime would be used in
both its stem and past tense form (i.e. both “blame
ACCUSE” and “blamed ACCUSE”). This allows us to
establish that the uninflected forms are sufficiently
semantically related to their targets to cause priming.
Also, if the past tense items do prime, this can be
measured against the amount of priming from the
associated stem, to ascertain the effects of mapping
onto verb semantics from an inflected form.
52 regular and 52 irregular verb primes were paired
with semantically related verb targets. Semantic
relatedness was established empirically by asking
participants to rate this on a nine-point scale (1 =
extremely unrelated, 9 = extremely related). Separate
ratings were collected for stem and past tense forms of
each prime. Groups of 15 participants (native speakers
of UK English, aged between 18 and 40, with no
language disorders) rated the semantic relatedness of
either the stem or past tense form of each verb prime
paired with its target. Past tense prime-target pairs were
rated slightly less related than their associated stem
prime-target pairs (mean rating for stems = 7.34, sd .63,
mean rating for the past tense = 7.12 sd .73, F (1,96) =
13.54, p < .001) with no effect of verb regularity.
Unrelated primes (e.g. “laugh ACCUSE” and
“laughed ACCUSE”) were selected by rotating test
primes about their targets whilst maintaining tense and
verb regularity. This ensured that there could be no
systematic differences between test and control primes
in each condition, other than semantic relatedness to
targets. The semantic relatedness of control primes and
their targets was pretested in the same way as the test
primes. Past tense prime-target pairs were again rated as
slightly less related than their associated stem primetarget pairs (mean rating for stem controls = 2.39, sd
.84, mean rating for past tense controls = 2.07 sd .65, F
(1,96) = 13.16, p < .001) with no effect of verb
regularity. Related test primes had a mean rating of 7.23
(sd = .69) and unrelated controls had a mean rating of
2.2 (sd = .75). As our aim was to examine semantic
rather than associative priming, all primes were selected
to have a low associative strength to their targets.
To ensure that any differences in semantic priming
between regular and irregular past tense primes were
due to verb regularity we matched primes across verb
regularity for semantic relatedness and associative
strength to targets, familiarity, imageability, and surface
and cumulative frequencies from the Celex Lexical

Database (Baayen, Piepenbroek and Gulikers, 1995).
Number of syllables could not be matched, as the
regular past tense tends to be longer than the irregular
form. Targets were matched across conditions for
surface and cumulative frequencies, familiarity,
imageability and number of syllables. Since many
English verbs can also be used as nouns, we ensured
that all primes had higher surface and cumulative
frequencies as verbs.
The listener’s task was to make a lexical decision to
each target, with instructions to respond as quickly and
accurately as possible. A range of fillers was selected to
ensure that semantic relationships, verbal primes or
inflected verb primes could not be used to predict word
targets. To this end we used 208 unrelated
noun/adjective prime-target pairs, with half the nouns in
the plural form and nonwords used for half the targets.
We also used 104 verb-nonword pairs with the same
proportions of regular and irregular, stem and past tense
primes as the test items.
The materials were divided into four versions of the
experiment. These were balanced so that all targets
appeared once in each version. Each version had the
same target preceded by either a semantically related
stem or past tense or a control stem or past tense. All
versions had 460 trials: 24 practice trials, 20 “warm-up”
trials, 52 test trials (13 of each condition), 52 control
trials (13 in each condition) and 312 filler trials.
Semantically related verb pairs made up 25% of the
word targets heard. These were pseudo-randomly
distributed throughout the list, with the same order of
test and filler items in each of the four versions. There
were an equal number of word and nonword targets in
each version.
All items were recorded by a female native speaker of
English onto DAT tape. They were digitized at a
sampling rate of 22kHz, and were played binaurally to
the listeners over headphones under the control of
DMDX experimental software (Forster and Forster,
1990).
There was a 200 millisecond interval between primes
and targets and participants had up to 3 seconds to
respond. After responding the next trial followed in
1500 milliseconds. Reaction times were measured from
target onset. The experiment lasted approximately 50
minutes in total.
60 participants (native speakers of UK English, aged

between 18 and 40, with no language disorders) took
part in the experiment. 15 participants were randomly
assigned to each version of the experiment.

Results
The data from four participants were discarded because
of relatively high error rates and unusual, or variable
reaction times. Six items were also removed, four
because of experimenter error and two because of high
error rates. This left a total of 56 participants and 98
items.
For the analysis of reaction times, all errors (2.5%)
and extreme values (0.1%, defined as ≤ 500 ≥ 2000
msec) were removed from the data. Mean reaction
times were then calculated over participants and items.
These were entered into two analyses of variance on
participant (F1) and item (F2) means, with the factors of
prime type (test or control), verb regularity (regular or
irregular), tense (stem or past tense) and version (1-4).
Item means are shown in Table 1.
There was a main effect of prime type (F1 (1,52) =
166.53, p < .001; F2 (1,90) = 91.31, p < .001) due to
faster reaction times following semantically related
(mean RT = 826 msec, sd = 82 msec) compared to
unrelated (mean RT = 875 msec, sd = 89 msec) primes.
There was also a main effect of tense (F1 (1,52) =
14.37, p < .001; F2 (1,90) = 15.69, p < .001) with
reaction times following past tense items (mean RT =
857 msec, sd = 87 msec) being slower than those
following verb stems (mean RT = 843 msec, sd = 90
msec). There was no main effect of verb regularity.
There were no interactions between priming, tense and
regularity. Planned comparisons confirmed that there
was significant priming for every condition.

Discussion
This first experiment found that past tense primes
significantly facilitated lexical decision responses to
semantically related targets. With auditory presentation
these inflected words were able to map onto their verb
semantics sufficiently strongly and quickly to prime
responses to related words presented 200 milliseconds
later. Not only did the related past tense items facilitate
responses but the main effect of priming and the
absence of any interaction between priming and tense
shows that they primed as much as their associated
stems. This is surprising as semantic priming is

Table 1 Mean item reaction times and standard deviations for intramodal semantic
priming.
STEM PRIMES
Test
Control Diff
REGULAR 818 (82) 872 (85) 54 ***
IRREGULAR 815 (86) 868 (94) 53 ***
*** p < .001

PAST TENSE PRIMES
Test
Control Diff
840 (74) 883 (82) 43 ***
830 (85) 876 (95) 46 ***

generally thought to reflect semantic relationships
between basic lexical forms. As the past tense is an
inflected, or modified, form of its verb stem one might
not have expected both to prime equally, especially as
past tense prime-target pairs had been rated as being
less related than their associated stem prime-target pairs
in pretests.
The phonological form of the regular past tense is
nearly identical to that of its stem so perhaps it is more
predictable that this could map onto verb semantics as
quickly as its stem. However, the phonology of words
in the irregular past tense is less similar to their verb
stems than the regular past tense, so we might have
expected these to prime less. The lack of a significant
interaction between priming, tense and regularity shows
that this was not the case. Both the regular and irregular
past tense primed as much as their stems and as much
as each other.
There are several possible interpretations of these
findings. If inflected verbs need to map on to the stem
to activate verb semantics this mapping may occur so
quickly and effectively that it does not interfere with
priming. The degree of phonological similarity to the
stem does not seem to affect the efficiency of this
mapping. The irregular past tense has less phonological
similarity to associated stems than the regular past tense
yet this does not delay access to verb semantics. If the
regular and irregular past tense are processed differently
this does not seem to have consequences for semantic
activation as measured in this experiment.
Another alternative is that inflected verbs do not need
to map on to the stem in order to activate verb
semantics. All forms might be equally associated with
verb semantics. However, if the stem is not the most
basic form associated with verb semantics, why should
past tense inflections have led to slower responses? It is
not the case that there was no effect of words being
inflected in this experiment, just that this did not
interact with semantic priming.
To summarize, this experiment found that past tense
inflection, whether regular or irregular, did not affect
semantic priming, although it did increase response
latencies to targets.

Experiment 2: Cross-modal semantic
priming.

It is already established that intramodal presentation of
the regular and irregular past tense facilitates responses
to associated verb stems (Marslen-Wilson and Tyler,
1997) and Experiment 1 established that they also
facilitate responses to semantically related verbs.
However, when primes and targets are presented in
different modalities the irregular past tense no longer
facilitates responses to associated stems (MarslenWilson, Hare and Older, 1993). This contrasts with the
regular past tense, which continues to show
morphological priming. As modality seems to affect
morphological priming from the irregular past tense the
second experiment tested whether it also affects
semantic priming.
Cross-modal presentation also allows us to probe
semantic activation earlier in its time course. The first
experiment might have failed to detect effects of tense
or verb regularity on semantic activation if these had
dissipated in the 200 millisecond inter-stimulus interval
between the prime and target. In addition, reducing
available processing time allows us to assess whether
the tense effect found in the first experiment reflected
the impact of inflected words on initial semantic
activation or a possible post-lexical effect arising in the
interval between hearing primes and responding to
targets.
The second experiment used the design and materials
from Experiment 1 but this time a visual target
presented for 500 milliseconds followed the immediate
offset of the auditory prime. Reaction times were
recorded from target onset as before. 51 participants
took part (native speakers of UK English, aged between
18 and 40, with no language disorders). 12 to 14
participants were randomly assigned to each version of
the experiment.

Results
The data from four participants were discarded due to
unusual and/or variable reaction times. The items
involving 5 target words were also removed because of
high error rates. This left a total of 47 participants and
99 test items.
For the analysis of reaction times, all errors (2%) and
extreme values (0.1%, defined as ≥ 1350 msec) were
removed from the data. Mean reaction times were then
calculated over participants and items. These were

Table 2 Mean item reaction times and standard deviations for cross-modal semantic
priming.
STEM PRIMES
Test
Control Diff
REGULAR 516 (51) 525 (54) 9
IRREGULAR 517 (50) 536 (60) 19 **
* p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001

PAST TENSE PRIMES
Test
Control Diff
511 (46) 538 (63) 27 ***
512 (44) 531 (59) 19 *

entered into two analyses of variance on participant (F1)
and item (F2) means, with the same factors as
experiment 1. Item means are shown in Table 2.
There was a main effect of prime type (F1 (1,43) =
28.62, p < .001; F2 (1,91) = 24.59, p < .001), due to
faster reaction times following related (mean RT = 514
msec, sd = 48 msec) compared to unrelated (mean RT =
532 msec, sd = 59 msec) primes. There were no main
effects of verb tense or regularity and no interactions
between priming, tense and regularity.
Planned comparisons on item means in individual
conditions indicated that regular stems did not prime
significantly (t (48) = -1.23, p = .225) due to an
unexplained interaction between priming and version
(F2 (3,45) = 6.49, p <.001). One version showed
reduced latencies following semantically unrelated
regular stems. The remaining three versions showed a
significant effect of priming (F2 (1,33) = 9.62, p = .004)
and no interaction with version (F2 (2,33) = 2.39, p =
.107) with semantically related regular stems (RT = 510
msec) facilitating responses by 21 msec relative to
unrelated regular stems (RT = 531 msec). All other
conditions produced significant priming across all four
versions.

Discussion
This experiment confirmed the main effect of priming,
with semantically related primes facilitating responses
to targets as before. Priming did not interact with tense
or verb regularity. The amount of priming shown by
regular stems is smaller than the other conditions when
all four versions are analyzed. The main effect of
priming, however, indicates that regular stem priming is
not significantly different to other conditions when
version-related variance is partialled out.
Past tense primes facilitated semantically related
targets despite cross-modal presentation and reduced
processing time. As the irregular past tense fails to act
as a morphological prime under these conditions, one
might have expected to see an interaction between
prime, tense and verb regularity, such that the irregular
past tense failed to prime despite priming in all other
conditions. This was not found. Again there seem to be
no consequences for semantic activation, as indexed by
semantic priming, of words being inflected or having
different degrees of phonological similarity to their
stems.
In addition, the lack of a tense effect, when
processing time is reduced, suggests that the effect
found in the earlier experiment did not reflect the
impact of inflected words on initial semantic activation
but a post-lexical effect arising in the interval between
hearing primes and responding to targets. This might be
a consequence of the irrelevance of the past tense
inflection to the subsequent stem target.

Thus in this second experiment, once processing time
was reduced, there was no effect of words having past
tense inflections on semantic activation. This suggests
that all forms of a verb access its semantic
representations equally rapidly.

General discussion.
Research on the English past tense has concentrated on
issues relating to phonological or orthographic form. A
central question has been whether the predictable
similarity in form between verb stems and the regular
past tense engages specialized rule-based processes to
compute the past tense rather than storing it in full.
However, theoretical models answering this question
have made implicit, largely untested assumptions about
the activation of verb semantics from verbs in the past
tense.
Most models assume that verbs in the past tense
access the same semantic representations as their verb
stems and are processed as modified forms of their verb
stems. We assume that the form, not the semantics, of
the verb is modified as a result of syntactic constraints.
These assumptions lead us to expect some effect of this
modification of form on the activation of verb
semantics. Single route accounts suggest that inflected
words will have patterns of phonological activation that
are highly similar, but not identical, to those of their
stems. Dual route accounts suggest that inflected words
must map onto underlying morphemic representations,
accessed via the verb stem. Therefore, we might expect
not to see semantic priming from inflected forms, or to
see reduced priming reflecting the time taken to map
onto semantics via the verb stem. However, both the
experiments reported here show that this is not the case.
Activation of verb semantics did not show any effects
of verb inflection. The only consequence of verbs being
inflected, i.e. the increase in response latencies to
auditory targets following past tense primes, did not
interact with semantic priming and appeared to be a
post-lexical integration effect, as it was not present
when processing time was reduced in the second
experiment.
It is also commonly assumed that the amount and
predictability of phonological similarity between stems
and past tense, which is greater in the regular past tense,
will have processing consequences, and might even
engage different types of processing. The results
reported here, however, suggest that these factors have
no effect on the activation of verb semantics in
comprehension.
Thus both stem and past tense, regular and irregular
verb primes all accessed verb semantics equally in the
same time frame. Activation of verb semantics seems
insensitive to morphological complexity and
inflectional regularity. The surprising aspect of this is

that verb stems are assumed to be the most basic form
of verbs and processing of the regular and irregular past
tense has been found to dissociate in development
(Berko, 1958) and to doubly dissociate following
neurological damage (Marslen-Wilson and Tyler, 1997;
Tyler, deMornay-Davis, Anokinah, Longworth,
Randall, & Marslen-Wilson, in press; Ullman, Corkin,
Coppola, Hicock, Growdon, Koroshetz, and Pinker,
1997).
In particular these results might seem surprising
given the dissociations between processing the regular
and irregular past tense even in the normal adult. Both
the regular and irregular past tense act as morphological
primes when presented intramodally but with crossmodal presentation the irregular past tense no longer
primes stem targets (Marslen-Wilson, Hare and Older,
1993). However, the current results show that the
irregular past tense does facilitate responses to
semantically related verbs, both cross-modally and
intra-modally. This is consistent with the complete
equivalence of regular and irregular forms in terms of
their linguistic and communicative function.
In summary, these experiments suggest that past
tense forms activate the same semantic representations
as their stems, priming related words to the same extent.
There is no evidence that morphophonological
processing delays semantic activation. There was no
reduction in semantic priming to suggest a processing
cost for inflected verbs and no regularity differences to
suggest that degree of phonological modification affects
the time course of access to semantics. This suggests a
lexical architecture permitting either direct mapping of
all verb forms onto semantics, or the mapping of all
verb forms, regular and irregular, stem and past tense,
onto an abstract root morpheme providing access to
semantics. If, on either view, separate processing routes
are indeed involved in the perceptual analysis of regular
and irregular forms, then they deliver their output to
higher-order interpretive systems with essentially the
same time-course. Theoretical models explaining the
processing of the regular and irregular past tense
therefore need to bear in mind that access to verb
semantics seems to be insensitive to both morphological
complexity and inflectional regularity.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by an MRC post-graduate
research studentship (number G78/6297), and an MRC
programme grant to LKT.

References
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbroek, R. and Gulikers, L. (1995)
The CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM).
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Berko, J. (1958) The child’s learning of English
morphology. Word, 140, 150-177.
Butterworth B. (1983) Lexical Representation. In B.
Butterworth (ed.) Language Production volume 2:
Development, writing and other language processes.
Academic Press.
Coltheart, M. (1981) MRC Psycholinguistic Database.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A,
497-505.
Forster, K.I., and Forster, J.C. (1990) The DMASTR
display system for mental chronometry. Tucson,
Arizona: University of Arizona.
Joanisse, M.F., and Seidenberg, M.S. (1999)
Impairments in Verb Morphology Following Brain
Injury: A Connectionist Model. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA. 96,7592-7597.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D., Hare, M. and Older, L. (1993).
Inflectional morphology and phonological regularity
in the English mental lexicon. In Proceedings of the
15th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. London.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D., Tyler, L.K., Waksler, R. and
Older, L. (1994) Morphology and meaning in the
English mental lexicon. Psych. Rev. 101 (1), 3-33.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D., and Tyler, L.K. (1997)
Dissociating types of mental computation. Nature,
387,592-594.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D., and Tyler, L.K. (1998) Rules,
representations and the English past tense. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 2 (11),428-435.
Pinker, S. (1991) Rules of Language. Science, 253, 530535.
Plaut, D.C., and Gonnerman, L.M. (2000) Are nonsemantic morphological effects incompatible with a
distributed connectionist approach to lexical
processing? Lang. Cognitive Proc. 15 (4-5), 445-485.
Plunkett, K., and Marchmann, V. (1993) From rote
learning to system building: acquiring verb
morphology in children and connectionist nets.
Cognition, 48, 21-69.
Rumelhart, D., and McClelland, J. (1986) On learning
the past tense of English verbs. In McClelland, J.L.,
Rumelhart, D.E., and the PDP Research Group,
(Eds.) Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations
in the Microstructure of Cognition, Vol.2.
Psychological and Biological Models), MIT Press.
Tyler, L.K., deMornay-Davies, P., Anokhina, R.A.,
Longworth, C.E., Randall, B., & Marslen-Wilson, W.
D. (in press) Dissociations in processing past tense
morphology: Neuropathology and behavioral studies.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience.
Ullman, M.T., Corkin S., Coppola M., Hicock, G.,
Growdon, J.H., Koroshetz, W.J., and Pinker, S.
(1997) A neural dissociation within language:
evidence that the mental dictionary is part of
declarative memory, and that grammatical rules are
processed by the procedural system. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 266-276.

