UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adaptive Selection of Problem Solving Strategies

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7mx0j1n1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Fum, Danilo
Del Missier, Fabio

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A daptive Selection ofProblem Solving Strategies
D anilo Fum * (fum @ univ.trieste.it)
D epartm entofPsychology,via S.A nastasio 12
Trieste,I-34134 Italy

Fabio D elM issier (delm isfa@ univ.trieste.it)
D epartm entofPsychology,via S.A nastasio 12
Trieste,I-34134 Italy

A bstract
The issue of strategy selection in solving the Tow er of
H anoi(TO H )problem is investigated by focusing on the
critical issues of w hether the selection process is
contingentand adaptive.The results of an experim entin
w hich participants solved a series of different four-disk
TO H problem s under instructions requiring accuracy
m axim ization vs. effort m inim ization are presented. A
com puter sim ulation, com paring a num ber of know n
strategies to the experim entaldata,has been carried out
to try to identify the strategies used by the participants.
The findings support the hypothesis of adaptive and
contingentstrategy selection in the TO H dom ain.

Introduction
M uch w ork in the problem solving arena has dealtw ith
the Tow er of H anoi (TO H )— considered as a typical
w ell-structured
problem — producing
im portant
theoretical and em pirical results. Researchers have
discovered interesting phenom ena and tried to provide
explanations for them .Several solution strategies have
been described (Sim on,1975),and various m odels have
been proposed to sim ulate hum an perform ance on this
task (K arat, 1982; Ruiz & N ew ell, 1989; A nderson,
K ushm erick & Lebiere, 1993; A nderson & Lebiere,
1998;A ltm ann & Trafton,2000).D etailed accounts of
learning how to solve the TO H on a trial-by-trialbasis
(A nzai& Sim on,1979)have been putforw ard together
w ith hypotheses concerning the strategies and the
heuristics people seem to learn in successive attem pts to
solve the problem (V anLehn,1991).
D espite these achievem ents, m any issues are still
unresolved and m any topics are currently investigated.
Tw o recentexam ples involve the role of goalencoding
and retrieving in m em ory (A ltm ann & Trafton,2000),
and the possible use of active planning to avoid
previously visited states (D avies,2000).
G iven thatdifferentm odels and strategies have been
proposed in different experim ental settings, it seem s
im portant to try to identify the factors affecting the
selection ofsolution strategies in this dom ain.
*

The order of authorship is arbitrary; each author
contributed equally to allphases ofthis project.

W e propose the hypothesis that strategy selection in
the TO H is a contingentprocesses,i.e.,itis sensitive to
task and contextual factors. Follow ing a w idely
accepted idea about hum an problem solving (Sim on,
1975; A nderson, 1990; Christensen-Szalanski, 1998)
and decision-m aking (Payne, Bettm an & Johnson,
1993),it is further hypothesized that strategy selection
is adaptive. G iven a specific task and context, it is
functional to the achievem ent of a good trade-off
betw een accuracy and cognitive effort (ChristensenSzalanski,1998;Fum & D elM issier,2000).
These tw o strategy-related questions (i.e., is the
process ofstrategy selection contingent? is itadaptive?)
are the m ain topics ofthis w ork.In the paperw e briefly
discuss som e issues concerning research on the TO H
strategies.Then w e presentthe results ofan experim ent
in w hich participants solved a series of different fourdisk TO H problem s under instructions requiring
accuracy m axim ization vs. effort m inim ization. A
com puter sim ulation, com paring several solution
strategies to the experim entaldata,has been carried out
to try to identify the strategies used by participants in
the tw o instruction groups.

Issues on Strategy R esearch
Research on strategies in TO H , and related problem
solving tasks, m ust deal w ith several theoretical and
em piricalissues.
A first issue concerns identificability (A nderson,
1990):patterns ofbehavioraldata are used as a trace to
induce the existence of a given strategy, but in m any
cases the data do not allow discrim inating am ong
distinct m odels of strategic behavior. In our specific
dom ain, how ever, very few attem pts (an exception
being represented by A ltm ann & Trafton, 2000) of
directly com paring different m odels on the sam e data
sethave been done.
O ther theoretical problem s deal w ith the underspecification and the low generalizability ofsom e ofthe
proposed strategies. W ith underspecification w e m ean

the factthatthe description ofa strategy does notallow
a unique identification ofthe m ove to be done forevery
problem state. W ith low generalizability w e m ean the
factthatthe proposed strategy results ad hoc and cannot
be extended to dealw ith som e classes ofTO H problem s
people are able to solve.
A further theoretical lim itation is constituted by the
fact that som e strategies are w illfully optim al
(A nderson & Lebiere, 1998), w hile people seldom
achieve such a brilliantperform ance (G oel& G rafm an,
1995;M iyake etal.,2000;K arat,1982).
O n the em pirical side, there is the problem of the
intrusiveness of the m ethods utilized to identify the
existence of a given strategy. V erbal protocols, for
instance,(A nzai& Sim on,1979;V an Lehn,1991)have
proved to be a useful exploratory tool, but there is
evidence (Stinessen, 1985; A hlum -H eath & D i V esta,
1986) that participants verbalizing during the task
perform differently from participants that do not
verbalize. The very use of verbal protocols could
prom ptthe adoption ofdifferentsolution strategies.
A related issue deals w ith the suggestiveness of the
experim ental instructions. For instance, A nderson,
K ushm erick & Lebiere (1993) gave hints that
deliberately encouraged the adoption of a particular
strategy. The generalizability of their m odel is,
therefore,directly related to the w ay the sam e strategy
is spontaneously adopted by the participants w hen no
hints are given.
A nother concern is constituted by the fact that
strategy selection in the TO H has often been studied by
having people perform m any trials over the sam e
problem . In this w ay it cannot be excluded that the
im provem ent in the participants perform ance could be
attribute to rote m em orization instead of genuine
learning. To control for this factor, A nderson,
K ushm erick & Lebiere (1993) presented a w ider range
of problem s to their participants preventing them from
evolving special-case strategies.
In our experim entw e investigated a factor thatcould
possibly affect the adoption of different solution
strategies, and w e ran a sim ulation study to try to
identify them . To do this, w e had to m ake som e
underspecified strategies com putationally w orkable by
postulating a few additional assum ptions. W e
concentrated ourattention on generalstrategies— i.e.on
strategies capable of solving problem s put not only in
their standard (i.e., tow er-to-tow er) form — and on
strategies that do not prescribe an optim al solution.
Furtherm ore, w e refrained to force participants to
justify and com m ent on their m oves, and carefully
avoided suggesting any specific solution procedure.
Finally,w e utilized a setofdifferentproblem types.

The Experim ent
The m ain goal of the experim ent w as to test the
hypotheses of contingent and adaptive strategy
selection.W e m anipulated the experim entalinstructions
to m odify the im portance participants gave to the
distinct goals of accuracy m axim ization vs. effort
m inim ization.
A ccording to the contingentand adaptive hypothesis,
w e expected to find a rationaluse ofdifferentstrategies
in differentexperim entalgroups.The strategies used by
participants in the accuracy group should increase the
accuracy of the solutions by paying a higher tem poral
cost.The strategies used in the effortgroup should yield
effortsavings butless accurate solutions.

M ethod
Participants The participants w ere 34 undergraduates
students, aged betw een 18 and 24. N one of them w as
suffering from any perceptual, cognitive or m otor
deficiency. The sam ple w as balanced for gender. A ll
the participants had a basic fam iliarity w ith com puters
and w ere able to use the m ouse.
Procedure Participants read an instruction docum ent
that explained the basic rules of the TO H ,show ed the
interface used by the com puter program ,and described
how to use it.The instructions required the participants
to solve the problem “in the few estpossible num ber of
m oves” or“in the shortestpossible tim e”,depending on
the group (accuracy vs. effort, respectively) to w hich
they w ere random ly assigned. The experim enter
(alw ays one ofthe authors)asked the participants about
their know ledge of the task and w as w illing to answ er
possible questions about the procedure. A fter going
through a short training session,participants started to
solve the series oftestproblem s.
M aterials A num ber of different three- and four-disk
TO H problem s w ere random ly generated for the
experim ent. The problem s com prised four possible
configurations ofdisks obtained by com bining a flatvs.
tow er disposition in the startstate w ith a flatvs.tow er
disposition in the goalstate.
Tw o random ly generated three-disk problem s, w ith
an optim alsolution path ofseven m oves and w ith a flatto-flat configuration, w ere used for training and
presented to the participants in casualorder.
The test set com prised eight random ly generated
four-disk problem s, tw o for each possible
configuration. Each problem had an optim al solution
path of 15 m oves. The test set w as delivered using
block random ization.
A pparatus A Pow erM acintosh 9500 com puter w as
used for the experim ent. A program im plem enting the

show ed significant differences betw een the follow ing
pairs oftrials:1-5 (p<.05),1-6 (p<.01),1-8 (p<.05),2-5
(p<.01),2-6 (p<.001) and 2-8 (p<.01).The Bonferroni
procedure confirm ed the results.
20
18

A CCU RA CY
EFFO RT

16
14
ERRO RS

TO H task w as w ritten using M CL 4.3 and CLIM 2.The
program recorded each participantm ove (including the
m oves violating the TO H rules) w ith the associated
tim e.
The interface w as com posed by tw o identical
w indow s, vertically stacked and centered. The upper
w indow show ed the initial state of the problem and
could be acted upon by the participants. The low er
w indow ,w hich show ed the goalstate,presented a fixed
display. The participants had to perform a drag-anddrop operation w ith the m ouse to m ove disks from peg
to peg in the upper w indow .In case of an illegalm ove,
an auditory w arning w as delivered, and the dragged
disk w as forced back to its source peg.

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

R esults
A llthe data analyses w ere perform ed on 31 cases1 (15
in the accuracy, 16 in the effort group) either on
transform ed and untransform ed variables2. G iven the
absence of any difference, w e w ill present only the
results obtained using the untransform ed variables.
Errors A 2x8 analysis of variance (A N O V A ) on the
num beroferrors (Figure 1)show ed the significantm ain
effects of instruction type (F(1,29)=6.57,M SE=173.53,
p<.05),and trial(F(7,203)=4.95,M SE=69.33,p<.001).
The interaction w as notsignificant.The participants in
the accuracy group m ade few er errors thatthose in the
effortgroup (M =6.73 foraccuracy;M =11.02 foreffort).
In both groups the num beroferrors decreased from the
first block of four trials to the second block (M =11.38
for the firstblock,M =6.38 for the second one).A post
hoc analysis carried out w ith the Tukey H SD test
1

Tw o cases w ere excluded because the participants needed
m ore than the m axim um allow ed tim e (45 m in) to com plete
the first tw o problem s in the test session. O ne case w as
excluded because the participant said,only at the end of the
session,thatshe had previously w ritten a program capable of
solving this kind oftask.
2
A logarithm ic transform ation w as perform ed on all the
variables m easuring tim e,w hile a square-root transform ation
w as applied to all the variables recording the num ber of
m oves.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

TRIA L

Figure 1:N um beroferrors foreach trialin the
accuracy and effortconditions.
Illegal M oves Participants attem pted to execute very
few illegal m oves. The num ber of such m oves w as
how ever low er in the accuracy group than in the effort
group (M =0.77 for accuracy, M =1.87 for effort),and
decreased from the first to the second block of trials
(M =2.00 for the first; M =0.65 for the second block).
Both the effects, but not the interaction, w ere
statistically significant (F(1,29)=6.71, M SE=11.17,
p<.05 and F(7,203)=6.37, M SE=3.76, p<.001,
respectively).
180
160

A CCU RA CY
EFFO RT

140
TIM E (in s)

Experim entalD esign Tw o independentvariables— one
betw een-subjects (instruction type) and one w ithinsubjects (trial num ber)— w ere m anipulated in a 2x8
m ixed design.The num ber of trials in the test session
(eight) w as chosen to obtain an acceptable balance
betw een the possibility ofobtaining learning effects and
that of inducing fatigue effects. The basic dependent
variables w ere the num ber of errors (i.e.legalm oves in
addition to m inim um path length), the num ber of
attem pted illegal m oves, the total tim e to solve the
problem , the m ean m ove latency (excluding the first
m ove),and the tim e necessary to execute the firstm ove.

120
100
80
60
40
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

TRIA L

Figure 2: Solution tim es for each trial in the
accuracy and effortconditions.
Solution Tim es A 2x8 A N O V A on the solution tim es
(Figure 2) revealed the significant m ain effects of the
instruction type (F(1,29)=7.83, M SE=7947.67, p<.01)
and ofthe trial(F(7,203)=8.68,M SE=2259.27,p<.001),
w hile their interaction w as not significant. The
participants needed m ore tim e to solve the problem s in
the accuracy than in the effort group (M =100 s for
accuracy, M =69 s for effort). The tim e necessary to
com plete the task decreased from the firstto the second
block of trials (M =103 s for the first, M =66 s for the

second).The Tukey test and the Bonferroni procedure
highlighted significantdifferences betw een the firsttrial
and the lastsix and betw een the second trialand the last
four(w ith the exception ofthe pair2-7).
M ove Latencies A 2x8 A N O V A on m ove latency
tim es show ed a significant interaction (F(7,203)=3.10,
M SE = 946783,p<.01)betw een instructions and trial.
The m ain effects w ere also significant:
F(1,29)=14.85,M SE=9131212,p<.001 for instructions,
F(7,203)=8.00, M SE=946783, p<.001 for the trial. A
2x7 A N O V A w ith the exclusion of the first trial
confirm ed the m ain effects but not the interaction
(F(6,174)=1.29, M SE=745583, p=.26). This result
suggests that the interaction could be attributed to the
extrem ely high latencies of the participants in the
accuracy group on the firsttrial.This w as confirm ed by
the post hoc tests on the first A N O V A . The m ove
latency w as higher in the accuracy group than in the
effort group (M =3.82 s for accuracy, M =2.34 s for
effort), and decreased from the first to the second
(M =3.46 s first block; M =2.71 s second block). The
Tukey post hoc analysis on the second A N O V A
show ed significant differences betw een the pairs 2-5
(p<.05), 2-6 (p<.05) and 2-8 (p<.05). The Bonferroni
procedure confirm ed only the difference betw een the
trials 2 and 8 (p<.05).
First M ove Latency A 2x8 A N O V A on the firstm ove
latency show ed only the significant m ain effect of the
instruction type (F(1,29)= 13.18,M SE=583.18,p<.01)
w ith latency higher for participants in the accuracy
group (M =14.78 s foraccuracy,M =3.64 s foreffort).
C luster A nalysis of M ove Latencies W e perform ed
also a k-m eans clusteranalysis to determ ine w hetherthe
m eans of the m ove latencies and the m ean percentages
of m oves w ithin given latency boundaries w ere
different betw een the tw o instruction groups. The
cluster analysis w as perform ed on all the m oves that
required less than 4 s to be executed3.For each subject
a solution w ith 2 clusters (m oves having an alm ost
exclusive m otor com ponent vs. m oves requiring m ore
relevantcognitive processes)w as looked for.
A 2x2 (M ove x Instruction) A N O V A on the cluster
m eans show ed a significant interaction (F(1,29)=9.46,
M SE=80919,p<.01) and significantm ain effects of the
m ove kind (F(1,29)=2499.81,M SE=10229,p<.001)and
of the instruction type (F(1,29)=10.31, M SE=10229,
p<.01).The interaction is explained by the factthatthe
3
G iven an independentestim ate of 2.15 s for the tim e needed
to m ove a disk using a TO H program w ith a directm anipulation user interface (A nderson,& Lebiere,1998),w e
assum e thatm oves requiring 4 s or m ore are also affected by
som e kind ofhigher-ordercognitive operation.

difference of 140 m s betw een participants in the tw o
instruction groups forthe “cognitive” m oves (M =3.08 s
for accuracy and M =2.94 for effort) w as significantly
sm aller than the difference of 305 m s found betw een
the groups forthe sim plest“execution” m oves (M =1.87
for accuracy vs. M =1.57 for effort). These results
confirm the indications obtained from the previous
m ove latency analysis, but suggest also a potential
execution speed-up for the participants in the effort
group.
A further analysis w as focused on the m ean
percentages ofcases belonging to the tw o m ove clusters
and to the m oves requiring 4 s orm ore (the third cluster
of“long” m oves)in both instruction groups.The results
show ed significant differences betw een the accuracy
and effort groups for the execution m oves (M annW hitney U test, U =57,z=2.49,p<.05) and long ones
(U =32, z=3.47851, p<.001). In particular, the m ean
percentage of cases belonging to execution m oves w as
greater in the effortgroup (M =61.77,SD =8.35) than in
the accuracy group (M =50.94,SD =12.11).The reverse
w as true for the long m oves (accuracy: M =24.82,
SD =10.26;effort:M =12.08,SD =5.98).This could m ean
that participants in the effort group m ade a higher
percentage of execution m oves and a low er percentage
ofcognitive m oves in com parison w ith the m oves m ade
by the participants in the accuracy group.

D iscussion
There is clear evidence that the experim ental
m anipulation has been very effective in changing the
w ay the TO H problem s are solved. A s expected,
participants are able to achieve theirrespective goals of
m inim izing effort and m axim izing accuracy, and they
are forced by the instructions to trade a low er num ber
ofm oves w ith a highersolution tim e.
There is also clear evidence of the existence of a
learning effect. Participants in both groups learn to
perform better in successive trials,m aking few er errors
and using less tim e. The learning profiles for the tw o
groups rem ain how everdistinctacross allthe trials.The
difference concerns not only the errors m ade and the
tim es needed for solution, but extends to all the
dependent variables suggesting that participants in the
tw o groups w ere selecting and using different solution
strategies.

The Sim ulation
The goal of the sim ulation w as to try to identify the
strategies used in each trial by participants in the tw o
instruction groups by com paring several know n TO H
solution strategies on theircapacity to fitthe data.

The Im plem ented Strategies
For the sim ulation w e developed a series of A CT-R
(A nderson & Lebiere,1998) m odels im plem enting the
follow ing solution strategies:
SS1 The selective search strategy described by A nzai&
Sim on (1979), and subsequently studied by V an Lehn
(1991).A teach step only disks thatare free to m ove in
the current state are considered. The choice of w hich
disk to m ove and w here is guided by tw o heuristics:
“(1) do notm ove the sam e disk on consecutive m oves,
and (2)do notm ove the sm allestdisk back to the peg it
w as on just before it w as m oved to its current peg”
(V an Lehn,1991,p.6).Because the strategy is underspecified,an additionalassum ption has been m ade:“(3)
w henever possible, choose the m ove w hich has the
effect to put the largest out of place disk (the LO O P
disk) into the target peg”, w hich gives the strategy a
m ore goal-oriented attitude. Because the participants
did notalw ays follow the directives of the don’t-m ovetwice and don’t-undo-m ove heuristics, the m odel
em ploys them probabilistically according to tw o
em pirically-derived param eters (93% of the cases in
w hich they could be applied w hen m odeling the
participants in the accuracy condition,and 90% of the
tim es for the effortcondition).Finally,w henever there
is still uncertainty about w hich m ove to m ake, the
m odelchooses random ly.
SS2 The selective search strategy previously described
augm ented w ith the new one-follows-two heuristics that
states thatifyou have justm oved the disk ofdim ension
tw o,you should now putthe sm allestdisk on top ofit.
SP The (sim ple)perceptualstrategy described in Sim on
(1975) and rephrased as follow s:“(1) if alln disks are
placed on the targetpeg,stop;else (2)find the nextdisk
(i)to be placed on the targetpeg (3)ifthere are sm aller
disks on top ofdisk i,clearthem (4)cleardisks sm aller
than ioffthe targetpeg (5)m ove disk ito the targetpeg
(6) go to 1.” (G oel& G rafm an,1995,p.633).In order
to avoid being stuck into an infinite loop, because
clearing the source peg to m ove disk i w ill block the
target peg and vice versa, a stack of subgoals is
m aintained w hich allow s the strategy to be rescued.
K R The strategy described in K arat (1982) w hich
com bines elem ents of dom ain-specific know ledge into
a general problem -solving fram ew ork. The strategy
adopts a lim ited look-ahead: if the m ovem ent of the
LO O P disk from its source to the targetpeg is blocked
by only the sm allesttw o disks,the task of m oving the
sm alldisks on the third peg is considered as trivial,and
the m oves are im m ediately executed.
A T In addition to im plem enting the above m entioned
strategies, w e utilized also the activation-based m odel
of m em ory for goals (A ltm an & Trafton, 2000)4. The
4

W e thank Erik A ltm ann for m aking the m odelavailable and
allow ing us to use itin the sim ulation study

m odel adopts the strategy of A nderson & Lebiere
(1998),butstores goals as ordinary declarative m em ory
elem ents instead of caching them in the architectural
goal stack, and uses a strengthening process for
encoding and prim ing from cues forretrieval.
A s previously m entioned,allthe strategies are suboptim al, i.e. they do not generally reach the solution
w ith the m inim um num ber of m oves, a perform ance
thatalso our participants w ere seldom (i.e.,12% of the
tim es in the accuracy, and 5% in the effort condition)
able to m ake.

Procedure and R esults
W e executed a sim ulation of all the strategies on the
TO H problem s used in the experim ent.
W e decided to com pare the strategies only on their
capacity to predict the num ber of errors m ade by the
participants. A dditional assum ptions and param eter
tuning w ould be required to m odel also the tim es.
Therefore,w e preferred to stick to a very conservative
sim ulation policy.
The trial-by-trial results of the sim ulation are
presented in Table 1. The table show s the strategies
that,in each trial,predicted a num ber of errors falling
into the 99% confidence intervals (CI) com puted from
the experim entaldata.
Table 1:Trial-by-trialsim ulation results.
G roup

A ccuracy
Effort

1

2

KR
SP
AT
S2
KR
SP

KR
SP

KR
SP

3
SP
AT
KR
SP

Trial
4
5

6

KR
SP

SP

SP
AT

KR

KR

KR

7

8

KR
SP

KR
SP
AT
KR
SP

The globalfitofthe three beststrategies (SP,K R and
A T)— m easured using the m ean absolute difference
(M A D ), the root m ean square error (RM SE) and the
percentage oftrials in w hich the prediction ofthe m odel
is w ithin the 99% CI(P99CI)— is presented in Table 2.
Table 2:Sim ulation results forthe beststrategies.
Strategy
KR
SP
AT
KR
SP
AT

G roup
accuracy
accuracy
accuracy
effort
effort
effort

M AD
3.098
2.899
5.093
2.264
5.992
9.382

RM SE
3.615
3.239
5.763
3.074
7.111
10.112

P99CI
62.5%
100%
50%
87.5%
50%
0%

The best fitting strategies are SP in the accuracy
condition and K R in the effort condition. The A T

strategy yields good results on half of the trials in the
accuracy condition. The selective search strategies are
notable to achieve a good fit:only the use ofSS2 in the
firsttrialofthe effortcondition cannotbe excluded.

D iscussion
The basic conclusion that can be draw n from the
sim ulation is that the results are m ainly in com pliance
w ith the contingentand adaptive selection hypotheses.
The perceptualstrategy is actually m ore accurate but
probably m ore effortful than the K arat’s strategy (that
does not require expensive recursive operations). The
A ltm ann & Trafton’s m odel is m ore accurate than the
other tw o strategies,butprobably m ore expensive than
the K arat’s m odel.
Further sim ulations, using m odel-tracing and tim e
data,should provide additionalsupporting evidence.

C onclusions
A prelim inary support has been gained for the
contingent and adaptive nature of strategy selection in
the TO H .O n this basis,w e suggestthatitis im portant
to pay attention to the problem solving factors affecting
the accuracy vs.effort trade-off,due to their influence
on the strategy selection.
M any otherissues m ustbe cleared to obtain a deeper
understanding of the selection processes in the TO H
and in sim ilarw ell-structured problem s.In this context,
w e regard as especially im portantthe transition tow ards
m ore detailed,cognitively grounded strategies to further
constrain and specify the existing m odels,and to allow
m ore detailed com parisons.
This process could yield both the redesign of old
strategies and the definition of new ones. A ltm ann &
Trafton (2000) offered a first im portant contribution
w ith their m em ory–based m odel of the A nderson &
Lebiere (1998) strategy.W e think thata closer analysis
and experim ental investigation of the attentional and
perceptual processes in the TO H could produce
significative advances in our understanding of the
cognitive processes underlying the solution strategies.

R eferences
A hlum -H eath, M . E. & D i V esta, F. J. (1986). The
effect of conscious controlled verbalization of a
cognitive strategy on transfer in problem solving.
M em ory & Cognition,14,281-285.
A ltm ann,E.M .& Trafton,J.G .(2000).A n activationbased m odel of m em ory for goals. M anuscript
subm itted forpublication.
A nderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of
thought.H illsdale,N J:Erlbaum .
A nderson,J.R.,K ushm erick,N .& Lebiere,C.(1993).
The tow er of H anoi and goal structures. In J. R.
A nderson (Ed.), Rules of the m ind. H illsdale, N J:
Erlbaum .

A nderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atom ic
com ponents ofthought.H illsdale,N J:Erlbaum .
A nzai, Y . & Sim on, H . A . (1979). The theory of
learning by doing. Psychological Review, 86, 124140.
Christensen-Szalanski, J. J. J. (1998). Problem -solving
strategies:a selection m echanism ,som e im plications,
and som e data.In L.R.Beach (Ed.),Im age Theory.
H illsdale,N J:Erlbaum .
D avies, S. P. (2000). M em ory and planning processes
in solutions to w ell-structured problem s. The
Q uarterly JournalofExperim entalPsychology,53A,
896-927.
Fum , D . & D el M issier, F. (2000). A daptive spatial
planning.Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACT-R
W orkshop.Pittsburgh:Carnegie M ellon U niversity.
G oel, V . & G rafm an, J. (1995). A re the frontal lobes
im plicated in “planning” functions? Interpreting data
from the tow er of hanoi.Neuropsychologia,33,623642.
K arat, J. (1982). A m odel of problem solving w ith
incom plete constraint know ledge. Cognitive
Psychology,14,538-559.
M iyake, A ., Friedm an, N . P., Em erson, M . J., W itzki,
A . H ., H ow erter, A . & W ager, T. D . (2000). The
unity and diversity of executive functions and their
contribution to com plex “frontallobe” tasks:a latent
variable analyisis.Cognitive Psychology,41,49-100.
Payne,J.W .,Bettm an J.R.,& Johnson,E.J.(1993).The
adaptive decision m aker. N ew Y ork: Cam bridge
U niversity Press.
Ruiz,D .& N ew ell,A .(1989).Tow er-noticing triggers
strategy-change in the Tow erofH anoi:a Soarm odel.
Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 522-529).
H illsdale,N J:Erlbaum .
Sim on, H . A . (1975). The functional equivalence of
problem solving skills.Cognitive Psychology,7,268288.
Stinessen,L.(1985).The influence of verbalization on
problem
solving. Scandinavian Journal of
Psychology,26,342-347.
V anLehn, K . (1991). Rule acquisition events in the
discovery of problem solving strategies. Cognitive
Science,15,1-47.

