UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Analogue of The Phillips Effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2bp0h522

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Suret, Mark
McLaren, IPL

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Analogue of The Phillips Effect
Mark Suret (m.suret@psychol.cam.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology; Downing Street
Cambridge, CB2 3EB. UK
I.P.L. McLaren (iplm2@cus.cam.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology; Downing Street
Cambridge, CB2 3EB. UK

Abstract
Previous experimental work has demonstrated that human
participants can easily detect a small change in a visual
stimulus if no mask intervenes between the original stimulus
and the changed version and the inter-stimulus interval is
small (Phillips, 1974). Rensink, O’Regan & Clark (1997)
have shown that if a mask is used then detecting the change is
extremely difficult, no matter how small the ISI is made. This
work attempts to establish whether familiarity with a stimulus
has any effect on a participants ability to detect a small
change in it using Rensink’s masking procedure with Phillips’
stimuli (checkerboards). Participants were required to make
judgements as to whether two stimuli, which alternated with
one another in presentation, were the same or different. Some
participants attempted the task using just one checkerboard
pattern which became increasingly familiar across sessions,
others were given new, randomly generated checkerboards
for each trial. In both conditions, any change (which would
occur on 50% of trials) would only affect one square of the
pattern.
The results show a clear advantage for the
participants dealing with familiar stimuli in detecting any
change, and go some way towards explaining why this is so.

Introduction
Phillips (1974) demonstrated how easy it was for
participants to detect a change between two stimuli if they
were presented one after the other without a gap in a single
alternation. This is the Phillips Effect. He also investigated
the consequences of inserting a grey mask and a blank
screen between the two stimuli. The inclusion of an interstimulus interval adversely affected participants'
performance, and the presence of a mask made performance
even worse. Rensink et al. (1997) demonstrated that the
brief inclusion of a grey mask between repeated
presentations of two slightly different stimuli made any
change extremely difficult to detect. This is the Rensink
Effect. Their experiment used electronically altered images
which allowed manipulation of the colour, position and
presence of an object. Without the mask, spotting the
difference becomes trivial, if the stimuli are positioned in
the same place and then alternated. Current explanations of
this phenomenon cite retinal transients (Klein, Kingstone &
Pontefract, 1992) as the mechanism for detecting changes in
this latter case, which would be unaffected by familiarity.

Some pilot work using a single participant indicated that
the effect of familiarity with the stimuli was likely to be
very significant. Hence introducing the notion of familiarity
removes some of the difficulties intrinsic to the Rensink
Effect and makes the task more similar in difficulty to the
Phillips Effect. One drawback of this pilot experiment was
that it contained familiar and random trials in each session
so after a while the participant became able to tell which
were the familiar trials, and this may have differentially
affected the responses to each trial.
Nevertheless, the results of the pilot experiment (Figure
1) allowed the prediction that the Familiar condition would
lead to better detection of changes than the Random
condition. It was also predicted that there would be an
improvement in performance as the amount of time spent on
the task increased.
The main aim of this work was to take the Rensink Effect,
and attempt to ameliorate it, by allowing participants to
practice on the same stimulus all the time. This would
require the use of a different type of stimulus, as the
repeated use of a real life scene would be impossible to
control properly, so checkerboards were used as the training
stimuli. In this way, the participants were presented with
essentially the same stimulus on every trial, but with the
possibility of a change in one of the elements within the
100

90

Familiar
Random

80

70

60

50
Session 1

Session 2

Session 3

Session 4

Figure 1: The Basic Familiarity Effect

Session 5

The experiment was run in a quiet room on an Apple
Macintosh LCIII computer using a colour monitor.
Participants responded to the stimuli by pressing one of two
keys, either [x] or [.] on a QWERTY keyboard. Between
blocks, participants were required to fill in a sheet to record
their errors and reaction times before pressing the space bar
to continue to the next block. The responses for each block
were logged in separate data files.
Figure 2: An example pair of chequerboard stimuli.
checkerboard. An example pair is shown in Figure 2) with
the difference being rather difficult to spot.
Once a reliable difference had been found between the
Familiar and Random groups, subsequent testing
concentrated on the mechanism being used by participants
to detect the changes.

Experiment
The experiment was conducted with two groups, each with
different sets of stimuli. The Random group was a control
group, and received different, randomly generated
checkerboards for each trial during the experiment. In the
Familiar group, each participant was trained on a single
checkerboard unique to that participant. The primary aim of
the experiment was to determine whether familiarity with
the stimulus affected the participants’ performance.
Initially two participants were run in each condition
followed by a preliminary analysis. It was found that a
large difference between the groups had already been
established, and the final four participants were all run in the
familiar condition. This allowed manipulations in the
familiar condition, namely test blocks which departed from
the standard task. The test blocks used manipulations
intended to disrupt the performance of the participants in the
Familiar group in the hope that this would suggest a
possible mechanism for the way the changes were being
detected. Clearly an effect of familiarity or session needed
to be established first, as there is no directly relevant and
properly controlled research in this area.

Stimuli and Apparatus
All the stimuli were randomly generated, two centimetre
square checkerboards, with sixteen elements on a side
giving a total of 256. Each base pattern stimulus had equal
numbers of black and white squares, before any change was
introduced. An example pair for the change condition is
shown above (Figure 2), with the difference between the
two checkerboards in the top right centre of the stimulus.
Checkerboards were chosen as they are easy to manipulate
for this type of experiment. Many different individual
changes could be made whilst keeping the majority of the
stimulus the same. In addition, the participants were
unlikely to be familiar with the stimuli prior to the
experiment
Those participants assigned to the random condition were
given a newly generated checkerboard on each trial,
whereas those in the familiar condition were always
presented with the same pattern, albeit with a change on half
the trials.

Participants and Design
In total eight Cambridge undergraduates took part in the
study. Four were allocated to the initial phase to determine
the possible existence of a familiar/novel distinction. Two
participants were allocated to the novel condition and two to
the familiar condition. The remaining four participants were
all allocated to the familiar condition.
The experiment consisted of a training phase for all
participants and a test phase for those participants in the
familiar group. The first four sessions were used for
training for both groups, with the fifth session containing
some test blocks for participants in the Familiar condition.
All sessions for the random group were identical, as the tests
given to the familiar group would have made no difference
to a participant receiving a new checkerboard on every trial.
Each one hour session consisted of ten blocks of stimuli,
each containing 24 trials giving 240 trials in a session. Each
block contained twelve trials where a change was present
and twelve where there was no change between the two
checkerboards. These trials were presented in a random
order.
Participants were asked to try to detect a change between
the two checkerboards, and respond appropriately as to
whether or not they thought that a difference was present.
For each trial, two checkerboards were alternated with one
another, separated by a randomly generated mask. These
checkerboards were either the same, or differed by one
element within the pattern, i.e. one element that was black in
one checkerboard was white in the other. The trials were
such that each checkerboard was displayed for 500
milliseconds and the mask for 100 milliseconds. Over one
trial, each checkerboard could be presented ten times, giving
nineteen changes in a trial if the checkerboards were
different. After the final alternation, the trial ended and if
no decision had been made by the participant, then they
were timed out.
During the fifth session, the participants in the familiar
group were given test blocks in between familiar blocks, in
an attempt to determine how they might be detecting the
changes. These test blocks were ones containing random
trials, such as those given to the participants assigned to the
random group, and another type of block, labeled “C”. In
these blocks, there was always a fixed, random one square
difference from the original base pattern, on both
checkerboards, whether the trial was one of change or no
change. This fixed change was different on each trial within
the block. On change trials, there was also an additional
change made to one of the checkerboards.
This
manipulation ensured that some difference from the base
pattern was no longer a cue for change, although there was
still a single change present between the two checkerboards

on change trials. The idea behind this manipulation was to
contrast any changes in performance on “C” trials with that
obtained on Random trials. In the former case, the
perturbation of the familiar pattern is minimal, in the latter
case it is, in some sense maximal. The sequence of blocks
was: Familiar, “C”, Familiar, Random, Familiar, “C”,
Familiar, Random, Familiar, “C”. This gave three Familiar
(as the first block is removed from any analysis), three “C”
and two Random blocks to be used in the analysis for each
participant from a session of ten blocks. The Familiar
blocks were inserted between the test blocks to allow the
participants an opportunity to re-establish baseline
performance before the next test block was administered.

Procedure
The participants were seated in front of the computer
approximately 50 centimetres from the screen and asked to
make themselves comfortable. They were then read the
instructions concerning their task, and were then asked if
they had any questions about the instructions they had just
been given. The participants were asked to respond to a
“change” trial with their left index finger, by pressing the
[x] key, and to a “no change” trial by pressing the [.] key
with their right index finger. The participant was then asked
to press the space bar to begin, and follow the on screen
instructions that occurred throughout the experiment. The
experimenter waited in the room until the first few trials had
been completed, to ensure that the participant fully
understood what it was that they were meant to be doing
before leaving the room. Each block was started by
pressing the space bar. The trials consisted of the
alternation of two checkerboards, with a random black and
white dot pattern mask being presented between
presentations of the checkerboards. These checkerboards
were either the same or differed by one element. The
checkerboards subtended a visual angle of approximately
two degrees and were presented in the centre of the screen.
The participants were given feedback on each trial, with the
words “correct” or “error” being displayed on the screen. If
an error was made, the computer also beeped. After each
block of twenty-four trials, participants were required to
record their errors and reaction times on a sheet provided for
them in the room. This was primarily to get the participants
to take a break between blocks. It also gave a readily
available source of data that could be tallied with the

analysis on the computer. At the end of the session of ten
blocks, the participants were given a short questionnaire to
determine how motivated they were feeling during the
session and what, if any strategy they were using.
After the questionnaire had been completed the
participants were thanked for their time and the next session
was arranged. After the fifth session, a more thorough
questionnaire was administered, and the participants were
paid and thanked for their participation.

Results
The basic familiarity effect is shown below in Figure 3. The
Familiar and Random groups are denoted by F and R
respectively. The graph shows that both groups improved at
the task at roughly the same rate, but that performance in the
Familiar group is better than that in the random group on all
sessions by a roughly constant amount.
The initial analysis focused on finding significant effects
of both group and session. Three dependent variables have
been determined for each session: overall accuracy;
percentage of changes detected; percentage of correct no
change trials. Each of the three variables used may indicate
something different about the way that the participants may
be performing their task.
100

Overall (F)
Overall (R)

90
80

70
60

50
1

2

3

4

5

Session
Figure 3: Between Groups Familiarity Effect.

Table 1: Within Session Comparisons between Random and Familiar Groups
(All probabilities are one-tailed)
Overall Percentage Correct
Session 1
Session 2
Session 3
Session 4
Session 5

U=0, p=0.022
U=0, p=0.022
U=0, p=0.022
U=0, p=0.022
U=0.5, p=0.033

Percentage of No Change
Trials Correct
U=0, p=0.023
U=0, p=0.020
U=0, p=0.022
U=0, p=0.020
U=0, p=0.017

Percentage of Changes
Detected
U=0.5, p=0.032
U=1, p=0.046
U=0, p=0.022
U=0, p=0.023
U=1, p=0.048

Table 2: Between Session Comparisons Collapsed across Groups
(All probabilities are one-tailed)
Change between Sessions

Overall Percentage Correct

1 and 2
2 and 3
3 and 4
4 and 5

T=1, p=0.009
T=0, p=0.009
T=2.5, p=0.024
T=6, p=0.173

Only non-parametric tests were used to analyse the data,
as there were both small and unequal numbers in the
groups. A significance level (α) of p<0.05 was used for
all analyses. In each session, the score from the first
block was not included in any subsequent analysis. This
was to allow the participants an opportunity to practice
the task before the session proper began. Means for each
variable for a given session were used for all analyses. In
the session 5 analyses, the different block types were
separated and then the average for each variable was used.
Differences between Groups
This analysis compares the performance of the two groups
on all three variables. For session five, only the familiar
blocks are used for the analysis. The Mann-Whitney UTest is used to compare the two unrelated samples.
The effect of group is so large that the difference
between the Familiar and Random groups is significant
for all variables in all sessions. In each case the
percentage is higher for the Familiar group. A summary
of the statistical results obtained from the analyses for
comparisons between the Familiar and Random groups
for each session is given in Table 1. Probabilities
reported are one-tailed following the results of the pilot
work discussed in the introduction.

Percentage of No Change
Trials Correct
T=5, p=0.034
T=2, p=0.036
T=6.5, p=0.100
T=0, p=0.008

Percentage of Changes
Detected
T=2, p=0.013
T=0, p=0.014
T=6, p=0.046
T=8, p=0.156

the participants trained solely on random stimuli. The
predictions made for the effect of the test are that the
participants’ performance will be worse on the test blocks
than on the familiar blocks presented during the session.
This prediction was made as the familiar stimulus which
the participants have been trained was to be distorted, to a
greater (Random blocks) or lesser (“C” blocks) extent in
session 5. It was deemed extremely unlikely that these
manipulations would improve performance, hence onetailed probabilities were used.
Figure 4 shows the data obtained in session 5. The
Familiar, “C” and Random entries in the histogram are the
averages for each block type collapsed across all the
participants in the Familiar group. The control group has
been included so that their performance can be compared
with that of the Familiar Group on the Random blocks.
When comparing the familiar with the random blocks,
all three variables produced significant results. The
familiar blocks produced higher scores in the overall
percentage correct (T=0, p=0.014) and the percentage of
change (T=0, p=0.014) and no change trials correct (T=0,
p=0.015). The Random group have been trained on the
general task of detecting one square changes within a
randomly generated checkerboard. The Familiar group

Differences by Session
The test used in these analyses was the Wilcoxon
Matched Pairs Test, as the values being compared were
from the same participant, tracking their improvement as
the sessions progressed (Table 2).
The effect of session is also a major factor in the
performance of all the participants. Early in training there
is the greatest effect of session, where participants rapidly
become more familiar with their task and are able to
improve easily. In later sessions, ceiling performance is
being approached, so the difference between subsequent
sessions will not be as great and the effect will be
reduced.

100

Results from Session 5
The differences between the variables for the different
blocks were compared. The comparisons of greatest
interest were between the familiar and “C” test blocks and
the performance of the participants in the familiar group
on the random blocks compared with the performance of

0

Familiar
"C"
Random
Control

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Overall

No Change

Change

Figure 4: Comparisons between different blocks during
Session 5.

have been trained on a task which can be considered as
much more specialised. Using the task on which the
Random group have been trained allows the comparison
between the their performance and the performance
attained by the Familiar participants to see if there is any
overall advantage of training on a unique stimulus. No
significant differences were found for any of the three
variables when comparing the performance of the
participants in the random group with the scores obtained
by the participants in the familiar group on their test
blocks with randomly generated stimuli. If anything, the
familiar group participants were worse on these trials
(Figure 4).
Comparing the results from the familiar and “C” trials,
the only significant difference was found between the
scores for the percentage of no change trials correct (T=1,
p=0.039) with performance on the familiar trials being
better. The other variables were found not to have any
significant difference between them. Figure 5 shows the
elevated false alarm rate for the “C” condition when
compared with the Random and Familiar trials in session
5 and also the control group. The difference between the
“C” condition and other blocks is significant in both cases
(T=0, p<0.05). For this analysis, only trials where a
response was made are included, thus removing any
occasions on which a decision was not made in time.
Figure 5 illustrates the differences in false alarm rates
for the four different cases from session 5. These rates for
the Familiar participants, using their familiar stimulus,
and the control group are on zero, as they registered no
false alarms.

Discussion
The effects of session and group have been found to be
significant. Although this is not in itself surprising, these
two effects had to be established before any further
investigations could be carried out. The main effect of
group was surprising in its magnitude, with the effect
being carried through the sessions. If the participants
were allowed to reach asymptotic performance, the
prediction from the pilot study is that this significant
difference would be maintained. However, this prediction
cannot be confirmed as the Random group were not
trained for long enough to allow their performance to
plateau.
Although the effect of group may have been expected
with it being easier to detect changes in a stimulus that is
familiar, it could have been the case that there was no
difference. If the participants were simply detecting the
change between the two checkerboards, then there might
have been no difference in the scores. It could have been
the case that the unchanging part of the pattern was
irrelevant as it was the change between the checkerboards
which was being probed. However, the demonstration of
a difference between the groups implies that there must be
another process at work, apart from the mechanism being
used to detect the changes themselves. This position is
supported by the finding of no significant difference
between the two groups of participants when tested on the
random stimuli in session five. Whatever the mechanism

3
2.5

Familiar
"C"

2

Random
Control

1.5
1
0.5
0

Figure 5: Comparisons of False Alarm rates during
Session 5.
favouring the Familiar group, it is specific to the familiar
stimuli and not some global strategic advantage
developed during training.
The questionnaires administered after the sessions give
an insight into how the participants were trying to detect
the changes. Every participant reported using a scanning
strategy, starting in a particular place for each trial, and
then working around the checkerboard, attempting to spot
the change. Participants in the random group employed
this method throughout their sessions, with no
modifications. Participants allocated to the familiar group
also used such a strategy, but they reported some
modification in later sessions. The scanning became
faster, whilst still improving in accuracy between the
sessions, there was also a chance to learn about the
pattern. They were able to divide the stimulus into subpatterns and detect changes in these, rather than searching
for a single change. This certainly seems to make the
detection of differences easier, as performance for the
Familiar group was significantly higher for all variables
during all five sessions.
The test session produced a significant difference
between the percentage of no change trials detected for
the “C” blocks and the familiar. In the “C” blocks, there
was always a random one-square difference in the
checkerboard pairs from the original, familiar stimulus.
This additional fixed difference made sure that novelty
from the familiar was no longer a necessary signal that
there was a difference between the two checkerboards.
Many of the participants reported that they had noticed
the additional fixed change, and were consciously trying
to avoid mistaking it for the actual change between the
checkerboards. This result implies that novelty, in
addition to a strategic search is central to the task being
performed by the participants in the Familiar group. If it
were solely a search strategy, then there should be
minimal di sruption of performance on test blocks which
involve a minimal change in the familiar stimulus. The

analysis of the false alarms (Figure 5) supports this
position, as there was a greater disruption to the
participants on the “C” trials than on the Random trials,
where the stimulus was completely different from the one
that they were familiar with, and despite the fact that
overall performance was significantly lower on the
Random trials.

Conclusion
There is good evidence that stimulus familiarity makes it
easier to detect a change in that stimulus when compared
with participants trained on random stimuli. This is in
addition to the necessary attentional requirements
reported in Rensink et al. (1997). The ability to detect the
change improves with increasing familiarity with the
stimulus.
However, this ability is limited to that
particular stimulus, or ones very close to it, and there is
no advantage for other random stimuli of the same type as
shown by the test blocks given in session 5.
The mechanism for the detection of the change may be
based, at least in part, on novelty. The use of a distracting
fixed change induces more false alarms on no change
trials than would otherwise be expected. This result
indicates that the strategy of scanning the image for
change cannot completely account for the enhanced
ability to detect the changes. The method for detecting
the changes in a given stimulus may involve a
combination of better stimulus scanning and the use of
novelty to discriminate between familiar stimuli. It is
likely that both mechanisms are important in the detection
of change. The degree to which each is employed will
doubtless depend on both the type and familiarity of the
stimulus.

References
Klein, R., Kingstone, A., & Pontefract, A. (1992)
Orienting of Visual Attention. In K. Rayner (Ed.) Eye
movements and visual cognition: Scene perception and
reading (pp. 45-65). New York: Springer.
Phillips, W.A. (1974) On the distinction between sensory
storage and short-term visual memory. Perception and
Psychophysics, 16, 283-290
Rensink, R.A., O’Regan, J.K. & Clark J.J. (1997) To See
Or Not To See: The Need for Attention to Perceive
Changes in Scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368-373

