UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Influence of Spatial Language on Recognition Memory for Spatial Scenes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/85t17083

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Feist, Michele I.
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Influence of Spatial Language on Recognition Memory for Spatial Scenes
Michele I. Feist (m-feist@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
Whether and how much the routine use of language
influences thought is a perennially fascinating question in
cognitive science. The current paper addresses this issue by
examining whether the presence of spatial language
influences the encoding and memory of simple pictures.

Introduction
In the last few years there has been a resurgence of interest
in the question of whether and how much language
influences thought. As Billman and Krych (1998) point out,
this is a question that can be asked either at the level of the
language system, or at the level of the linguistic form.
At the level of the language system, one can ask whether
cognitive differences can be explained via cross-linguistic
differences. The strong version of this hypothesis is well
expressed in Whorf’s (1956, p. 134) quote of Sapir: “[w]e
see and hear and otherwise experience very largely as we do
because the language habits of our community predispose
certain choices of interpretation.” Other scholars suggest a
weaker version of the hypothesis, namely that language,
while not determining thought, nonetheless influences how
one thinks.
Slobin's (1996) thinking-for-speaking
hypothesis states that linguistic influences exist only when
one performs a linguistically-mediated task (cf., Slobin,
1996).
Evaluation of the hypothesis at the level of the language
system involves an examination of performance on nonlinguistic tasks by speakers of different languages in order to
determine whether there are language-related differences.
Such examinations have yielded mixed results. Pederson
and his colleagues (1998) and Levinson (1996) found that
speakers of different languages performed differently on
nonlinguistic tests of visual memory, including
reconstruction of an array of objects, a clearly Whorfian
result. Malt, Sloman, and Gennari (in press), on the other
hand, found that Spanish speakers’ judgments of similarity
of videotaped motion events conformed to normal verb use
in Spanish, but only when participants were instructed to use
linguistic descriptions during the encoding phase of the
experiment. This is consistent with a thinking-for-speaking

(Slobin 1996) version of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.
Furthermore, the language effect did not appear for the
English-speaking participants, nor did Malt and her
colleagues find a language effect on similarity judgments for
artifacts, nor on recognition memory.
The other level at which language could influence thought
is that of linguistic forms within a language. Evaluation of
the hypothesis at this level involves comparing performance
on non-linguistic tasks by speakers of the same language in
conditions that invite different forms within the language.
For example, Bower, Karlin, and Dueck (1975) found that
participants rated new pictures as more similar to the one
they had seen during encoding if they conformed to the
linguistic description presented at encoding. Gentner and
Loftus (1979) found an influence of the language presented
at encoding on participants’ recognition memory for pictures
of events. Billman and Krych (1998) found effects of verbs
present at encoding on recognition of videotaped motion
events (but see Malt et al., in press).
Our research asks whether spatial prepositions can
influence the way people encode and remember spatial
relations. We chose spatial prepositions for several reasons.
First, while many studies of the Whorfian question have
focused on possible effects of verbs of motion on the
encoding of events, there has been comparatively little work
on the possible effects of prepositions on the encoding of
static spatial relations. Spatial prepositions exhibit striking
cross-linguistic variability, as demonstrated by Bowerman
and Pederson’s (in preparation) comparative study of the
semantics of ‘on-terms’ – terms related to contact and
support. As Gentner (1981; Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001)
points out, relational terms such as verbs and prepositions
are a promising arena in which to seek Whorfian evidence.
Relational terms are more variable cross-linguistically than
nominal terms of comparable concreteness. This semantic
variability suggests that there is a wide variety of plausible
encodings consistent with the perceptual input. Thus, this
arena may provide fruitful ground for the investigation of
Whorfian effects.
In this research, we showed people spatial scenes under
different linguistic encoding conditions, and later tested their
recognition memory. Our goal was to determine (1) whether

spatial language influences spatial encoding and memory
and (2) whether such influence occurs when there is no overt
use of language, or is restricted to the case when spatial
language is explicitly present. If we see language effects
only when people are encouraged to utilize language at
encoding, this will provide support for a thinking-forspeaking or, in our case, thinking-for-comprehending
hypothesis. If, on the other hand, we see language effects
under other conditions, this would leave open the possibility
of language influencing cognition in a more comprehensive
manner.
The logic of our studies is as follows. For each of the
prepositions, we created a sentence and a triad of pictures
that ranged in how well they fit the sentence (see Figure 1).
The standard picture (the initial picture) was acceptably
described. For each standard, there were two variants: the
plus variant, which was a better exemplar of the spatial term,
and the minus variant, which was a poorer exemplar (see
Figure 1 below). Thus, the initial picture was somewhat
ambiguous, but was designed so that the spatial term could
apply to it, and the two variants were either more typical of
the core prepositional category or less so. All of the pictures
involved the same objects; the only source of variation was
the spatial relation between the two objects. In preparing the
pictures, every attempt was made to guard against a possible
recognition bias for the plus variant (see Experiment 2).

with a pair of sentences: the target sentence that described
the picture as outlined above, and a distracter sentence in
which only the nouns were changed. The distracter sentence
was meant to be obviously wrong; its purpose was simply to
force participants to read the correct sentence and encode
the target spatial relational term. For example, for the
picture in Figure 1, participants chose between The block is
on the building and The plant is on the shelf.
The initial picture from each triad was used for the study
portion of the experiment; all three pictures in the triad were
used for the recognition task.
Procedure
Part 1: Study. Twenty-five pictures (thirteen targets and
twelve distracters) were randomized and presented
individually for five seconds each on a computer screen. All
participants were told that this was part one of a two-part
experiment.
To ensure that the spatial sentences group processed the
sentences we asked them to choose which of two sentences
best described the picture. They were provided with answer
sheets with two sentences for each picture: the target
sentence and a distracter sentence. Participants in the
control
condition were given no additional instructions.

Experiment 1a
Participants viewed pictures depicting static spatial relations
- e.g., a marionette standing on a table or a coin in a hand.
Half the participants read a descriptive sentence at the time
that the pictures were encoded. After participating in
unrelated experiments for about fifteen minutes, participants
performed a recognition task that included the original
pictures and two variants.
The recognition test included all three pictures - the initial
picture, the plus variant, and the minus variant. If the
presentation of language at encoding influences recognition
memory, there should be different patterns of false alarms
for the two groups. The group provided with sentences at
encoding should be more likely than the control group to
falsely claim that they had previously seen the plus variants
of the pictures.

Method
Design. Encoding Condition (Spatial Sentences/Control), a
between-subjects variable, was crossed with Recognition
Item Type (Plus Variant/Initial Picture/Minus Variant), a
within-subject factor.
Subjects. Thirty-six Northwestern undergraduates received
course credit for their participation in this experiment. All
reported being fluent speakers of English.
Stimuli. Thirteen triads of pictures and corresponding sets
of sentences were created for this experiment. As discussed
above, the pictures were created such that one might be well
described by a target sentence, one passably described, and
one poorly described. Each triad of pictures was associated

Plus variant

Initial picture

Minus variant

Figure 1: Triad of pictures corresponding to the sentence
"The block is on the building."
Part 2: Recognition. All participants received the same
yes/no recognition task. All three of the pictures in each
triad were presented individually in random order along with
twelve distracters (six old and six new). Participants were
asked to indicate on a numbered answer sheet whether or not
they had seen each picture during the earlier study portion.
Each picture remained on the screen until the participant
pressed the “c” key, indicating that they were ready to
continue.

Results
As predicted, we found that participants’ recognition
memory was influenced by whether a linguistic description
was presented during study. Participants in the spatial
sentences condition were significantly more likely to falsealarm to the plus variant than to the minus variant. (Figure
2). The difference between the false alarms in response to
the plus variant and the false alarms in response to the minus
variant differs significantly in the spatial sentences
condition, as confirmed by a paired samples t-test (t(17)
=5.32, p<.0001). Participants in the control condition
showed no such difference in their false alarm rate. Thus,

having spatial language present at encoding led to a skewing
of recogntion errors towards the core of the spatial category.

0.5
0.45

Experiment 1b
In this study we asked whether participants instructed to pay
careful attention to the pictures at study might be induced to
encode the pictures linguistically and, as a result, to display
an error pattern similar to that seen in the spatial sentences
condition of Experiment 1a.

0.4

Method

0.35
0.3
control
0.25

spatialsentences

0.2

Subjects Eighteen Northwestern undergraduates received
course credit for their participation in this experiment. All
reported being fluent speakers of English.

0.15
0.1

Stimuli The stimuli used were the same as those in
Experiment 1a.

0.05
0
plus

m inus

Procedure

Figure 2: False alarms by condition, Experiment 1a
d' analysis To further test the claim that the presentation of
sentences during study influences recognition memory for
pictures, two d' measures were calculated for each individual
subject. One d' indicates the discriminability of the minus
variant and the initial picture; the other, the discriminability
of the plus variant and the initial picture. The larger of the
two was then determined, and the participants were pooled
by condition, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Participants pooled according to the d' analysis,
Experiment 1a

Control
Spatial
Sentences

Plus
larger
4
0

Minus larger

Equal1

4
12

10
5

Part 1: Study The procedure was identical to the control
condition in Experiment 1a, except that the participants were
instructed to pay careful attention to the pictures because the
recognition test would be very difficult.
Part 2: Recognition The recognition task was the same as
that used in Experiment 1a.

Results and Discussion
The error rate observed in Experiment 1b is lower than that
observed in Experiment 1a, indicating that participants did
pay more careful attention to the pictures during study.
However, the pattern of false alarms is the same as that
observed for the control subjects from Experiment 1a.
Figure 3 shows the results of Experiment 1b along with
those of Experiment 1a. These results suggest that more
careful attention did not necessarily evoke linguistic
encoding.
0.5

In the spatial sentences condition, but not in the control
condition, the discriminability of the minus variant is greater
than that of the plus variant (X2=9.65, p<.01).

0.45

Discussion

0.25

0.4
0.35
0.3

We found that when spatial language was present at
encoding, memory for the spatial relations in the pictures
was systematically shifted in the direction of the spatial
preposition. This is evidence for at least the moderate
thinking-for- speaking version of the Whorfian hypothesis.
In the next study we sought evidence for the strong version
of the hypothesis. We hypothesized that if people had to
attend closely to the pictures, this might evoke spontaneous
linguistic descriptions as a memory aid. We thus examine
the effect of more careful attention on recognition memory
in Experiment 1b.

1

d' measures within .25 of one another were considered equal
for the analyses discussed in this paper.

control
spatialsentences
attention

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
plus

m inus

Figure 3: False alarms by condition, Experiments 1a and
1b
So far we have evidence for the influence of spatial
language when it is explicitly presented, although not for the
stronger possibility that language will affect cognition even
when it is not overtly present. In Experiment 1c, we tested
the specificity of the language effect. If, as we have
assumed, the recognition shift is due to spatial language,

then we should not see this shift if participants are given
verbal descriptions that do not contain spatial language.

0.5
0.45

Experiment 1c
In order to more carefully inspect the source of the language
effect from Experiment 1a, we presented participants with
sentences without spatial prepositions at encoding. The
sentences used named only the objects in the picture. We
predict that these sentences, which are missing the
hypothesized source of the language effect, will not replicate
the effect found in Experiment 1a.

0.4
0.35
spatialsentences

0.3

attention
0.25
control
0.2

objectsentences

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
plus

Method
Subjects Nineteen Northwestern undergraduates received
course credit for their participation in this experiment. All
reported being fluent speakers of English.
Stimuli The pictures were the same as those in Experiment
1a. The sentences on participants’ answer sheets were
modified from those used in Experiment 1a by removing the
prepositions, resulting in sentences of the following form:
The picture shows a block and a building.
The picture shows a plant and a shelf.

Procedure
Part 1: Study The procedure was identical to that in the
spatial sentences condition in Experiment 1a. Participants
chose which sentence best matched the picture.
Part 2: Recognition The recognition task was the same as
that used in Experiment 1a.

Figure 4: False alarms by condition, Experiment 1
Table 2: Participants pooled according to the d' analysis,
Experiment 1
Plus larger
Minus larger
Equal
Control
4
4
10
Spatial
0
12
5
sentences
Attention
8
4
5
Object
6
3
7
sentences
In the spatial sentences condition only, the discriminability
of the minus variant is greater than that of the plus variant
(X2=19.31, p<.01). Or to put it more directly, only in the
spatial sentences condition is the plus version more
confusable with the initial picture than the minus version.

Results and Discussion
As predicted, participants failed to show any shift towards
the core spatial category designated by the preposition. The
participants in Experiment 1c demonstrated the same pattern
of equal plus and minus false alarms as the no-language
subjects in the previous studies (the subjects in Experiment
1b and the control subjects in Experiment 1a). This pattern
differed significantly from the pattern by spatial sentence
subjects in Experiment 1a. Specifically, the two groups
differed in their rate of false alarms in response to the minus
variant (independent samples t-test: t(34) =3.91, p<.005).
This provides support for the suggestion that it is
specifically the preposition that is responsible for the change
in the pattern of responses observed in the spatial sentences
condition in Experiment 1a. The complete set of results for
Experiment 1 is presented in Figure 4.
d' analysis As in Experiment 1a, two d' measures were
calculated for each individual participant in Experiment 1:
one indicated the discriminability of the minus variant and
the initial picture, and one indicated the discriminability of
the plus variant and the initial picture. The larger of the two
was then determined, and the participants were pooled by
condition (Table 2).

m inus

Experiment 2
This study was done to verify that the spatial sentences
applied to the three variants of each picture as expected. We
asked participants to rate the applicability of the sentences
from the study portion of Experiment 1a to each of the
pictures.

Method
Subjects Twenty-four Northwestern undergraduates
received course credit for their participation in this
experiment. All reported being fluent speakers of English.
Stimuli The pictures used were the same as those in
Experiment 1. The sentences used were the correct spatial
sentences from Experiment 1a.

Procedure
All three of the pictures in each triad were presented
individually in random order along with the twelve
distracters from the recognition task from Experiment 1.
Participants were asked to rate the applicability of the
sentences to the pictures on a scale from one to seven, with
seven being the highest rating. Each picture remained on the
screen until the participant pressed the “c” key, indicating
that they were ready to continue.

Results and Discussion

Results

As expected, participants gave the highest ratings to the plus
variants (mean rating 5.72), in-between ratings to the initial
pictures (mean rating 4.47), and the lowest ratings to the
minus variants (2.54). This distribution of the ratings
suggests that the assignment of pictures to the various
categories with respect to the sentences used in the spatial
sentences condition of Experiment 1a was indeed
appropriate. Examination of the results for individual triads
showed that for two of the triads, one depicting a coin in a
hand and one depicting a firefly in a dish, the sentences did
not fit exactly as predicted. These sentences were adjusted
accordingly for Experiment 3.

As in Experiment 1a, we found that participants’ recognition
memory was influenced by the presence or absence of
spatial language during study. The pattern of false alarms
for the spatial sentences condition differs from that in the
control condition (Figure 5). As in Experiment 1a,
participants in the spatial sentences condition were
significantly more likely to false-alarm to the plus variant
than to the minus variant. Participants in the control
condition showed no such difference in their false alarm
rate. The difference between the false alarms in response to
the plus variant and the false alarms in response to the minus
variant differs significantly only in the spatial sentences
condition, as confirmed by a paired samples t-test (t(57)
=2.23, p=.047). In addition, the difference in the rate of
false alarms between the two groups only reaches
significance for the responses to the plus variant, as
confirmed by an independent samples t-test (t(116) =2.20,
p=.039).

Experiment 3
This study was a replication of the spatial language
condition, with a methodological improvement. In
Experiment 1a, participants saw all three versions of each of
the pictures (one at a time) during the yes/no recognition
task. This leaves open the possibility of carryover effects
from one variant to another. In Experiment 3, the study task
was that of Experiment 1a, but the recognition task was
designed so that each participant was tested on only one
version of each picture.

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

Method
Design. Encoding Condition (Spatial Sentences/Control), a
between-subjects variable, was crossed with Recognition
Item Type (Plus Variant/Initial Picture/Minus Variant)
(within-subjects) and with Assignment condition. This was a
between-subjects variable determining which variant in each
set was received by a given participant in the recognition
test.
One
hundred
eighteen
Northwestern
Subjects.
undergraduates received course credit for their participation
in this experiment. All reported being fluent speakers of
English.
Stimuli. The stimuli used were the same as those in
Experiment 1, with minor modifications to two of the triads
of pictures, and with a change of preposition (from in to on)
in the sentences corresponding to two others. One of the
triads used in Experiment 1, depicting a balloon on a stick,
was not used for Experiment 3.

Procedure
Part 1: Study The procedure was identical to the study
portion of Experiment 1a.
Part 2: Recognition Both conditions received the same
yes/no recognition task. One picture from each triad was
presented in random order along with twelve distracters (six
old and six new). As in Experiment 1, participants were
asked to indicate whether or not they had seen each picture
during the earlier study portion, and each picture remained
on the screen until the participant pressed the “c” key
indicating readiness to continue.

control
spatialsentences
0.3

0.2

0.1

0
minus

plus

Figure 5: False alarms by condition, Experiment 3
d' analysis As in Experiment 1a, two d' measures were
calculated for each individual subject. One d' indicates the
discriminability of the minus variant and the initial picture;
the other, the discriminability of the plus variant and the
initial picture. The larger of the two was then determined,
and the participants were pooled by condition (Table 3).
Table 3: Participants pooled according to the d' analysis,
Experiment 3
Spatial
sentences
Control

Plus larger
4

Minus larger
38

Equal
16

20

20

20

The results of the d' analysis for Experiment 3 replicate
those for Experiment 1: in the spatial sentences condition
alone, the discriminability of the minus variant is greater
than that of the plus variant (X2=16.67, p<.0001).

General Discussion
In these experiments, we examined the question of whether
spatial language influences the encoding and memory of
spatial relations presented visually. The answer is a qualified
yes. Our evidence shows that the use of spatial language
during the encoding of a picture can affect recognition
memory for the spatial relations in the picture. People given
spatial prepositions during encoding showed a shift in
recognition towards the core spatial category denoted by the
preposition (Experiments 1a and 3). This effect was specific
to spatial relational language (Experiment 1c); no such shift
was observed for sentences that simply described the objects
in the pictures.
However, our evidence that language influenced encoding
was limited to the case when overt spatial language was
present. We did not find a shift towards the core spatial
semantic category when participants were simply instructed
to pay close attention to the pictures (Experiment 1b). Thus,
our evidence supports the view that language can affect
encoding when it is present, but not the strong Whorfian
view that non-linguistic perception is shaped by the
language one speaks.
There has been much controversy in recent years over
whether language exerts an effect on non-linguistic
cognition. Our results suggest that language forms do exert
an effect on one type of non-linguistic cognition:
recognition memory for simple pictures. This suggestion
must be qualified, however, as we do not show an effect of
language forms in the absence of linguistic descriptions at
encoding, which would suggest a stronger influence of
language on everyday non-linguistic cognition. Of course, it
remains an open question whether in some situations,
speakers might prefer encodings that are compatible with
their language, resulting in cross-linguistic differences that
are habitual though not inescapable.
Our results are compatible with Slobin’s (1996) thinkingfor-speaking hypothesis and with the results of Malt et al. (in
press). They suggest that language can have profound nonlinguistic effects when it is used, but that its use is not
inevitable. This is consistent with Gentner and
Loewenstein’s (in press) suggestion that language provides
tools that potentiate forming and holding ideas -- the tools–
for-thought hypothesis. On this view, language potentiates
kinds of encodings rather than forcing them.

Acknowledgments
Please address all correspondence and reprint requests to
Dedre Gentner, Northwestern University, Department of
Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208. This
work was supported by NSF-LIS grant SBR-9720313 to the
second author.

References
Billman, D., & Krych, M. (1998). Path and manner verbs in
action: Effects of “skipping” and “exiting” on event
memory. Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Bower, G. H., Karlin, M. B., and Dueck, A. (1975).
Comprehension and memory for pictures. Memory and
Cognition, 3 (2), 216-220.
Bowerman, M., and Pederson, E. (in preparation). Crosslinguistic perspectives on topological spatial relationships.
Gentner, D. (in press). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner
& S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind:
Advances in the study of language and thought.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
verbs and nouns. Cognition and Brain Theory,4 (2), 161178.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
deveolopment.
Cambridge, England:
Cambridge
University Press.
Gentner, D., & Loewenstein, J. (in press). Relational
language and relational thought. In J. Byrnes & E. Amsel
(Eds.), Language, literacy, and cognitive development.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gentner, D., & Loftus, E. (1979). Integration of verbal and
visual information as evidenced by distortions in picture
memory. American Journal of Psychology, 92 (2), 363375.
Levinson, S.C. (1996). "Relativity in spatial conception and
description." In Gumperz, J. and Levinson, S. (Eds.),
Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., & Gennari, S. (in press).
Speaking vs. thinking about objects and actions. In D.
Gentner & S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind:
Advances in the study of language and thought.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pederson, E., Danziger, E., Wilkins, D., Levinson, S. C.,
Kita, S., & Senft, G. (1998). Semantic typology and
spatial conceptualization. Language, 74 (3), 557-589.
Slobin, D. (1996). From “thought and language” to
“thinking for speaking.” In J. J. Gumperz and S. C.
Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, thought, and reality:
Selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf. J. B. Carroll
(Ed). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

