UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cats could be dogs, but dogs could not be cats: what if they bark and mew? A
Connectionist Account of Early Infant Memory and Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0ks6c8b5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Reuter, Robert A.P.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cats could be dogs, but dogs could not be cats: what if they bark and mew? A
Connectionist Account of Early Infant Memory and Categorization
Robert A.P. Reuter (rreuter@ulb.ac.be)
Cognitive Science Research Unit, CP 191, Av. F.D. Roosevelt, 50
B-1050 Brussels, Belgium

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to replicate and extend the
connectionist model presented by Mareschal and French
(1997) as an account of 'the particularities of […] infant
memory and categorization'. With infants, the sequential
presentation of cats followed by dogs yields an expected
increase in infants' looking time, whereas the reversed
presentation order does not. This intriguing asymmetry
of infants' category formation, first reported by Quinn,
Eimas, and Rosenkrantz (1993), was simulated by
Mareschal et al.'s simple connectionist network. In
addition, the authors proposed that this asymmetric
categorization is a natural byproduct of the 'asymmetric
overlaps of the visual feature distributions' of cats and
dogs. Using a simple feedforward backpropagation
network, we successfully replicated this asymmetric
categorization effect, as well as a reported asymmetric
exclusivity effect in the two categories, and an
asymmetric interference effect of learning dogs on the
memory for cats, but not of learning cats on the memory
for dogs. We furthermore investigated the authors'
explanation of the asymmetric effects, firstly, by
systematically varying the overall similarity between
learned items and interfering items, and secondly, by
adding a binary feature to the input set, namely the
animal cry (barking vs. mewing). The results of the
present modeling underscore the authors' explanation of
the observed effects in infants' memory and
categorization, but also suggest lines of further
experimental research susceptible to undermine the
proposed connectionist account.

Introduction
In this paper, we report on a replication and two
extensions of Mareschal and French's (1997) simple
connectionist model that accounts fairly well for
unexpected findings observed in spontaneous category
formation in young infants (e.g., Quinn, Eimas, &
Rosenkrantz, 1993) and in infant memory. Indeed,
Mareschal et al. focused their modeling efforts on three
target behaviors of very young infants concerning their
categorization and memory, namely: (a) the ability to
categorize complex visual stimuli, (b) the asymmetric
effect in early categorization, and (c) interference
effects in early memory.
The empirical data Mareschal et al. modeled show that
infants, aged 3 to 4 months, are able to accurately
categorize cats and dogs, and that they form an

exclusive category of cats (thus excluding novel dogs)
but an inclusive category of dogs (thus novel cats may
well fall into the category of dogs) (Quinn et al., 1993).
Furthermore, infants are known to present catastrophic
forgetting of previously learned stimuli when shown
certain other intervening material (e.g., Cohen &
Gelber, 1975). This interference effect decreases
precisely when infants' categorization abilities increase
(Quinn & Eimas, 1996). Infant memory and
categorization can thus be thought to be closely linked
to each other and to depend on the same basic
mechanisms.
Indeed, the connectionist account given for the
observed asymmetric effects in categorization and for
the interference effects in memory is based on the same
reasoning. The asymmetry in category formation arises
from the unequal overlap of the visual features
distribution and not just the variance of the distribution
itself. In other words, the values of the cat features fall
within those of the dog values. Hence, based merely on
the statistical structure of the input features, infants (and
neural networks) form a category of dogs including
cats, whereas they form a category of cats excluding
(some) dogs1. The correlational structure extracting
mechanism is precisely what accounts for the observed
asymmetric effects of unequally exclusive (or inclusive)
cat and dog categorizations. Catastrophic forgetting, on
the other hand, can be understood as the deleterious
effect of representing, within the same connections,
stimuli whose features are very differently distributed.
This, consequently, "washes out" the relevant
knowledge previously stored in the network. However
learning items whose features lie within the same range
as those learned previously should not create very
different internal representations - and may hence even
consist in "learning more of the same". Based on this
connectionist account of the relationship between infant
categorization and memory, Mareschal et al.
successfully produced the conjectured asymmetry in
catastrophic interference consistent with the asymmetry
observed in category elaboration (i.e., dogs interfered
with previously learned cats, whereas cats did not
interfere with learned dogs).
1

Indeed, some dogs "look" like cats, since that they fall into
the range of the cat distribution for some features. We will
come back to this later.

In the following we, first of all, report on a conceptual
replication of Mareschal et al.'s modeling results,
concerning the development of categories, the
asymmetry in category exclusivity, and the asymmetry
in interference effects. Next, we show that the results of
a cluster analysis performed on the input data and on
the hidden units activation patterns (after learning of all
items had occurred) suggest that the asymmetry in
category exclusivity closely depends on the particular
items used for "cross-category compatibility"2 testing.
Then, we explain how we tested Mareschal et al.'s
connectionist account of asymmetry in category
exclusivity and in interference effects, based on two
systematic manipulations of the overlap in feature
distributions of cat and dog categories. The first
variation of overlap was produced by carefully
choosing the items presented for training and those for
interfering. The second variation of overlap was
produced by the introduction of a supplementary
(binary) input feature that unambiguously, taken
individually, separates cats from dogs. Finally, we
propose lines of further experimental research that
might undermine the connectionist account embraced
here.

insight into the inherent structure of the input data and
its implication on modeling results. They will as well
allow us to justify the proposed extensions of
Mareschal et al.'s neural network simulations.

Cluster Analysis
On the basis of the clusters of correlated values of the
input data, cats and dogs cannot be clearly separated
into two mutually exclusive categories (see figure 1).
Likewise, the connectionist model's internal
representations (as reflected by the activation pattern of
its hidden units after training on the whole set of
stimuli) do not reflect clear-cut groupings of just dogs
or just cats (see figure 2). Indeed, some cats,
respectively some dogs, are more prototypical in terms
of their overall feature similarity with the other
members of their category.

The Model
We made the same assumptions as Mareschal et al.
about the mapping between experimental results found
in infants with the technique of preferential looking
times and modeling results. The increase of error in the
model’s output is indeed assumed to be related to
increased infant attention. The results reported below
are based on the performance of a standard 10-8-10
feedforward backpropagation network, as well as that
of a standard 11-8-11 network when the supplementary
input feature was added. For both models, learning rate
and momentum were both set to 0.9. The Fahlmann
offset used in the original paper was not used in our
model. Networks learned the data for a maximum of
250 epochs or until all output bits were within 0.2 of
their targets. Results are averaged over 50 replications.
Weights were updated after each stimulus presentation.
Further details about changes in procedure compared to
Mareschal et al.'s model are given in the results section
below.

The Data
The data were identical to those used by Mareschal et
al. A description of their origin and their characteristics
can be found in their paper. In the following
paragraphs, we report a cluster Analyses performed on
the input data (and on the activation patterns of the
trained network's hidden units) that will provide some

Figure 1. Cluster analysis performed on the input data
patterns for cats (c1-c18) and dogs (d1-d18). Distances
and cluster structure in this graph correspond to the
overall similarity structure of the input patterns.
Moreover, and this is most crucial for Mareschal et al.'s
proposed account of infant memory and categorization,
nearly all cats (except 2 out of 18) fall into the "family"
of "dog-cat"s 3, whereas, only 5 dogs (out of 18) clearly
fall into the group which the majority of cats belong to.
The clustering of cats and dogs into different subgroups
suggests that the observed category exclusivity effects,
as well as interference effects, should not occur for all
combinations of learned and novel items (respectively,
learned, interfering and novel/same-category items).
Based on these results we predicted, precisely, that the
closer items are in terms of cluster analysis distance, the
smaller interference and cross-category exclusion
effects should be.

2

Cross-category compatibility refers to the question whether
a novel exemplar is "accepted" as a member of the opposite
category or not.

3

"Dog-cat"s corresponds to a regrouping of clusters
containing cats and dogs.

0.7
before learning
after learning
novelexem plars

0.6

m ean error

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
Cats

Dogs
Category

Figure 2. Cluster analysis performed on the activation
patterns of the network’s hidden units for cats (c1-c18)
and dogs (d1-d18). Distances and cluster structure in
this graph correspond to the overall similarity structure
of the network’s internal representations of the input
patterns.

Figure 3. Mean error on the network’s output when (a)
presented with exemplars before learning, (b) presented
with trained exemplars after learning, and (c) presented
with untrained exemplars after learning.
0.7
N ovelCat
N ovelDog

0.6

Results
0.5

m ean error

In the following section, we will briefly report the basic
replication results since they nearly reflect the findings
of Mareschal et al., and then describe our new results
with their model.

0.4

0.3

0.2

The Development of Cat and Dog Categories
We obtained results comparable to those described in
Mareschal et al. Networks do form a category of both
cats and dogs. Figure 3 shows the initial mean error
score, the mean error after training on the first 12 items
of each category4, and the mean error score (after
learning) for the 6 remaining exemplars of the
corresponding category (same-category testing).
Needless to say that networks develop a faithful internal
representation of both cats and dogs, and that they
nevertheless recognize novel items as unfamiliar (small
increase in error compared to the learned items). It is
worth noting however that the initial error scores are
slightly different between dogs and cats. Relative to
those of cats, the features of dogs are more variable.
Thus the mean error on dogs without training tends to
be bigger than on cats. This confirms Mareschal et al.'s
data analysis in terms of means and variances of the
feature distributions of cats and dogs.

The Exclusivity of Cat and Dog Categories
Figure 4 shows the mean error on output of networks
trained on 17 (out of 18) cats when they are presented
with either the single remaining cat or with any of the
dogs (18 out of 18), as well as with the corresponding
opposite configuration (dogs learned first and then
tested on novel dogs, respectively novel cats).
4

We suppose that this selection is pseudo-random, since we
did not give the stimuli set a particular a priori order.

0.1

0
"Cats" learned first

"Dogs" learned first
Condition

Figure 4. Asymmetric exclusivity of the cats and dogs
categories. When trained first on cats, an untrained dog
results in a larger increase of error than an untrained
cat, but when trained on dogs, an untrained cat only
produces a small increase in error as compared to an
untrained dog.
We used this training regime, instead of training the
networks on 12 out of 18 items and then testing it on 4
cats, in order to get a reasonable number of different
controlled combinations of training and testing items.
All cats, respectively dogs, appear once as the novel
item which the network has to categorize based on its
nearly perfect "knowledge" of the same or opposite
category. Our results show that, on average, dogs are
less likely to be accepted as members of the cat
category, than vice-versa. Indeed, a novel cat presented
to a network that has learned dogs is less likely to
produce a big increase in error, than a dog when
presented to a network that was trained on cats. Based
on the results of the cluster analysis, we suggest that the
exclusion of the various cross-category items (but also
of very atypical same-category items) somehow
depends on their similarity with the core representation
the network has developed during training.

The Asymmetric Interference Effect
In this section we examine the effect of learning items
of a second category on the networks ability to correctly
"accept" novel items as belonging to the category it was
trained on in the first time. The network, for instance,
was trained on 12 cats, then tested on the remaining
(novel) cats, then trained on 4 dogs, and finally retested on the novel cats. The difference in error scores
on the novel cats before and after learning the 4 dogs is
called interference effect, interference of dogs on the
memory for cats. The same reasoning holds for the
opposite case, memory for dogs interfered by training
on cats. The interference effect of dogs on cats was
easily replicated, by pseudo-randomly (see above)
choosing cats to learn and dogs to interfere with the
memory for cats. However, in contrast to Mareschal et
al., we did observe a considerable interference effect of
learning cats upon the memory for dogs.
0.7
before interference
after interference

0.6

m ean error

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2
0.1

0
dogs (interfered by
PRO XIM A L cats)

cats (interfered by dogs (interfered by
PRO XIM A L dogs)
DISTA L cats)
Category

cats (interfered by
DISTA L dogs)

Figure 5. Network performance with untrained
exemplars before and after learning an interfering
category as a function of overall similarity between
trained items and interfering items (distal vs. proximal).
See figure 5 for the results on the network’s
performance with novel items before and after learning
items of the opposite category. We thus observed
catastrophic interference in both cases, when not
controlling for the similarity between training, testing
and interfering. In figure 5, “distal” refers to items that
are very dissimilar to the target category based on the
cluster analysis. We thus analyzed the similarity
between training and interfering items, we had pseudorandomly chosen, and furthermore carefully selected
packages of items in order to produce the "desired"
results, based on the distance between items estimated
by cluster analysis. The results of the simulations
conducted on these items is reported in the following
paragraph.

The Effect of Similarity between Learned and
Interfering Items
We trained the network with various combinations of
category learning items and interfering items from the

other category. The choices of the items were motivated
by the results of the cluster analysis performed on the
input data. This enabled us to distinguish between
groups of stimuli that are more or less "similar" to each
other. We predicted that interference depends upon the
overall feature similarity (i.e., overlap of feature
distributions) between the central tendencies of these
two groups, the bigger the similarity, the smaller the
interference should be and vice-versa. We were, by this
subterfuge, able to qualitatively reproduce Mareschal et
al.'s asymmetry in interference effects by showing that,
under selected conditions, dogs are not interfered by
cats (see figure 5, dogs interfered by proximal cats). We
were also able to show that results contrary to those
reported in Mareschal et al. could be found. If cats
learned in the first place, were "interfered" by very
similar dogs, and the test items (i.e., novel cats) were
chosen as close to the (two) learned set(s), then
interference was minimal and relatively close to that
observed in the case of dogs "not-interfered" by
(similar) cats. Our results show that the results found by
Mareschal et al. need not be the only possible ones.
Furthermore, we could not manage to replicate the
reported "average" 5 absence of interference of learning
cats on the memory for dogs. Still, consistent with their
connectionist account of infant category and memory
our results are conclusive regarding the influence of
overall feature similarity on the exclusivity and
interference effect, though locally and not really
globally. We could indeed show that overall similarity
of items used for training and those used for
interference could be used to predict interference of
learning a second category on the memory for a first
category. What we could not show was that this really
is true for cats and dogs, on average, taken as
categories. We remain agnostic to the very reasons of
our failure to reproduce the absence of interference of
cats on the memory for dogs when exemplars of both
categories were randomly chosen. If the account given
by Mareschal et al. is as general as they presume, a
claim to which we subscribe in principle, then it should
show up more consistently and more reliably with
nearly any random selection of cats and dogs. Although
we stay puzzled concerning the precise reasons of our
failure to replicate, we have some hints on potential
explanations. In fact, we wonder whether the rather
small increase in error on dogs after interference by cats
is consistent with the nevertheless not so small increase
in error found with novel cats when dogs have been
learned first. If it is true that, on average, learning cats
does not have a deleterious influence on the memory for
dogs, then why does presenting cat after training on
dogs produce an increase in error compared to
5

Since the authors did not precisely mention how they chose
their items for training and interfering, we assume that the
reported asymmetry in interference effects must be supposed
to reflect average results, which is quite consistent with their
account of the category exclusivity effects.

presenting a dog? After all, if learning cats is truly
somewhat equivalent to learning more of the dog
category6, then why does testing on novel cats not
produce less error then testing on novel dogs? We think
that this prediction might be consistent with the
connectionist account proposed by Mareschal et al.,
solely based on the asymmetry of overlap of feature
distributions. Since nearly all cats belong to a narrow
range of distribution embraced by the distribution of the
dog category, dogs are more likely, on the average, to
fall outside this narrow range, within which the
"prototypical" dog also falls and which is precisely
what the network's internal representation should
reflect. Comparing cats and dogs to this "prototypical"
dog should show that cats are situated closer to it in
nearly all considered feature distributions, thus
producing less error than dogs (which are more likely
than cats to be different from this prototype).

Figure 6. cluster analysis performed on the input data
patterns for cats (c1-c18) and dogs (d1-d18) after
addition of the “animal cry” feature. Distances and
cluster structure in this graph correspond to the overall
similarity structure of the modified input patterns.

The Effect of Induced Changes in the Inherent
Structure of the Stimuli

The results shown in figures 7 and 8 confirm our
predictions based on the account given by Mareschal et
al. In other words, cats no longer could be part of the
dog category, and learning cats considerably interfered
with the memory for the dog category. The inherent
correlational structure of the input data thus has an
important effect on networks categorization and
memory. Note that the networks successfully formed a
category of cats and dogs just like when the animal cry
was not added to the stimuli features.

N ovelCat
N ovelDog

1.6

m ean error

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
"Cats" learned first

"Dogs" learned first
Condition
(w ith anim al cry)

Figure 7. Symmetric exclusivity of the cats and dogs
categories, when “animal cry” is added to the input
features.
2
before interference
after interference

1.8
1.6
1.4
m ean error

We conducted the same simulations as before, except
that networks were trained on inputs that included the
animal cry (barking vs. mewing) as an eleventh
characteristic variable. A cluster analysis (shown in
figure 6) performed on these input data shows that this
manipulation manifestly segregates dogs and cats into
two next-to-perfectly distinct categories. The increase
in distinctiveness of cats and dogs produced by the
addition of the binary variable should eliminate (or at
least considerably reduce), we hypothesized, the
asymmetry of the category exclusivity, as well as the
asymmetry of cross-category interference effects.

2
1.8

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
cats (interfered by dogs)

dogs (interfered by cats)
Category
(w ith anim al cry)

Figure 8. Network performance with untrained
exemplars before and after learning an interfering
category, when “animal cry” is added to the stimulus
features.
6

This is of course only true in some sense, since the dog
category is clearly characterized by greater feature variance.

Discussion
Connectionist autoassociator networks, like young
infants, form categorical representations of cats and
dogs. The categories developed show asymmetric
exclusivity, closely related to the unequal distribution
of features in the stimuli shown. Most of the cats could
be classified as dogs, but most dogs are not plausible
cats. The model also suggests the presence of
asymmetric interference effects of sequential learning
of cats and dogs. Such effects have recently (Mareschal,
French, & Quinn, draft) been observed in infants.
Supported by empirical works on infants, the model
thus pleads for a close link between the mechanisms
underlying infant visual memory and categorization. In
fact, Mareschal et al. (1997) claim that some kind of
associative, data driven mechanism underlies early
visual memory and categorization. The present paper
underscores this claim, by showing that explicit
manipulations of the correlational structure of the data
input
influences
the
networks
performance.
Connectionist models, by making clear assumptions
about the input data, can thus be helpful in predicting
which stimulus features are likely to be taken into
account by infants. Indeed, experimental works
(Spencer, Quinn, Johnson, & Karmiloff-Smith, 1997)
have shown that infants typically rely 'on head/face
information to categorically differentiate between cats
and dogs, under conditions of short exposure duration'.
This empirical result is consistent with the connectionist
model presented here, since face visual features (viz.
nose length and nose width) are the most informative
features about the cat/dog distinction. In addition, based
on Mareschal et al.'s (1997) connectionist account, it
seems reasonable to predict that presenting pictures of
cats and dogs in association with the corresponding
animal cry should produce the same results in infants
than in networks, namely mutual and symmetric
category exclusivity and symmetric interference effects.
Based on simulation results, we also predict a close
parallelism between infants' and connectionist models'
performances in memory and categorization task in
terms of the similarity of particular stimuli (and
combinations of stimuli). Truly, the model incorrectly
excludes certain stimuli and not others, thus infants
should present the same behavior pattern with precisely
those stimuli in question. Likewise, if the model, for
certain items but not others, does not present the
discussed asymmetry in interference effects then
infant's behavior should qualitatively reflect the same
catastrophic forgetting. We thus suggest an item based
analysis of networks' and infants' memory and
categorization performances. Finally, we would like to
recall that, by construction, connections networks'
performance depends upon the very selection of certain
stimulus features and not other. Thus, if networks
produce categorization and memory effects similar to
those of infants, then the selection of the particular
features is given support. Nevertheless, it must be

experimentally shown that infants actually rely on those
features and not others. Still, connectionist models
provide good predictions about which stimulus features
are most likely to participate in infant categorization
and memory.

Acknowledgments
Robert A.P. Reuter is a Research Assistant of the
National Fund for Scientific Research (Belgium).
Thanks to Bob French and Axel Cleeremans for their
insightful comments on earlier drafts of this paper.

References
Cohen, L. & Gelber, E. R. (1975). Infant visual
memory. In L. Cohen & Salapatek (Eds.), Infant
perception: From sensation to cognition, Vol. 1 (pp.
347-403). NY: Academic Press.
Mareschal, D., & French, R. M. (1997). A
Connectionist Account of Interference Effects in
Early Infant Memory and Categorization, In
Proceedings of the 19th Annual Cognitive Science
Society Conference, NJ: LEA, pp. 484-489).
Mareschal, D., French, R. M., & Quinn, P. (draft, April
14, 1998). Interference Effects in Early Infant Visual
Memory and Categorisation: A Connectionist Model.
Quinn, P. C., & Eimas, P. D. (1996). Perceptual
organization and categorization in young infants. In
C. Rovee-Collier & L. P. Lippsitt (Eds.), Advances in
infancy research (Vol. 10, pp. 1-36). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Quinn, P. C., & Eimas, P. D., & Rosenkrantz, S. L.
(1993). Evidence for representations of perceptually
similar natural categories by 3-month-old and 4month-old infants, Perception, 22, 463-475.
Spencer, J., Quinn, P. C., Johnson, M. H., & KarmiloffSmith, A. (1997), Heads you win, tails you loose:
Evidence for young infants categorizing mammals by
head and facial attributes, Early Development and
Parenting, Vol. 6 (3-4), 113-126.

