UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive U ncertainty in Syllogistic Reasoning: An Alternative M ental M odels Theory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fv282zm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Quayle, Jeremy D.
Ball, Linden J.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

C ognitive U ncertainty in Syllogistic R easoning:
A n A lternative M entalM odels Theory
Jerem y D .Q uayle (j.d.quayle@ derby.ac.uk)
Cognitive and BehavioralSciences Research G roup,
Institute ofBehaviouralSciences,U niversity ofD erby,
M ickleover,D erby,D E3 5G X ,U K

Linden J.Ball(l.ball@ lancaster.ac.uk)
Psychology D epartm ent,LancasterU niversity,
Lancaster,LA 1 4Y F,U K

A bstract
In this paper w e propose a m ental m odels theory of
syllogistic reasoning w hich does not incorporate a
falsification procedure and clearly specifies w hich
conclusions w ill be generated and in w hat order of
preference.Itis assum ed the m odels constructed vary in
term s of the num ber of uncertain representations of end
term s, and the directness of the representation of the
subjects of valid conclusions. These key factors
determ ine w hich quantified conclusion w illbe generated,
as w ellas the varying tendency to respond that"nothing
follow s". The theory is show n to provide a close fit to
m eta-analysis data derived from pastexperim ents.

Introduction
The categorical syllogism is a deductive reasoning
problem com prising two prem ises and a conclusion (see
exam ple below ).
Som e artists are beekeepers
A llbeekeepers are carpenters
Therefore,som e artists are carpenters
The prem ises feature three term s w hich refer to classes
of item s or individuals: an end term in each prem ise,
and a m iddle term w hich appears in both prem ises.The
form al structure of a syllogism is determ ined by its
m ood and its figure. The term m ood refers to the
differentcom binations of quantifer thatcan be featured
in the prem ises and conclusion. Four standard
quantifiers are used in English language syllogism s:All,
Som e, No/None, or Som e… are not. The term figure
refers to the four possible arrangem ents of the term s
w ithin the prem ises: A -B, B-C; A -B, C-B; B-A , C-B;
and B-A , B-C (w here A refers to the end-term in the
first prem ise, C refers to the end-term in the second
prem ise, and B refers to the m iddle term ). A s each
prem ise can contain one of four quantifiers, and there
are four figures,64 standard prem ise pairs are possible.
The logically valid conclusion to a syllogism is a
statem entw hich describes the relationship betw een the

two end term s in a w ay that is necessarily true, given
thatthe prem ises are true.
The principal challenges for a theory of syllogistic
reasoning are: (1) to explain how people are able to
reach the right conclusion for the right reason (i.e.,
logical com petence), and (2) to explain the system atic
variations in difficulty and responding betw een
different form s of syllogism (i.e., perform ance).
Responses to syllogism s vary both in term s ofthe form s
ofquantified conclusion generated,and in the tendency
to respond thatthere is no valid conclusion.O ne theory
that provides a good fit for the data, and that has
received considerable support and attention in the
literature is the m ental m odels theory (e.g., JohnsonLaird & Byrne,1991).
This theory, w hich can be said to have its routes in
early Euler circles, set-based accounts (e.g., Erickson,
1974,1978),is one ofthe m ostcom prehensive theories
ofsyllogistic reasoning com petence and perform ance.It
assum es that the reasoning process begins w ith the
construction of a m ental m odel of the prem ises w ithin
w orking m em ory that m akes explicit the m inim um
am ount of inform ation. From this initial m odel a
parsim onious conclusions is form ulated,the validity of
w hich is tested in a search for counter-exam ples— a
process w hich m ay involve 'fleshing out' the initial
m odel.Ifa falsifying m odelcannotbe constructed,then
the conclusion is generated (since it m ust be valid),
otherw ise it is rejected. Reasoners w ho experience
difficulty w hilst reasoning w ill be inclined either to
respond with an incorrect quantified response that is
consistentw ith currentm odels,orto say thatthere is no
valid conclusion.
A centralassum ption of the m ental m odels theory is
that syllogism s vary in term s of the num ber of m ental
m odels it is necessary to construct in order to test
putative conclusions. W ith som e syllogism s a single
m odel is sufficient for a valid conclusion to be
generated (term ed one-m odelsyllogism s),w ith others it
is necessary to construct tw o or three m odels (term ed
m ultiple-m odelsyllogism s).M ultiple-m odelsyllogism s

place greater,and less m anageable dem ands on lim ited
w orking m em ory resources than one-m odelsyllogism s,
and consequently,yield the sm allestproportion ofvalid
conclusions and the largest proportion of erroneous no
valid conclusion (NVC)responses.
A lthough good support has been found for m ental
m odels accounts ofperform ance (e.g.,Johnson-Laird &
Bara, 1984), the theory does have som e notable
w eaknesses. First, the theory does not clearly specify
how conclusions are form ulated, and so cannot
adequately explain the clear preference for som e
conclusions over others. For exam ple, according to
Johnson-Laird and Steedm an (1978),the theory predicts
an average of 3.3 different responses per syllogism .
Second, there is increasing evidence to suggest that
reasoners construct only a single m ental m odel and do
notengage in a falsification process atall(e.g.,Polk &
N ewell, 1995; Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird, 1999;
N ew stead,H andley & Buck,1999).
In spite of these w eaknesses, w e find m any
assum ptions of the m ental m odels theory to be
intuitively plausible,and believe thatthere is scope for
a new Euler-circle inspired m ental m odels account
w hich retains som e of these assum ptions,specifies the
m anner in w hich conclusions are generated m ore
precisely,and incorporates the idea thatconclusions are
generated after the construction of a single m inim al
m entalrepresentation.

A C ognitive U ncertainty Theory
In accordance with the m ental m odels theory, w e
propose a theory that assum es people reason with
syllogism s by constructing abstract analogical m odels
ofthe logicalrelationships betw een the term s described
in the prem ises w ithin w orking m em ory. W e w ould
argue that the goal of reasoners w hen constructing
m odels of syllogism s is to represent m entally both the
sem antic m eaning of each prem ise and the order of the
term s w ithin each prem ise in the sim plest and m ost
probable form . Sim ple m odels are those w hich do not
explicitly represent all of the different possible
relationships betw een the end term s. These are
constructed for reasons of cognitive econom y, since
they should not place such high loads on lim ited
w orking m em ory capacity as w ould the consideration of
m ore com plex alternative m odels.Probable m odels are
those w hich represent the m ost likely or 'available'
situation w here a num berofalternatives are possible.
Justas the written and spoken form s of term s w ithin
prem ises are read orheard in a particularserialorder,so
the m ental representations constructed of term s w ithin
prem ises are intended to be scanned m entally in a
direction w hich corresponds w ith these form s of
presentation. For ease of explanation w e shall refer to
this intended scanning direction as 'leftto right'.

The R epresentation ofQ uantifiers
If a 'universal' quantifier (all or no/none) precedes a
term ,then the com plete class of item s or individuals to
w hich the term refers w illbe represented in the m odel.
For exam ple, in our notation, "A ll A " would be
represented as:[A ]
W hen a prem ise has the universal, affirm ative
quantifier all (e.g., "A ll A are B"), we suggest that
reasoners representthe prem ise as:[A B]
This representation (and the representations
constructed for all other form s of prem ise) is intended
to represent both the m eaning of the prem ise and the
order of the term s w ithin the prem ise. It features a
description ofthe class A (the subjectofthe prem ise)in
term s of the class B. This is the sim plest m ost
econom ical w ay of representing this prem ise, since it
avoids the need to represent m em bers of the B class
w ho are not also m em bers of the A class. The
representation is equivalentto the conditionalstatem ent
"Ifitis an A ,then itis a B".Justas the statem ent"A llA
are B" is intended to be read from left to right (or
spoken in a corresponding serial order), so this
representation is intended to be scanned from left to
right. W hen scanned from left to right, this
representation is unam biguous.H owever,w hen scanned
from right to left, the representation is am biguous,
suggesting a fallacious identity interpretation of the
prem ise (i.e., am biguity in the representation leads to
the assum ption that"A llA are B" also m eans "A llB are
A ").
Twenty eight syllogism s have at least one prem ise
featuring the All quantifier. Eighteen of these are
determ inate syllogism s. For fourteen of these, the
am biguity of this representation does not affect valid
conclusion generation. H owever, the assum ption that
participants construct am biguous representations of All
prem ises can account for all preferred conclusions for
the rem aining fourteen syllogism s.
The prem ise "N o A are B" (featuring the universal,
negative quantifier)w ould be represented as:[A ][B]
If an 'existential'quantifier precedes a term , then an
incom plete class of item s or individuals to w hich the
term refers w ill be represented in the m odel. For
exam ple,"Som e A " would be represented as:A )or(A
G rice's (1975)m axim of quantity states thatspeakers
should be as inform ative as possible, and should not
deliberately w ithhold inform ation w hich they know to
be true. It follows from this notion that it w ould be
w rong for speakers to use the w ord "som e" w hen they
know "all" to be true (see also Begg,1987;N ew stead &
G riggs, 1983). W e argue, therefore, that although a
logician's definition of the quantifier som e is "at least
one and possibly all", com plete classes of item s or
individuals are notrepresented w hen a term is preceded
by "som e".H ence,we suggest that the prem ise "Som e

A are B" (featuring the existential, affirm ative
quantifier)would be represented as:[A )B]
W ith this prem ise,the possibility thatthere could be
A 's that are not B's is not represented in the m odel,
although this m ay be understood im plicitly.
The prem ise "Som e A are not B" (featuring the
existential, negative quantifier) would be represented
as:(A [B]
In this instance,the possibility thatthere could be A 's
that are B's is not represented in the m odel,but again,
this m ay be understood im plicitly.

M odelC onstruction
Itis suggested thatthe construction ofm odels occurs as
follow s:
1) O ne of the tw o prem ises is picked to be the first
prem ise represented in the m odel.
2) A m odel of the first prem ise is constructed in
w hich the first term in the prem ise is described in
relation to the second term .
3) The m odelofthe firstprem ise is augm ented so that
it features a representation of the first term in the
second prem ise described in relation to the second
term in the second prem ise.W hen a universalsetis
represented in the m odel of the first prem ise, and
the term referring to thatsetis preceded by som e in
the second prem ise,the universal representation is
reduced to an existential representation in the
com bined m odel(e.g.,syllogism s 3 and 5).A s w ith
the firstprem ise,the m odelis constructed such that
the sem antic m eaning of the quantifier and the
serial order of term s in the second prem ise are
retained w ithin the m odel(see exam ples below).
1.
Som e A are B
A llB are C

2.
Som e A are B
N o C are B

3.
N o A are B
Som e B are C

[A )B C ]
Som e A are C
(valid)

[c ] [A )B ]
N o C are A
(invalid)

[a ] [B )c ]
N o A are C
(invalid)

4.
Som e A are notB
A llC are B

5.
N o B are A
Som e B are C

6.
A llB are A
N o B are C

(A [c B ]
Som e A are notC
(valid)

[B )c ] [a ]
Som e C are notA
(valid)

[B A ] [C ]
N o A are C
(invalid)

Syllogism 1 exem plifies a situation in w hich it is
necessary to represent m em bers of one end-term class
w ho are also m em bers of the other end-term class in
order to construct a m odel in w hich the sem antic
m eaning of each prem ise and the order of the term s

w ithin each prem ise is represented. In contrast,
syllogism s 2 to 6 exem plify situations in w hich itis not
necessary to represent m em bers of one end-term class
w ho are also m em bers ofthe otherend-term class.
W e acknow ledge thatthe m odelshow n for syllogism
5 is not the only possible m odel that could be
constructed. For exam ple, the possible intersection
between the A term and C term , or the possible
containm entof the A term w ithin the C term could be
represented in a m odel. W e would suggest, how ever,
thatifitis notnecessary to representan overlap in class
m em bership in a m odel in order to represent the
m eaning of each prem ise and the order of the term s,
then no overlap w ill be represented. The m odel for
syllogism 5 show s no overlap betw een the A term and
the C term ,and so,the relationship between these term s
show n in the m odel is equivalent to "N o C are A " or
"N o A are C". This m ay be considered a rational
approach to m odelconstruction,since the situation "N o
X are Y " (where X and Y are tw o properties picked at
random ) is alm ostalw ays true (cf.Chater & O aksford,
1999). H ence, the m odel show n for syllogism 5
represents the m ostprobable situation outof a num ber
ofpossible alternatives.

C ertainty and U ncertainty w ithin M odels
In som e instances,the representation ofone end term in
relation to the other end term in a m odelis 'certain'.By
this w e m ean thatthe class represented by one end term
(e.g., the A 's in syllogism 4) cannot incorporate
m em bers ofthe class represented by the other end term
(e.g., the C's in syllogism 4) unless m em bers of one
end-term class (e.g.,the A 's in syllogism 1) are already
m em bers of the other end-term class (e.g., the C's in
syllogism 1). In other instances, how ever (e.g., in
syllogism s 2,3 4 and 5),the representation of one end
term is 'uncertain'in relation to the otherend term .That
is, m em bers of one end-term class w ho are not
represented as being m em bers of the other end-term
class could possibly be m em bers of thatother end-term
class— in our notation, low ercase letters denote
uncertain representation of a term .For exam ple,in the
m odelforsyllogism 2,as the possibility thatthere could
be som e A 's that are not B's is not explicitly
represented, it is possible that som e or all of the C's
represented could be A 's— hence, the C term is
represented by a low ercase letter. In the m odels for
syllogism s 3 and 5,the only certain representations are
ofthe B's thatare C's.A s som e orallofthe A 's thatare
represented could be C's,and som e orallofthe C's that
are not B's could be A 's, both the A 's and the C's are
show n in low ercase.

Suggested C onclusion G eneration
The conclusion thatis initially 'suggested'by a m odelis
the one thatfollow s the serialorder in w hich the term s
are represented (left-to-right in our notation). The
subject of this conclusion w ill be the end term on the
left.The quantifier that is chosen is determ ined by the
representation of that term . If an existential set is
represented,then the conclusion w illhave an existential
quantifier(eithersom e orsom e… are not),otherwise the
conclusion w illhave a universalquantifier(eitherAllor
No). If the first end term in the m odel is represented
outside the second end term ,then the conclusion w illbe
negative (eitherNo orSom e… are not),otherwise itw ill
be affirm ative (eitherAllorSom e).
A lthough conclusions that are suggested by a m odel
w ill be the preferred responses, the initial conclusion
suggested by left-to-right scanning is not alw ays the
one thatis generated.The initialconclusions suggested
by left-to-right scanning of the m odels constructed for
the six exam ple syllogism s are show n beneath the
m odels.
W ith som e syllogism s the representation of the
subject of the conclusion suggested by left-to-right
scanning is uncertain (e.g., the C term in syllogism 2
and the A term in syllogism 3). U ncertainty of this
nature in a m odel should cause reasoners to lack
confidence or certainty over the validity of an initial
conclusion,and should m otivate them to scan the m odel
from right-to-leftin search ofan alternative conclusion.
If the subject of the conclusion suggested by right-toleft scanning has a certain representation, then this
conclusion w ill be favoured over the conclusion
initially suggested (w hen scanned from rightto leftthe
m odel for syllogism 2 suggests the valid conclusion
"Som e A are not C" and the m odel for syllogism 3
suggests the valid conclusion "Som e C are not A ").
Since tw o stages of conclusion generation are required
w ith these problem s, they load cognitive resources
m ore heavily than those w ith m odels w here the subject
of the conclusion suggested by left-to-rightscanning is
certain (e.g., syllogism 1). Consequently, they should
yield m ore logical errors— in particular,the generation
of invalid conclusions that are consistent w ith left-toright scanning (w hich should be the second m ost
com m on quantified response)— low er feelings of
certainty in participants, and high levels of fallacious
NVC responding.
W ith som e indeterm inate syllogism s,the subjects of
conclusions suggested by both left-to-rightand right-toleft scanning have uncertain representations (see
syllogism s 8 to 12). W ith these problem s w e suggest
that the conclusion suggested by left-to-right scanning
w ill be generated m ore frequently than the one
suggested by right-to-left scanning. This is because
som e reasoners w ill fail to generate a conclusion

through right-to-leftscanning due to the extra cognitive
dem and involved,w hile m ostreasoners w illbe able to
generate an initial conclusion through left-to-right
scanning.These syllogism s should yield low er feelings
of certainty in participants and m ore NVC responses
than syllogism s w ith m odels containing one or no
uncertain representations.
D irect and indirect representation of the subject
W ith m ost determ inate syllogism s the subject of the
valid conclusion is represented 'directly'in the m odelby
m em bers of the class referred to by the subject of this
conclusion. For exam ple, the subject of the valid
conclusion to syllogism 2 is "Som e A ", and the
representation of this in the m odel is also "Som e A ".
W ith som e determ inate syllogism s, how ever, the
subjectofthe valid conclusion is represented 'indirectly'
in the m odelby m em bers ofthe m iddle-term class w ho
are also m em bers ofthe class referred to by the subject
ofthis conclusion.Forexam ple,the subjectofthe valid
conclusion to syllogism 3 is "Som e C", although the
representation of this in the m odelis "Som e B".In this
instance it is necessary to convert m entally the
representation of the subject of the conclusion from
"Som e B" to "Som e C" before a valid conclusion can be
generated. A s this additional step in the reasoning
process is necessary,w e suggestthatthese problem s are
m ore difficult than those w here the subject is
represented directly. H ence, syllogism 3 should yield
m ore logical errors (including a greater proportion of
NVC responding) and lower feelings of certainty in
participants than syllogism 2.

Im plied C onclusion G eneration
N ot all individuals respond w ith a conclusion that is
suggested directly by a m odel.A sm allproportion will
respond with a conclusion that is im plied by a m odel.
W e suggest that im plication affects responding in the
follow ing w ay:
•

•

A s som e and som e… are not are given sim ilar
interpretations (e.g., see Begg & H arris, 1982),
w henever a som e conclusion is suggested by a
m odel, a som e… are not conclusion w ill often be
generated, and w henever a som e… are not
conclusion is suggested by a m odel, a som e
conclusion w illoften be generated.
Conclusions w ith universalquantifiers (alland no)
im ply that existential alternatives are also true
(som e and som e… are notrespectively).

C ategorising Syllogism s
W hen m odels are constructed and conclusions
generated according to the assum ptions w e have
outlined,five types of determ inate syllogism (assigned

labels D 1 to D 5 in Table 1) and four types of
indeterm inate syllogism (assigned labels I1 to I4 in
Table 1) can be identified.Exam ple syllogism s 1 and 4
are classified as D 1 problem s, syllogism 6 is a D 2
problem ,syllogism 2 is a D 3 problem ,syllogism 5 is a
D 4 problem ,and syllogism 3 is a D 5 problem .
Exam ples of indeterm inate syllogism s together w ith
m odels and suggested conclusions are given below .
7.
A llA are B
Som e B are C

8.
Som e B are notA
N o C are B

9.
Som e A are notB
Som e C are B

[A B )C ]
Som e A are C

[c ] (B [a ]
NVC
N o C are A

(a [c )B ]
NVC
Som e A are notC

10.
N o B are A
N o B are C

11.
Som e B are notA
Som e B are C

12.
Som e B are A
Som e C are B

[ B ] [a ] [ c ]
[a ][B ][c ]
or
[c ][B ][a ]
NVC
N o A are C
or
N o C are A

(B [ a ] [ B )c ]
(a [B )c ]
or
((c B [a ]
NVC
Som e A are notC
or
Som e C are notA

[ B )a ] [ c )B ]
[c )B )a ]
NVC
Som e C are A

Exam ple syllogism 7 is an I4 problem ,syllogism s 8 and
9 are I1 problem s, syllogism s 10 and 11 are I3
problem s,and syllogism 12 is an I2 problem .W ith tw o
of these (types I4 and I1),it is possible to construct a
m odelin w hich the sem antic m eaning of each prem ise
and the order of term s in the prem ises are represented
w ith little difficulty.W ith the rem aining two,however,
the construction of a 'unified' m odel is less
straightforward, as either: (1) the prem ises suggest
m odels w ith a split representation of the m iddle term
(type I2 and som e I3),or(2)the prem ises do notdictate
the order in w hich the end term s should be represented
in a m odel (type I3). W ith type I2 and I3 problem s,
reasoners m ay feel highly confident that there is no
necessary relationship between the end term s, and so,
respond that there is NVC. H ow ever, as reasoners
display a bias towards the generation of quantified
responses w here NVC responses are appropriate (e.g.,
Johnson-Laird & Steedm an, 1978; Johnson-Laird &
Bara, 1984), with I2 and I3 syllogism s w e have
considered strategies reasoners m ay adoptin order that
m odels m ight still be constructed and quantified
conclusions generated.W ith I2 syllogism s a quantified
conclusion m ay be generated if reasoners construct a
m odelin w hich a representation of the end term w hich
form s the subjectofa som e prem ise (e.g.,"Som e C are

B" in syllogism 12) is contained w ithin the class
referred to by the m iddle term in the other prem ise (see
second m odelforsyllogism 12).There are good reasons
forassum ing thatm odels ofthis nature are constructed:
(1) they are able to represent the sem antic m eaning of
each prem ise and the order of the term s w ithin each
prem ise, and (2) they feature a representation of a
highly probable relationship betw een the end term s.
W ith I3 syllogism s, a unified m odel m ay be
constructed after applying a sim ple conversion
procedure to one of the prem ises (i.e.,by sw itching the
two term s in a prem ise around w ithout changing the
quantifier). O nce conversion has taken place, it is
possible for reasoners to construct m odels like those
constructed for I1 or I2 syllogism s (depending upon
m ood) and to generate quantified conclusions (see
second m odels forsyllogism s 10 and 11).
Table 1:N ine types ofsyllogism as a function of
figure,togetherw ith NVC rankings.

Type
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
I1
I2
I3
I4

AB
BC
4
1
0
0
1
5
2
0
3

BA
CB
4
1
0
0
1
5
2
0
3

AB
CB
4
0
2
0
0
2
0
5
3

BA
BC
4
3
0
2
0
0
0
7
0

Total
16
5
2
2
2
12
4
12
9

NVC
Rank
1
2
3
3
4
5
6
6
2.5

Rank values have been assigned to each type of
syllogism in Table 1 according to the level of NVC
responding that should be associated with them
according to the theory (a 1 ranking denotes a low level
of NVC responding). W ith the exception of I2 and I3
syllogism s (w here high levels of NVC responding
should be associated with strong feelings of certainty),
these rankings should correlate negatively with the
levels of certainty associated w ith each type of
syllogism .

Predicting perform ance
W e have used Chater and O aksford's (1999) m etaanalysis data (on conclusion quantification and NVC
responding) together w ith Johnson-Laird and Steedm an
(1978, Experim ent 1 and 2), and Johnson-Laird and
Bara's (1983, Experim ent 3) data (on conclusion term
order) in order to test how w ell the cognitive
uncertainty theory explains syllogistic reasoning
perform ance.

Q uantification
The theory m akes ranking predictions form ostcom m on
conclusions, as w ell as second, third and fourth m ost
com m on conclusions. Predicted rankings m atch data
rankings in 175 outof256 cases.W hen the proportions
ofquantified responses associated with correctm atches
are sum m ed, the theory accounts for nearly 91% of
quantified responses in exactorderofcom m onality.

Term O rder in Preferred C onclusions
The theory m akes a definite prediction aboutthe order
of term s in preferred conclusions for 50 of the 64
prem ise pairs.It m atches the term order for preferred
conclusions in 47 of these, and therefore, directly
predicts the term order for over 73% of preferred
quantified responses in the dataalthough the theory
can accom m odate over95% ofthese.

N VC responding
Rank values have been assigned to each syllogism
based on predicted feelings of certainty in participants,
and how m uch NVC responding would be expected
according to the theory (see Table 1). There is a
significant correlation between these rankings and the
percentages ofNVC responses in the m eta-analysis data
(Spearm an's Rho = .885,p<.001).The theory,therefore,
accounts for78% ofthe variance in the NVC data.

D iscussion
A new theory ofsyllogistic reasoning,inspired by early
Euler circles, set-based, explanations has been
proposed.The theory has been show n to provide a good
fitto m eta-analysis data derived from pastexperim ents,
in term s of: (1) predicting order of preference for
quantified responses, (2) predicting term -order in
preferred conclusions, and (3) accounting for the
varying tendency to give NVC responses.
The new theory w as developed in response to an
increasing aw areness that key assum ptions of the
m entalm odels accountproposed by Johnson-Laird and
colleagues w ere failing to receive support in the
literature.In particular,serious doubts have been raised
concerning the conclusion falsification and fleshing out
processes outlined in the m ental m odels theory. The
new accountovercom es this problem by suggesting that
only a single m odel is constructed based on an
interpretation ofthe sem antic m eanings ofthe prem ises.
M odels m ay be logically accurate, or suggest a
fallacious oram biguous interpretation ofAllquantifiers.
D ifficulty is said not to be caused by cognitive loads
associated w ith m odel construction, but instead by the
cognitive loads associated with 'searching'a m odel in
order to identify a conclusion that does not feature an
uncertain representation ofthe subject.

The m entalm odels accountm ay also be criticised for
not adequately specifying the m anner in w hich
conclusions are form ulated, and hence, not explaining
w hy clear orders of preference for different quantified
conclusions are evident in the data (e.g.,see Chater &
O aksford's m eta-analysis ofpastexperim ents).The new
theory clearly specifies w hich conclusion w ill be
identified firstfrom a m odel,w hetherotherconclusions
w ill be identified that are also suggested by a m odel,
and w hich conclusions w ill be generated to a lesser
degree after being im plied by a m odel. Im portantly,
clear psychological justifications are given for the
predicted orders of preference for these quantified
responses.

R eferences
Begg, I. (1987). Som e. Canadian Journal of
Psychology,41,62— 73.
Begg,I.,& H arris,G .(1982).O n the interpretation of
syllogism s. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behaviour,21,595— 620.
Bucciarelli, M ., & Johnson-Laird, P.N . (1998).
Strategies in syllogistic reasoning.Cognitive Science,
23,247— 303.
Chater, N ., & O aksford, M . (1999). The probability
heuristics m odel of syllogistic reasoning. Cognitive
Psychology,38,191— 258.
Erickson, J.R. (1974). A set analysis theory of
behaviour in form al syllogistic reasoning tasks. In
R.L. Solso (Ed.), Theories of cognitive psychology:
The Loyola Sym posium . H illsdale, N .J.: Lawrence
Erlbaum A ssociates Inc.
Erickson, J.R. (1978). Research on syllogistic
reasoning.In R.Revlin & R.E.M ayer(Eds.),H um an
reasoning.W ashington,D C:W inston.
G rice, P. (1975). Logic and converstion.In P. Cole &
J.L.M organ (Eds.),Studies in syntax,Vol.3: Speech
acts.N ew Y ork:A cadem ic Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N ., & Bara, B.G . (1984). Syllogistic
inference.Cognition,16,1— 62.
Johnson-Laird, P.N ., & Byrne, R.M .J. (1991).
D eduction.H ove:Lawrence Erlbaum A ssociates Ltd.
Johnson-Laird, P.N ., & Steedm an, M . (1978). The
psychology of syllogism s.Cognitive Psychology,10,
64— 99.
N ew stead, S.E., & G riggs, R.A . (1983). D rawing
inferences from quantified statem ents:A study of the
square of opposition.Journalof V erbalLearning and
VerbalBehaviour,22,535— 546.
N ew stead, S.E., H andley, S.J., & Buck, E. (1999).
Falsifying m ental m odels: Testing the predictions of
theories of syllogistic reasoning. M em ory and
Cognition,27,344— 354.
Polk,T.A ., & N ew ell, A . (1995). D eduction as verbal
reasoning.PsychologicalReview,102,533— 566.

