UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Competition between linguistic cues and perceptual cues in children's categorization:
English- and Japanese-speaking children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0z46v1jf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Yoshida, Hanako
Smith, Linda B.
Drake, Cindy
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Competition between linguistic cues and perceptual cues in children’s
categorization: English- and Japanese-speaking children
Hanako Yoshida (hayoshid@indiana.edu)
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Cindy Drake (cdrake@indiana.edu)
Joy Swanson (jomswans@indiana.edu)
Leanna Gudel (lgudel@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychology Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-7007 USA

Abstract
Past research on children’s categorizations has centered
on the question of whether categorization is based
primarily and /or strictly on perceptual properties or on
more conceptual notions of kinds. This paper reports
new data pertinent to this issue by examining the
influence of linguistic cues and perceptual cues. The
results showed that the linguistic cues strongly
influenced English-and Japanese-speaking children’s
judgments in systematic manner. This suggest that for
both language groups, linguistic cues activated different
conceptual understanding that direct children’s attention
to different properties. Nevertheless, the linguistic cues
had their effect only given named things with ambiguous
properties.

Introduction
Children categorize the world systematically. The
systematicity of early categories has been well
documented by many researchers (Mandler, Bauer and
McDonough, 1991; Landau, Smith and Jones, 1998a,
1998b; Samuelson & Smith 1999; Soja, Carey &
Spelke1991; Markman, 1991; Bauer & Mandler, 1989.)
Yet the mechanisms responsible for this systematicity
in performance are not yet specified. The research
reported in this paper seeks insights into these
mechanisms and is motivated by both contemporary
and traditional ideas about the nature of categories. The
first idea is the more modern one of emergent
categories that reflects momentary goals as well as long
term knowledge. The second idea is the more
traditional one of stable categories that reflects
regularities in experience. Considered jointly these two
ideas suggest a new way of thinking about how
language influences children’s category formation and
fosters cultural differences.

Contemporary Idea
Barsalou (1983) introduced the idea of an ad hoc
category, a category formed in the moment in the
service of solving a specific problem, for example one
might from a category of “all the objects on my desk I
can use to draw a straight line” or “all the things I can

eat in this restaurant that I can afford.” Our ability to
form coherent ad hoc categories clearly depends on
long-term knowledge of objects, their properties, and
goals. The idea, however, is that specific bits of
knowledge and the current input are melded to form a
category adaptively fit to the moment. "Ad hoc
categories should come to mind only when primed by
current goals. Laurence W. Barsalou, 1983, (p. 223)"

Traditional Idea
The traditional idea of categories contrasts with the
on-line flexibility of Barsalou’s ad hoc categories.
Traditionally, categories have been seen as fixed,
mental structures that one either has or does not. It is
this traditional idea about categories that make Whorf’s
(1956) claims about the role of language in
categorization so contentious. Whorf argued that
concepts are the product of language and so speakers of
different languages “have” different concepts. But
viewed through a more modern lens, Whorf’s ideas
present another possibility. “… all observers are not led
by the same physical evidence to the same picture of
the universe, unless their linguistic backgrounds are
similar.”(1956:214)—(p. 6 Gumperz & Levinson,
1996) Here is the idea: Language operates both as a
contextual and long-term force an on-line category
formation, causing speakers of different languages to
attend to different properties in the task and thus to
create different ad hoc categories. We test this idea in a
study of English- and Japanese-speaking children’s
attention to cues distinguishing animates and
inanimates.

Animates and inanimates
All languages distinguish between animates and
inanimates and do so in a variety of ways. However,
English and Japanese differ in their systems for
individuating objects, and specifically in whether they
treat animates as special discrete kinds. English treats
both animate and inanimate objects as discrete and
countable, that is, names for animate and inanimate
objects are count nouns that take the plural. Substances,

in contrast, are named by mass nouns and not pluralized
but instead take continuous quantifiers. In contrast,
Japanese treats only animates as discrete. Nouns in
Japanese are not pluralized, but names for animates can
take an optional plural form. Further, the classifier
system used for counting distinguishes animates from
inanimate objects, but does not distinguish substances
from inanimate objects. If Whorf is right, these
linguistic differences might lead Japanese speakers
more than English speakers to attend to properties
relevant to animal categories. If instead Barsalou is
right about the online creation of categories, cues
suggesting the relevance of animacy properties should
make speakers of both languages attend to properties
relevant for animal categories. Finally, if both Whorf
and Barsalou are right, speakers of both languages may
be differentially sensitive to these cues and thus form
different categories online.

Task
One task commonly used to examine children’s
category formation is the novel noun generalization
task (e.g., Landau, Smith & Jones, 1988.) In this task,
children are presented with a novel object, told its
name, and then asked what other objects have the same
name. Since both the objects and names are novel, this
task measures category creation. Research has shown
that children smartly use information about the objects
and information from linguistics in the category
formation (See, Smith, 1995, for a review). Critical to
the present research are well replicated findings
showing that when the named novel object has the
properties of an artifact (solid, angular, complex
shapes), children from categories based on shape but
when the named novel object has properties of animals
(e.g., eyes), children form categories based on a joint
similarity in shape and texture (Jones et. al, 1991). We
use this task and children’s creation of shape-based
versus shape plus texture based categories as a measure
of the role of language history and on-line linguistic
cues in children’s category formation. More
specifically, the experiments examine the interaction of
the immediate linguistic cues, the individual’s history
of using those linguistic cues, and perceptual properties
of the to-be-classified objects.

Experiment 1
The first experiment examined Japanese-speaking
children’s use of both linguistic cues and perceptual
cues in category formation. The design crosses two
levels of linguistic cues, one clearly marking the object
as animate, one clearly marking the object as
inanimate—with three different perceptual cues, cues
that strongly suggest an animate thing, cues that weakly
suggest an animate thing and cues that strongly suggest
an inanimate thing.

The linguistic cues are aru and iru . In locative
constructions (e.g., There is a cup) aru is obligatorily
used with inanimate objects and iru is obligatorily used
with animate objects. This is a highly salient and
pervasive lexical contrast in Japanese. Figure 1
illustrates the 3 kinds of perceptual cues: rounded
objects with eyes, rounded objects with appendages that
might be viewed as legs, and angular objects with no
properties suggestive of animate things. We ask: How
do Japanese-speaking children combine these
perceptual and linguistic cues when forming a new
category?

Method
Participants Sixty monolingual Japanese-speaking
children who were 21.06 to 45.7 months old
participated. Participants’ mean age was 34.51 months.
All the participants were recruited from Niigata, Japan.
All children participated with their parents.
Stimuli, materials and procedure Children
participated in one of the six conditions that resulted
from crossing the two linguistic cues (iru/aru) with the
three levels of perceptual cues. In each condition
children were tested in two blocks of 12 trials. In each
block, a unique exemplar was named with a novel name
and the child was asked whether that name also labeled
each of 6 test objects. These six test objects were each
queried twice in a randomly determined order. Three of
these were control objects designed so that children
should respond the same way regardless of whether
they perceived the named object as depicting an
animate or inanimate. One control object matched the
exemplar in all features thus all children should say
“yes” the name of the exemplar applies to this object.
Two control objects differed from the exemplar in both
shape and texture (or shape and color), thus all children
should say “no” the name of the exemplar does not
apply to these objects. The three diagnostic test objects
matched the exemplar in shape and texture, shape and
color, or only shape. If children perceive the exemplar
as an animate, they should say the name applies only to
the shape-and –texture matching object. If children
perceive the exemplar as an artifact, they should say ”
yes” the name of the exemplar applies to all three
diagnostic objects.
The sentence frames used in the experiment were
presented in the following in the Iru and Aru
conditions, respectively: "Kokoni ____ ga iru yo" and
"Kokoni ___ ga aru yo." Test objects were queried as
follows in the Iru and Aru conditions respectively:
"Kokoni ____ga iru kana?” and "Kokoni _____ ga aru
kana?"
The objects used in this experiment are, illustrated in
Figure 1. The 3 control objects and 3 diagnostic test
objects for the two test sets were constructed in the
same way and are labeled in Figure 1 by the properties
on which they match the named exemplar. All objects

were 3-dimensional, approximately 7cm x 7cm x 7cm,
in size. The sample set illustrated in Figure 1 is stimuli
with suggestive of animate cues: all objects in the pretraining set, the keppuru set, and tema set had
appendages made of pipe cleaners.

Results
When the exemplar had eyes, a clear cue indicating the
depiction of an animate, children generalized the name
to new instances that matched in both shape and
texture. The linguistic cues of iru and aru had no effect
on performance. When the exemplar was angularly
shaped and presented no cues suggesting an animate
thing, children generalized the name to all test objects
matching in shape. The linguistic cues of iru and aru
had no effect on performance. However, when the
exemplar presented weak perceptual cues suggesting an
animate thing, the linguistic cues had a dramatic effect.
The children generalized the name in the context of iru
(the animate form) only to test objects that matched the
exemplar in shape and texture just as they did when the
exemplar had eyes. However, in the context of aru (the
inanimate form) , the children generalized the name to
all objects that matched the exemplar in shape just as
they did when the exemplar was clearly an artifact.
These conclusions were confirmed by analyses of “yes”
responses (the name applies) on the diagnostic trials.
Children’s proportions of “yes” responses on these
trials were submitted to analysis of variance for a 2
(Linguistic cues) X 3(perceptual cues) mixed design.
The analysis revealed the main effect of Linguistic
cues, F (1,54) = 15.834, p < .001, the main effect of
perceptual cues, F (2,54) = 14.132, and the interaction
between perceptual cues and linguistic cues, F (2,54) =
9.073, p < .001. The “yes” responses for these
diagnostic test objects in the 6 conditions are shown in
Figure 2. These results show: (1) clear effects of
perceptual cues on category formation. (2) clear effects
of linguistic cues, and (3) the dominance of perceptual
over linguistic cues, at least for these children in this
task context.

saying, “This mobit wants to stay here.” or “This mobit
goes here”

Method
Participants Twenty monolingual English-speaking
children between the ages of 23 to 43 months
participated. The mean age was 31.7 months. The
experimental sessions were held in Bloomington, IN.
Participation of children was voluntary.
Stimuli, materials, design and procedure All aspects
of the stimuli, procedure and design were identical to
Experiment 1 with the exceptions of the type of stimuli
and the sentence frames in which the novel names were
presented. We used only one perceptual level for
stimuli: ambiguous objects (see Figure. 1). The
sentence frames used in English were non-locative
constructions that had plausible animate/inanimate
distinction “wants” for animate and “goes” for
inanimate or neutral. The novel words employed to
name the exemplars in the Experiment 2 were slightly
altered to sound natural in English (e.g., mobito/mobit;
keppuru/kipple; tema/teema).

Results
As shown in Figure 3, the English-speaking children
generalized the names for these objects in the same way
in both linguistic conditions, to all test objects that
matched the exemplar in shape. This suggests children
saw the objects as artifacts. The key result, however, is
that they were unaffected by the linguistic cues. This
contrasts with the Japanese-speaking children of
Experiment 1 who categorized these same ambiguous
objects differently in the two linguistic contexts.

Experiment 3
Are English-speaking children just less sensitive to
linguistic cues? Perhaps “wants” is not as strong a cue
suggesting animacy in English as “iru “ is in Japanese.
In Experiment 3, we used a sentence context containing
personal pronouns (he/she) in an attempt to encourage
children to form animal-like categories.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed Japanese-speaking children’s
sensitivity to linguistic cues in category formation,
when the perceptual cues were not strongly pointing in
some other direction. The goal of Experiment 2 was to
replicate this finding with English-speaking children.
Specifically, children were provided with stimulus
objects that presented weak cues suggestive of animacy,
appendages that could be seen as legs. The exemplar
was named in one of two sentence frames that used
different verbs; one using a verb suggesting an animate
kind, the other using a neutral verb. The verbs used
were “wants” and “goes”: The exemplar was named

Method
Participants Twenty monolingual English-speaking
children between the ages of 24 to 43 months
participated. The mean age was 32.95 months. The
experimental sessions were held in Bloomington, IN.
Participation of children was voluntary.
Stimuli, materials, design and procedure All aspects
of the stimuli, procedure and design were identical to
Experiment 2 with the exception of the sentence frames
in which the novel names were presented. The sentence
frames used in English had either pronoun “she/he” or
neutral subject “it” to refer the object

Results
English-speaking children showed clear (and reliable)
effect of linguistic cue. As is evident in Figure 4, in the
context of “he/she,” children generalized the name to
test objects matching the exemplar in shape and texture.
In the context of “it,” children generalized the name to
new instances the same shape as the exemplar. Thus,
we see clear on-line effects of linguistic cues on
category formation in English-speaking as well as
Japanese-speaking children.
The analysis revealed that the number of ‘yes’
responses to the shape matching test objects for the two
groups of children differed reliably, t=3.851, p<.005.
Given objects with features suggestive of animal limbs,
English-speaking children provided with pronoun
“she/he" were significantly more likely to form a
narrower category based on both shape and texture than
children with the neutral subject "it" only new instances
that matched in shape alone.
Clearly, these pronouns activated different
conceptual understanding that directed children’s
attention to different properties.

Experiment 4
The evidence thus far fits the contemporary vision of
systematic categories created on-line and in-themoment from the combination of perceptual cues and
linguistic cues. But what of the long-term effects of
learning particular language with a particular structure
on on-line category formation. Although both English
and Japanese have many linguistic devices and
contrasts organized around animacy, the Japanese
language through its system of individuation is
arguably more concerned with animacy than English.
Are linguistic cues suggesting animacy thus stronger
for Japanese-speaking children than English-speaking
children? To test this, we presented both English- and
Japanese-speaking children with a novel angular artifact
with no cues even remotely suggestive of animate
thing. We named the object with a novel name in a
linguistic context loaded with multiple cues indicating
the conceptualization of the object as an animate.: for
English “See, who do you think this is? He is a Mobit!
Isn’t this mobit cute? There might be some more mobits
that came to play with us!” and for Japanese, “Hora,
koko ni dare ga iru to omou? Kokoni iru nowa mobito
kun. Mobito kuntte kawaii desyo? Hoka nimo motto
ippai mobito ga asobini kiteirukamo shirenaiyo!”

Method
Participants Ten monolingual English-speaking
children who were 25 to 45 months old and 10
Japanese-speaking children who are 27.4 to 38 months
old participated. English-speaking children’s mean age
at this study was 35.5 months, and Japanese-speaking

children’s mean age was 33.82 months. The Englishspeaking children were recruited from Bloomington,
IN. The Japanese-speaking children were recruited
from Niigata, Japan. All children participated with their
volunteer parents.
Stimuli, materials, design and procedure All aspects
of the stimuli, procedure and design were identical to
Experiment 2 & 3 with the exceptions of the sentence
frames in which the novel names were presented.

Results
As is evident in Figure 5, Japanese-speaking children
generalized the name to all test objects that matched the
exemplar in shape and texture, the pattern typical of
animate things. In contrast, English-speaking children
generalized the name to all instances like the exemplar
in shape, the pattern typical of artifacts. The numbers of
‘yes’ response to the shape matching test objects for the
two groups of children differ reliably, t=7.577, p<.001.
Apparently English-and Japanese-speaking children
see these objects differently. English-speaking children
form categories based on the perceptual cues, Japanesespeaking children follow the linguistic cues. It appears
that different histories of using language lead children
to make different use of on-line information, and thus,
in-the-moment-of the task, form different categories.

General discussion
The Whorfian question is often conceptualized as
asking whether speakers of different languages “have”
different categories. This question does not make sense
if categories are momentary creation. Certainly,
children’s categorizations in the novel noun
generalization task used here are momentary creations,
formed de nouveau from learning a single novel object
named with a novel name. But both English- and
Japanese-speaking 3 year olds readily and coherently
create categories in this task using perceptual and
linguistic information in the task as the basis for
categorizing new instances. But how in-task, in-themoment, information is used will also depend on the
life time histories in using those cues in other contexts.
In this way, we may see direct effects of the language
one knows, not on the categories and concepts one has,
but on the categories and concepts one creates to solve
a specific task.

Figures
Control objects

Keppuru

sh+tx+co tx

Tema

sh+tx+co tx

co

co

Diagnostic objects
sh+co sh+tx

sh+co sh+tx

sh

sh

Pronoun vs. Neutral (Ambiguous)

% of "yes" resonses

Exemplar

100

neutral

80

pronoun

60
40
20
0
SH+TX

SH+CO

SH

diagnosticobjects

Figure 1: Test set stimuli with suggestive animacy
features.
Iru & Aru with the perceptual cues

Figure 4. Proportion of “yes” responses by Englishspeaking children with two different linguistic cues to
test objects. On the x-axis, objects are labeled by the
properties matched to the exemplar.

% of "yes" to
diagnostic trials

100
80

Linguistic Loaded

40

Ar
u
I

20
0
artifact

ambiguous

animate

perceptual cues

% of "yes" responses

Figure 2: Proportion of “yes” responses by Japanesespeaking children with two different linguistic cues to
test objects that matched the exemplar by shape. On the
x-axis, objects are labeled by three perceptual cues.

100

wants

Wants vs. Goes (Ambiguous)

goes

80

% of "yes" responses

60

English

100

Japanese

80
60
40
20
0
SH+TX

SH+CO

SH

diagnostic objects

Figure 5. Proportion of “yes” responses by Japaneseand English-speaking children with a maximum
linguistic cues to test objects that are clearly artifacts.
On the x-axis, objects are labeled by the properties
matched to the exemplar.

60
40

References

20

Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad Hoc categories. Memory
and Cognition, 3, 211-227
Bauer, P.J. & Mandler, J.M. (1989) Taxonomies and
triads: Conceptual organization in one- to two-year
olds. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 156-184.
Gumperz, J. J., & Levinson, S. C. (1996) Introduction;
Linguistic relativity.re-examined. In J. J. Gumperz &
S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity
(pp-1-18). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Jones, S., Smith, L., & Landau, B. (1991). Object
properties and knowledge in early lexical learning.
Child Development, 62, 499-516.

0
SH+TX

SH+CO

SH

diagnostic objects

Figure 3. Proportion of “yes” responses by Englishspeaking children with two different linguistic cues to
test objects. On the x-axis, objects are labeled by the
properties matched to the exemplar.

Landau, K. B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning.
Cognitive Development, 3, 299-321.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. (1998a) Object
shape, object function, and object name. Journal of
Memory and Language, 38, 1-27.
Landau, B., Smith, L. & Jones, S. (1998b) Object
perception and object naming in early development.
Trends in cognitive science, 2, 19-24.
Mandler, J., M., Bauer, P. J., and McDonough, L.
(1991) Separating the sheep from the goats;
Differentiating
global
categories.
Cognitive
Development, 3, 247-264
Markman, E. M. (1991). The whole object, taxonomic,
and mutual exclusivity assumptions as initial
constraints on word meanings. In J. P. Byrnes & S.
A. Gelman (Eds.), Perspectives on language and
cognition: Interrelations in development (pp-72-106).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Samuelson, L. & Smith, L. B. (1999) Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category structure, and
syntax correspond? Cognition. 73, 1-33
Smith, L. B. (1995). Self-organizing processes in
learning to learn words: Development is not
induction. The Minnesota Symposia on Child
Psychology. Volume 28. Basic and applied
perspectives on learning, cognition, and development
(pp. 1-32). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Soja, N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children's inductions of word
meanings: Object terms and substance terms.
Cognition, 38, 179-211.
Whorf, B. (1956). Language, thought and reality:
Selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf (J.B.
Carroll, Ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

