UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conceptual Combination as Theory Formation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/70r6k9d1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Janetzko, Dietmar

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conceptual Combination as Theory Formation
Dietmar Janetzko
dietmar@cognition.iig.uni-freiburg.de
Institute of Computer Science and Social Research
Center of Cognitive Science
University of Freiburg i. Br.
D-79098 Freiburg

Abstract
Conceptual combination is an instance of synthetic problem solving comparable to design or planning. This work
reviews evidence supporting the view that the result of
such a synthesis has much in common with theory formation. Similar to theory formation inference in conceptual
combination can be modeled by using abduction as the
principal mechanism to generate hypotheses. However,
abduction in itself provides no answer to questions regarding the explanation and selection of hypotheses. Results of two experiments address these issues and provide
converging evidence to the view that conceptual combination is a form of theory formation. The results are
interpreted within a framework of constraint satisfaction
which is assumed to take place on a micro-level (compounding relations) and on a macro-level (principle of
parsimony).

Introduction
What is the “glue” between words like house and boat
that allows us to make sense out of the resulting conceptual combination house boat? There is a number of indications suggesting that conceptual combination is an instance of synthetic problem solving (like design or planning) that may be qualified as theory formation en miniature: First, most of the researchers in the field agree that
conceptual combination can be best described in terms
of knowledge structures, viz., two or more concepts that
are reconstructed locally once they are involved in conceptual combination. Simple concepts in itself are often
viewed as condensed theories (e.g., Murphy & Medin,
1985). Second, in many cases conceptual combinations
can be paraphrased by a relative clause (e.g., a house
boat is a boat that ...). In this way it becomes evident that
conceptual combinations may add a more fine-grained
conceptual schema to the conceptual classification system we already have. This is an example of taxonomy
revision that is often related to theory formation (e.g.,
Shrager & Langley, 1990). Third, conceptual combinations provide support in description, explanation and
prediction of phenomena, all of which are often taken
to be the defining functions of theories (e.g., Brown &
Ghiselli, 1955). The descriptive function is perhaps the
most obvious one since conceptual combination is one
of the major linguistic mechanisms for word formation
(Olsen, 2000). The explanatory function is actually at the

heart of conceptual combination: whenever we are confronted with a combination of concepts, we cannot but
start searching for a coherent explanation that integrates
the concepts usually by relation linking or carry over
of an attribute. Finally, the predictive function is supported by the fact that selective inheritance of attributes
is made possible in conceptual combination (Hampton,
1987). Hence, new phenomena or artifacts are often labeled by making use of it (Costello & Keane, 2000).
While work in theory formation has traditionally focused
on respectable scientific theories that have become hallmarks in the history of science, theory formation in conceptual combination is of a more mundane type. Usually,
its basic function is to set up micro theories that help explaining simple compounds like, e.g., turpentine jar and
the phenomena they are referring to. However, there are
striking parallels between both types of theory formation.
Though most of the work on conceptual combination
relies on comparable schemas of knowledge representation, the procedural assumptions may differ considerably. Upon closer inspection it becomes evident that
some of the variance in the field is due to the fact that different problems of conceptual combination are focused.
These aspects can be sorted by recasting them in terms of
a model of theory formation. In so doing, constraint satisfaction needs to be recognized as a major aspect of processing in synthetic problem solving (Smith & Brown,
1993). As in many instances of synthetic problem solving, in conceptual combination there is a huge number of
possibilities to integrate entities (e.g., nouns). This is evidenced by the high number of interpretations obtained
especially from novel compounds (Costello & Keane,
1997).
However, many of the investigations of conceptual
combination rely exclusively on interpretation and rating tasks. These methods can only tap time-consuming
processes. Clearly, we all know that conceptual combination can proceed both slowly and controlled. But
there is also evidence from the few reaction time studies
on conceptual combination that this process can also be
very fast and and carried out automatically (e.g., Gagné
& Shoben, 1997). The fact that processing of conceptual combinations may be accomplished either very fast
or slowly needs to be accounted for. For this reason, I
will suggest a schema that addresses the issue of constraint satisfaction in conceptual combination on two lev-

els, which classify problems of conceptual combination
according to two tasks:
I. The interface-selection task. A open question in
conceptual combination is whether or not conceptual
combinations are represented as a whole or in parts (full
listing hypothesis vs. decomposition hypothesis, Butterworth, 1983). This issue clearly has consequences
for models of processing of compounds and thus for
the interface-selection task in conceptual combination.
Usually, however, in work on conceptual combination
it is the decomposition hypothesis, which is implicitly adopted. In so doing, a number of rationales has
been hypothesized for the selection of the part(s) of the
knowledge structures involved (e.g., slots, relations) that
are taken to establish the linkage between combining
concepts. Investigations and models that address the
interface-selection task have been put forth: Wisniewski
(2000) suggested that an alignment process, viz., similarity assessment, between modifier and head guides
this task, while Estes & Glucksberg (2000) found evidence that salience of attributes is underlying interfaceselection. Finally, investigations by Gagné & Shoben
(1997) supported the view that there is a fixed set of compounding relations and selection of a relation is done according to the frequency of its usage. Construction of
interpretations of conceptual combinations proceeds by
rendering the reconstructed knowledge of the concepts
involved into the natural language. This task is accomplished if one or many interpretations of candidate conceptual combinatations are found.
II. The interpretation-selection task. Even if the selection problem is solved successfully, there is usually
a great number of possible interpretations remaining.
Hence, a second step has to take over that consists of
evaluating the candidate interpretations. Work along
these lines has been carried out by Costello & Keane
(2000) who provide empirical evidence that search of an
appropriate interpretation is narrowed down by the constraints of diagnosticity, plausibility and informativeness.
Basically, the two task of this schema boil down to a
generate-and-test approach, which is adjusted to issues
of conceptual combination. While there are a number
of investigations that address either the first or the second task, there is no organizing framework that integrates
work in the field and provides empirical evidence supporting this framework. Only in a few investigations the
generative nature of conceptual combination that leads to
synthesis of knowledge structures has been spelled out
in a sound way. The goal of this paper is to identify and
investigate mechanisms of theory formation in conceptual combination. In so doing the schema outlined above
provides some methodological assistance by guiding the
investigations to both a micro-level and a macro-level.
The paper is organized as follows: First, I am describing the type of conceptual combination that has been investigated in this work. Second, the role of theories in
conceptual combination is discussed. Third, following
the work of Stickl (1989) and Hobbs, Stickel, Appelt

& Martin (1990), I give an outline of abduction, which
is assumed to be the generative mechanism that drives
theory formation in conceptual combination. While the
work on abduction mentioned provides a sound foundation of processing conceptual combinations, there are
some empirical questions relating to the generation and
selection of hypotheses that are not addressed by this approach. Fourth, according to the two-step schema introduced above, I am presenting two experiments on these
issues. The first experiment highlights mechanisms of
linking modifier and head in conceptual combination.
The structure of preferred theories is investigated in the
second experiment. The final discussion places the results into the framework presented initially and considers
open questions related to theory formation in conceptual
combination.

Conceptual Combinations
The first part of a nominal or noun-noun compound is
usually called the modifier and the second part is referred
to as the head. There are various schemata for classifying interpretations of this type of compound, but the one
most widely accepted schema seems to be the one introduced by Wisniewski (e.g., Wisniewski, 2000). He
distinguishes three types of interpretations: In relationlinking interpretations, people explicitly use a relation to
explain a compound (e.g., robin snake = a snake that
eats robins). Property interpretations involve one or a
few properties of the modifier that are applied to the
head (e.g., robin snake = a snake that has a red underbelly). Hybrid interpretations are not precisely characterized since this category might apply to a conjunction
of the constituents or a cross between them (robin canary
= a bird that is half canary and half robin). The work
on conceptual combination described in this paper is focusing on noun-noun compounds that have a relational
interpretation.

The Role of Theories
The seminal paper of Murphy & Medin (1985) is often taken to be the beginning of a line of research that
views concepts as condensed theories. In many investigations of conceptual combination that follow this approach, knowledge or theories have not been described
very precisely. Still, ample evidence has been collected
that background or domain knowledge feeds into conceptual combination (e.g., Hampton, 1997).
In the work presented here, theories may be defined on
two levels: On a functional level, theories are conceived
as knowledge structures subjects may use for description, explanation and prediction of phenomena of interest. On a representational level, I am adopting a schema
for describing both the nominal compounds, background
knowledge and for deriving thematic or compounding relations that has been suggested by Hobbs et al. (1990, p.
24f):


x y turpentine y








jar x




nn y x




The three propositions of this logical form are meant
to signify a juxtaposition of two nominals, and nn is a
placeholder for the compounding relation to be found.
The background theory might take the following logical
form








y liquid y






etc1 y


turpentine y





which denotes that being liquid is among other attributes
a feature of turpentine and










e1 x y f unction e1 x contain e1 x y
etc2 e1 x y
jar x




liquid y



















meaning that if the function of something (x) is – among
other things – to contain liquid, then it may be a jar.1

Abduction in Conceptual Combination
The view on conceptual combination outlined in this
work follows a rationale of inference called abduction
that can be described as explanatory hypothesis generation (Stickel, 1989; Hobbs et al, 1990). More precisely,
the proper place of (the generative part of) abduction in
the schema described above is within the first task: By
abductive inference hypotheses are generated on the basis of domain or background knowledge that provide a
means for interface selection. Evaluation of the hypothesis is part of the second task.
Abduction is a mechanism used frequently in models of theory formation. Contrary to deductive reasoning
there is no guarantee for correctness in abductive reasoning. Cast in a more concise formal lingo, abduction can
be described as follows:
is a collection of data (facts, observations, givens);
explains ( would, if true, imply );
(1.)
(2.) No other hypothesis explains as well as ;
Therefore, is correct.
(cf. Falkenhaimer, 1990, p. 160, numbers added).
Applied to the analysis of conceptual combination
is really just a
refers to a noun-noun juxtaposition.
juxtaposition and does not provide any hints concerning
its potential coherence or fitting together. However, it
motivates processes that seek to find evidence in favor or
signifies
against coherence in (cf. Thagard, 1997).
one or many compounding relation(s). They slip into the
role of hypotheses that have the potential of specifying in
which way the concepts of cohere. Note that hypotheses are derived from domain or background theories. In
our example introduced in the preceding section we may
infer abductively








e1 x y contain e1 x y


nn x y




meaning that the placeholder nn might be identified with
the relation or hypothesis contains.
If there are more hypotheses that may explain , the
best of them is selected. Clearly the criteria of what
1 The primed predicate contain e x y together with its ar1
guments signify that e1 is the eventuality of contain being true
for x and y.










”best” means in the field of conceptual combination are
not specified in this fairly general definition.
Two things should be noted in the definition of abduction as provided by Falkenhainer (1990): First, abduction is a two-step process that bears strong commonalities to the two tasks in conceptual combination described
above. Second, to find out whether or not the definition
– and thus abduction – holds in conceptual combination,
this definition needs to be applied to the field and also
further specified. But what does “true” (1.) and what
does “well” mean” (2.) in the definition above?
Both issues are essentially empirical questions. Concerning the first of them I am making the conjecture that
the hypothesis is said to be true iff the relation can be
successfully instantiated by the concepts of . Whether
and to which degree instantiation is modified by similarity on the level of attributes is also an open issue. Concerning the second issue I assume that a hypothesis is
well if it is parsimonious and sound,
said to explain
which is equivalent to the heuristic of Occam’s razor.

Experiment 1: Constraints on the
Micro-Level
Experiment 1 examines the effect of activation of thematic relations on the process of conceptual combination. Patterns of the compounding relations were varied
as the independent variable. This variable was chosen
for two reasons: First, by using this variable it could
be investigated whether the full listing hypothesis or the
decomposition hypothesis holds in conceptual combination. Second, by using this variable groups of items
could be set up that differed in the degree of similarity.
Hence, a comparison of different accounts to conceptual
combination could be carried out. These are approaches
that rely primarily on similarity (e.g., Wisniewski, 2000)
vs. approaches in which compounding relations hold the
key to conceptual combination (e.g., Gagné & Shoben,
1997). With regard to the schema introduced above, experiment 1 addressed the interface-selection task, viz.,
the mechanisms leading to the linkage between modifier
an head.

Method
A semantic decision task was used to assess conceptual
combination in nominal compounds. Subjects were instructed to read both prime and target and were requested
to decide as quickly and as correctly as possible whether
the target was a concept that refers to a material entity
(e.g., rubberball).
Participants. The subjects were 39 students (18 male and
21 female) of Freiburg University who either participated
for course credit or payment. The age of the subjects
ranged between 18 and 29.
Materials and Procedure. The experimental stimuli were
prime-target pairs. Both prime and target were common compounds that were based on simple German

nouns2. Compounds based on metaphors, names or associated words were excluded. Since novel compounds are
known to elicit a variety of interpretations, I used common compounds that have a standard interpretation. In
this way, fixation of the number of interpretations was
achieved, and thus the effect of the independent variable, viz., the pattern of the compounding relation, could
be investigated more precisely. Investigations of the effects of the independent variable led to the selection of 4
groups of items (cf. Table 1).

Prime
Target

The items were used in a between subjects design with
three groups. Subjects of each group was presented with
the 36 Items of (CI & DI; NCI & DI, CoI & DI). Thus,
in each group there was the same number of abstract and
concrete targets (18:18). The SOA was 300 msec and
the ISI was 100 msec (cf. Zwitserlood, 1994). Subjects
worked first through a series of 24 training items that included a mixture of all types of items mentioned above.
After that subjects were requested to decide as quickly
and as correctly as possible whether the 36 items used
were concrete or abstract words.

CoI
CI
NCI
DI
lipstick
snowball tennisball summertime
rubberball rubberball rubberball speedlimit

1000

Table 1: Groups of Items used in Experiment 1

Note that prime and target of CI, NCI and CoI (each
of which was presented together with the items from DI)
were becoming increasingly dissimilar: In CI there was
an identity of thematic relation and modifier, in NCI only
the heads were overlapping. Finally, in CoI there was
neither on the level of words nor on the level of the thematic or compounding relations any overlap. While all
words in CI, NCI and CoI were concrete, all words in DI
were abstract.
2 Note that the experiment was carried out in German where
all compounds are written as one word.

800

700

ms

18 Control items (CoI), which were made of pairs of
compounds each of which used a different thematic relation. Moreover, the words in each pair were different (e.g., tennisball - snowball - thematic relations: “x is
made of y”, “x is used for y”). All items used (both prime
and target) were made up of concrete concepts (e.g., lipstick).
18 Concordant items (CI), which were made of pairs of
compounds both of which shared the same thematic relation. Moreover, the head concept was identical in prime
and target (e.g., snowball - rubberball, common thematic
relation: “x is made of y”). To achieve a balance between
concrete and abstract relations, 9 of the items of CI used
the relation “x is made of y”, and 9 employed the relation
“x is used for y”. All CI used concepts (both prime and
target) referring to concrete words.
18 Non-concordant items (NCI), which were made of
pairs of compounds each of which used a different thematic relation. Still, 9 target compounds used a concrete
thematic relation (”x is part of y”), while 9 used an abstract thematic relation (”x is used for y”). The head concept was identical in prime and target (e.g., tennisball snowball, thematic relations: “x is made of y”, “x is used
for y”). All NCI used concepts (both prime and target)
referring to material entities.
18 Distractor items (DI), which were made of pairs of
compounds each of which used a different thematic relation. In contrast to items of all other groups all distractor items (both prime and target) used abstract concepts
(e.g., speed record).

900

600
CoI





CI

NCI

DI

Figure 1: Results of Experiment 1

Results and Discussion
Fig. 1 presents an overall view of the results of experiment 1. Pairwise analyses of the results were carried
out via Mann-Whitney-U-tests and via the Wilcoxontest in the case of the dependent samples involved in
the comparison of CI and DI. Scores of CI were significantly lower than the scores of the groups NCI (z=-7,37
, p .001), CoI (z=-3,41 , p .001), and DI (z=-6,45 ,
p .001). Interestingly, the difference between scores
of CoI and scores of NCI was not statistically reliable.
Beyond that the difference does not point into the direction expected on the basis of a similarity approach (cf.
Figure 1). This suggests that similarity (on the level of
attributes) between heads of prime and target had no facilitating effect.
The results indicate two things: First, processing of
the compounding thematic relation plays indeed an important role in conceptual combination. Throughout the
investigation the thematic relation has never been expressed explicity. Given the fast mode of the task we may
safely conclude that the compounding relation is processed unconsciously. This is especially striking since
common compounds were used. These concepts are often believed to be processed as one unit without considering the constituents. This can be taken as a conservative
test of the decomposition hypothesis, which was clearly
better supported by the data than the full listing hypothesis.
Second, having addressed the more basic question
whether the decomposition hypothesis or full listing hy





pothesis gives a better account of the data, I will now
turn to the question whether similarity (on the level of
attributes) or relations hold the key for the interfaceselection task. It is worth pointing out that NCI scored
quite low although there was an identity of heads in both
prime and target. If attributes had played at least a minor role, then the increasing similarity on the side of the
stimuli (sim CI NCI CoI) would have induced corresponding effects on the side of the dependent variable (rt
CI NCI CoI). However, this is not the case. Taken
together, the data do not support the view that similarity (as specified on the level of attributes) provides the
rationale of addressing the selection problem.
It is tempting to assume that by priming a particular
(misfitting) relation in NCI, this relation may block or
reduce the salience of the most suitable thematic roles
of the constituents. Hence, the subject has to make an
effort to retrieve a more appropriate relation from the domain knowledge. This may be due to a time-consuming
derivation process. A possible model of this process is
provided by the abductive rationale spelled out by Hobbs
et al. (1990).

hotel”) according to 4 conditions: detailed and creative
(dc), detailed and plausible (dp), concise and creative
(cc), and concise and plausible (cp). Second, in a subsequent in-between rating study a new sample of subjects (32 subjects, 21 female, 11 male, between 18 and
47 years old) assessed each group of interpretations on a
five-point scale according to its aptness or inaptness. For
each of the 20 novel compounds that have been used, 4
interpretations with the highest aptness ratings were selected and were subsequently employed in experiment 2.
The final outcome of the two preparation studies were
80 pairs of conceptual combination + interpretation all
of which were on a high level of aptness. The pool of
80 pairs of conceptual combination + interpretation was
divided into 4 groups of 20 items. Each group consisted
of an equal share of items from all 4 conditions (dc, dp,
cc, cp). In experiment 2, subjects of each group were
presented with 20 pairs of novel compounds + interpretations that should be assessed on a five point rating scale
(1 excellent – 5 unappropriate) concerning their aptness
as an explanation of the compound.

Experiment 2: Constraints on the
Macro-Level

Fig. 2 presents an overall view of the results of experiment 2. Pairwise comparisons of the results were conducted via Mann-Whitney-U-Tests. Scores of cp turned
out to be significantly lower than the score of the groups
dc (z=-16,29 , p .001), dp (z=-3,54 , p .001), and cc
(z=-18,05 , p .001).
The results of experiment 2 show that criteria that are
usually applied to sound theories also apply to interpretations of conceptual combinations. These results are consistent with the more general hypothesis of this paper that
conceptual combination is a form of theory formation.









The goal of experiment 2 was to examine aspects of compound interpretation that affect its acceptance. With respect to the schema introduced above, experiment 2 addressed the interpretation selection task, viz., the choice
between competing interpretations of a conceptual combination. If conceptual combination is indeed a form of
theory formation, then features like “concise” and “plausible” often considered to be aspects of a good theory
should also characterize an appropriate interpretation of
a conceptual combination.

Results and Discussion







4,5

Method
4,0



3,5

3,0

2,5

Inaptness-Rating

In experiment 2 judgments of interpretations of novel
compounds were elicited. The type of interpretation was
used as the independent variable. The interpretations
employed in the experiment had been generated and assessed in two preparation studies conducted before experiment 2 with independent samples of subjects.
Participants. 121 subjects (57 male, 64 female) between
16 and 42 years old participated in experiment 2.
Materials and Procedure. 4 20 pairs of novel compounds along with group specific interpretations were
used in experiment 2. The material consisted of novel
compounds since common compounds have a standard
interpretation. Thus, a variety of different possible and
in principle equally appropriate interpretations could not
be generated on the basis of common compounds.
The interpretations investigated in experiment 2 had
been set up in two preparation studies carried out with
different subjects: First, in an in-between study a sample of subjects (20 subjects, 12 female, 8 male, between
18 and 41 years old) was requested to generate interpretations of 20 novel German compounds (e.g., “curtain

2,0

1,5

1,0


dc

dp


cc


cp

Figure 2: Results of Experiment 2

General Discussion
Research on conceptual combination can be characterized by two more general issues: First, empirical work in
the field has mostly been conducted isolated from considerable formal work on conceptual combination. The

formal work on abduction outlined briefly in this paper
provides valuable insights for conceptual combination,
e.g., concerning knowledge representation and abduction. Second, within the camp of empirical researchers
the two basic tasks in conceptual combination have usually not been distinguished properly. The work presented in this paper reacts to these problems both by
setting up an account of conceptual combination as theory formation that integrates many aspects of the field
and by providing empirical data that is consistent with
this framework. Clearly, more empirical work is necessary that fleshes out the framework presented in this
work and elucidate the role of domain or background
knowledge which has also been found influencial in conceptual combination. In fact, work on abduction coming
mostly from computational linguistics offers some guidance for knowledge representation (Hobbs et al., 1990, p.
24), which is almost absent in more psychological work
on this topic. Taken together, both issues stress the role
of abduction in conceptual combination. This pattern of
reasoning might help to explain conceptual combination
in terms of theory formation.
Viewing conceptual combination as an example of theory formation holds the promise of a crossfertilisation
between two hitherto almost uncombined research tradition: Research on conceptual combination could became more aware than hitherto that the phenomenon under study is a generative process details of which can be
captured in terms of explicit schemas of knowledge representation. On the other hand, work in theory formation
that has been focusing on theory formation in the natural
science (an excellent survey is given by Darden, 1997)
could broaden this perspective and consider theory formation en miniature in conceptual combination. Investigations based on this research strategy could be fruitfully
applied in psychology, anthropology and ethnology.

Acknowledgments
I like to thank Zachary Estes, Barbara Hemforth, Bipin
Indurkhya, and Gerhard Strube for valuable comments
to this paper, and I am grateful to Roman Kennke for the
programming work put into this research project.

References
Brown, J. S. & Ghiselli, E. E. (1955). Scientific method
in psychology. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Butterworth, B. (1983). Language processes (Vol 2).
Academic Press, London.
Costello, F. & Keane, M. T. (1997). Polysemy in conceptual combination: Testing the constraint theory of
combination. Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 137–
141). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Costello, F., & Keane, M.T. (2000). Efficient Creativity: Constraints on conceptual combination. Cognitive
Science, 24, 299-349.

Darden, L. (1997). Recent work in computational scientific discovery. Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 161–
166). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Estes, Z. & Glucksberg, S. (2000). Interactive property
attribution in concept combination. Memory & Cognition, 28, 28-34.
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of
thematic relations on the comprehension of modifiernoun combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 71–87.
Hampton, G. (1987). Inheritance of attributes in natural
concept conjunctions. Memory and Cognition, 15, 55–
71.
Hobbs, J., Stickel, M., Appelt, D., and Martin, P.
(1990). Interpretation as abduction. Technical note
499, Menlo Park, CASRI International.
Murphy, G. & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92,
289-316.
Shrager, J. & Langley, P. (1990). Computational approaches to scientific discovery. In J. Shrager & P.
Langley (Eds.), Computational models of scientific
discovery and theory formation. (pp. 1-25). San Mateo, CA, Morgan Kaufmann.
Smith, G. F. & Brown, G. J. (1993). Conceptual foundations of design problem solving. IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 23, 1209-1219.
Stickel, M. (1989). Rationale and Methods for Abductive Reasoning in Natural Language Interpretation. In:
R. Studer (Ed.), Natural Language and Logic, Berlin:
Springer, 233-252.
Thagard, P. (1997). Coherent and creative conceptual
Combinations. In T.B. Ward, S.M. Smith, & J. Viad
(Eds.), Creative thought: An investigation of conceptual structures and processes. (pp. 129-141). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Wisniewski, E. (2000). Similarity, alignment, and conceptual combination: Comments on Estes and Glucksberg. Memory & Cognition, 28, 35-38.
Zwitserlood, P. (1994). The role of transparency in the
processing and representation of dutch compounds.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 341-368.

