UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Connectionsit modelling of surface dyslexia based on foveal splitting: Impaired
pronunciation after only two hlaf pints

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/078816fj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Shillcock, Richard
Monaghan, Padraic

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Connectionist modelling of surface dyslexia based on foveal splitting:
Impaired pronunciation after only two half pints
Richard Shillcock†
Padraic Monaghan
rcs/pmon@cogsci.ed.ac.uk
 Institute for Adaptive and Neural Computation, Division of Informatics
† Department of Psychology
University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK
Abstract
In cases of surface dyslexia and phonological dyslexia
there is a dissociation between the reading of irregular
words and nonwords. This dissociation has been captured in connectionist models of dyslexia in terms of impairments to the models’ phonological representations.
We report a series of connectionist simulations based on
an alternative neuro-anatomically motivated theory that
dyslexia is at least partly caused by hemispheric desynchronisation. Problems of interhemispheric transfer affect the mapping between orthography and phonology because the human fovea is precisely vertically split: a fixated word is initially split and the two parts contralaterally
projected to the two hemispheres of the brain. Much of
lexical processing can be reconstrued as the integration of
this information (Shillcock, Ellison & Monaghan, 2000).
We demonstrate that the dissociation between the reading of irregular words and nonwords can be understood
in terms of a failure to integrate the initially split input.

Introduction
The word pint is pronounced differently from its orthographic neighbours dint, hint, lint, mint, tint. In this sense
its pronunciation is irregular. Because of the presence
of such words in its lexicon, English is said to have a
deep orthography. Irregular pronunciations have been
observed to cause processing problems both for normal
readers and for certain impaired readers: in the former
a low frequency irregular word such as pint may take
measurably longer to pronounce than a matched regular word, and in the latter such a word might be erroneously regularised (pint pronounced to rhyme with
mint). For these reasons irregular words have been used
in a large number of studies of how readers translate the
orthographic representation of a word into its phonological specification. In this paper we approach the pronunciation of irregular words from the perspective of
a new model of visual word recognition based on the
neuro-anatomical observation of foveal splitting (Shillcock, Ellison & Monaghan, 2000). We will argue that
this model provides a principled motivation for some of
the problems associated with irregular pronunciations in
both normal and impaired readers.
The measurable processing problems that normal adult
readers have with low frequency irregular words (pint)
do not extend to high frequency irregular words such
as have (whose pronunciation cannot be predicted from

cave, rave, pave, knave) (Paap & Noel, 1991; Seidenberg, Waters, Barnes & Tanenhaus, 1984; Taraban & McClelland, 1987). Perhaps the most productive approach
to modelling this interaction between regularity and frequency has been that developed by Seidenberg and McClelland in their (1989) connectionist model of reading
and by Plaut and others subsequently (e.g. Plaut & McClelland, 1993; Plaut, McClelland, Seidenberg & Patterson, 1996; Harm & Seidenberg, 1999). Seidenberg
and McClelland’s original model was a simple feedforward model; later models have contained recurrent connections and more structured input and output layers. In
general, in these models the apparently rule-based behaviour that generates regular pronunciations is recast in
statistical terms, so that a low frequency irregular pronunciation (pint) is militated against by the more frequently occurring regular pronunciation of the relevant
vowel in similar contexts. Thus, when the irregular pronunciation is itself high frequency (have), that particular
mapping between orthography and phonology is sufficiently emphasised to co-exist with the regular mapping.
The superpositional storage that characterises these models means that a minority mapping such as that required
by pint is disproportionately demanding in terms of computational resources compared with the efficient generalisation represented by a regular pronunciation. This fact
is also demonstrated in Plaut and McClelland’s (1993)
model in which attractors behave componentially when
the input and output representations of words are split
into onset, nucleus and coda. In their model, pronunciation of the vowel in pint involves the connections from
all three input slots (onset, nucleus and coda), whereas
the regular, default pronunciation of the i involves only
the nucleus.
Irregular words pose particular problems for surface
dyslexics, who are liable to produce regularisation errors (Patterson, Coltheart & Marshall, 1985; Manis et
al., 1996). In connectionist models, the learning and retention of irregular pronunciations are generally vulnerable. For instance, Seidenberg and McClelland showed
that restricting the number of hidden units impairs learning low frequency irregular words, and Harm and Seidenberg (1999) produced a similar effect by lowering the
learning rate overall. Plaut et al. (1996) and others explore the idea that a division of labour occurs between
the direct orthography-phonology mapping and the same

mapping mediated by semantics: the irregular pronunciations are seen as relying more on the route that proceeds
via semantics, leaving the direct route to concentrate on
the regular pronunciations. This behaviour of the models seems to capture the observation that developmental dyslexics frequently have impaired phonological processing (see Snowling, 2000, for a comprehensive review
of the phonological processing problems of dyslexics).
Some of the most critical data in this area concerns
the dissociation between the ability to pronounce irregular words and the ability to pronounce nonwords. This
dissociation is found between the surface and phonological subtypes of dyslexia (Beauvois & Derouesné,
1979). Surface dyslexics cope moderately well with
novel words and nonwords, but are liable to make regularisation errors on known irregular words, whereas
phonological dyslexics cope moderately well with irregular words but are disproportionately impaired when
reading novel words and nonwords. This dissociation
motivated Marshall and Newcombe’s (1973) original
dual-route model and its later development and computational implementation by Coltheart and others (e.g. Coltheart, Curtis, Atkins & Haller, 1993), in which a lexical
route and a non-lexical route (containing grapheme-tophoneme correspondence rules) can be differentially impaired to produce the desired impairments.
In this paper we claim that developmental surface dyslexia, characterised by problems with irregular
words, arises naturally from impaired hemispheric interaction in a model based on the observation that the human fovea is precisely vertically split. There are longstanding observations that dyslexia is frequently associated with problems of callosal transfer (e.g. Davidson &
Saron, 1992). By modelling word recognition within a
split network, we ground these observations of impaired
reading in an implemented model of normal reading. We
claim that impaired hemispheric interaction is a fundamental, qualitative explanation of problems in pronouncing irregular words, and is a more parsimonious account
than resource-based explanations.

The split-fovea model of reading
Shillcock, Ellison and Monaghan (2000) present a model
of lexical access based on the precise vertical splitting
of the human fovea. Information presented in the left
visual field (LVF) projects, initially, to the right hemisphere (RH), whereas information in the RVF projects
to the LH. This long-recognised initial contralateral projection of the visual field to the two hemispheres of the
brain is also true of the human fovea – a fact that has
not been extensively explored in research in visual word
recognition. When a word is directly fixated, the two
parts of the word on either side of the fixation point are
projected to different hemispheres. In order for a word to
be recognised and pronounced correctly, the information
in the two hemispheres has to be integrated. Shillcock et
al. (2000) investigate some of the implications of foveal
splitting for a full-sized lexicon and show that the initial
splitting of the word is an informationally attractive start-

ing point for word recognition, rather than being merely
an inconvenience.
Consider the word pint, centrally fixated. The two
sides of a split model will receive the two letters pi and
nt, respectively. In order to pronounce the vowel correctly, the model must process information from both
sides of the model: pi on its own may be pronounced
as in pine, or as in pill. If this integration is not complete
then a regularisation error is likely to occur, so that pi will
be pronounced in its most frequent form: /pI/ (see Table 1). As Harm and Seidenberg (1999) observe, the task
of reading irregular words is akin to solving the XOR
problem. In the case of a split model without recurrence,
this task is impossible, as the structure is akin to a perceptron.
Table 1: Pronunciation of pi.
Pronunciation
of vowel
/I/
/ii/
/&I/
/I@/

Example

Count

pith
piece
pint
pier

14
2
10
2

Frequency
(per million)
424
175
164
16

When a single word is read it may be fixated to the
left of the first letter, to the right of the last letter, or
at all points in between. Elsewhere (e.g. Shillcock &
Monaghan, 2001) we have implemented an idealised version of the initial splitting of these different visual inputs in reading single words in a series of neural network models, so that there are five different fixation positions across the input for a four letter word (only “fixations” between letters are considered). In the simulations
we report here, we employ a simplified version of this
model, in which each word is only fixated at one fixation point within the word. This simplification allowed
us to stay closer to Harm and Seidenberg’s (1999) simulations, which provide an important point of comparison.
We show that impairments to the integration of information in the two parts of the word results in the behaviour
associated with surface dyslexia.
One version of the split model of reading is shown in
Figure 1. The model comprises two orthographic input
layers, corresponding to the left and right visual fields.
Each input layer has 4 letter slots. If a letter is present in a
slot then one of 26 units representing the letters of the alphabet will be active. The output layer is a representation
of phonology, with two slots each for onset, nucleus and
coda. Phonemes are represented in terms of 11 phonological features. We have used the features described
by Harm and Seidenberg (1999), although we have augmented their phonology to accommodate the transcriptions found in the CELEX database (Baayen, Pipenbrock
& Gulikers, 1996). These changes to the phonological
transcription principally involved the representation of
diphthongs and the role of schwa; the changes consid-

__ /p/ /I/ __ /n/ /t/

_ _ p i

n t _ _

Figure 1: The split model of reading.
erably increased the problems of learning the mapping
from orthography to phonology. Each input layer in the
model is fully connected to one of two hidden layers each
with 100 units. These hidden layers are fully connected
to the output. The model has to learn to map orthography
onto phonology given the constraints of a split input.
The model was trained on 3835 single-syllable word
lemmas from the CELEX English database with up to
two consonants in the onset and coda. Four words were
omitted because they contained orthographic consonant
clusters that would not fit within the input1. Words were
presented in the input so that the first vowel was justified immediately to the left of centre. In total, 57.5%
of words were fixated at or to the left of their physical
centre, which is the usual site of fixation during reading
(Rayner, 1998). Words were presented randomly to the
model according to the log-frequency of the word, and
backpropagation was used to train the connections between the layers.
Several versions of the model were trained: (a) a feedforward version with no phonological attractors (“SplitNo Attractors”), (b) a recurrent version with phonological attractor units (“Split-Attractor”), and (c) a recurrent and interconnected version with phonological attractors, with the hidden layers fully connected to one
another (“Split-Interconnected”). The attractor models
had a set of 35 “clean-up” units connected to the output layer, which were pretrained in learning a phonology
to phonology mapping. Orthography to phonology trials were then interdispersed with phonology to phonology trials during training of the attractor models. Two
nonsplit models were also trained as controls, equivalent to those employed by Harm and Seidenberg (1999).
These models were required to make the same mapping
1 The

omitted words were eighth, borscht, touched, and
schnapps.

between orthography and phonology, except that all the
input units were connected to a single hidden layer of
100 units. Feedforward (“Nonsplit-No Attractor”) and
recurrent attractor (“Nonsplit-Attractor”) versions were
trained.
The 361 nonwords used by Harm and Seidenberg
(1999) were employed2. The model was tested with 44
irregular words taken from Taraban and McClelland’s
(1987) materials3 .
We predicted that the Nonsplit-Attractor model would
perform well on both irregular words and nonwords, following Harm and Seidenberg’s demonstration of the capabilities of that model. The Nonsplit-No Attractor version should perform relatively poorly on irregular words
and nonwords; this model corresponded to Harm and
Seidenberg’s (1999) unimpaired model, and their phonologically impaired model, respectively). We predict that
the split models will exhibit surface dyslexia to varying
degrees according to the level of interaction between the
two hemispheres. Furthermore, this deficit will be robust
in the face of further training on the model – additional
training will not reverse the pattern of difficulties in reading irregular words and nonwords, as happens in Harm
and Seidenberg’s (1999) delayed model of reading.

Results
Figures 2, 3 and 4 show the performance of the different models, in terms of percentage of words correctly
pronounced, at different stages of training. Figure 2
shows how well the models learned the whole training
set, and we see that the NonSplit-No-Attractors model
performs comparably to the same architecture presented
by Harm and Seidenberg, climbing steadily to levels in
excess of 90% correct. Even though the current training set contained more elaborate phonological representations than those used by Harm and Seidenberg for the
same type of model, we see that the curve has not asymptoted even after the presentation of 5M words in training;
further training promises to improve performance even
more. We see a similar level of success for the NonSplitAttractors model, though this model is slower to learn
than the NonSplit-No-Attractors model due to the interleaving of phonology to phonology trials during training.
These models replicate Harm and Seidenberg’s (1999)
success with the same architectures.
In contrast, Figure 2 shows that the Split-NoAttractors model asymptotes early, after about 3M words
of training, and never exceeds 70% of words correct. The
simple split model is fundamentally incapable of more
than this modest performance. The remaining learning
curves in Figure 2 demonstrate the value of connectivity between the two halves of the split model: the SplitAttractors model behaves on a par with the different
2 Three nonwords were omitted because they appeared as
real words in our training corpus: plop, mo, and peep.
3 4 of the original 48 items were omitted because they were
wordforms that did not occur in our word lemma training set:
does, said, says, and were.

100
90
80
70

Percent Correct

Non-Split models, and the most rapid learning of all occurs in the Split-Corpus-Callosum model, although the
latter model is not directly comparable with the others as
it contains more weighted connections and hence more
computational resources. The principal result from the
training of the different models is that sharing information between the two halves of the input is critical to successful learning.
Figure 3 shows relatively successful generalisation by
all of the models to the set of nonwords. The Split-NoAttractors model performs least well as we might predict
from Figure 1, but all of the models asymptote within the
55%-70% region, in generalising to pronounce nonwords
that were not encountered in training.
The central result of all of these simulations can be
seen by comparing Figures 3 and 4. In Figure 4 we see
differences between the models in their performance on
pronouncing irregular words. The Split-No-Attractors
model performs extremely poorly on these words, pronouncing only about 50% of the irregular words correctly. The Split-Attractors and NonSplit-Attractors
models perform comparably well, and the NonSplit-NoAttractors and Split-Corpus-Callosum models perform
extremely well on these irregular words. In relation to
the performance of the other architectures, the simple
split architecture shows a dramatic dissociation between
its moderately good performance with nonwords and its
poor performance with irregular words.

60
50
40
NS_NA
NS_A
S_NA
S_A
S_CC

30
20
10
0
0M

1M

2M

3M

4M

5M

Words Presented

Figure 3: Performance of the split and nonsplit models
on nonwords.
produces regularisation errors even after such lengthy
training. The differences between the Split and NonSplit
models are not only quantitative but qualitative, with the
Split model producing plausible over-regularisations for
irregular words.

100

Table 2: Productions of the Split and NonSplit NoAttractor models for irregular word examples.

90
80

Percent Correct

70

Word
bind
broad
come
hood
mild
pear
pint
quay
tomb

60
50
40
NS_NA
NS_A
S_NA
S_A
S_CC

30
20
10
0
0M

1M

2M

3M

4M

Correct
b&Ind
brOOd
kVm
hUd
m&Ild
pE@r
p&Int
kii
tuum

Pronunciation
NonSplit model Split model
b&Ind
b&nd
brOOd
brOOd
kVm
kVm
hUd
huud
m&Ild
mEIld
pE@r
pIEr
p&Int
pInt
kii
kEI
tuum
tOm

5M

Words Presented

Discussion
Figure 2: Performance of the split and nonsplit models
on the training set.
The errors produced by the simple split model resembles those found in surface dyslexia. Table 2 compares
the performance of the Split-No Attractors and NonSplitNo-Attractors models on an example set of irregular
words after 5 million words had been presented to the
models. The NonSplit model converges to correct pronunciations for all these words, whereas the Split model

We have successfully reproduced the dissociation between the reading of irregular words and nonwords observed in surface dyslexia. We started by observing that
the human fovea is precisely vertically split, and that a
fixated word is initially divided between the two hemispheres. We reconstrued the task of lexical processing
as one of integrating the information contained in the
two hemispheres. We explored the performance of neural network models of reading which had been similarly
vertically split, and demonstrated that simple split archi-

100
90
80

Percent Correct

70
60
50
40
NS_NA
NS_A
S_NA
S_A
S_CC

30
20
10
0
0M

1M

2M

3M

4M

5M

Words Presented

Figure 4: Performance of the split and nonsplit models
on irregular words.

tectures are crucially limited in their success in mapping
from orthography to phonology.
The problem of pronouncing a divided irregular word
like pint resembles the XOR problem. The two halves
cannot map directly and independently onto the output to
solve the problem. There is no purely componential solution, as there is with the pronunciation of a regular word
like mint. Instead, there have to be intermediate representations that combine the two halves and then map onto
the eventual solution. The problem is not restricted to the
pronunciation of vowels, although they are the main part
of the problem. The consonant cluster at the beginning
of chef is liable to be regularised to resemble that in chad
and cheat if the whole of the word is not present.
A paradox of the connectionist modelling of cognitive
neuropsychological data is the emergence of complex
dissociations from relatively undifferentiated architectures. Such demonstrations are parsimonious accounts
of the data because they seem to emerge from the structure of the problem, ”out there” in the world rather than
from the details of some putative functional processing
architecture. Researchers have produced successful connectionist accounts of the pattern of dissociations found
in the different dyslexias. These dissociations have been
achieved in a variety of ways, and we can distinguish
three broad strategies. The first is the Representational
Strategy. Thus, in Plaut and Shallice’s (1993) model
of deep dyslexia the authors show that the proportion of
the different types of error produced by the lesioned network can be changed by lesioning in different parts of the
model; lesioning around the model’s semantic clean-up
units causes more semantic errors, for instance. Similarly, Harm and Seidenberg (1999) show that impairing
the phonological attractors in their model increased the
errors on irregular words. The psychological reality of

this strategy is relatively easy to assess. For instance,
Harm and Seidenberg’s impairing of the phonological
attractors is motivated by the data showing that surface
dyslexia is often accompanied by phonological impairment (see, e.g., Snowling, 2000). The second strategy
we identify is the Parametric Strategy. Examples are the
manipulation of the computational resources available to
the model, or changes in the details of training. Seidenberg and McClelland (1989) reduced the numbers of
hidden units available to the orthography-to-phonology
mapping, showing that it militated against learning the
irregular words. Similarly Harm and Seidenberg (1999)
produced the same outcome by reducing the learning
rate. Such manipulations are quantitative, compared to
the qualitative effects of the Representational Strategy,
and their psychological reality is more difficult to assess.
There are clear demonstrations that the orthography-tophonology mapping for irregular words is the hardest aspect of the pronunciation problem, but equally there are
demonstrations that the problem can be solved by a network model with only a few hundred nodes, given the
correct representations. Are irregular words still hard
for a processor with the resources of the human brain,
and with several years to spend on the problem? Additional training of Harm and Seidenberg’s model with a
low learning rate producing surface dyslexia behaviour
leads to the convergence of performance on regular and
irregular words, for example. Parametrically based models of dissociations in dyslexia carry with them costly assumptions concerning the capacities of the human brain.
Our own approach has been to introduce a discrete,
qualitative neuro-anatomical distinction into the modelling: the effects of foveal splitting. We characterise surface dyslexia as being caused, at least in part, by hemispheric desynchronisation. No amount of extra training
and no amount of extra computational resources devoted
to either half of a split processor can improve performance on irregular words in a direct mapping between
orthography and phonology. The problem is a qualitative one.
Thus, we have provided an account of the dissociation
between irregular words and nonwords in surface dyslexics. We do not see this hemispheric desynchronisation
account as a necessarily exclusive one. There may also
be a contribution from the impairment of phonological
representations, as is generally assumed. The relative
contribution of each account, and any possible interaction between them, is an empirical question. However,
it may be possible to ground phonological impairment
itself in hemispheric desynchronisation, despite the fact
that expressive phonology is conventionally viewed as
the sole preserve of the LH.
A further aspect of the dissociation between regular words and nonwords concerns the performance of
phonological dyslexics, who can be highly proficient
readers of known words, but can also be dramatically
poor at reading nonwords and unknown words, even to
the extent of not being able to generate the sound of an
isolated letter. We interpret phonological dyslexia as also

resulting from hemispheric desynchronisation. We propose that the desynchronisation is more severe in phonological dyslexia, compared with surface dyslexia, and
that a different relationship emerges between the orthographic, phonological and semantic forms of words to
compensate for the inability to integrate the orthographic
information in the two hemispheres and to map it directly onto a phonological representation. We propose
that orthographic information is mapped directly onto
semantic information independently in the two hemispheres; each hemisphere partially activates the semantic representations of all the words corresponding to its
own orthographic input. Identification of the word is
achieved by the interhemispheric transfer of semantic information. The routes by which semantic information
might be transferred interhemispherically are more extensive, compared with those concerned with vision, and
the problem of finding the intersection of two sets of partially activated semantic representations is, we claim, an
easier problem than integrating the corresponding visual
information. In this account, a novel word can only be
pronounced ad hoc by analogy with known words. This
account is therefore a qualitative explanation of the often
dramatic problems with novel words observed in phonological dyslexia.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Wellcome Trust grant
059080.

References
Baayen, R.H., Pipenbrock, R. & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Linguistic Data
Consortium, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA.
Beauvois, M.-F. & Derouesné, J. (1979). Phonological alexia: Three dissociations. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 42, 1115–1124.
Coltheart, M., Curtis, B., Atkins, P. & Haller, M. (1993).
Models of reading aloud: Dual-route and paralleldistributed-processing approaches. Psychological Review, 100, 589–608.
Davidson, R.J & Saron, C.D. (1992). Evoked potential
measures of interhemispheric transfer time in reading
disabled and normal boys. Developmental Neuropsychology 8, 261-277.
Harm, M. W. & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Phonology, reading acquisition, and dyslexia: insights from
connectionist modelling. Psychological Review, 106,
491–528.
Manis, F., Seidenberg, M., Doi, L., McBride-Chang, C.
& Peterson, A. (1996). On the basis of two subtypes
of developmental dyslexia. Cognition, 58, 157–195.
Marshall, J.C. & Newcombe, F. (1973). Patterns of paralexia: A psycholinguistic approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 2, 175–199.

Paap, K. R. & Noel, R. W. (1991). Dual-route models of
print to sound: Still a good horse race. Psychological
Review, 53, 13–24.
Patterson, K., Coltheart, M. & Marshall, J.C. (1985).
General introduction. In J.C. Marshall, M. Coltheart
& K.E. Patterson (Eds.) Surface dyslexia. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Plaut, D.C. & McClelland, J.L. (1993). Generalization
with componential attractors: word and nonword reading in an attractor network. In Proceedings of the 15th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Plaut, D.C., McClelland, J.L., Seidenberg, M.S. & Patterson, K. (1996). Understanding normal and impaired
word reading: Computational principles in quasiregular domains. Psychological Review, 103, 56–115.
Plaut, D. C., & Shallice, T. (1993). Deep dyslexia: A
case study of connectionist neuropsychology. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 10, 377–500.
Rayner, K. (1998) Eye movements in reading and information processing: 20 years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 373–422.
Seidenberg, M. S. & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A distributed, developmental model of word recognition
and naming. Psychological Review, 96, 523–568.
Seidenberg, M. S., Waters, G. S., Barnes, M. A. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1984). When does irregular spelling or
pronunciation influence word recognition? Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23, 383–404.
Shillcock, R. Ellison, M. T. & Monaghan, P. (2000).
Eye-fixation behaviour, lexical storage and visual
word recognition in a split processing model. Psychological Review, 107, 824–851.
Shillcock, R. & Monaghan, P. (1998). Using physiological information to enrich the connectionist modelling
of normal and impaired visual word recognition. Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 945–950). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Shillcock, R. & Monaghan, P. (2001). The computational exploration of visual word recognition in a split
model. Neural Computation, 13.
Snowling, M. (2000). Dyslexia: A Cognitive Developmental Perspective (Second Edition). Oxford: Blackwell.
Taraban, R. & McClelland, J. L. (1987). Conspiracy effects in word pronunciation. Journal of Memory and
Language, 26, 608–631.

