UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distributed Cognition in Apes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4hq8r0p3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Johnson, Christine M.
Oswald, Tasha M.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distributed Cognition in Apes
Christine M. Johnson (johnson@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Tasha M. Oswald (tashason@hotmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

Abstract
Socio-cognitive complexity, as manifest in dynamic
multi-party interactions, is central to many theories of
hominid cognitive evolution. To assess the rudiments of
these abilities in apes, we chose to study the triadic
interaction known as “social tool use”. In this scenario,
one animal (the User) is said to interact with a second
(the Tool) to in some way influence the behavior of a
third (the Target). The “Machiavellian” model typically
used to account for such behavior depends on folk
theoretical descriptions of intentional manipulation and
deception and has mired the field in unproductive
attempts to define such mental states and justify their
inference based on observable behavior. As an
alternative, we conducted a distributed cognition
analysis of these interactions among a group of seven
bonobos (Pan paniscus) at the San Diego Wild Animal
Park. Assuming that attentional behavior was critical, we
gained insights from a wide range of research including
human developmental, neurological, ethological, and
comparative experimental work on social gaze in
primates. This work lead us to perform a micro-analysis
of 16 video segments (12 of social tools, 4 controls) in
which we recorded all changes, at 1/6 second intervals,
in relative trajectory, relative body and head orientation
(open, peripheral, or closed to other animal) and,
whenever possible, gaze. We also recorded the source,
timing and duration of social interactions (groom,
aggress, etc.) that occurred in those segments. In
addition, data on patterns of association and social
interaction collected over several years were used to
establish long-term relationships such as rank and
affiliation to situate and thus help interpret the microanalysis. To facilitate cross-dimensional comparisons,
the results of the micro-analysis were represented along
time-lines (X axis = time) such that, for a given dyad and
a given attentional dimension, each animal’s proximity
to physical or eye contact was indicated by the proximity
of its line (along the positive or negative Y axes) to zero.
Transitional probabilities for a change in any one of
Animal A’s dimensions being immediately followed by a
change in any one of Animal B’s dimensions
(“triggering”), and for simultaneous changes (“syncs”),
were computed for each dyad. Our results indicate that,
while overt social behavior was directed by the User to
the Tool, of the three dyads involved, the User/Target
dyad were disproportionately responsive to one anothers’

attentional behavior (while their counterparts in the
control segments were not). Thus, this distributed
approach has generated evidence that bonobos can and
do monitor and respond to the attentional states of
others, and that “social tool use” in these animals can
best be characterized as a rudimentary capacity for multitasking.

Introduction
Studying Socio-Cognitive Complexity
Among the practices that set humans apart from other
animals are the complex multi-party interactions in
which we frequently engage. Comparative research
suggests that the cognitive processes involved in such
interactions are unusual in that they enable us to deal
with a variety of dynamic social parameters
simultaneously (e.g. Humphrey 1976). However, the
elaborate collaborations (including conversation and
other cultural activities) typical of our species present a
daunting challenge to the evolutionary theorist
concerned with their origins and course of development.
By studying complex, polyadic interactions in our
closest genetic relative, the ape, we hope to help
identify rudiments shared by the less sophisticated
system which, during hominid evolution, may have been
subject to additional adaptive specialization.
“Social complexity” has been fairly well defined and
documented in nonhuman primates. While in most
social animals, power relations can be represented by a
simple linear hierarchy and get played out in dyadic
interactions, in many higher primates (monkeys and
apes), rank and power are not necessarily equivalent
(De Waal 1986). That is, for example, through triadic
interactions such as coalitions or third party
interventions, lower ranking animals can sometimes
jointly gain access to resources over higher ranking
individuals. Furthermore, the actions taken by a given
participant have been shown to take into account not
only that individual’s own relationships to the others,
but the relationship that exists between the others as
well (e.g. de Waal & Van Hoof 1981; Cheney, Seyfarth
& Silk 1995). For example, a subordinate macaque will

recruit aid against an opponent based more on the ally’s
rank relative to the opponent than on its own rank
relationship with the ally (Silk 1999).
However, the concomitant models of the cognition
involved are much less well developed. This is, in part,
due to the difficulties inherent to studying social
cognition. Gaining experimental control over the
relevant variables in a social negotiation, for example,
is extremely difficult and the relatively few attempts
made with nonhuman primates have produced data that
are ambiguous and controversial (see Heyes 1994;
Povinelli 1994). Furthermore, the theoretical framework
typically used to describe such interactions depends on
“folk
theoretic”
accounts
of
“Machiavellian
intelligence” (Byrne & Whiten 1988). That is, the
animals involved are anthropomorphically portrayed as
engaging in maneuvers designed to outwit, deceive, or
otherwise strategically manipulate one another. This
approach raises issues concerning complex, internal
mental states such as intentionality, self-consciousness,
theory of mind, etc. and has mired the field in attempts
to define such states and justify their inference based on
observable behavior.
In some respects, given our close genetic
relationship, our largely-shared repertoire of gesture
and expression, and our many brain similarities, such
anthropomorphic descriptions of, especially, ape
behavior may not be entirely unjustified. However, they
constitute an unsatisfactory model of cognition for
several reasons. For one, folk-theoretic accounts of
mental behavior are arguably metaphorical, and their
validity has been challenged even when applied to
humans (Churchland 1981). Second, they may well
reveal more about the ‘storyteller’ than about the
players to whom they are applied, however consistent
the tales that are generated. Third and most critically, it
is unclear whether or not, as hypotheses, they are
ultimately falsifiable. In any case, while fermenting
much interesting discussion over the past decade or so,
this approach has yet to yield much in the way of useful
data.

An Alternative Approach
In this paper, we are proposing an alternative approach
to the study of the cognitive complexity involved in
primate negotiations. The distributed cognition
approach (e.g. Lave 1988; Rogoff 1990; Resnick ,
Levine & Teasely 1991; Fogel 1993; Hutchins 1995)
takes cognition as a co-constructed, real-time process
that occurs not only whithin but also between
individuals. (See also Vygotsky 1978; Wertsch 1985.)
As a result, the observable group processes that occur
during social discourse can themselves be taken as
cognitive events. Through a detailed analysis of changes

propagated across the “media” (Hutchins 1995) of such
events, one can chart information flow, characterize
task complexity, document developments in the roles of
participants, etc. Thus, while not denying that internal
mental states are involved, this model offers the
advantage, especially as applied to nonhumans, of
focusing on the cognition that is apparent in social
interaction.
In particular, we have chosen to apply this model to
the study of the triadic interaction known as “social tool
use” (Kummer 1967; Jolly 1985; Goodall 1986) in the
bonobo or pygmy chimpanzee. While no formal
definition of “social tool” has been established in the
primate literature, it is widely applied and commonly
understood to involve one animal (the “User”)
interacting with a second (the “Tool”) to in some way
influence the behavior of a third (the “Target”). Such
interactions are traditionally divided into five basic
classes, all of which were included in our database.
These include “recruitment” (User attempts to elicit aid
from the Tool against the Target), “agonistic buffering”
(User physically uses Tool as a shield or otherwise
engages with it to diffuse a threat from the Target),
“passport” (User positively interacts with Tool who has
a special relationship to the Target, such as
mother/offspring, to gain access to the Target),
“incitement” (User positively interacts with Tool to
incite investment from the Target) and “alibi” (User
directs exaggerated attention at Tool to avoid
responding to a solicitation from, or to disengage from
interacting with, the Target).
While expressly avoiding attributing the implied
mental states (manipulation, deceit, jealousy, etc.) to the
animals involved, we explicitly acknowledge and even
adopt these anthropomorphic terms for two reasons.
One is that they are useful as ‘shorthand’ descriptions
that readily communicate the essentials of the
behavioral dynamics involved. The other is that it was
on such an intuitive, anthropomorphic basis that we
originally identified the incidents of social tool use from
our videotapes of the bonobos’ interactions. One goal of
this study, then, is to discover, through a detailed
analysis of the tapes, whether those intuitions have any
basis in behavioral cues that are meaningful not only to
us as observers but that also serve as salient, effective
media in the animals’ distributed cognition. It is from
such an empirical base that we may build a stable
comparative model of socio-cognitive complexity.

Methodological Challenges
Given that the distributed approach is still in its infancy,
especially as applied to nonhumans (although for
discussions see Cousi-Korbel & Fragazsy 1995; Strum,
Forster & Hutchins 1997; Johnson, 2001) there are few

established protocols for research design and analysis
beyond the essentials demanded by the theory. These
essentials include using interactions (as opposed to the
actions of individuals) as the units of analysis, charting
change over time, and collecting observations at
multiple time scales, including the historic and the
micro-levels (see Hutchins 1995; Fischer & Granott
1995). The latter is generally done via detailed video
analysis of particular interactions. The former is done
using macro-level sampling techniques over the longterm, and is meant to provide background information
(cultural constraints, social relationships, task exposure,
etc.) that can help to “situate” and thus interpret the
interactions. Beyond such guidelines, however, work in
this emerging field
faces several challenges in
determining what to score, how to represent those data,
and how to generate a meaningful interpretation of
them.

Challenge I: What to score
For insights into what might be the most relevant
parameters to document in the bonobos’ behavior, we
turned to the ethological traditions embraced by
primatologists, the current experimental work by
comparative psychologists, related neurological
research, and the developmental study of “theory of
mind’ issues in human children. Interestingly, these
approaches converge on some of the elements that they
consider critical. For instance, in the developmental
work, an emphasis has been placed on joint visual
attention and, in general, on the social manipulation of
attention, especially gaze (e.g. Baron-Cohen 1995;
Moore & Dunham 1995). This has also become the
focus of one of the few productive areas of comparative
experimental work on social cognition. That is, for
example, several primate species have recently been
documented as being capable of “gaze following” (e.g.
Anderson et al. 1996; Tomasello Call & Hare 1998;
Peignot & Anderson 1999). However, with the notable
exception of the chimpanzee (e.g. Povinelli & Eddy
1996; Itakura & Tanaka 1998), most respond to the
direction of head orientation and seem incapable, even
after extensive training, to respond to the eyes-only as a
cue (although see Vick & Anderson 2000). Relevant
physiological findings include an increase in corticosteroids and other orienting responses to direct eye
contact (e.g. Keating & Keating 1982; Perrett & Mistlin
1990), as well as cerebral cortex cells in monkeys that
are sensitive to the direction of head orientation and/or
gaze of another (Perrett et al 1985). Our subject, the
bonobo, has not yet been tested on any of the above.
Ethologists, likewise, have long been tuned to the
attentional behavior of their subjects (see Smith 1977;
Alcock 1978). This can be traced to some simple

structure/function relationships. For example, across the
phyla, animals with forward-facing eyes (like primates)
tend to move in the direction their gaze is oriented,
making gaze direction a predictive signal for others.
Similarly, body orientation (judged in primates by the
orientation of the shoulders and degree of proneness) is
also a cue as to one individual’s readiness to engage
with another. However, these measures are complicated
by the fact that orienting toward another individual can
also be a function of information-gathering. In fact, this
dual role of attentional behavior - both sending and
receiving information - is responsible for an inherent
ambiguity that can be exploited by the likes of primates.
For example, a monkey that does not look directly at
another who is threatening it, and thereby does not
‘acknowledge’ the threat, can sometimes effectively
hold the aggressor at bay. Similarly, a subordinate not
looking at a contested resource is much less likely to
stimulate an overt conflict over it than another who
openly displays its interest. In 1967, Chance described a
more general relationship between primates’ attentional
behavior and rank, with subordinates looking to
dominants more often than the reverse. This presumably
serves to gather information about likely troop
movement or other important group developments.
Nevertheless, in most primates a direct stare is a threat
and the avoidance of eye contact is common in most
species (Kummer 1967).

Subject and Procedures
The subjects of this study were seven bonobos (Pan
paniscus) living as a coherent social group since 1993
at the San Diego Zoo’s Wild Animal Park. The group
consists of four mature animals - one adult male, two
adult females, and one female who went from
adolescent to parturient adult over the course of the
study. The group also includes three juveniles born, one
to each of the females, in 1991, 1994 and 1996.
In response to the above-described research, we
chose to score the following dimensions of the bonobos’
activity. Historic data on association patterns (per interanimal distances) and gross social interactions (such as
groom, follow, food-sharing, aggress, etc.) were taken
in instantaneous scan samples, at two minute intervals,
in twenty minute sessions, for months to years
preceding the video segments. These data were used to
establish long-term rank and affiliative relationships, as
well as to document more short-term developments like
disputes or alliances, changes in reproductive status,
etc.
Approximately fifty hours of videotape taken of the
group since 1993 were reviewed by the authors and
twelve incidents of ‘social tool use’ were identified.
(Additional putative examples were also found, but

these did not meet practical criteria such as video
quality sufficient to assess gaze, or all three animals
being visible for at least 80% of the interaction.) These
selections were based on the strength of a combined
total of ten years of experience watching these animals.
The control segments involved the same configuration
of animals, from the same periods of time, engaged in
the same gross interactions (e.g. a pair grooming in the
vicinity of a third) as the test segments, but which did
not, in the authors’ estimation, involve social tool use.
For each segment, a User, Target and Tool (or their
correspondents in the control segments) were identified
and data collected on each dyad (User/Target,
User/Tool and Target/Tool). The segments, which
varied from 15 to 50 seconds long, were analyzed at
intervals of 1/6 of a second (ten frames), which was
determined as the shortest interval in which any relevant
event (e.g. a glance) could take place, For each interval,
the following states were recorded for each individual
within each dyad: 1) Inter-animal distance, in fractional
body widths, 2) Focus of gaze, whenever it could be
determined, 3) Relative body orientation and 4)
Relative head orientation, the latter two scored as
OPEN, PERIPHERAL, or CLOSED. OPEN was
defined as (body or head) oriented directly toward the
dyad partner. PERIPHERAL was defined as the partner
being positioned from about 20o to about 110o right or
left of a sagittal plane between the animal’s eyes. (This
estimate is based on bonobo visual and cranial anatomy
and is assumed to include the area in the animal’s
peripheral visual field. Ankel-Simons 1983) CLOSED
was defined as the partner being behind and thus not
within the animal’s visual field. For any change in state
across intervals, the individual responsible (i.e. whose
movement resulted in the change) was scored as having
shifted TO or FROM its partner. If an individual
actively maintained a state (e.g. turned its head to track
another’s movements, thus actively maintaining an
OPEN) this type of ‘change’ was scored as a KEEP. In
an ongoing, time-locked narrative, we also recorded all
social interactions (such as groom, play, sex, etc.) and
individual tension/relaxation indicators (such as scratch,
flinch, clap, playface, etc.).

Challenge II: How to represent
When continuous data are collected over multiple media
simultaneously, representing the results in a
comprehensible form poses another challenge. In
general with such data, some sort of time-line charting
the course of changes is commonly employed. But, for
example, warranting the ordering of the Y axis values,
or aligning the valences of such changes across multiple
lines (so that, for instance, movement away from the X
axis at time T along one dimension is augmented by

movement away from the X axis, at the same time,
along another dimension) demand a careful assessment
of the media being studied. We again looked to
behavioral and physiological data on primates to
facilitate this assessment.
In our own earlier work with the bonobos, we found
that 70% of all incidents of eye contact were followed
by a decrease in inter-animal distance and/or direct
interaction (of both positive and negative kinds).
Bonobos are also unique among nonhuman primates in
that they regularly engage in face-to-face sex, during
which eye contact is typically made (Savage-Rumbaugh
& Wilkerson 1978). In keeping with the abovedescribed primate research, such data make it clear that
eye contact should be treated as central in any
representation of the bonobos’ gaze relationships. That
is, head and gaze states can be organized according to
their ‘proximity’ (i.e. ease of transition) to eye contact.
Similarly, body orientations and inter-animal distances
can likewise be organized according to the accessibility
they offer to (physical) contact.
As a result, we have chosen to represent these data in
the following manner. For each medium (gaze, body
orientation, etc.), each dyad is represented along a
single X axis of Time, marked at 1/6 second intervals.
One animal’s behavioral values are represented along
the positive Y axis and the other’s along the negative Y
axis. In both cases, the Y values farthest from ‘contact’
are farthest from the X axis, so that when the pair are
far away from each other or oriented away from
(CLOSED to) each other, their time-lines are far from
the X axis. As each makes a move toward, or turns
toward, the other, their lines draw closer, until when
contact (physical or eye contact) occurs, the lines meet
at the X axis. Using these multiple time-lines, we can
then chart a “cognitive trajectory” for each dyad, as
informative changes move across and between the
media. Plus, since the various time lines are constructed
according to similar criteria, we can collapse or blend
them into a single (paired) line that depicts all the
changes (i.e. all TO’s, FROM’s and KEEP’s) in a given
dyad’s attentional access to one another. Such summary
lines are also useful for examining inter-dyad
relationships, facilitating the search for the constraints
imposed not just by the activity of an individual’s
partner, but also by the joint activity of the other dyad.

Challenge III: Analysis
While we can reasonably assume that the media we are
scoring are perceptually accessible to our subjects, we
are primarily concerned with whether these media are
functionally salient. More specifically, we are
questioning whether the three dyads involved

differentially produce and respond to changes in each
other’s attentional behavior.
To address these questions, we will first compare the
transitional probabilities (see Bakeman & Gottman
1997), across dyads, of any change in one partner’s
media being followed, in the next 1/6 second interval,
by any change in the other partner’s media. We will also
compare the occurrence of partners’ simultaneous
changes and coordinated active maintenance (i.e.
simultaneous KEEPs) across dyads. Thus, both
synchrony (“SYNCS”)and immediacy of reaction
(“TRIGGERS”) will be taken as measures of the
sensitivity of our animals to the attentional behavior of
others. In addition, by assessing patterns of change
initiation (e.g. Animal A:TO, followed by Animal
B:FROM) we aim to establish a motivational valence
for these interactions, based on the basic assumption
that organisms approach stimuli they consider desirable
and avoid those they consider undesirable. Ethologists
have long maintained that “approach/avoidance”
conflicts provide a reasonable account of much interanimal positioning as well as the thresholds for dynamic
change. Finally, we will also examine our data for largescale temporal patterns, both in specific state changes as
well as along the more general TO/FROM/KEEP
dimension.

Preliminary Results
Defining social tool use as: “One animal using another
to manipulate or influence the behavior of a third”, we
asked two additional observers, familiar with the
animals but blind to the cognitive model being tested, to
judge whether or not the test and control segments met
those criteria. These observers each disagreed only on a
single different example. In interviews after the tests,
the observers indicated that the User’s behavior toward
the Tool seemed “insincere”, at times because of the
abruptness of its termination but most often because of
“furtive” looks directed by the User to the Target
(although neither mentioned a co-sensitivity to attention
between both User and Target - see below).
We are currently conducting the micro-analyses of
the video segments. Preliminary results indicate that, in
all 12 social tool examples, the User/Target dyad can be
identified by their disproportionately high level of
responsiveness to changes in one another’s attentional
behavior. That is, both more Triggering and more Syncs
occur in the User/Target dyad than in either the
User/Tool or the Target/Tool dyads. In contrast, in the
control segments, the pair that was engaged in the
primary interaction (i.e. that of the User and Tool in the
corresponding social tool examples) show a tendency to
be the most responsive to one another’s attentional
behavior. The additional level of attentional sensitivity

between what would be the User and the Target does
not appear in the control segments.
As expected, the cognitive trajectories of these
interactions frequently jump across media (e.g. an
approach by one animal triggers a look-away by
another). The most intense (simultaneously multimedia) interactions occur in the User/Target dyad. The
directionality of triggers (i.e. who initiates an exchange)
often varies between and even within segments. In fact,
it may be the case that a tendency to ‘vacillate’ in the
direction of triggers is especially characteristic of the
User/Target dyad. In addition, the Target appears more
sensitive to attentional interactions between the User
and Tool than either of them do to his interactions with
the other.
At least two types of larger-scale patterns have thus
far been identified. “Cascades” involve a sequence of
triggers, often alternating in source animal, and
culminating in some intense level of attentional
coordination. In “Suspensions” a prolonged lack of
response is maintained by one animal, who remains
visually fixated on a particular point (its hand, the grass,
etc.), until the partner removes itself from probable
engagement (e.g. “closes”), at which point the first
finally glances at the partner. Both patterns are most
often seen between User and Target. Such interactions
provide additional evidence for the functional salience
of attentional behavior as well as for the motivational
dynamics that characterize social tool use.

Discussion
In summary, we have chosen to conduct a distributed
cognition analysis of the triadic primate interaction
known as “social tool use”. Through this work, we have
been able to show that bonobos can and do monitor and
respond to the attentional states, including eye gaze, of
one another under natural social conditions.
Furthermore, rather than relying on a folk-theoretic
description of “social tool” that involves attributing
humanlike mental states to the animals involved, we
have been able to generate an operational definition of
social tool. That is, social tool use can be said to occur
when one animal (the User) directs some overt social
behavior toward a second (the Tool) while keeping its
attention primarily fixed on the attentional behavior of a
third (the Target) who is likewise attuned to the first.
By examining these interactions in moment-tomoment detail, we can clearly see the co-constructed
nature of the cognition involved and the level of
complexity that the animals can jointly attain. It would
be particularly interesting to do a similar analysis of
humans engaged in such interactions, to compare the
media, transitional patterns, and levels of sophistication
involved. In addition, as a result of this analysis, we can

characterize the individual cognitive abilities of the
bonobos not as involving intentionality, deception, or
theory of mind, but as reflecting a rudimentary capacity
for multi-tasking. Considered one of the most complex
of primate behaviors, social tool use is rare even in
apes, and thus may be viewed as lying at the limits of
those animals’ abilities. As such, it suggests that
speculation on the critical changes in hominid cognitive
evolution might do well to focus on traits that would
enable the manipulation of one’s own and other’s
attentional behavior and the capacity to engage in
multiple social trajectories simultaneously.

References
Anderson JR, Montant M, Schmitt D (1996) Rhesus
monkeys fail to use gaze direction as an experimentergiven cue in an object-choice task. Behavioural
Processes 37: 47-56
Ankel-Simons F (1983) A survey of living primates and
their anatomy. Macmillan, New York
Bakman R, Gottman JM (1997) Observing interaction: An
introduction to sequential analysis (2nd edition).
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Baron--Cohen S (1995) Mindblindness: An essay on
autism and theory of mind. MIT Press, Cambridge MA
London.
Byrne, R, Whiten A (1988) Machiavellian Intelligence,
Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Chance MRA (1967) Attention structure as the basis of
primate rank orders. Man, 2: 503-518.
Churchland PM (1981) Eliminative materialism and the
propositional attitudes. Journal of Philosophy 78:67-90.
Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Silk JB (1995) The response of
female baboons (Papio cynocephalus ursinus) to
anomalous social interactions: Evidence for causal
reasoning Journal of Comparative Psych 109:134—141.
Coussi--Korbel S, Fragaszy D (1995) On the relation
between social dynamics and social learning. Animal
Behaviour 50:1441-1453.
de Waal FBM (1986). Dynamics of social relationships.
In Smuts, B. B. et al. (eds.), Primate Societies.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
de Waal FBM, van Hooff J (1981) Side--directed
communication and agonistic interactions in
chimpanzees. Behaviour 77:164--198.
Fischer KW, Granott N (1995) Beyond one--dimensional
change: parallel concurrent socially distributed processes
in learning and development. Human Development
38:302—314.
Goodall, J (1986). The Chimpanzees of Gombe, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge MA.
Heyes CM (1994) Cues, convergence and a curmudgeon: A
reply to Povinelli. Animal Behaviour, 48:242-244.
Humphrey NK (1976) The social function of intellect. In
Bateson PPPG, Hinde RA (eds) Growing points in
ethology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hutchins E (1995) Cognition in the wild. MIT Press,
Cambridge MA.
Itakura S, Tanaka M (1998) Use of experimenter-given

cues during object-choice tasks by chimpanzees (Pan
troglodytes), an orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus) and human
infants (Homo sapiens). Journal of Comparative
Psychology 112:119-126.
Johnson C.M. (2001) Distributed Primate Cognition: A
Review. Animal Cognition 4:167-183.
Jolly A (1985) The evolution of primate behavior, Second
edition. Macmillan, New York.
Keating CF, Keating EG (1982) Visual scan patterns of
rhesus monkeys viewing faces. Perception 11: 211-219.
Kummer H. (1967) Tripartite relations in Hamadryas
baboons. In Altmann, SA (ed) Social Communication
Among Primates. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lave J (1988) Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics
and culture in everyday life. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Moore C, Dunham PJ (1995) Joint attention: Its origins and
role in development. Erlbaum, Hillsdale NJ.
Peignot P, Anderson JA (1999) Use of experimenter-given
manual and facial cues by gorillas (Gorilla gorilla) in an
object-choice task. Journal of Comparative Psychology
113: 253-260.
Perrett DI, Smith PAJ, Potter, DD, Mistlin AJ, Head AS,
Milner AD, Jeeves MA (1985). Visual cells in the
temporal cortex sensitive to face and gaze direction. Proc.
Roy. Soc. Lond., B, 223:293-317.
Perrett DI, Mistlin AKJ (1990) perception of facial
characteristics by monkeys. In Stebbens WC, Berkley MA
(eds) Comparative perception. Wiley, NY.
Povinelli DJ (1994) Comparative studies of mental state
attribution: A reply to Heyes. Animal Behaviour 48:239241.
Povinelli DJ, Eddy TJ (1996) Chimpanzees: Joint visual
attention. Psychological Science 7: 129-135.
Resnick LB, Levine JM & Teasley SD (1991) Perspectives
on socially shared cognition. American Psychological
Association, Washington DC.
Rogoff B (1990) Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive
development in social context. Oxford University Press.
Savage-Rumbaugh ES, Wilkerson BJ (1978) Socio-sexual
behavior in Pan paniscus and Pan troglodytes: A
comparative study. J. Human Evol. 7: 327-344.
Silk JB (1999) Male bonnet macaques use information
about third party rank relationships to recruit allies.
Animal Behaviour 34: 1640—1658.
Smith WJ (1977) The behavior of communicating: An
ethological approach. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge MA.
Strum S, Forster D, Hutchins E (1997) Why
"Machiavellian intelligence" may not be Machiavellian.
In: Whiten A, Byrne R (eds) Machiavellian intelligence
II. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge New York.
Tomasello M, Call J, Hare B (1998) Five primate species
follow the visual gaze of conspecifics. Animal Behaviour
55: 1063-1069.
Vygotsky LS (1978) Mind in society: The development of
higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge MA.
Wertsch JV (1985) Culture communication and cognition:
Vygotskian perspectives. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

