UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does pure water boil, when it's heated to 100°C?: The associative Strength of Disabling
Conditions in Conditional Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/69s5f0k7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
De Neys, Wim
Schaeken, Walter
d'Ydewalle, Gery

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

‘Does pure water boil, when it’s heated to 100°C?’: The Associative Strength
of Disabling Conditions in Conditional Reasoning
Wim De Neys (Wim.Deneys@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Géry d’Ydewalle (Géry.dYdewalle@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
Reasoning with conditionals involving causal content is
known to be affected by retrieval of alternative and
disabling conditions. Recent evidence indicates that
besides the number of stored conditions, the relative
strength of association of the alternative conditions with
the consequent term is another important factor that
affects the retrieval process. In this study we examined
the effect of the strength of association for the disabling
conditions. We identified causal conditionals for which
there exists only one highly associated disabler. With
these conditionals we constructed conditional inference
problems in which the minor premise was expanded with
the negation of a strongly or weakly associated disabler.
Results indicate that strength of association of the
disabling conditions is affecting reasoning performance:
Acceptance of Modus Tollens increased when there was
no strongly associated disabler available.

Introduction
Conditional reasoning has attracted a lot of interest from
cognitive scientists studying human reasoning.
Conditional reasoning consists in making inferences on
the basis of ‘if p then q’ sentences. In a conditional
inference task people are usually asked to assess four
kinds of arguments: Modus Ponens (MP, ‘if p then q, p
therefore q’), Modus Tollens (MT, ‘if p then q, not q
therefore not p’), Denial of the Antecedent (DA, ‘if p
then q, not p therefore not q’), and Affirmation of the
Consequent (AC, ‘if p then q, q therefore p’).
Under the material implication interpretation of
standard logic, MP and MT are considered valid
inferences while DA and AC are regarded as fallacies.
Much of the work on conditional reasoning has tried to
identify the factors that influence performance on these
four problems (for a review, see Evans, Newstead, &
Byrne, 1993).

A growing body of evidence is showing that peoples
knowledge about the relation between the p (antecedent)
and q (consequent) part of the conditional has a
considerable effect on the underlying reasoning process
( e.g., Byrne, Espino, & Santamaria, 1999; Markovits,
1984; Newstead, Ellis, Evans, & Dennis, 1997; Rumain,
Connell, & Braine, 1983; Thompson, 1994).
In the case of reasoning with conditionals involving
causal content (e.g., ‘If cause p, than effect q’) seminal
work has been done by Cummins and her colleagues
(1995; Cummins et al., 1991). Following Byrne (1989),
Cummins examined the effect of the alternative and
disabling conditions of a causal conditional. An
alternative condition is a possible cause that can
produce the effect mentioned in the conditional while a
disabling condition prevents the effect from occurring
despite the presence of the cause. Consider the
following conditional:
If the brake is depressed, then the car slows down
Possible alternative conditions for this conditional are:
running out of gas, having a flat tire, shifting the
gear down…
The occurrence of these conditions will result in the car
slowing down. The alternatives make it clear that it is
not necessary to depress the brake in order to slow the
car down. Other causes are also possible.
Possible disabling conditions are:
a broken brake, accelerating at the same time, skid
due to road conditions…
If such disablers are present, depressing the brake will
not result in the slowing down of the car. The disablers
make it clear that it is not sufficient to depress the brake

in order to slow down the car. There are additional
conditions that have to be fulfilled.
When people (fallaciously) accept DA and AC
inferences, they fail to see that there are other causes
that may lead to the occurrence of the effect beside the
original stated one. Cummins (1995) and Cummins et
al. (1991) found that peoples acceptance of DA and AC
inferences decreased for conditionals with a high
number of possible alternative conditions. This showed
that a crucial factor in making the fallacious inferences
is the number of alternative causes people can think of.
In addition, she found that the number of disabling
conditions affected the acceptance of the valid MP and
MT inferences: If there were many conditions that
could disable the relation between antecedent and
consequent, people tended also to reject the valid
inferences.
Recently, Quinn and Markovits (1998) have
identified another factor that may influence reasoning
with causal conditionals. They showed that not only the
number of alternative conditions is important, but also
what they call the ‘strength of association’ of the
alternative conditions. Quinn and Markovits developed
a framework (see also Markovits, Fleury, Quinn, &
Venet, 1998) where reasoning performance is being
linked to the structure of semantic memory. In this
framework it is assumed that, when confronted with a
causal ‘if p then q’ conditional, reasoners will access a
causal structure in semantic memory that corresponds to
‘ways of making q happen’ (i.e., alternative conditions).
Within the structure, there will be causes that are more
strongly associated with q than others. The more
strongly associated a specific cause is, the higher the
probability that it will be retrieved by the semantic
search process.
Quinn and Markovits (1998) measured strength of
association by frequency of generation: In a pretest,
participants were asked to write down as many potential
causes for a certain causal consequent (effect, e.g., ‘a
dog scratches constantly’). This allowed the
construction of conditionals with a strongly (e.g., ‘If a
dog has fleas, then it will scratch constantly’) and
weakly (e.g., ‘If a dog has skin disease, then it will
scratch constantly’) associated cause. With the weak
conditional, reasoners will be able to activate the
strongly associated cause, while they will have to
activate some other, less closely associated term for the
strong conditional. Thus, it will be more difficult to
retrieve an alternative condition in case of the strong
conditional, which would lead to a greater acceptance
of DA and AC inferences. The results of the study were
consistent with the predicted response pattern.
The identification of the strength of association effect
raises the question whether this effect is also present for
the disabling conditions. Indeed, although knowledge of
disabling conditions is also stored in semantic memory,

Quinn and Markovits (1998) restricted their case to an
analysis of the alternative conditions. Cummins (1995)
already showed that both the number of alternatives and
disablers is affecting reasoning performance. In
addition, Elio (1998) has shown that the process of
disabler retrieval is not only important in conditional
reasoning but also in the field of belief revision and
non-monotonic reasoning: Belief in a conditional after
contradiction was lower when people could find many
disablers. Thus, both for reasoning psychologists and
the psychological and AI community studying belief
revision, examining the effect of associative strength of
disablers can identify a new factor affecting the crucial
disabler retrieval. Therefore, we examined in this study
whether Quinn and Markovits’ strength of association
effect also generalized to the disabling conditions.
The framework developed by Quinn and Markovits
(1998) was adopted and extended to the disabling
conditions. It was assumed that when presented a causal
conditional, people will not only access a causal
structure with alternative conditions but also one that
corresponds to ‘ways that prevent q to occur’ (see
Vadeboncoeur & Markovits, 1999). When such
disabling conditions are retrieved, p will no longer be
perceived as a sufficient condition for q what renders
the MP and MT conclusions uncertain.
In a generation task we identified strongly and
weakly associated disablers for a number of
conditionals. We constructed experimental items by
expanding the original antecedents of the conditionals
with the negation of the strongly or weakly associated
disabler. Suppose that for a certain conditional we find
that S is a strongly associated disabler, while W is a
weak one. This allows the construction of the expanded
conditionals: ‘If P and not S, then Q’ (strongly
expanded) and ‘If P and not W, then Q’ (weakly
expanded). These expanded conditionals have an equal
number of possible disablers (i.e., the original number
minus one). However, reasoners presented with ‘If P
and not W, then Q’ will still be able to activate the
strongly associated disabler S, while with ‘If P and not
S, then Q’ they will have to activate a less closely
associated one. Thus, it will be harder to access and
retrieve disablers for the strong conditionals. This
access-to-disablers manipulation rests solely on the
strength of association of the disablers and not on the
number of accessible disablers.
Retrieving disablers from semantic memory will
decrease the acceptance of MP and MT inferences.
Therefore, we predict that acceptance ratings for MP
and MT inferences will be higher for the strongly
expanded conditionals than for the weakly ones. In the
present experiment we did not manipulate the access to
alternative conditions. Since, Cummins (1995) findings
indicate that retrieving disablers has no effect on DA
and AC it follows that no difference should be observed

on DA and AC acceptance between the strong and weak
conditionals.

Experiment
Pretest
The material for the present experiment was selected
from previous pilot work (see De Neys, Schaeken, &
d’Ydewalle, 2000), where 20 participants wrote down
as many disabling conditions as possible for a set of 20
causal conditionals (with 1.5 min generation time for
each conditional).
For every conditional we established the relative
frequency of appearance of the disablers that
participants wrote down. We needed conditionals with a
set of disablers in which there was one specific disabler
that was very frequently generated. The expanded
conditionals manipulation also forced us to take an
additional criterion into account. We could not allow
disablers that express a quantification of the original
antecedent (e.g., ‘brake not depressed hard enough’).
Expanding the original with this kind of disablers
would result in inconsistencies for some problems (e.g.,
DA, ‘The brake was not depressed and the brake was
depressed hard enough’). We selected 3 conditionals
that met these criteria. From each set of disablers one
infrequently generated disabler was selected. This
weakly associated disabler had to meet the nonquantification criterion. Furthermore, if the strongly
expanded conditional contained an explicit negation
(e.g., ‘If the apples are ripe and they are not picked’),
we opted to express the selected weakly associated
disabler in an explicit negated way too. The negation
criterion should guarantee that the strongly and weakly
expanded conditionals have comparable lexical
complexity. Finally, the selected disablers had to sound
as natural (according to our intuitions) as possible (e.g.,
‘not too little wind’ was not accepted). Table 1 presents
the material that was selected for the experiment.
We note that one might utter reservations about the
use of frequency of generation as a measure of strength
of association. Quinn and Markovits (1998) did not

address this issue. However, our pilot study showed that
frequency of generation was related to other possible
strength of association measures such as plausibility
and generation order: More frequently generated
disablers were judged more plausible and tended to be
generated prior to less frequently generated ones.

Method
Participants and Material
89 first-year university students participated in the
experiment. Participants received a 4-page booklet.
Page one included the instructions for the task. On the
top of each of the next three pages appeared the
selected conditionals. Each conditional was embedded
in the four inference types (MP, DA, MT, AC). So,
each of the three pages included one conditional with
four inference problems. For each conditional there was
a specific presentation order of the four inferences (AC,
MT, DA, MP or MP, MT, DA, AC or MP, DA, MT,
AC). The three pages were bound into booklets in
randomized order. Below each inference problem
appeared a seven point rating scale. This resulted in the
following item format:
Rule: If water is heated to 100°C, then it boils
Fact: The water is heated to 100°C and the water is pure
Conclusion: The water boils

I
-1--------2--------3---------4--------5--------6--------7very sure somewhat I somewhat sure very
sure
sure
I
sure
sure
That I CANNOT draw
this conclusion

That I CAN draw
this conclusion

Figure 1. An example of the item format
Figure 1 presents an example of the MP problem. On
the same page participants would also find the MT, DA
and AC problem. The access to disablers manipulation

Table 1.
Relative frequency of generation of the most frequently mentioned disablers for the three selected conditionals. The
disablers are given in order of frequency (%). Selected strongly and weakly associated disablers are highlighted.
If the apples are ripe, then they fall If John grasps the glass with his bare If water is heated to 100° C, then
from the tree
hands, then his fingerprints are on it
it boils
Picked (65%)
Too little wind (25%)
Not enough weight (20%)
Not ripe enough (20 %)
Apples caught in branches (10 %)

Hands not greasy (50%)
Grasped glass with palms only (35%)
Prints wiped off (30%)
Glass was wet (25%)

No pure water (75%)
No normal pressure (30%)
Bad temperature measure (30%)

consisted in the presentation of two different minor
premises (the information under the heading ‘Fact’); the
above example would belong to the strongly associated
group were the original information was expanded with
the negation of the strongest associated disabler.
Similarly, in the weakly associated group, the negation
of the selected weakly associated disabler was added to
the ‘Fact:’-information. In both expanded groups
appeared the original conditionals on top of the item
pages. Thus, participants were not presented explicit
expanded conditionals but rather conditional inference
problems with expanded minor premises. All the items
in a single booklet belonged to the same group. Table 2
gives an overview of the different material in the two
groups (for an MP problem)
Table 2.
Different contents in the experimental groups. Both
groups only differ by the kind of information that is
presented in the minor premise.

Participants rated each of the four inference types three
times. For every inference type the mean of these three
ratings was calculated. This resulted in a 4 (inference
type, within-subjects) x2 (group, between-subjects)
design. All hypotheses were tested with planned
comparison tests and rejection probability of .05.
Table 3 shows the overall mean acceptance ratings for
the four inference types in the expanded weakly and
strongly associated group. Planned contrasts indicated
that the acceptance ratings in both groups differed
significantly [F(1, 87) = 4.55, MSe = 3.85, p < .04]. As
expected, both expanded groups did not differ in terms
of the acceptance ratings for DA and AC inferences.
For MT inferences we did obtain significantly higher
ratings in the strongly associated group [F(1, 87) =
4.99, MSe = 2.67, p < .03]. Although, the effect on MP
problems was in the expected direction (higher ratings
in the strongly than in the weakly associated group), it
did not reach significance.

Expanded strongly associated:

Table 3.
Mean acceptance rating for the four inference types in
the strongly associated and weakly associated groups.

(a) Water is heated to 100°C and the water is pure
(b) The apples are ripe and they are not picked
(c) John grasps the glass with his bare hands and his
hands are greasy

Inference
type

Expanded weakly associated:
(a) Water is heated to 100°C and the pressure is normal
(b) The apples are ripe and they are not caught in the
branches
(c) John grasps the glass with his bare hands and the
glass is dry

Group
Expanded weakly
associated (n=45)

MP
5.7
DA
4.78
MT
4.37*
AC
4.98
* planned contrast p<.05

Expanded strongly
associated (n=44)
5.92
5.11
5.14*
5.44

Discussion
Procedure
The booklets were randomly given out to students who
agreed to participate in the experiment. No time limits
were imposed. The instructions explained the specific
item format of the task. Participants were told that the
task was to decide whether or not they could accept the
different conclusions. The instruction page showed an
example problem (always standard MP) together with a
copy of the rating scale. Care was taken to make sure
that participants understood the precise nature of the
rating scale. As in Cummins (1995), participants were
NOT specifically instructed to accept the premises as
always true. With Cummins we assume that this
encourages people to reason as they would in everyday
circumstances.

Results

The study showed that the strength of association of a
disabling condition is affecting the conditional
reasoning process. As predicted, peoples acceptance of
MT inferences increased when there was no strongly
associated disabler available, while the associative
strength of the disablers had no effect on DA and AC
inferences. This supports the hypothesis that in addition
to the number of disabling conditions (Cummins, 1995),
retrieving disablers from semantic memory is affected
by their strength of association.
We suspect that the non-significance of the expected
effect on MP may be due to a ceiling effect on the MP
acceptance ratings. In the pretest, relatively few
disablers were generated (less than the overall mean)
for the three conditionals that were adopted for the
experiment. Cummins (1995) already obtained high MP
acceptance ratings for these conditionals. The
‘expansion’ manipulation in the present experiment

then further decreased the available number of
disablers. This may have resulted in a ceiling effect. It
could be the case that MP acceptance was already at the
top in the weakly associated group. Mean acceptance
for MP in the weakly associated group (Mean = 5.7, see
Table 3) indeed tended to the 'sure that I can draw this
conclusion' rating, located at the upper end of the scale.
As in Cummins (1995), acceptance ratings on the (more
difficult) MT inference were lower, what allowed the
associative strength effect to show up.
It is interesting to note that for all of the four
inference types acceptance ratings were lower when
there was a strongly associated disabler available.
Although the effect on AC and DA was not significant,
one could suggest that the availability of a strongly
associated disabler results in an overall decrease in
certainty for every inference type (and not just for MT
or MP). This might tie in with recent evidence (e.g.
Manktelow & Fairley, 2000) showing that acceptance
of DA can be affected by disabling conditions. This
issue, together with the hypothesized ceiling effect on
MP, will need to be addressed in further research.
In this study we adopted Quinn and Markovits’
(1998) notion of a semantic search process and
extended it to the disabling conditions. We should note
that Quinn and Markovits (see also Markovits et al.,
1998) incorporated the postulated semantic search
process in the mental models theory (Johnson-Laird and
Byrne, 1991). Here we refrained from making specific
claims about the nature of the basic inferential
principles (i.e., mental models or mental inference
rules). The general semantic search process can be
incorporated in other reasoning theories like mental
logic (Braine & O’Brien, 1998; Rips, 1994) or the
probabilistic approach (Oaksford & Chater, 1998).
Comparing these different implementations is not
within the scope of the present study or the Quinn and
Markovits experiment.
We mentioned the relevance of the present study for
the work of Elio (1997, 1998) and other researchers in
the domain of belief revision and non-monotonic
reasoning. Elio established that the number of stored
disabling conditions affected peoples belief revisions
and stated that conditional reasoning and belief revision
are guided by the same memory search process. Our
results show that successful retrieval is not only
affected by the number of stored disabling conditions
but also by their strength of association.
The present study can also be related to the work of
Chan and Chua (1994). They examined the effect of
‘relative salience’ of disabling conditions. This factor
can be interpreted as strength of association. Chan and
Chua presented participants inference problems with
two conditionals (e.g., ‘If p then q, If r then q, p, thus
q?’). The second conditional mentioned a possible
disabling condition while the categorical premise was

not expanded (see Byrne, 1989). Acceptance of MP and
MT decreased with the strength of association of the
mentioned disabler. However, a crucial difference with
our study is that the present manipulation specifically
affected the retrieval of disablers from semantic
memory. In Chan and Chua’s experiment, reasoning
was affected by the strength of association of the
mentioned disabler per se. The expansion of the
categorical premise in the present experiment
eliminated a strongly or weakly associated disabler and
thereby affected the strength of association in the
residual disabler set.
In sum, our study indicated that the conditional
inferences people make are influenced by the strength
of association of the disabling conditions. This
complements Quinn and Markovits’ (1998) contention
that the strength of association of elements in semantic
memory is an important factor in predicting conditional
reasoning performance.

Acknowledgements
Preparation of the manuscript was supported by grants
from the Fund for Scientific Research- Flanders (FWO)
and the Belgian Program on Interuniversity Poles of
Attraction, Convention number P4/19.

References
Braine, M. D. S., & O’Brien, D. P. (Eds.). (1998).
Mental logic. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Byrne, R. M. J. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences
with conditionals. Cognition, 31, 61-83.
Byrne, R. M. J., Espino, O., & Santamaria, C. (1999).
Counterexamples and the suppression of inferences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 347-373.
Chan, D., & Chua, F. (1994). Suppression of valid
inferences: Syntactic views, mental models, and
relative salience. Cognition, 53, 217-238.
Cummins, D. D. (1995). Naive theories and causal
deduction. Memory and Cognition, 23, 646-658.
Cummins, D. D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R.
(1991). Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory
and Cognition, 19, 274-282.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2000).
Causal conditional reasoning, semantic memory
retrieval, and mental models: A test of the ‘semantic
memory framework’. (Psychological report No.270).
Leuven: University of Leuven. Laboratory of
Experimental Psychology.
Elio, R. (1997). What to believe when inferences are
contradicted: the impact of knowledge type and
inference rule. Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 211-216.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Elio, R. (1998). How to disbelieve p -> q: Resolving
contradictions. Proceedings of the Twentieth Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society, 315-320. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M .J.
(1993). Human reasoning: The psychology of
deduction. Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991).
Deduction. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Manktelow, K. I., & Fairley, N. (2000). Superordinate
principles in reasoning with causal and deontic
conditionals. Thinking and Reasoning, 6, 41-65.
Markovits, H. (1984). Awareness of the ‘possible’ as a
mediator of formal thinking in conditional reasoning
problems. British Journal of Psychology, 75, 367-376.
Markovits, H., Fleury, M., Quinn, S., & Venet, M.
(1998). The development of conditional reasoning and
the structure of semantic memory. Child
Development, 69, 742-755.
Newstead, S. E., Ellis, C. E., Evans, , J. St. B. T., &
Dennis, I. (1997). Conditional reasoning with realistic
material. Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 49-96.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1998). Rationality in an
uncertain world: Essays on the cognitive science of
human reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Quinn, S., & Markovits, H. (1998). Conditional
reasoning, causality, and the structure of semantic
memory : strength of association as a predictive factor
for content effects. Cognition, 68, B93-B101.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Rumain, B., Connell, J., & Braine, M. D. S. (1983).
Conversational comprehension processes are
responsible for reasoning fallacies in children as well
as adults. Developmental Psychology, 19, 471-481.
Thompson, V. A. (1994). Interpretational factors in
conditional reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 22,
742-758.
Vadeboncoeur, I., & Markovits, H. (1999). The effect
of instructions and information retrieval on accepting
the premises in a conditional reasoning task. Thinking
and Reasoning, 5, 97-113.

