UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effect of Choice Set on Valuation of Risky Prospects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7nr5d0xz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Stewart, Neil
Charter, Nick
Stott, Henry P.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effect of Choice Set on Valuation of Risky Prospects
Neil Stewart (neil.stewart@warwick.ac.uk)
Nick Chater (nick.chater@warwick.ac.uk)
Henry P. Stott (hstott@owc.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV1 3GA, UK

Abstract
Current models of decision making under risk assume
access to the absolute magnitudes of gamble attributes.
The two experiments presented here provide evidence
that decisions under risk are based, in addition, on the
context of the decision. In Experiment 1 the set of
options offered as certainty equivalents was shown to
determine the value of simple gambles of the form “p
chance of £x”. Experiment 2 employed a novel procedure
where the payment structure was such that it was optimal
for participants to provide truthful certainty equivalents.
Again, the context provided by the set of certainty
equivalents influenced the choice of certainty equivalent.

Many existing theories of decision making under risk
(e.g., Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Quiggin, 1982;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1992; von Neumann &
Morgenstern, 1947) predict that participants use the
absolute magnitudes of value and probability in making
risky decisions, or that some monotonic transform of
these attributes is used. For example, in expected utility
theory (von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1947), the utility
of an outcome is a negatively accelerated function of
value, and outcomes which maximize the expected
utility are preferred. The aim of the experiments
described here was to investigate to what extent
contextual factors also influence decision under risk.
Mellers, Ordóñez and Birnbaum (1992) measured the
attractiveness ratings and buying prices of simple
binary gambles presented in two different contexts. In
one context, the distribution of expected values of
accompanying gambles was positively skewed, and in
the other context, the expected values were negatively
skewed. Attractiveness ratings were influenced by
context. However, for simple gambles of the form “p
chance of £x” context had a minimal effect on buying
price. With more complicated gambles of the form “p
chance of £x otherwise £y”, the effect was slightly
larger. The effect of context on attractiveness and the
lack of an effect of context on buying price is consistent
with a similar demonstration by Janiszewski and
Lichtenstein (1999), and consistent with a review of
previous research by Poulton (1982).
However, context does affect choice of certainty
equivalents (hereafter, CEs) in other conditions. (CEs
are the amount of money that can be obtained for

certain, participants feel is equivalent to a given
gamble). Birnbaum (1992) demonstrated that skewing
the distribution of CEs offered for simple gambles,
whilst holding the range constant, influenced the
selection of a CE. When the CE options were positively
skewed (i.e., more small values) gambles were overvalued compared to the negatively skewed context,
consistent with range-frequency theory (Parducci, 1965;
1974).
The aim of Experiment 1 was to demonstrate that the
options offered as potential CEs influence estimates of
a gamble’s CE. Following a similar logic to a loudness
judgment experiment by Garner (1954), participants
were given a set of potential CEs for each gamble, and
asked to choose the option closest to their estimate of
the CE for each gamble. For each gamble, CE options
were either all lower in value than the free choice CE
(given by another group of participants) or all higher. If
participants were not influenced by context, then their
choices of CE should be highly skewed towards the
mean free choice CE. If participants’ responses are
solely determined by context, then the distribution of
responses across options should be the same for both
the low and high value range of CEs. Experiment 2
introduces a new procedure to investigate these context
effects in which it is optimal for participants to provide
truthful CEs.

Experiment 1
The curve in Figure 1 represents a hypothetical
normal distribution of CEs given under free choice
conditions. If participants are not affected by the
context provided by the range of CEs offered in the
restricted choice conditions, it is possible to predict
their distribution of responses. For an option at the
lower end of the range, the probability of selecting that
option is the integral of the free choice function
between -• and a point half way between the lowest
two options. Similarly for an option at the higher end of
the range, the probability is the integral between a point
half way between the highest two options and +• . For
an option of intermediate value, the probability is the
integral between the bound half way between the
intermediate option and the next lowest option, and
bound half way between that intermediate option and
the next highest option. In other words, it is assumed

Probability
Density
0.6

Probability
1.0

PDF for Free Choice CE
Low CEs Condition

0.8

High CEs Condition
0.4

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.0
-1.0

0.0
-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

Standardized CE

Figure 1: Predicted choices in Stage 2, under the
assumption that context will not affect CE choice.
participants choose the option nearest to the CE they
would have chosen under free choice conditions.
For the options used in Experiment 1 (see the Design
for a description), the two lines in Figure 1 represent the
expected distribution of responses. If participants are
not influenced by the context provided by the four CE
options then the key prediction is that participants in
the high CEs condition should choose the lowest option
more than half of the time, and participants in the low
CEs condition should choose the highest option more
than half of the time. This prediction holds for any
symmetrical distribution of free choice CEs.

equal to approximately half the free choice standard
deviation. One set of CEs was placed below the free
choice value, and the other set above. This difference
between the lowest CE in the high CEs condition (or
the highest CE of the low CEs condition) and the mean
free choice CEs was set to be roughly equal to the
difference between CEs within a condition. Options
were rounded to be familiar, easy to deal with values.
Procedure Participants were given written instructions.
They were asked to imagine choosing between "£30 or
a 50% chance of £100" to illustrate that gambles could
have a value. They were told they would be asked to
value a series of gambles, and that they should imagine
they had the chance to play the gamble. For each
gamble they were asked how much money for certain
they thought it was fair for someone to give them for
the other person to have a chance to take the gamble
instead. They were also asked to consider the opposite
situation, where they would be buying the gamble. It
was explained that the purpose of the experiment was to
investigate how much they thought the gambles were
worth, and that there was no correct answer. For
participants in Stage 2, it was explained that they
should choose the CE option nearest the value they
thought the gamble was worth.
Each gamble was presented on a separate page of a
20 page booklet. For participants in Stage 1 gambles
were presented as follows:
For you, how much is the gamble
"80% chance of £600"
worth?

Method
Participants 30 psychology undergraduates from the
University of Warwick participated for course credit. 14
took part in Stage 1 of the experiment. 16 took part in
Stage 2.
Design Stage 1 was designed to measure participants’
free choice CEs for a series of simple gambles. A set of
20 gambles was created by crossing the amounts £200,
£400, £600, £800 and £1000 with the probabilities 0.2,
0.4, 0.6 and 0.8. In Stage 2 different participants were
presented with the same gambles, and asked to select
from a set of four CEs the CE that was closest to their
judgment of the value of the gamble. For each gamble
two sets of CEs were created. In the low CEs condition
participants received options all lower than the mean
free choice CE given in Stage 1. In the high CEs
condition participants received CEs that were all higher.
The CE sets were constructed as follows. The mean and
standard deviation of the free choice CEs was
calculated for each gamble. The two sets of equally
spaced CEs (for the high value and low value
conditions) were calculated so that their range was

£____
Probabilities were always presented as percentages.
For participants in Stage 2, a set of options was added.
Options were always presented in numerical order, as
with the following example of a low CE set:
How much is the gamble
"60% chance of £400"
worth?
Is it: £60

£80

£100

£120

Results
Participants took approximately 5 minutes to complete
the task. Figure 2 plots the Stage 1 free choice CE
against the gamble amount for the four gamble
probabilities. As expected, the average CE increased
with both probability of winning and gamble amount
demonstrating that participants were sensitive to
manipulations of both. The chosen CE was an
approximately linear function of the independent effects
of gamble amount and gamble probability. Participants
were risk averse, with the mean CE being, on average,

Mean Free
Choice CE/£
500

Proportion
of Responses
0.5

400

Gamble
Probability
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

300
200

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

100

0.0
A

0
200

400

600

800

1000

Gamble Amount/£

Figure 2: Mean free choice CE as a function of
gamble amount for different gamble probabilities for
Stage 1 of Experiment 1. (Error bars are standard
error of the mean.)
61% of the expected value of the gamble (standard error
3%).
The results of Stage 2 are of most interest. Responses
are labeled A through D, with A being the lowest CE,
and D being the highest CE. The proportion of times
each response type was chosen is plotted in Figure 3.
There is no evidence of skewing – instead the
distribution of options is approximately the same for the
two conditions. The highest CE in the low CEs
condition was chosen less than half the time t(7)=4.21,
p<0.05. The same was true of the lowest CE in the high
CE condition, t(7)=5.26, p<0.05.

B
C
Low CEs

D

A

B
C
High CEs

D

Figure 3: Proportion of responses to each CE for
Stage 2 of Experiment 1. (Error bars are standard
error of the mean.)
was optimal for participants to report CEs truthfully.
This procedure is simpler than other methods used to
elicit truthful CEs (e.g., the first price auction, or the
Becker, DeGroot & Marschak, 1964, procedure).
Specifically, participants divide a given amount into an
amount for certain, and an amount to be won with a
certain given chance. For example, they might split
£1000 into a sure amount of £300 and a “60% chance of
£700” gamble. Participants know that the experimenter
will select either the gamble or the sure amount, taking
the “better” of the two, leaving the participant with the
other. Thus it is optimal for participants to split the
given amount so that the resulting fixed amount has the
same utility as the resulting gamble.

Method

Discussion
Participants were asked to value a simple gamble of the
form “p chance of £x”. The effects of p and x on the CE
were linear and independent, consistent with
Birnbaum’s (1992) data. Mean value judgments were
below the expected value (£px) of the gamble showing
participants were risk averse. Different participants
were given a restricted set of CEs for each gamble,
either all lower than the mean free choice CE for every
gamble or all higher. CE judgments were completely
determined by the range of CEs offered, and were not
skewed towards the mean free choice CE. Control
conditions, not reported here, rule out task demand
characteristics as a potential account of these findings,
as participants were happy to give highly skewed
responses in these conditions. Further, only one of the
16 participants from the second stage reported they
were unhappy with the restricted range of CEs offered.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to demonstrate the same
effect of restricting the range of CEs in a task where it

Participants 17 participants took part in the Stage 1 of
the experiment. 19 different participants took part in the
Stage 2. All participants were paid £4 plus performance
related winnings of up to £4.
Design In each trial in Stage 1 a participant divided a
given amount of money, £x, into two smaller amounts,
£y and £z, to make one fixed amount (£y) and a gamble.
There is a given probability p of winning £z, otherwise
nothing. Probability p is known to participants before
splitting amount £x. Participants know that (if the trial
is selected at random at the end of the experiment) the
experimenter will take either the fixed amount or the
gamble for themselves leaving the participant with the
other. It is therefore optimal for the participant to split
the amount £x into amounts £y and £z such that £y and
a p chance of £z have equal utility for them, i.e., £y is
the CE for the gamble “p chance of £z”. Under the
assumption that the experimenter has the same utility
function as them, participants understand that the
experimenter will choose the gamble with greater

utility, leaving them with less, if they do not split the
amounts in this way.
Stage 2 of the experiment differed by offering
participants a choice from a set of four pre-split options,
rather than giving them a completely free choice. That
is, values for £y and £z were presented, and participants
selected one pair which could be played at the end of
the experiment. As in Stage 1, participants knew that
the experimenter would choose the option from the
chosen pair with the greatest utility, and therefore they
should choose the pair of options closest in expected
utility.
It was hypothesized that the pairs of values for y and
z presented in Stage 2 would influence participants’
choices, and that participants would therefore not just
choose the optimal pair. To demonstrate this there was
one between participants factor. The set of values for £y
and £z were either selected such that £y was always
greater than the free choice value of £y from Stage 1
(for equal £x) and £z smaller than the free choice value,
or vice versa. The option sets were constructed as
follows. The mean and standard deviation of the free
choice amount was calculated for each gamble. The two
sets of equally spaced options (for the high value and
low value conditions) were calculated as described for
Experiment 1. As in Experiment 1, if participants are
not influenced by the set of choices, then the
distribution of responses across the options should be
skewed towards the free choice splitting.
Procedure For both stages the experiment began with
instructions. It was explained to participants that they
were playing a gambling game, and that they should try
to win as much money as possible. They were told the
purpose of the experiment was to investigate how much
people thought gambles were worth. The task was
described. It was emphasized that it was optimal for
them to split the money so they thought the amount for
certain was equal in worth to a chance on the gamble.
They were told that if they allocated funds so either the
certain amount was worth more than the gamble, or
vice versa, then the experimenter would take the better
one, leaving them with less than if they had allocated
the money so the gamble was worth the certain amount.
They were told that although they could not be certain
what the experimenter would do, they should assume
the experimenter would behave like them.
Participants were given five practice trials to
complete. One of the trials was chosen at random, and it
was explained that if the experimenter chose the fixed
amount, then the gamble would be played, and they
would get the winnings. They were also told that if
instead the experimenter took the gamble they would
get the fixed amount. Note that this discussion was
hypothetical, and participants were not actually told
what the experimenter’s preference would be.
After the practice the experiment began. The
participant completed a booklet of gambles. Gambles

were presented in a random order to each participant.
An example page from a free choice condition booklet
is shown below.
£1000

£____
for certain

or

60% chance of
£____

In the restricted choice conditions, pre-split options
were presented as in the example below.
£1000

Tick

£322 for certain
£334 for certain
£346 for certain
£358 for certain

or
or
or
or

60% chance of £678
60% chance of £666
60% chance of £654
60% chance of £642

When the experiment was completed one trial was
chosen at random, and played to determine each
participant’s bonus using an exchange rate.

Results
Participants took between half an hour and one hour to
complete the booklet. One participant was eliminated
from subsequent analysis for showing a completely
different pattern of results to other participants,
suggesting they had misunderstood the task. The
participant had decreased the value of the fixed amount,
£y, as the chance of the gamble amount, p, increased
(i.e., they responded as if more likely gambles were
worth less to them). 14 out of the remaining 512 trials
(16 participants x 32 trials) with incorrect arithmetic
were deleted, and treated as missing data.
Figure 4 plots the average fixed amount £y as a
function of the gamble chance p for the different total
amounts (£x). As the total amount £x increased, then
participants’ allocation of the fixed amount £y
increased. As the probability p of winning the gamble
increased participants’ estimates of the value of the
gamble, £y, also increased. Thus participants’ responses
seem lawful and sensible. These two effects are
approximately independent. The dashed lines in Figure
4 represent risk neutral responding. Data points falling
above the dashed line demonstrate risk averse behavior.
On average, participants were risk averse for low
gamble chances (p=0.2), risk neutral for intermediate
gamble chances (p=0.6) and slightly risk prone for high
gamble chances (p=0.8). However, standard deviations
were approximately 15% of the mean fixed amount
allocated and thus for larger gamble chances

Mean Fixed Amount
Allocated y/£
1000

Total
Amount x/£

800

250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000

600
400
200
0
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Gamble Chance p

Figure 4: Mean fixed amount allocated in Stage 1 of
Experiment 2 as a function of gamble chance for the
different total amounts. (Error bars are standard error
of the mean.)
approximately half of responses were risk prone, and
half risk averse.
The choices made in Stage 2 are shown in Figure 5.
Participants did prefer end options over central options
in both conditions, consistent with the pattern of results
expected if participants were to show no context effect.
However, option D in the low y condition was chosen
significantly less than half the time, t(9)=3.47, p<0.05.
Similarly, option A in the high y condition was chosen
significantly less than half the time, t(8)=4.20, p<0.05.
This observation is consistent with participants showing
some context effect. In other words, the proportion of
times each option was selected differed significantly
from the proportions expected under the assumption
that context would not have an effect.

Discussion
The new procedure for eliciting CEs under free choice
provides results consistent with Experiment 1. In
Experiment 1 participants were, on average, risk averse.
Under free choice conditions in Experiment 2
participants were only risk averse for low probability
gambles, and were slightly risk prone for high
probability gambles. This pattern is the opposite of
Tversky and Kahneman’s (1986, Problems 10 and 11).
Risk averse responding for low probabilities, and risk
prone responding for high probabilities is, however,
consistent with over estimation of low probabilities and
underestimation of high probabilities (e.g., Prelec,
1998; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992; Wu & Gonzalez,
1996). (Consider the case for p=0.2. If this probability
is overestimated, say at 0.3, then the risk neutral
strategy is to increase £y and decrease £z, as the gamble
p chance of £z will be overvalued.)
The results of the restricted choice conditions in
Experiment 2 replicate those shown in Experiment 1

Proportion
of Responses
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
A

B
C
Low y

D

A

B
C
High y

D

Figure 5: Proportion of each response choice for
Stage 2 of Experiment 2. (Error bars are standard
error of the mean.)
under a more rigorous procedure, despite participants
taking at least six times longer to complete the task
compared to Experiment 1. When participants were
presented with a range of pre-split total amounts, so that
the CE options were either always lower or always
higher than the free choice value, their choice of CE
was not skewed towards the mean free choice CE. The
context provided by the pre-split options influenced
their choice of CE.

General Discussion
In the experiments presented here, participants’ choice
of CE for simple gambles was affected by the range of
option CEs offered to them, compared to CEs given by
different participants under free choice conditions. For
example, when the option CEs were all lower than the
free choice CE, participants behaved as if their CE was
lower.

Judged and Choice Certainty Equivalents
Careful discussion by Luce (2000) highlights the a
difference between judged CEs, where participants
provide a single judgement of the value of a gamble,
and choice CEs, derived from a series of choices
between gambles and fixed amounts. For example, for
the kinds of gambles used here, with large amounts and
moderate probabilities, judged CEs are overvalued
compared to choice CEs (e.g., Bostic, Herrnstein &
Luce, 1990). Luce (2000) advocates developing
separate theories to for judged and choice certainty
equivalents. Participants in these experiments were
instructed to complete the restricted CE conditions by
judging CEs. However, in Experiment 2, the design
should certainly have encouraged imagining choices
between gambles and fixed amounts. The degree to
which this was the case may explain the ‘u’ shaped

pattern of results in Experiment 2, rather than the ‘n’
shaped pattern in Experiment 1.

Other Context Effects
Here the context provided by a set of certainty
equivalent options has been found to influence the CE.
In other experiments, the context provided by a set of
gambles has been shown to influence preferences
amongst those gambles. For example, Simonson and
Tversky (1992) demonstrated that there was a tendency
to prefer a given option when there are other options in
the choice set that are unfavorable when compared to
the given option. Specifically, in making risky choices
between three three-outcome gambles, a gamble was
preferred if it dominated another gamble in the choice
set.

Implications
Existing models of decision making under risk typically
assume that only the attributes of the gamble need be
considered when reaching a CE decision. The context
or anchoring effects demonstrated here show that the
context also needs to be considered. The extent to
which context can cause deviation from ‘rational
choice’ has implications for other domains, such as
economics and political science, where ‘rational choice’
models of the individual are applied (e.g., expected
utility theory and game theory).

Relation to Perception
The demonstration of context effects in risky decision
making suggests that the representation of the utility
dimension is similar to that for perceptual psychological
dimensions where context effects have also been
demonstrated. For example, Garner (1954) showed that
participants were completely unable to determine which
of six tones was more or less than half as loud as a
reference loudness. Instead, participants’ judgments
were entirely influenced by the range of the six tones.
(Laming, 1997, provides an extensive discussion of
other similar findings.) Further research is underway in
this laboratory to investigate to what extent the context
provided by simultaneously presented gambles (see also
Mellers et al., 1992) and the context provided by
recently considered gambles affects the utility of
gambles. This research should help to establish whether
utility really is like perceptual dimensions.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from Oliver,
Wyman & Company to the Institute of Applied
Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology,
University of Warwick. We are grateful to Gordon D.
A. Brown for his insightful comments.

References
Becker, G. M., DeGroot, M. H., & Marschak, J. (1964).
Measuring utility by a single-response sequential
method. Behavioral Science, 9, 226-232.
Birnbaum, M. H. (1992). Violations of monotonicity
and contextual effects in choice-based certainty
equivalents. Psychological Science, 3, 310-314.
Bostic, R., Herrnstein, R. J., & Luce, R. D. (1990). The
effect of preference-reversal phenomenon of using
choice indifferences. Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 13, 193-212.
Garner, W. R. (1954). Context effects and the validity
of loudness scales. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48, 218-224.
Janiszewski, C., & Lichtenstein, D. R. (1999). A range
theory account of price perception. Journal of
Consumer Research, 25, 353-368.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory:
An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47,
263-291.
Laming, D. (1997). The measurement of sensation.
London: Oxford University Press.
Luce, R. D. (2000). Utility of gains and losses:
Measurement-theoretical and experimental
approaches. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mellers, B. A., Ordóñez, L. D., & Birnbaum, M. H.
(1992). A change-of-process theory for contextual
effects and preference reversals in risky decision
making. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 52, 311-369.
Parducci, A. (1965). Category judgment: A rangefrequency theory. Psychological Review, 72, 407418.
Parducci, A. (1974). Contextual effects: A rangefrequency analysis. In L. Carterette and M. P.
Friedman (Eds.), Handbook of Perception (Vol. II).
New York: Academic Press.
Poulton, E. C. (1989). Bias in quantifying judgments.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Prelec, D. (1998). The probability weighting function.
Econometrica, 66, 497-527.
Quiggin, J. (1993). Generalized expected utility theory:
The rank-dependent model. Boston: Kluwer
Academic.
Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1992). Choice in context:
Tradeoff contrast and extremeness aversion. Journal
of Marketing Research, 29, 281-295.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 204217.
von Neumann, M., & Morgenstern, O. (1947). Theory
of games and economic behavior. (2nd ed.).
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wu, G., & Gonzelez, R. (1996). Curvature of the
probability weighting function. Management Science,
42, 1676-1690.

