UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Efficacious Logic Instruction: People Are Not Irremediablly Poor Deductive Reasoners

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8mf7r4qs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Rinella, Kelsey J.
Brinsjord, Selmer
Yang, Yingrui

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Efficacious Logic Instruction:
People Are Not Irremediably Poor Deductive Reasoners
Kelsey J. Rinella (rinelk@rpi.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Psychology & Cognitive Science
The Minds & Machines Laboratory
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI)
Troy, NY 12180 USA

Selmer Bringsjord (selmer@rpi.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Psychology & Cognitive Science
Department of Computer Science
The Minds & Machines Laboratory
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI)
Troy, NY 12180 USA

Yingrui Yang (yangyri@rpi.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Psychology & Cognitive Science
The Minds & Machines Laboratory
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI)
Troy, NY 12180 USA

Abstract
Cheng and Holyoak, and many others in psychology and
cognitive science, subscribe to the view that humans
have little context-independent deductive capacity, and
that they can’t acquire such a capacity through
instruction in formal logic. This position is based, in no
small part, upon C&H’s well-known investigation of the
efficacy of an undergraduate course in logic in
improving performance on problems related to Wason’s
Selection Task, in which they found the benefit of such
training to be minimal (Cheng, Holyoak, Nisbett, &
Oliver, 1986). We believe, based on the encouraging
results of a new study involving a similar pre-test/posttest design on a logic class at RPI, that the results
obtained in the Cheng & Holyoak study serve to
highlight problems with the way logic has historically
been taught (related to techniques unavailable or
impractical before the advent of heavy computer
saturation in higher education), rather than to suggest
that humans are unable to learn to reason. This
prompted the reevaluation of conclusions based on
C&H’s research, requiring a new theory of metareasoning, Mental MetaLogic.

Introduction
The backlash against Piaget’s claims (e.g., see the
claims in Inhelder and Piaget, 1958) that humans
naturally acquire competence in (elementary
extensional) logic has “ruled the roost” in the
psychology of reasoning for some time. Recently there

has been some thought that perhaps the inherent
irrationality of the species has been exaggerated (see
Bringsjord, Noel, & Bringsjord, 1998; Evans & Over,
1996; Rips, 1994). This article is targeted specifically
at the claims made by Cheng et. al. (1986) that not only
are humans inherently bad at logic, but we are unable
through training in formal logic to learn how to reason
in abstract, context-independent fashion. One of the
experiments they report, experiment 2, involves a pretest/post-test design in which students in a logic class
are tested on their understanding of how the conditional
works in examples—the improvement they report is
minimal. Using the same design, but a different
instructional method, our results indicated a
significantly greater improvement.
The three major reasons put forth in this presentation
that the logic class at RPI differed from those in
previous studies is that it taught disproofs,
diagrammatic techniques, and, “Rigorous and generalpurpose procedures for formalizing natural language
logic problems in first-order logic so that they can then
be solved by automated theorem provers”. (For more
on this last technique, see Bringsjord & Ferrucci, 2000.)
Briefly, disproofs are proofs that one sentence does not
follow from a set (possibly empty) of givens. Put
another way, they are proofs that, given whatever
premises one has, it is not possible to prove the goal,
nor is it possible to prove the negation of the goal. The
software used in the course, HYPERPROOF (Barwise

and Etchemendy, 1994), allows students to see how
sentential information in first-order logic interacts with
a toy world which acts as the domain of discourse (were
it not for the existence of this world, it would not be
possible to perform disproofs in a way remotely similar
to that used in the RPI course) through experimentation
and practice problems. Because of this, our students
learn the meanings of the sentences in a much more
understandable fashion while retaining the abstractness
and universality of formal logic—these are the
diagrammatic techniques. Finally, one of the most
challenging tasks involved in solving many of the
problems presented by psychologists of reasoning is
finding the intended content in the words presented.
The translation procedures mentioned above allow
students to make fewer errors on these sorts of tasks.
The virtues of these advances are discussed in some
detail in Bringsjord, Noel, & Bringsjord (1998), with
additional data presented in Bringsjord & Rinella
(1999).
To demonstrate the abovementioned diagrammatic
techniques from HYPERPROOF, which may be
unfamiliar to many readers, consider figure 1:

The HYPERPROOF window consists of two major
areas: on top, there is the toy world, which shows the
locations and properties of a small number of objects
(in this case, five); on the bottom, sentential logic
inferences proceed toward the goal. This particular
example is a formalization of the THOG problem, a
common problem used in the psychology of reasoning.
The first given sentence claims that an object has the
property G if and only if it has either the emotional state
(happy or unhappy) or the shape (dodecahedron or
tetrahedron) of the object f, but not both. Since we
don’t know f’s shape (HYPERPROOF hides shape
when it is not know by placing a cylindrical box over
the object, which is why f appears to be a cylinder) or
emotional state, we need the information in the second
given, that object a has property G, to determine which
of the other objects has property G. The proof proceeds
by first manipulating the givens to extract the
information that object a has either the emotional state
or shape of f, but not both. Unlike regular sentential
logic, we are then able to observe from the world the
status of a, noting that it is unhappy and a dodecahedron
(in some problems, it is actually necessary to use
information from the sentential section to add
information to the world, often allowing the user to
detect an object’s location, shape, or size, so this
information moves up to the world as well as down to
the sentences). From this, we infer that f must be either
a happy dodecahedron or an unhappy object of a
different shape. Finally, we show that, in either of these
instances, object d also has property G, and conclude by
stating that d must have G. Students using this system
have the advantage that they are able to see what the
sentences mean—rather than proceeding merely by
manipulating the symbols of the sentences according to
rules they have learned by rote, they begin to
understand how different configurations of objects alter
the effects of different sentences.

Method
We gave students enrolled in Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute’s Introduction to Logic class in the Fall term of
1998 a pre-test including Wason’s Selection Task as
problem one, the THOG problem as problem two, and
five other problems from previous work by
psychologists of reasoning or from experience with tests
of logic encountered by students in other contexts (e.g.,
two of the problems were straightforward adaptations of
problems the Board of Regents of New York State say
every New York high school students should be able to
solve; Verzoni & Swan, 1995).
A similar test,
mathematically matched for problem type and
difficulty, was given as a post-test appended to the final
exam. Though there is insufficient space here to present
them, the complete pre-test and post-test are available
online:
Figure 1:The THOG Problem

http://www.rpi.edu/~faheyj2/SB/INTLOG/pretest.f98.pdf,
http://www.rpi.edu/~faheyj2/SB/INTLOG/posttest.f98.pdf. An example pair of THOG-like problems
follows. In both cases, of course, students had to
provide correct justifications.
2
Suppose that there are four possible kinds of
objects:
•
•
•
•

an unhappy dodecahedron
a happy dodecahedron
an unhappy cube
a happy cube

Suppose as well that I have written down
on a hidden piece of paper one of the
attitudes (unhappy or happy) and one of
the shapes (dodecahedron or cube). Now
read the following rule carefully:
•

An object is a GOKE if and only if it
has either the attitude I have written
down, or the shape I have written
down, but not both.

I will tell you that the unhappy
dodecahedron is a GOKE. Which of the
other objects, if any, is a GOKE?
The analogous problem on the post-test was the
following:
2
Suppose that there are four possible kinds of
objects:
•
•
•
•

an smart tetrahedron
a stupid tetrahedron
a smart cube
a stupid cube

Results & Discussion

Suppose as well that I have written down on a
hidden piece of paper one of the mental
attributes (smart/stupid) and one of the shapes
(tetrahedron/cube). Now read the following
rule carefully:
•

Note that a direct, unreflective transfer of reasoning
brought to bear on the first of these problems to the
second won’t yield a solution to the second. This pair
of problems (and this holds true for each pair on our
pre-test/post-test combination) will not “match” at the
surface level in English, nor at such a level in the
propositional calculus. However, we needed pairs of
problems that, at the level of proof or disproof, could be
said to be very similar, formally speaking. Without
such mathematical similarity we wouldn’t be able to
justifiably say that the problems, from the standpoint of
formal deduction, are essentially the same. Figure 1
above presents a proof-theoretic solution to the first of
the THOG-like problems—it is at this level of detail
that difficulty must be matched without allowing the
same argument form to work a second time.
Subjects who took only one of the two tests were
discarded, to ensure that every participant had exposure
to the entire course, leaving exactly 100 participants.
After the first test, we abandoned asking the subjects
whether they had seen the question before. There were
two reasons for this: prior experience did not correlate
with success on the questions, and the problems on the
post-test were so similar in theme and difficulty that it
was very likely that their experience with the pre-test
would generate false positive responses. We also of
course asked for justifications for their answers, hoping
that out of the data we would be able to divine an
appropriate scheme for categorizing the unstructured
and heterogeneous responses we were likely to get.
As a preface to the first test, we gathered some
biographical information, including the sex of the
participants, the location of their high school, and
previous logic experience. Since New York’s Board of
Regents has decreed that students must learn logic in
their math courses, we hypothesized that attending high
school in New York state would increase performance
on tests of reasoning. We also hypothesized that
previous experience in logic would increase scores on
the pre-test, but that this effect would be reduced or
eliminated by the post-test.

An object is a LOKE if and only if it has
neither the mental attribute I have written
down, nor the shape I have written down.

I will tell you that the stupid tetrahedron is a
LOKE. Which of the other objects, if any, is a
LOKE?

As expected, the averages on the pre-test were
significantly lower than on the post-test, 3.89 correct
compared to 5.11 correct. A paired-samples t-test
reported an extremely low (t = -8.393) probability of no
effect, suggesting that taking the logic class did improve
students’ ability to reason logically. Full results for
each of the questions appear in table 1, below:
Table 1: Individual Question Results
Test 1

Test 2

t

Significance

Question 1

29

84

-9.563

0.000

Question 2

72

83

-2.076

0.040

Question 3

77

94

-3.597

0.001

Question 4

55

80

-4.639

0.000

Question 5

90

98

-2.934

0.004

Question 6

7

58

-9.768

0.000

Question 7

59

14

7.595

0.000

Though the improvement was significant at the .01
level for each of the first six questions except question
two (which had a problem with a ceiling effect, but was
still significant at the .05 level), there were three
questions that particularly attracted our attention.
Questions one and six showed extremely low initial
rates of success, but great improvement—this suggests
that these question types may be particularly amenable
to improvement by instruction in formal logic.
Question seven totally reversed our expectations—
students did markedly worse on the post-test.

Individual Question Findings
The first result of some import is the comparison of
Wason’s Selection Task and its analogue (in each case,
question one) on the post-test. These problems were
chosen to test the ability of students to comprehend the
use of the conditional in a context-free setting. The
difficulty our subjects had on the pre-test with this
problem very much agrees with the performance of
Cheng & Holyoak’s participants on their pre-test
(1985). From this poor performance, and the lack of
improvement, Cheng & Holyoak concluded that people
are not good at using the conditional in a contextindependent manner. On the pre-test, the problem
looked like this:
1
Suppose that I have a pack of cards each of
which has a letter written on one side and a
number written on the other side. Suppose in
addition that I claim the following rule is true:
• If a card has a vowel on one side, then it
has an even number on the other side.
Imagine that I now show you four cards
from the pack:
E

T

4

7

Which card or cards should you turn over in
order to decide whether the rule is true or
false?
The analogous problem (from Verzoni & Swan,
1995) on the post-test follows:

1
Suppose that you are doing an experiment for a
biology expedition. You learn before starting
on this expedition that insects can be one of
two kinds, a spade fly or a bevel wasp, and that
insect color is either black or green. Your task
is to study insects in order to find out if a
certain rule is false. The rule is:
• If an insect is a spade fly, then it is black.
You see an insect that is green. Which of the
following would be true about the insect if it
violates the rule?
a
b
c

The insect is a spade fly.
The insect is a bevel wasp
The type of insect does not matter.

Because these are the problems which are identical in
underlying form to those used by Cheng et. al. in the
aforementioned 1986 study, we were quite pleased to
discover that our methods had induced an improvement
from 29 correct responses to 84 correct responses, an
extremely impressive improvement. This confirms our
initial hypothesis, and allows our results to very directly
be compared with previous work.
The second question which drew our attention
because of the extremely poor (well below chance)
performance on the pre-test. Since this was the question
relating to reductio ad absurdum, or proof by
contradiction, which is an integral part of the work our
students do with HYPERPROOF during the semester.
Such a proof, from the standpoint of the psychology of
reasoning (which focuses on untrained reasoning), is
exotic, but from the standpoint of mathematics and
mathematical logic, it’s thoroughly routine, and is
therefore part and parcel of an introductory course of
the type we offered. The full text of this question from
the pre-test follows:
6
We will use lower-case Roman letters a, b, c,
… to represent propositions. Let the symbol
‘¬’ stand for ‘it is not the case that.’ Let the
symbol ‘∨’ stand for ‘or.’ Let the symbol ‘→’
stand for ‘if-then’, so that p → q means ‘if p
then q.’
Given the statements
¬¬c
c→a
¬a ∨ b
b→d
¬(d ∨ e)
which one of the following statements must
also be true? (Check the correct answer.)
¬c

e
h
¬a
all of the above

each other; to make both sets of questions available in
this way would have introduced an unacceptably strong
confound.

Demographic Data
Once again, of course, we gave a corresponding
problem on the post-test. Alert readers will have
realized that the answer to 6 is “all of the above,” which
of course means that h must be true given the quintet.
The reason for this, of course, is that the quintet is
inconsistent, and therefore a straightforward proof for h
(or any other propositional variable) can be easily
given.
The final question of particular interest was question
seven, the results from which seemed to suggest that our
course had made students worse at reasoning of this
type.
It involved fairly complex reasoning on
statements which were presented in English, thus
requiring more effort to extract meaning. Looking for
an explanation, we noticed that the following sentence
appeared in the pre-test version of this question (from
Smullyan, 1982), “‘At least one of them did [tell the
truth],’ replied the Dormouse, who then fell asleep for
the rest of the trial.” The question from the post-test,
which was intended to be analogous, included the
following sentence, which was supposed to play the
same role, “‘Well, one of them did [tell the truth],’
replied Devin, who then fainted and remained
unconscious for the remainder of the investigation.”
This difference seemed potentially problematic.
On further investigation, we noticed that many of the
justifications on the second problem suggested that
subjects were having problems interpreting this
statement by Dr. Devin, “Well, one of them did.” This
can be (and was) interpreted in two common ways, as,
“One and only one of them did,” or as, “At least one of
them did.” If these are both appealing interpretations,
as they seemed to be for many of the participants, there
is no entirely logical way to figure out the answer. A
very small number of particularly clever subjects
assumed that there would be enough information given
in the question to figure out the right answer, and
realized that one of the interpretations, that only one of
them told the truth, did not fulfill this requirement.
These students then rejected this option and solved the
problem. However, doing all of that, which seems to be
the only way other than guessing that subjects were able
to correctly answer the problem, is far more difficult
than interpreting the analogous statement in the missing
jam problem, which was made by the Dormouse, in
response to questioning about whether the Mad Hatter
and March Hare had spoken the truth: “At least one of
them did.” Since this is clearly much more explicit, we
have considered the seventh questions on the two tests
to be sufficiently different that they are no longer
appropriate for comparison. Unfortunately, it was not
possible to counter-balance the pre-test and post-test,
because of the high degree of availability of students to

Without the last question on each test, averages dropped
to 3.30 correct on the pre-test and 4.97 on the post-test.
This improved the value of the t-statistic to t= -13.653.
This indicates even more clearly that subjects did in fact
improve their ability to succeed on tests of reasoning
due to the instruction in logic, and that the improvement
was of a fairly substantial magnitude.
Interpreting the justifications turned out to be fairly
problematic. Our initial attempt was a fairly subjective
rating system based on the opinions of a competent
logician, but there is a potentially very important
confound in this method, which is that a correct answer
is much more likely to suggest to a reader that the
subject knew what s/he was doing, even if this is
somewhat underdetermined by the written justification.
Since we are most interested in the correlation between
justification quality and success rate, this rating system
was unacceptable. However, the information from the
justifications did turn out to be useful in checking to
make sure that the questions were interpreted as we
intended, and further exploration may reveal a more
objective way to code this data such that it may be made
more useful.
Point-biserial correlations (appropriate for categorical
data of this type, rather than more common values) were
calculated between sex, high school attendance in New
York state/elsewhere, and previous logic experience and
the two test averages, and similar Pearson correlations
calculated within those two groups of factors. Nothing
significant came out of sex. Surprisingly, we did not
observe a significant correlation between high school
state and performance on either test. Previous logic
experience did correlate positively with performance on
the pre-test, but not on the post-test, as expected, with
Pearson correlations of .246 (significant at the 0.05
level) and -.021, respectively. This indicates that the
course did make up for any disadvantage less
experienced students may have had coming in, and also
suggests that performance on the pre-test was actually
higher than it ought to have been, because we assumed
that incoming students would not have been formally
trained in logic. Since only one-tenth of the subjects
were so trained, and sometimes in courses that dealt
only tangentially with logic, we suspect this effect was
negligible.
Unsurprisingly, none of sex, high school state, and
previous logic experience correlated with each other.
Also unremarkable was the highly significant
correlation of .465 found between the pre-test and posttest scores—subjects with higher initial ability are likely
to have higher ability after the end of the course.

Conclusions
The proposition that humans are unable to learn to
reason better through instruction in formal logic seems
to be disconfirmed by these data. This naturally does
not mean that pragmatic effects hold no power over our
attempts to use what deductive competence we have
developed, nor does it suggest that all tests of reasoning
will show improvement following an arbitrarily-selected
course in logic. However, Cheng and Holyoak’s
proposed pragmatic reasoning schema theory (see
Cheng et. al., 1986; Cheng and Holyoak, 1985; and
Holyoak and Cheng, 1995) needs revision to remain a
plausible candidate explanation of human reasoning.
Yang and Bringsjord (2001, 2001) have suggested an
alternative theory of human and, by extension, machine
reasoning, viz., Mental Metalogic (MML), which allows
pragmatic reasoning schemas to continue to play a role
in human cognition, but not alone. In MML, mental
models and mental logic exist side-by-side with such
schemas, and a higher-level choice mechanism selects
the most appropriate form of reasoning for the task at
hand. In this regard, it’s important to note that MML
draws from a part of mathematical logic hitherto
untapped in cognitive science: metatheory.
Recent advances in the teaching of logic (particularly
HYPERPROOF) were utilized in the course used in the
study, and this may help explain the differences in the
results seen by Cheng and company, and those found in
our study (for a mathematical analysis of
HYPERPROOF in the context of ”heterogeneous”
reasoning consistent with Mental MetaLogic, see
Barwise & Etchemendy 1995). In addition to the
technological
sophistication
and
concomitant
improvement in available techniques, our interest in
matters related to the psychology of reasoning may help
to explain these results. In the class at RPI, students
were encouraged to think about problems from the
standpoint of metatheory: to ponder the way that they
might approach logic problems (e.g., from the
standpoint of searching for proofs a la mental logic, or
from the standpoint of disproofs and mental models.)
We routinely presented several options and contrasted
their power, and also studied the reasoning process
itself. The increased introspection about the reasoning
process that this may have produced in our students is
another factor which distinguishes the RPI logic class
from previous subjects of similar experiments.
We believe that the reason standard logic instruction
has not improved performance on tests of the sort given
by proponents of the pragmatic reasoning schema
theory may be related to the importance of one or more
of the factors we have mentioned, which are historically
missing in most classes. If this is correct, contra Cheng
and Holyoak, it is not the level of abstraction that keeps
logic instruction from being efficacious in improving
reasoning.
With the right theoretical perspective
(MML), and pedagogical techniques which recognize
the efficacy of non-pragmatic reasoning associated with

that perspective, students can easily carry out difficult
context-independent deduction suggestive of that of a
professional logician or mathematician.

References
Barwise, J., & Etchemendy, J.
(1994).
HYPERPROOF. Stanford, CA: CLSI.
Barwise, J. & Etchemendy, J. (1995) Heterogeneous
Logic. In Diagrammatic Reasoning, Glasgow, J.,
Narayanan, N.H., and Chandrasekaran, B., eds.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bringsjord, S. & Ferrucci, D. (2000) Artificial
Intelligence and Literary Creativity: Inside the Mind
of Brutus, A Storytelling Machine. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bringsjord, S., & Rinella, K. Hard Data in Defense of
Logical Minds. Annual International Conference on
Computing and Philosophy.
Carnegie-Mellon
University, August 6, 1999.
Bringsjord, S., Noel, R., & Bringsjord, E. (1998). In
Defense of Logical Minds. Proceedings of the 20th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 173-178). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Cheng, P. W., Holyoak, K. J., Nisbett, R. E., & Oliver,
L. M.
(1986).
Pragmatic versus Syntactic
Approaches to Training Deductive Reasoning.
Cognitive Psychology. 18, 293-328.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic
versus Syntactic Approaches to Training Deductive
Reasoning. Cognitive Psychology. 17, 391-416.
Evans, J., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
Reasoning. Hove, East Sussex, UK: Psychology
Press.
Holyoak, K. J., & Cheng, P. W. (1995). Pragmatic
Reasoning About Human Voluntary Action: Evidence
from Wason’s Selection Task. In S. E. Newstead &
J. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on Thinking and
Reasoning.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The Growth of
Logical Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence.
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Smuyllan, R. (1982). Alice in Puzzleland. New York,
NY: Morrow.
Rips, Lance. (1994). The Psychology of Proof.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Verzoni, K. & Swan, K. (1995) On the Nature and
Development of Conditional Reasoning in Early
Adolescence. Applied Cognitive Psychology. 9, 213234.
Yang, Y., & Bringsjord, S. (2001). Mental Possible
World Mechanism and Logical Reasoning in GRE.
(under submission).
Yang, Y., & Bringsjord, S. (2001). Mental
MetaLogic: A New Paradigm in Psychology of
Reasoning. (under submission).

