UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Graded lexical activation by pseudowords in cross-modal semantic priming: Spreading of
activation, backward priming, or repair?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9fk111pr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Bolte, Jens

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Graded lexical activation by pseudowords in cross-modal semantic priming:
Spreading of activation, backward priming, or repair?
Jens Bölte (boelte@psy.uni-muenster.de)
Institute of Psychology II, WWU Münster, Fliedner Str. 21
48149 Münster, Germany
Abstract
Spoken word recognition models treat mismatching sensory information differently. Mismatching information
deactivates lexical entries according to one type of models. In another type of models, lexical entries are activated reflecting their degree of match with the input.
This issue is mainly investigated with cross-modal semantic priming and lexical decision. This paradigm has
been suspected of backward priming. I report three
cross-modal priming experiments using naming and
lexical decision to explore the sensitivity of word recognition to different degrees of match and to investigate the
contribution of backward priming. Primes were pseudowords minimally (*baprika) or maximally (*zaprika)
deviating from a word (paprika). A contribution of
backward priming processes is likely. A repair of the
mispronounced item as suggested by Marslen-Wilson
(1993) seems untenable.

Introduction
The tolerance of spoken word recognition to a wide
variety of distortions, e.g. misarticulation, phonological
processes, or masking by environmental noise poses a
serious problem for spoken word recognition models.
This problem is tied to the question of what constitutes
a match or a mismatch. Certain distortions might not
form a mismatch at a lexical level. A system intolerant
even to minor mismatches seems unlikely given highly
prevalent variation in articulation.

Effects of Match and Mismatch
An account of mismatch effects has been formulated in
Cohort (Gaskell & Marslen-Wilson, 1996; MarslenWilson, 1993). Gaskell and Marslen-Wilson (1996)
found that primes with a legally place assimilated phoneme, e.g. *leam1, are as effective as unaltered primes,
e.g. lean, in cross-modal repetition priming. They suggest that only non-redundant, distinctive, and marked
phonological information is coded in the lexicon. For
instance, place of articulation is unspecified for coronals: [t],[d],[n],[s],[z]. Therefore, they can assimilate
to different places of articulation and still do not form a
mismatch at a lexical level (see Coenen, Zwitserlood, &
Bölte (in press) for different observations).
Ignoring phonological underspecification, Connine,
Blasko, and Titone (1993) found that minimally mismatching primes, e.g. *zervice, accelerated lexical
1

Pseudowords are marked by an asterix.

decision to visual targets, e.g. tennis. Maximally deviating primes (e.g. *gervice, > one phonemic feature)
primed if they were made from rare words. Priming
effects were graded by degree of mismatch. Connine et
al. (1993) concluded that the word recognition system
reflects the degree of featural overlap with the input
thereby compensating for deviations. These findings are
in conflict with observations by Marslen-Wilson (1993;
Marslen-Wilson & Zwitserlood, 1989).
McClelland and Elman (1986) claim that Trace can
compensate mismatching information. In Trace, activation spreads from a feature level to a phoneme level,
and from there to a word level. Activation also spreads
back from a word node to its constituent phonemes at
the phoneme level. McClelland and Elman (1986) report that minimal mismatches are recognised, e.g.
*bleasant as pleasant. But simulations using the whole
Trace lexicon showed that Trace does not recover easily from initial mismatches (Goldman, Frauenfelder, &
Content, 1997 cited after Frauenfelder & Peters, 1998).
The pattern of results by Connine et al. (1993) can
partly be captured by the Shortlist model (Norris,
1994). Input to this model consists of a string of phonemes. A list of words candidates, the Shortlist, is
formed on the basis of bottom-up information. Mismatching information lowers the bottom-up support for
lexical candidates, similar to the Cohort model. But
Shortlist can overcome this reduction and activate the
target to “a relatively high level of activation” (Norris,
1994, pp. 214). Bottom-up inhibition prevents activating the target if the mismatch is too large. Systematic
simulations investigating the role of mismatching information are not yet available.

Mismatch Repair
Marslen-Wilson (1993, Marslen-Wilson, Moss, & van
Halen, 1996) interpreted the findings obtained by Connine et al. (1993) as a reflection of a repair process.
According to this view, items like *zervice are identified as mispronunciations of service. *zervice activates
service but to a degree insufficient for word recognition. The best fitting lexical entry is determined in a
second pass. The target, e.g. tennis, might operate as a
cue to the identity of the pseudoword. The repair
mechanism is a subperceptual process that does not
form a new perceptual experience. Marslen-Wilson et
al. (1996) suggest that the influence of the repair
mechanism is more evident at long interstimulus intervals (ISI) or long reaction-times (RT > 650 ms) because

processing time available for repair is increased.

Contribution of Backward Priming
Cross-modal priming that is the presentation of an
auditory prime accompanied or followed by a visual
target was used in all studies mentioned above. This
paradigm supposedly reflects backward and forward
priming effects in lexical decision (Koriat, 1981;
Tabossi, 1996). Backward priming refers to the observation that an association from target to prime in absence of an association from prime to target facilitates
reactions.
The most unlikely mechanism for backward priming
is expectancy generation. In expectancy generation, the
prime is used to generate a set of potential targets. It is
unlikely, that the pseudoword primes are used to generate the appropriate targets. One has to assume that the
participants recognised the word the pseudoword had
been made of and then they used this word to generate
the appropriate target set.
At first, spreading of activation also seems to be an
unlikely candidate because it is often assumed that the
prime influences target processing before the target has
been presented. Activation spreads from the prime to
the target. Koriat (1981; Kiger & Glass, 1983) proposed
that activation also spreads back from the target to the
prime. This reactivation of the prime supports target
processing. This mechanism requires that the pseudoword activated a lexical entry. Otherwise, there is no
entry which could be reactivated by the target. Spreading of activation is restricted to short time frames and
therefore predicts a reduction in priming at longer ISIs.
Backward priming is a post-lexical relatednesschecking mechanism according to Seidenberg, Waters,
Sanders and Langer (1984). Only forward priming
reflects spreading of activation. Lexical decision is
especially prone to backward priming processes because of its sensitivity to post-lexical processes (Balota
& Lorch, 1986; Neely, 1991). Participants check
whether prime and target are related. If the check confirms this, a word answer is given. Chwilla, Hagoort,
and Brown (1998) suggest that backward priming reflects post-lexical integration by a fast semantic
matching mechanism.2
Peterson and Simpson (1989) found backward priming effects also for naming, but they were reduced relative to effects in lexical decision. The introduction of an
300 ms ISI reduced backward priming effects in naming even further while lexical decision was unaffected
(Peterson & Simpson, 1989). The differential sensitivity of naming and lexical decision suggests that (backward) priming effects have a different origin in these
tasks. Peterson and Simpson propose that backward
priming effects reflect mainly lexical retrieval proc2

Compound cue mechanisms of semantic priming come to
similar predictions (Ratcliff & McKoon, 1988). They will not
be considered here.

esses in naming but post-lexical bias in lexical decision.
In sum, naming is less influenced by backward
priming than lexical decision. If backward priming
effects are operative in naming, they reflect lexical
retrieval processes. It is possible that research investigating mismatch effects registered backward priming
effects because lexical decision has been used. The
contribution of a repair mechanism is unclear.

Experimental Issues
The research reported examines backward priming
effects in cross-modal priming situations while manipulating the degree of mismatch. I was interested
whether pseudowords mismatching lexical entries to
different extents produce priming effects and how processes other than forward spreading of activation contribute to these effects. Similar to experiments mentioned above, degree of mismatch was manipulated in
broad phonemic classes (voice, place, or manner) ignoring assumptions proposed by phonological underspecification. The contribution of backward priming or
a repair mechanism was determined by manipulating
the ISI of prime and target and by using lexical decision
and naming as tasks. The latter manipulations make this
study different from that of Connine et al. (1993).
Naming was used in Experiment 1 and 2. The target
followed immediately at prime offset in Experiment 1.
In Experiment 2 the ISI was 300 ms. A lexical decision
task (LDT) was employed in Experiment 3. The ISI
was 0 ms, 250 ms, or 750 ms.

Materials and Pre-tests
The first two experiments employed the same materials
and design. A subset of these materials were used in
Experiment 3. A target was combined with five different spoken primes. For instance, the visual target tomato was either preceded by an semantically related
prime, paprika, a pseudoword, *baprika, that minimally deviates from the semantically related prime, or a
pseudoword, *zaprika, that maximally deviates from
the semantically related prime. An unrelated word,
library, or a pseudoword derived from the unrelated
word, *nibrary, served as controls. Minimal deviation
means that the pseudoword’s first phoneme differed in
voice or place from the corresponding phoneme of the
base word. A maximally deviating pseudoword differed
in at least two phonemic classes from the base word.
There were two within-factors: Prime-Target Relatedness (related vs. unrelated) and Prime Type (word,
minimal, or maximal). ISI was varied between Experiment 1 and Experiment 2. In Experiment 3, ISI was a
between factor for participants but a within factor for
items. The experiments required evaluation of the semantic relatedness of prime and target (see Pre-test 1)
and the determination that pseudowords were unequivocally perceived as pseudowords (see Pre-test 2).
Pre-test 1 Potential targets (285 in total) were used

in a cross-modal priming experiment with a LDT.
Primes were either semantically related or unrelated to
the target. Targets were distributed over lists such that
each target appeared only once per list. On list 1 a target n was preceded by its semantically related prime
while target m was preceded by its control prime. Prime
conditions of target n and m were exchanged on list 2.
Pseudowords were added to have no-answers for the
LDT. Targets were presented at offset of the auditory
prime for 250 ms. RTs were measured from target onset
for 1500 ms. All prime-target pairs, 197 in total, which
attracted less than 50% errors and showed a priming
effect larger than 0 ms were selected for Pre-test 2.
Mean error percentage for word targets was 8.8%, 5.4%
for the semantically related pairs and 12.0% for the
unrelated pairs. The average priming effect was 78 ms
(t1(52) = 13.76, p < .001; t2(196) = 18.81, p < .001).
Pre-test 2 The goal was to investigate whether a
minimal pseudoword was unequivocally perceived as a
pseudoword. In case a minimal pseudoword is missed,
it is equal to its base word and priming might be amplified (Bölte, 1997). Minimal and unrelated control pseudowords were tested in an auditory LDT experiment
along with 197 words serving as fillers. RT was measured as before. It was 941 ms for pseudowords and 865
ms for words. Twenty-one pseudowords attracting more
than 20% errors were discarded as items for the following experiments. Further 26 pseudowords exhibiting
the next highest error rates were excluded. There were
3% errors for minimal pseudowords and 2.6% errors for
control pseudowords in the final item set of 75 primetarget pairs.

Experiment 1: Cross-modal Priming Naming with an ISI of 0 ms
This cross-modal priming experiment aimed at investigating the role of mismatching information on lexical
activation. There were 75 word targets (see Table 1).
Each word target was combined with either a semantically related word, a minimally deviating pseudoword,
a maximally deviating pseudoword, an unrelated word,
or an unrelated pseudoword. Unrelated pseudowords
were always maximally different. Fillers were added
such that each prime-target combination was counterbalanced.
On each trial, the visual target was presented in
capital letters for 360 ms at prime offset. Participants
(63 in total) were instructed to name the target as fast
and as accurately as possible.
Table 2 summarises the results of this experiment.
Two participants were excluded because of technical
failures. Latencies slower than 250 ms or faster than
1500 ms were discarded from the analyses.
Data were analysed using planned comparisons in
form of one-sided paired t-tests. Priming effects were
evaluated by comparing RTs of the related conditions
with RTs of the unrelated conditions. This comparison

of RTs provides a measure of priming. Its magnitude
can indicate the degree of lexical activation. Word
primes facilitated naming responses by 19 ms (t1(60) =
3.68, p < .001; t2(74) = 18.97, p < .001). Minimal (11
ms, t1(60) = 2.73, p = .004; t2(74) = 2.43, p = .009) and
maximal pseudowords (7 ms t1(60) = 1.94; p = .03;
t2(74) = 1.72, p = .04) were also effective primes.
Table 1: Primes of the target tomato as a function of
conditions
prime type
related
unrelated

word
paprika
library

minimal
maximal
pseudoword
*baprika *zaprika
*nibrary

Word primes were more effective than minimal (7
ms, t1(60) = 7.27, p = .017; t2(74) = 6.91, p = .048) or
maximal pseudoword primes (10 ms, t1(60) = 2.69, p =
.005; t2(74) = 2.48, p = .008). There was no significant
difference between minimal and maximal pseudoword
primes (3 ms, both t < 1). Thus, there is no gradation in
lexical activation between minimal and maximal pseudoword as one observes with lexical decision. The
overall smaller priming effect might prevent to distinguish between minimal and maximal pseudowords.
Table 2: Experiment 1. Mean RTs in ms, sd (in parentheses), and error percentages as a function of conditions.
prime type
related
unrelated

word
489 (61)
1.7%
507 (69)
2.8%

minimal
maximal
pseudoword
496 (65)
499 (62)
2.6%
2.5%
507 (61)
2.1%

Still, this finding replicates the one obtained by Connine et al. (1993). Minimal pseudowords and semantically related words prime naming responses. Similar to
Connine et al. (1993), maximal pseudowords also show
a priming effect. They are able to bring about semantic
priming effects if made from rare words which was also
the case in this study. The average base word frequency
was 23/1 million (Celex, 1995).
There was a graded effectiveness with word primes
being most effective. Minimal and maximal pseudowords were less effective than word primes. No
further differentiation was possible.

Experiment 2: Cross-modal Priming Naming with an ISI of 300 ms
This experiment used the same materials, design, and
task as was used in Experiment 1. The ISI was 300 ms,
however. The intention was to examine the effect of the
ISI on semantic priming. It was shown previously that
backward priming is reduced with such ISI in naming
(Peterson & Simpson, 1989). In contrast, a longer ISI
provides the repair process with more time available to

repair the deviating input. If it is operative, priming
should increase, or, at least, it should not decrease.
There were 53 participants. One participant with
more than 15% errors was excluded from the analyses.
Data treatment was the same as before. Table 3 displays
RTs, sd (in parentheses) and error percentages.
Table 3: Experiment 2. Mean RTs in ms, sd (in parentheses), and error percentages as a function of conditions.
prime type
related
unrelated

word
437 (63)
3.5%
448 (75)
4.7%

minimal
maximal
pseudoword
440 (68)
444 (66)
3.5%
4.4%
449 (71)
2.1%

There was significant priming with word primes (11
ms, t1(51) = 1.944, p = .029, t2(74) = 1.656, p = .051)
and with minimal pseudoword primes in t1 (9 ms,
t1(51) = 1.744, p = .044; t2 = 1.391, p = .084). There
was no priming for maximal pseudoword primes (both t
< 1). The conditions did not differ statistically from
each other (word – min pw: 3 ms, t < 1; word – max
pw: 7 ms t1(51) = 1.519, p = .068, t2(74) = 1.162, p =
.125; min pw – max pw: 4 ms, both t < 1).
Semantic priming was reduced relative to Experiment
1 and only word and minimal pseudoword primes (in
t1) accelerated RTs. This finding does not support the
repair mechanism suggested by Marslen-Wilson et al.
(1996). If such process was operative, an increase in
priming should have been obtained.
The activation the target received via spreading of
activation by the prime might have been reduced by
“normal“ decay when finally the target appeared. This
resulted in the reduction of priming effects. The same
argument also holds for backward priming via spreading of activation. When the target started to “reactivate”
the prime, the prime’s activation was already decayed.
The following lexical decision experiment served to
determine the contribution of specific backward priming accounts. Backward priming processes other than
spreading of activation are less affected by long ISIs in
lexical decision than in naming. Spreading of activation
suffers in lexical decision from the same reduction as in
naming (Neily, 1991; Seidenberg, et al. 1984).

Experiment 3: Cross-modal priming with
lexical decision
The rational of this experiment was to investigate the
influence of the ISI on semantic priming in a crossmodal lexical decision experiment. The ISI was 0 ms,
250 ms, or 750 ms. There were no maximal pseudoword primes here because semantic priming effects
are most reliably obtained with minimal pseudowords
(see Connine et al., (1993) or Experiment 2).
If there is no or only minor contribution of backward
priming processes other than spreading of activation,

then priming should be reduced at longer ISIs. If the
priming effects of pseudoword primes are due to a
repair mechanism, priming should increase with longer
ISIs.
The same targets and primes (words and minimal
pseudowords) as before were used. In order to have no
answers, pseudoword targets were added. Prime-target
pairs were added such that Prime Type and Lexical
Status of primes and targets were completely counterbalanced.
ISI was varied between participants. The visual target
on which the participants had to perform a typical lexical decision task followed an auditory prime. Thirtyfive participants were tested per ISI.
Two participants and two items were excluded because of high error rates (> 15%). See Table 4 for mean
RTs, sd (in parentheses), and error percentages.
Table 4: Experiment 3. Mean RTs in ms, sd (in parentheses), and error percentages as a function of conditions.
ISI
0

prime type
related
unrelated

250

related
unrelated

750

related
unrelated

lexical status
word
min pw
598 (84)
591 (70)
3.2%
.8%
626 (76)
614 (77)
4.7%
3.0%
610 (70)
605 (96)
3.6%
4.2%
652 (96)
625 (88)
4.7%
4.0%
607 (105)
614 (108)
4.1%
1.6%
641 (108)
631 (108)
6.9%
3.5%

ISI was a between factor in the participant analyses
but a within factor in the item analyses. All other factors were within factors. The ANOVA yielded a significant result for the main effect Prime Type
(F1(1,100) = 83.409, p < .001; F2(1,57) = 26.598, p <
.001). Lexical decisions were faster for related primetarget pairs (605 ms) than for unrelated prime-target
pairs (632 ms). The main effect Lexical status was also
significant F1(1,100) = 7.437, p = .008; F2(1,57) =
4.265, p = .043). Word pairs (622 ms) were responded
to slower than pseudoword pairs (613 ms). ISI was not
significant in F1 (F < 1) but in F2 (F2(2,57) = 17.267, p
< .001). RTs were faster when the target followed the
prime (608 ms) immediately. The ISI of 250 ms or 750
ms delayed the RT by 15 ms or 16 ms, respectively.
There was no significant interaction of ISI with any
other factor. Only the interaction of Prime Type (related
– unrelated) and Lexical Status (word – pw) (F1(1,100)
= 7.446, p = .008; F2(1,57) = 4.003; p = .050) was
significant. The RT obtained in the control conditions
differed from each other (word: 639 ms, pw: 623 ms),
while the RT in the related conditions did not differ

from each other (word: 605 ms, pw: 603 ms). The related conditions differed from the control conditions
(Tukey HSD = 9.145, p = .05). Put differently, the
priming effect of the pw condition (20 ms) was smaller
than that of the word condition (34 ms).
There is no reduction or any increase in priming
across the three ISIs. Thus, no evidence was obtained
for a repair mechanism as suggested by MarslenWilson et al. (1996). Rather, the stable priming pattern
suggests that backward priming processes other than
spreading of activation affect the semantic priming
effect with pseudoword primes in LDT.

Discussion
Semantic priming effects for words were obtained at all
ISIs in all experiments independent of the task. They
probably reflect a combination of forward spreading of
activation and fast backward priming mechanism such
as semantic matching (Chwilla, et al. 1998). Pseudoword primes behaved differently than word primes.
They produced (1) smaller semantic priming effects
than word primes, (2) they were sensitive to ISIs manipulations in naming but not in LDT.
Our results confirm the finding by Connine et al.
(1993) that lexical entries are activated reflecting their
degree of match with the input. Even maximal pseudowords are able to activate lexical entries if they are
made from rare words. This supports the assumption
that a perfect match is not required under certain conditions, e.g. low frequency (or low neighbourhood density?). The flexibility of the word recognition system
towards deviations is greater than suggested in Cohort.
It fits better to the assumptions formulated in Trace or
Shortlist. This flexibility is astonishing because listeners often have to distinguish between minimal pairs.
But the employed pseudowords are different from
minimal pairs. They were “unique” by fitting best to
one specific word, e.g. paprika, and not to several
words. A word of a minimal pair also fits best to a
specific lexical entry but it partly also fits to the other
half of the minimal pair. This activation of two lexical
entries might be sufficient to cancel out the flexibility
observed for pseudowords. The better fitting lexical
entry might inhibit the less well fitting one. It is also
conceivable that the difference in activation is sufficient
to discriminate between the two entries.
The consequences for the repair mechanism are described next. Then the priming mechanisms for naming
and lexical decision are introduced and finally some
adaptations for the models are outlined.
Marslen-Wilson and colleagues argued that the pseudoword prime activates a lexical entry to a low degree,
but not sufficient for normal word recognition. That is,
without the target tomato one would never recognise
paprika given *baprika. Supposedly, this recovery
process takes time and is more evident in longer RTs (>
650 ms) or longer ISIs. ISI did not influence the size of
the priming effect in lexical decision and RTs were

below this “critical” barrier. Thus, it is unlikely that the
repair mechanism as suggested by Marslen-Wilson et al
(1996) brought about the priming effects. Especially,
the assumption that this process “kicks in” later in time
does not fit to the data pattern.
The priming effects observed in naming can be a
combination of forward spreading of activation and
backward priming. They are reduced at longer ISIs
because both, forward spreading of activation and
backward priming, require a close temporal vicinity of
prime and target (Kiger & Glass, 1983). A target presented before prime processing is complete, guides
further processing of the prime and thereby influences
the final representation according to this view. Notice,
that a guidance of prime processing by a target requires
that a pseudoword had activated a lexical entry. The
smaller temporal overlap of prime-target processing
results in a reduction in priming.
Priming effects were unaffected by ISI in the LDT
experiment. Priming processes other than spreading of
activation influences lexical decisions. Chwilla et al.
(1998) showed that semantic matching contributes to
priming effects over a range of ISI (0 ms – 500 ms). De
Groot (1984, 1985) also postulates a fact-acting postlexical meaning integration process. The word recognition system searches for a meaningful relationship
whenever encountering words. A meaningful relationship between prime and target results in faster lexical
decisions because a meaningful relation biases the
participants to respond yes in LDT. Such process possibly hinders decisions to unrelated pairs because a failure to find a relation with the prime might bias a no
response. That was exactly obtained. But semantic
matching can only “form” a meaningful relationship if
a prime activates lexical entries. Their degree of activation depend on the amount of phonological overlap
with the prime. A semantic relation does not help to
name a target more quickly, however. Apparently,
semantic matching influences lexical decision more
than naming.
To summarise, the present experiments show that
pseudowords are able to bring about semantic priming
effects. The priming effects are either a consequences
of spreading of activation and fast-acting post lexical
integration processes. The proposed backward priming
mechanism requires the activation of a lexical entry by
the prime. Also, pseudowords activate lexical entries
according to their degree of overlap.
The models introduced above rely on spreading of
activation for explaining semantic priming effects.
Post-lexical integration is not implemented in any of
the models. I present three reasons for this shortcoming.
First, these models were not intended to cover situations in which a meaningful relationship between two
words is formed. However, humans look for meaning
most of the time. Second, the models miss capabilities
to explain flexible task dependent behaviour. Lexical
decision and naming as tasks are treated alike by the
models. Task dependent capabilities are needed for

covering the findings. Third, post-lexical processes are
often understood as task dependent processes in form of
a “strategic” adaptation. As such, these processes do
not inform about word recognition but rather about
“strategic” adaptations. This conception is adequate if
the “strategic” processes are under conscious control.
But semantic integration is a fast unconscious process
(Chwilla et al., 1998, De Groot, 1984, 1985).
Trace, Shortlist, or Cohort describe how semantically
related entries influence word recognition in a spreading of activation manner. A situation in which two
semantically lexical entries are activated at the same
time and form a meaningful relationship, is not taken
care of. Two lexical entries are mostly treated as competitors for word recognition. But word recognition can
benefit of two simultaneously activated entries, especially given an imperfect input.

Acknowledgements
Part of this research was supported by a grant, BO 1479
/ 3-1, of the German research foundation (DFG, Bonn)
awarded to Jens Bölte. Thanks go to Pienie Zwitserlood
for her support. Heidrun Bien, Gregor Weldert, and
Vanessa Mense were so kind to test the participants.

References
CELEX German database (Release D25) [On-line].
(1995). Available: Nijmegen: Centre for Lexical Information [Producer and Distributor].
Bölte, J. (1997). The role of mismatching information in
spoken word recognition. Hamburg, Germany: Verlag Dr. Kovaþ.
Chwilla, D.J., Hagoort, P., & Brown, C. (1998). The
mechanism underlying backward priming in a lexical
decision task: Spreading of activation versus semantic matching. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 15, 531-560.
Coenen, E., Zwitserlood, P. Bölte, J. (in press). Variation and assimilation in German: Consequences for
lexical access and representation. Language and
Cognitive Processes.
Connine, C., Blasko, D.G., & Titone, D. (1993). Do the
beginnings of words have a special status in auditory
word recognition. Journal of Memory and Language,
32, 193-210.
De Groot, A.M.B. (1984). Primed lexical decision:
Combined effects of the proportion of related prime –
target pairs and the stimulus-onset asynchrony of
prime and target. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36A, 253-280.
De Groot, A.M.B. (1985). Word-contexts effects in
word naming and lexical decision. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 37A, 281-297.
Frauenfelder, U.H. (1996). Computational models of
spoken word recognition. In T. Dijkstra & K. de
Smedt (Eds.), Computational psycholinguistics (pp.
114-138). London: Taylor & Francis.
Frauenfelder, U.H. & Peters. G. (1998). Simulating the

time course of spoken word recognition: An analysis
of lexical competition in Trace. In J. Grainger &
A.M. Jacobs (Eds.), Localist connectionist approaches to human cognition. Mahwah, NJ: LEA
Gaskell, M.G. & Marslen-Wilson, W.D. (1996).
Phonological variation and inference in lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 22, 144-158.
Goldmann, J.P. Frauenfelder, U.H. & Content, A.
(1996). Information flow in Trace: Recognising
words from mismatching sensory inputs. Manuscript
in preparation.
Kiger, J.L. & Glass, A.L. (1983). The facilitation of
lexical decisions by a prime occurring after the target. Memory & Cognition, 11, 356-365.
Koriat, A. (1981). Semantic facilitation in lexical decision as a function of prime-target association. Memory & Cognition, 9, 587-598.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D. (1993). Issues of process and
representation in lexical access. In G. Altmann & R.
Shillcock (Eds.) Cognitive Models of Speech Processing: The second Sperlonga meeting, (pp 187-210).
Hove: LEA.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D., Moss, H.E., & van Halen, S.
(1996). Perceptual distance and competition in lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 22, 1376-1392.
Marslen-Wilson, W.D. & Zwitserlood, P. (1989). Accessing spoken words: On the importance of word
onsets. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 15, 576-585.
McClelland, J.L. & Elman, J.L (1986). The Trace
model of speech perception. Cognitive Psychology,
18, 1-86.
Neely, J. H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual
word recognition: A selective review of current
findings and theories. In D. Besner & G.W. Humphreys (Eds.) Basic processes in reading: Visual
word recognition (pp. 264 - 336). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Norris, D. (1994). Shortlist: A connectionist model of
continuous speech recognition. Cognition, 52, 189234.
Peterson, R.R. & Simpson, G.B. (1989). Effect of
backward priming in single-word and sentence contexts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition, 15, 1020-1032.
Ratcliff, R. & McKoon, G. (1988). A retrieval theory of
priming in memory. Psychological Review, 95, 385408.
Seidenberg, M.S., Waters, G.S., Sanders, M., & Langer,
P. (1984). Pre- and postlexical loci of contextual effects on word recognition. Memory & Cognition, 12,
315-328.
Tabossi, P. (1996). Cross-modal semantic priming. In
F. Grosjean & U.H. Frauenfelder (Eds.), A guide to
spoken word recognition paradigms, (pp. 569-576).
London: Taylor & Francis.

