UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hemispheric lateralisation of the word length effect in Chinese character recognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6rv126db

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Chou, Yu-Ju
Shillcock, Richard

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hemispheric lateralisation of the word length effect in Chinese character
recognition
Yu-Ju Chou (sallyc@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
Richard Shillcock (rcs@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh,
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW UK

Abstract
In the last decade, researchers of hemispheric superiority
have become increasingly interested in the length effect
in word recognition in alphabetic languages. But little
has been known about ideographic languages like
traditional Chinese. The primary aim of this study is to
investigate hemispheric laterality and the word length
effect in Chinese script recognition. Different-length
words consisting of two-, three- and five-characters were
presented unilaterally in a lexical decision task. The
results, from 23 Taiwanese subjects, supported the wordlength effect showing significantly different recognition
latencies for the multi-character words of different
length, but no significant hemispheric lateralisation.
There was a significant interaction between gender and
visual field, with males tending to show a right visual
field advantage.

Previous studies have demonstrated hemispheric
lateralisation effects in recognizing words of different
length (Ellis & Young, 1985), concrete and abstract
words (e.g., Ellis & Shepherd, 1974 ) and a
word/number difference (eg, Besner, Daniels & Slade,
1982). The principle finding of a right visual field
(RVF) superiority has been repeatedly reported in
physically long English words: increasing word length
affects the left visual field (LVF) but not the RVF
presentations, resulting in a RVF superiority.
The Chinese writing system, the so-called ideogram,
is distinctive from the English writing system and is
supposed to present more pictorial characteristics,
involving an LVF superiority in recognition tasks.
Chinese stimuli presented in the LVF are hypothesized
to consume shorter time in lexical decision than those
presented in RVF, because the right hemisphere,
directly connected to LVF, is dominant in processing
pictorial images.
In 1994, Fang conducted experiments with differentlength Chinese words but failed to find a significant
interaction between Visual Field and Word Length.
Either a significant Word Length effect or a Visual
Field difference was found in separate experiments.
This failure to find an interaction between length and
visual field is important given the robustness of the
effect in English. Below we report a replication of

Fang’s experiment, but with an added manipulation of
gender, to investigate word recognition in Chinese.

Experiment
The primary aim of this study is to investigate
hemispheric laterality and length effects in Chinese
script recognition. Different-length words consisting of
two-, three- and five-character were presented
unilaterally in a lexical decision task.

Subjects
In this experiment, we used subjects who were able to
read Chinese in traditional fonts. Twenty-three
Taiwanese students studying in the University of
Edinburgh volunteered. Their average age was twentynine for twelve males and twenty-seven for eleven
females. All of them were native Mandarin speakers
and were skilled Chinese readers with normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. Only one of them was
ambidextrous, the rest were right-handed according to
self-report. The criterion of handedness was which hand
they use most frequently for writing, holding chopsticks
and badminton rackets, and whether there were any of
their family members who were ambidextrous or lefthanded.

Design
The stimuli were 120 different-length vertically
displayed Chinese words and non-words consisting of
2, 3 and 5 Chinese characters, which were chosen from
the Corpus of Journal Chinese (1993). Each length
category contained 20 non-words and 20 real-words.
This was a within-subjects repeated measures design.
Half of the words were presented in the LVF and the
other half the RVF. Twenty-three volunteers were
divided into two groups randomly. The stimuli were
arranged in a Latin Square design, therefore the words
used in the first group were identical to those in second
group, except that the stimuli presented in the LVF for
the first group were presented in the RVF for the
second group.

Stimuli
Switching the positions of two characters within one
word was the way we produced the non-words. For
example, three-character words like
changed to
. The fixation point was a 4 mm
4 mm cross
(Font: Bodoni MT Ultra Bold. Size: 24. Duration 1000
msec) presented at the center of the monitor. It was to
draw participants’ attention and fixate their eyes on the
center. A masking pattern was produced by overlapping
dozens of Chinese characters that did not appear in the
formal experiment. In addition, there were fifteen
practice trials preceding the experiment.
All of the Chinese materials were produced by
PhotoShop, and presented by Psyscope Version 1.2b5
(1994) and a Macintosh computer. The size of each
character was 13 mm
13 mm and the inter-character
space was 9 mm, thus the three different lengths of
words were 13 mm
35 mm, 13 mm
57 mm and
13 mm
100 mm respectively. All the stimuli were
presented on the screen either 2 mm to the right hand
side of the fixation point or 2 mm to the left hand side
of the fixation point. The smallest visual angle was
equivalent to 0.25 degree from the fixation point.

[åh


[hå








Procedure
Subjects were asked to complete the personal data
questionnaire before doing the experiment. After being
instructed to sit in front of the computer, they were to
face the center of the monitor at a distance of 450 mm
to 550 mm from their eyes to the monitor, and to press
the right or left button with the right or left index finger
to make lexical decisions. For all the subjects, pressing
the right button with the right index finger was for realwords and pressing the left button with the left index
finger was for non-words. The experimenter explained
the instructions and watched subjects’ responses during
fifteen practice trials, then subjects would be left alone
while the formal experiment was progressing. The
Psyscope software recorded response latencies with
millisecond precision.
The sequence of presentation was firstly a fixation
point, presented centrally for 1000 msec, followed by a
unilaterally presented vertical Chinese stimulus which

was ended by the critical response or which ended
automatically after 2000 msec, followed by a masking
picture presented for 1000 msec.

Analysis and results
An analysis of variance of response latencies was
carried out with Visual Field and Word Length as
within-subject factors and Gender as a between-subject
factor. A significant main effect was found for Word
Length (F(2,42)=270.832, p< .001), but was not for
Gender (F(1,21)=.429, p> .05) or Visual Field
(F(1,21)=.423, p> .05). In the LVF, five-character
words were recognized less efficiently than both twoand three-character words, however, the differences
between two- and three-character words did not reach
significance. On the other hand, in the RVF, response
times to 2-character words were shorter than those to 3character words which were in turn shorter than those
to 5 character words. Thus, there was a strong main
effect of word length, in the predicted direction, but not
of Visual Field.
The two-way interaction between Gender and Visual
Field was significant (F(1,21)=6.014, p< .05), but not
the one between Gender and Word Length (F(2,42)=
.898, p> .05) or between Visual Field and Word Length
(F(2,42)=.250, p> .05). Figure 1 shows that Females
tended to recognize Chinese scripts faster than Males
when scripts were presented in the LVF. But the
response time difference did not reach the significance
level of .05. Gender differences were not significant
either in the RVF or in the LVF. On the other hand,
Visual Field was marginally significant in Males (p=
.086) but not in Females (p= .121). That means, for
Males, words presented in the RVF tended to be better
recognized than those in the LVF. There was no
significant three-way interaction between Gender,
Visual Field and Length (p> .05).
In summary, a significant main effect was found for
word length, with longer words taking predictably more
time to process than shorter words. Although the
response times in the LVF were slightly slower than
those in the RVF, the main effect of Visual Field did
not reach statistical significance, either by subjects or
by items, nor was there any significant interaction

Table 1. The response latency of Lexical Decision for 2-, 3- and 5-character Chinese words in different visual
fields. This table presents the figures analyzed by items.
RT(msec)
RVF
LVF
For Entire Population
2-character words
780.8219 767.8909
774.3564
3-character words
863.2826 875.1924
869.2375
5-character words 1145.5332 1182.9296
1164.2314
Mean 935.9418

980

1300

1200
960
1100

1000

920

GENDER
Male
Female

900
RVF

LVF

VF

Response latency (msec)

Response latency (msec)

940

Word length

900

2-character words
800

3-characters words

700
RVF

5-characters words
LVF

VF

Figure 1 The interaction of Visual Field and Gender.
The Visual Field difference was marginally significant
in Males. That is, for Males, words presented in the
RVF tended to be better recognized than those in the
LVF.

Figure 2 A significant main effect was found for Word
Length, but was not for Visual Field or the interaction
between Visual Field and Word Length.

between Word Length and Visual Field. In conclusion,
hemispheric superiority for word length, as found in
English, does not appear to exist in Chinese, from the
results of this experiment.

the exclusively horizontal presentation found in the
relevant English experiments.
Two caveats are also necessary. Bole (1995) argued
that the severity of the criteria in selecting handedness
could affect the results of hemispheric superiority
experiments. Mistaking left-handers for right-handers
causes the data from right-handers to be less different
from that of left-handers, and results in insignificant
differences. Thus the current experimental procedure
might be improved by using instruments such as the
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory to investigate more
detailed hand uses, together with a severe filter of
subjects’ family history in handedness.
Not all of studies of hemispheric lateralisation have
reached the consistent conclusion that Chinese has
significant LVF superiority with the increase of word
length. But since Tzeng (1979) and following studies, it
was accepted that Chinese words yield a RVF
superiority whereas Chinese characters yield either a
slight LVF superiority or inconsistent performance.
However, many studies had failed to reduplicate these
results. Thus arguments were raised from the
consistency of hemispheric superiority in Chinese.
Whether there is a consistent hemispheric lateralisation
in recognizing Chinese words still remains doubtable.

Discussion
The methodology of this experiment was taken from
Fang (1994). We extended the research of Fang by
adding five-character words and introduced the gender
differences. In the results, only the main effect of Word
Length reached significance; neither the main effect of
Visual Field nor the interaction between Visual Field
and Word Length reached significance. There was,
however, a significant interaction between Gender and
Visual Field, the slowest reaction times coming from
males responding to the LVF, supporting the idea that
there are indeed visual field differences to be found in
the processing of Chinese script, and comparable to
those found in reading English orthography. Because of
their interaction with gender, these visual field effects
would seem to involve the lateralisation of
phonological versus spatial processing. We may
conclude that there is a qualitative difference between
text processing in English and Chinese that prevents the
emergence of a significant interaction between word
length and hemifield in Chinese. Speculatively, the
principal difference present in the current experiment is
the vertical presentation of the words, compared with

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisor Dr. Richard
Shillcock for his guidance and thank Dr. Sheng-Ping
Fang for her generosity in providing the corpus and
essential research papers.

References
Besner, D., Daniels, S., and Slade, C. (1982). Ideogram
reading and right hemisphere language. British
Journal of Psychology, 73, 21-28.
Boles, D. B. (1995). Parameters of the Bilateral effect.
In
Kitterle,
F.
L.
(Eds.),
Hemispheric
Communication- Mechanisms and Models, UK:
Lawrence Erlbaurn.
Chinese knowledge information processing group
(1993). The most frequent nouns in Journal Chinese
and their classification: Corpus-based research series
no. 1~ 4. Taiwan: Institute of information science
Academia Sinica and Institute of History & Philology
Academia Sinica.
Ellis, H. D. & Shepherd, J. W., (1974). Recognition of
abstract and concrete words presented in the left and
right Visual Fields. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 103, 1035-1036.
Fang, S. P., (1994).English word length effects and the
Chinese character-word difference: Turth or Myth?
Chinese Journal of Psychology, 36(1), 59-80.
Fang, S. P., (1997). Morphological properties and the
Chinese character-word difference in laterality
patterns. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and performance, 23(5), 14391453.
Tzeng, O. J. L., Hung, D. L., Cotton, B. and Wang, S.
Y. (1979). Visual lateralization in reading Chinese
characters. Nature (London), 382, 499-501.
Young A.W. & Ellis, A. W. (1985). Different Methods
of Lexical access for words presented in the left and
right visual hemifields. Brain and Language, 24, 326358.

