UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How to Solve the Problem of Compositionality by Oscillatory Networks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4c6088n3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Werning, Markus

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

H ow to Solve the Problem ofC om positionality by O scillatory N etw orks
M arkusW erning (m arkus.w erning@ uni-erfurt.de)
D epartm entofPhilosophy,P.O .Box 900221
D -99105 Erfurt,G erm any

A bstract
Cognitive system s are regarded to be com positional:The
sem antic values of com plex representations are determ ined by, and dependent on, the sem antic values of
prim itive representations. Both classical and
connectionistnetw orks failto m odelcom positionality in
a plausible w ay. The paper introduces oscillatory netw orks as a third alternative.It provides neurobiological
evidence for the adequacy of those netw orks and argues
that they are com positional. O scillatory netw orks com bine the virtues and avoid the shortcom ings of classical
and connectionistarchitectures.

C om positionality and System aticity
M inds have the capacity to com pose contents. O therw ise, they w ould not show a system atic correlation
betw een representational capacities: If a m ind is capable of certain intentional states in a certain intentional
m ode (perception, thought, im agination, preference,
etc.), it m ost probably is also capable of other intentional states w ith related contents in the sam e m ode.
The capacity to see a red square in a green circle,e.g.,
is statistically highly correlated w ith the capacity to see
a red circle in a green square.To explain this em pirical
phenom enon, w hich is closely related to the w ellknow n binding problem , com positional operations are
postulated. They enable the system to build com plex
representations from prim itive ones so thatthe sem antic
value of the com plex representation is determ ined by,
and dependenton,the sem antic values ofthe prim itives.
Several theories have been developed to m eet the requirem ent of com positionality. Both classical and
connectionist attem pts suffer from severe deficits,
though.
Fodorand Pylyshyn (1988)forone take recourse to a
language of thought,w hich they link to the claim that
the brain can be m odeled by a Turing-style com puter.A
subject’s having a m ental representation, they believe,
consists in the subject’s bearing a com putational relation to a m ental sentence; it is a relation analogous to
the relation a Turing m achine’s control head bears to
the tape. A ccordingly, the m ind com poses com plex
representations from prim itive ones justthe w ay a com puter com poses phrases from w ords:by concatenation.
The trouble w ith classical com puter m odels is w ell
know n and reaches from the fram e problem ,the problem of graceful degradation,and the problem of learning from exam ples (H organ & Tienson,1996) to prob-

lem s that arise from the content sensitivity of logical
reasoning (G igerenzer& H ug,1992).
To avoid the pitfalls of classicism , connectionist
m odels have been developed.Som e of them attem ptto
m eetthe com positionality constraint.Sm olensky (1995)
m aps the term s and the syntax ofa language hom om orphically onto an algebra of vectors and tensor operations.Each prim itive term ofthe language is assigned to
a vector.Every vector renders a certain distribution of
activity w ithin the connectionistnetw ork.The syntactic
operations of the language have tensor operations as
counterparts. Barnden (1991) pursues a related approach. A s far as syntax is concerned, som e
connectionist netw orks can com pletely im plem ent
com positionallanguages.
The kind of com positionality that is necessary for
system aticity,how ever,focuses noton syntactic,buton
sem antic features. The capacity to think that a child
w ith a red coat is distracted by an old herring is not
correlated w ith the capacity to think thata child w ith an
old coat is distracted by a red herring. The thoughts
oughtto be correlated,though,if syntactic com position
w as sufficientforsystem aticity.A lthough both thoughts
are syntactically com posed from exactly the sam e
prim itives by exactly the sam e operations,they are not
correlated because red herring is idiom atic,i.e.because
the m apping (red, herring) → red herring is syntactically, but not sem antically com positional. O ne m ay
w ell have the capacity to think of red coats and old
herrings even though one lacks the capacity to think of
red herrings.W e m ay infer,thus,thatsem antic com positionality is necessary for system aticity and that syntactic com positionality is notsufficient.The strategy to
m ap the syntax of a system atic language hom om orphically onto a connectionist netw ork does not suffice to
establish thatthe netw ork itselfis system atic.
To putthe dilem m a in a nutshell,connectionistm odels seem to be too w eak to explain system aticity,
w hereas classicalm odels are apparently too strong to be
im plem ented by real brains.The rest of the paper w ill
explore the option of som ething “in betw een” classical
and connectionist architectures.The presented solution
differs significantly from other approaches to the dilem m a (Lange & D yer, 1989; Shastri & A jjanagadde,
1993;H um m el& H olyoak,1997;Sougné 1999).Especially w ith respectto the representation ofrelations,the

presented m odel m ight have m ore plausible im plications.

xi(t)

(a)
F(xi(t- τ ie))
w ie

C onstituency
A further argum ent provides us w ith a deeper insight
into w hat’s w rong w ith traditional connectionist netw orks and gives us a key how to m atch this deficit.
M ostsem antic theories explain the sem antic properties
of internal representations either in term s of covariance,in term s ofinferentialrelations,orin term s of
associations.O ne m ay,e.g.,hold thata certain internal
state is a representation ofredness because the state covaries w ith nearby instances of redness. This covariance relation is, of course, backed by the intrinsic
and extrinsic causalproperties of the redness representation.O ne m ay also hold thatbachelor representations
characteristically are such thatthe subjectis disposed to
infer unm arried-m an representations from it. Those
dispositions, again, are grounded in the causal properties of bachelor and unm arried-m an representations.
O ne m ay, thirdly, hold that the sem antic value of the
cow representation is determ ined by the fact that it is
associated w ith representations like m ilk, leather,
m am m al,grass etc.The m echanism of association,too,
supervenes on the causal properties of the representations in question.A llof these theories have one principle in com m on: A n internal representation has its sem antic value because ithas a certain causalrole w ithin
the system (and – perhaps – the restof the w orld).The
question of how the sem antic values of prim itive representations determ ine the sem antic value of com plex
representations, hence, leads to the question of how
causal properties can be inherited from prim itive to
com plex states. From chem istry w e know that atom s
determ ine the causal properties of m olecules because
atom s are constituents of m olecules. Physics gives
sim ilar answ ers w ith regard to atom s and elem entary
particles. O ne can even m ake it a hard m etaphysical
point: If the causal properties of a state B are determ ined by, and dependent on, the causal properties of
the states A 1, ..., A n and their relations to each other,
then A 1,...,A n are constituents of B.H ere,constituents
are conceived of as necessary parts: A is a constituent
ofB ifand only ifthe follow ing is necessary and generally true: If B occurs at a certain region of space at a
certain tim e, then A occurs at the sam e region at the
sam e tim e.
The failure of connectionist attem pts, therefore, is
thatthe hom om orphism betw een language and netw ork
structure does not preserve the constituent relations
w ithin the language. The netw ork counterparts of
brown and cow aren’t constituents of the netw ork
counterpart of brown cow. Since the hom om orphism
does notpreserve constituentrelations,itfails to transfer sem antic com positionality: A lthough the operation
(brown, cow) → brown cow is sem antically com positional, the netw ork operation (h(brown),h(cow)) →

-

w ei
F(xe(t- τ ei))

+

(b)

xe(t)
ie(t)

-

-

-

-

-

+

+

+

+

+

Figure 1: (a) Elem entary oscillator consisting of a
coupled pair of an excitatory (+) and an inhibitory unit
(–) together w ith an inputunit.t,tim e;x(t),unitactivity; F(x) sigm oidal output function; w , coupling
w eight;τ, delay tim e;ie(t), external input. Subscripts:
e, excitatory unit; i, inhibitory unit. (b) O scillatory
elem ents coupled by short-range synchronizing connections (dashed) and long-range desynchronizing
connections (dotted), w ithout interaction at crossings.
The figure is m eant to show the principle of coupled
oscillators,ratherthan a particularconnectivity pattern.
h(brown cow) m ay not be sem antically com positional
(h being the hom om orphism ). If h(brown) and h(cow)
aren’t constituents of h(brown cow) you cannot say:
h(brown cow) co-varies w ith brow n cow s because
h(brown) co-varies w ith brow n things and h(cow) covaries w ith cow s.If the constituent relations w ere preserved,you could say this.Forthe sam e reason,you are
deprived ofthe possibility to explain the inferentialand
the associative properties of the com plex representation
on the basis of the inferentialand the associative properties ofthe prim itive representations.

Synchrony
Constituency is a synchronic relation, w hile causal
connectedness is a diachronic relation.W hole and part
co-existin tim e,w hereas causes and effects succeed in
tim e.The reference to causalconnections and the flow
of activation w ithin the netw ork w ill, therefore, not
suffice to establish constituent relations. W hat w e, in
addition, need is an adequate synchronic relation. O scillatory netw orks provide a fram ew ork to define such a
relation: the relation of synchrony betw een phases of
activity. Synchrony and asynchrony are synchronic
relations because the relata, phases of activity, coexist
in tim e.A n elem entary oscillatoris realized by coupling
an excitatory unit w ith an inhibitory unit using delay
connections. A n additional unit allow s for external
input (figure 1a). W ithin the netw ork, oscillatory elem ents are coupled by either short-range synchronizing
connections or long-range desynchronizing connections

H
H
H
H

V
V
V
V

V
V
V
V

H
H
H
H

H
H
H
H

V
V
V
V

O rientation m odule

G
B
B
G

Y
R
R
Y

Y
R
R
Y

G
B
B
G

G
B
B
G

Y
R
R
Y

C olor m odule

Figure 2: Schem e of a typical neuronal response
aroused by a blue vertical, a red vertical, and a blue
horizontal object. Circles w ith letters signify neurons
w ith the property they indicate (V ,H :horizontal,vertical;R,G ,B,Y :red,green,blue,yellow ).Like shadings
signify synchronous activity.The phases of som e blueneurons are synchronous w ith the phases ofsom e vertical-neurons (m iddle-shading),som e phases ofverticalneurons are in synchrony w ith som e phases of redneurons (dark-shading), and som e blue-neurons fire in
phase w ith som e horizontal-neurons (light-shading).
(figure 1b).A m ultitude of oscillators can be arranged
in feature m odules (e.g.,the color m odule),em ploying
appropriate patterns of connectivity. G iven a certain
selectivity of the inputunit,each oscillator is designed
to indicate a certain property (e.g.,redness) w ithin the
feature dom ain.O scillators for like properties are connected synchronizingly; those for unlike properties are
connected desynchronizingly. The pattern of connectivity m ay as w ell reflect topographical features. The
behavior of oscillatory netw orks have been studied in
detail elsew here (Schillen & K önig, 1994). Stim ulated
oscillatory netw orks, characteristically, show objectspecific patterns of synchronized and desynchronized
oscillators w ithin and across feature m odules. O scillators that represent properties of the sam e object synchronize because oscillatory netw orks im plem ent the
G estalt principles. O scillators that represent properties
of differentobjects desynchronize.W e observe thatfor
each represented object a certain phase of activity
spreads through the netw orks.The phase pertains only
to oscillators thatrepresentthe properties of the object
in question. A ssum ing that elem entary oscillators are
m odels of neurons and that oscillatory netw orks are
m odels of partof the visualcortex,the results of these
studies supporttw o hypotheses:
Indicativity. A s part of the visual cortex, there are
collections of neurons w hose function it is to show
activity only w hen an object in the perceptual field
instantiates a certain property.
Synchrony. N eurons that belong to tw o collections
indicative for the properties π1 and π2, respectively,
have the function to show activity synchronous w ith
each other only if the properties π1 and π2 are instantiated by the sam e objectin the perceptualfield.
The hypotheses are supported by neurobiological
evidence. The indicative function of neurons w as discovered by H ubel and W iesel (1962, 1968). N eurobiologists m eanw hile have specified a great variety of

feature dom ains:color,orientation,direction ofm otion,
speed, lum inance, etc. Property indicative neuronal
collections w ill, subsequently, be called π-collections,
w ith π standing for the property the neurons of the
collection indicate.
A num ber of experim entaldata supportthe hypothesis of synchrony (detailed review : Singer & G ray,
1995).1 Synchrony of neurons (<200µm apart) w ithin
one colum n w as recorded in m any differentspecies and
cortical regions of aw ake and lightly anaesthetized
anim als,and can be observed in the localfield potential
as w ell as in the m ulti-unit and paired single-unit recordings (G ray & Singer, 1989; K reiter & Singer,
1992). Intercolum nar synchrony of distant neurons
(>2m m ) w as show n by sim ultaneously recording the
activity of neurons in different parts of the cortex
(Schw artz & Bolz, 1991). Its occurrence w ithin and
betw een visualareas depends upon w hetherthe neurons
are stim ulated by single or separate objects.For exam ple,synchrony is strong w hen tw o neurons in V 1 w ith
non-overlapping butcollinear preferred orientations are
stim ulated by a single long bar m oving across their
receptive fields (G ray et al., 1989). It is w eaker w hen
they are stim ulated by tw o shortcollinear bars m oving
in the sam e direction,and it is absent altogether w hen
the tw o short bars m ove in opposite directions. These
and otherresults supportthe view thatthe synchrony of
distributed activity in the visualsystem im plem ents the
w ell-established G estalt principles of perceptual
grouping. The issue of object-binding as stated by the
principle of synchrony is supported by evidence from
the prim ary visual cortex of the cat (Engel, K önig, &
Singer, 1991) and other anim als. These experim ents
show that w hen tw o neurons w ith different orientation
and direction preferences are stim ulated by a single
m oving bar thatis sub-optim alfor both,then they synchronize,butw hen they are stim ulated by tw o separate
bars, each being optim al for one of the neurons, then
they do not.The representationalfunction of synchrony
is supported by studies of binocular rivalry w ith aw ake
strabism atic cats (Fries et al., 1997). There has long
been anatom ical evidence for long-range horizontal
connections in V 1 (Rockland & Lund, 1983). Low el
and Singer (1992) observed thatthese connections play
a synchronizing role. Figure 2 provides a schem atic
overview .

A lgebra
O scillatory netw orks that im plem ent the tw o hypotheses can be given an abstractalgebraic description:
N = 〈N i,N p,N s;ϕ1,...,ϕm ;F1,...,Fn;≈,≈| ,ε,∧〉.
____________
1

O ’K eefe and Recce (1993), W ehr and Laurent (1996),
G aw ne,K jaer and Richm ond (1996) assum e a m ore critical
attitude w ith respect to the role of synchrony in object binding.

Below ,this algebra w illbe show n to be isom orphic to a
system atic language.The prim itive entities of the algebra are (i) the phases of activity picked outby the sym bolsϕ1,...,ϕm and (ii)the sets ofphases related to each
π-collection and referred to by the sym bols F1, ..., Fn.
The phases of activity are elem ents of the set of all
neuronally possible phases N i. The sets of phases are
elem ents ofN p.The operations denoted by the sym bols
≈,≈|,ε, and ∧ serve to build com plex neuronal states
from prim itive entities.The setof allcom plex neuronal
states constructible in N is N s. Superior “N ” signifies
thatsym bols or sequences of sym bols in square brackets are interpreted in the algebra N .Thus ϕ1N ,ϕ2N ,...,
ϕm N are phases ofactivity;F1N ,F2N ,...,FnN are sets that
com prise the phases ofrelated π-collections;and ≈N ,≈|N ,
εN , ∧N are operations. Instead of F1, F2, ..., w e w ill
som etim es use m ore suggestive capital letters like the
H ,V ,R,G ,B,and Y offigure 2.
In N there is only one fundam entaloperation:being
synchronous w ith. It is referred to by the operation
sym bol≈ and relates phases ofactivity to each other:
[ϕi≈ϕj]N is the state [ϕi is synchronous with ϕj]N .
The rem aining N -operations are derivationally defined
by m eans ofstandard sym bols,w ith “¬” and “& ” signifying negation and conjunction, “∃” the existential
quantifier,“x” a variable,“(“ and “)” prentices,“∈” set
m em bership. W e can thus define asynchrony ≈| N in a
naturalw ay:
[ϕi ≈| ϕj]N is the state [¬ ϕi ≈ ϕj]N .
If neurons of a π-collection,to w hich the setof phases
FjN is assigned,show a certain phase ofactivity ϕiN ,w e
say thatthe phase ϕiN ora synchronous equivalentis an
elem entofthe setFjN .To referto this neuronalstate,w e
define the relation ofpertaining εN :
[ϕi ε Fj]N is the state [(∃ x)(x ≈ ϕi & x ∈ Fj)]N .
A furtheroperation is co-occurrence∧N oftw o states pN
and qN .Itis trivially defined:
[p ∧ q]N is the state [p & q]N .
The four operations are m otivated by the hypothesis of
indicativity and synchrony. They allow us to give an
algebraic description of the schem e show n in figure 2.
A ssum ing that the m iddle-shaded neurons show the
phase ofactivity ϕ1N ,the dark-shaded neurons the phase
ϕ2N and the light-shaded neurons the phase ϕ3N ,figure 2
expresses the corticalstate:
[ϕ1 ε V ∧ ϕ1 ε B ∧ ϕ2 ε V ∧ ϕ2 ε R ∧ ϕ3 ε H ∧ ϕ3 ε B]N .

Language
The notation already suggests thatthe algebra N m ight
be isom orphic to a com positional and system atic language L.Since languages can be treated as algebras,w e
m ay define:
L = 〈Li,Lp,Ls;ϕ1,...,ϕm ;F1,...,Fn;≈,≈|,ε,∧〉.
The entities of L are indexicalexpressions like this and
that (included in the set Li), predicates like red and
vertical(in Lp)and clauses like this is red orthis is the
sam e as that (in Ls).The prim itive sym bols ϕ1,...,ϕm

pick out specific indexicals and the prim itive sym bols
F1,...,Fn specific predicates.A gain w e w illsom etim es
use m ore suggestive capitalletters instead of F1,...,Fn.
The fundam entaloperation ofL is sam eness≈L:
[ϕi ≈ ϕj]L is the clause [ϕi is the sam e asϕj]L.
The rem aining operations can derivationally be defined.
D ifference≈| L:
[ϕi ≈| ϕj]L is the clause [¬ ϕi ≈ ϕj]L.
U sing ∈ as the sym bol for predication this tim e, the
copula εL,w hich links an indexicalexpression ϕiL to a
predicate FjL,is defined by:
[ϕi ε Fj]L is the clause [(∃ x)(x ≈ ϕi & x ∈ Fj)]L.
The copula (English: “is”) enables us to paraphrase
naturallanguage sentences like this is verticalin L:[ϕ1
ε V ]L.The conjunction ∧L betw een tw o clauses pL and
qL is defined:
[p ∧ q]L is the clause [p & q]L.
The sentence there is a blue vertical,a red vertical,and
a blue horizontalobjectcan now be paraphrased:
[ϕ1 ε V ∧ ϕ1 ε B ∧ ϕ2 ε V ∧ ϕ2 ε R ∧ ϕ3 ε H ∧ ϕ3 ε B]L.

Isom orphism and Preserved C onstituency
To prove that the algebras N and L are isom orphic,a
num ber of conditions have to be w arranted. (i) There
are as m any phases ofactivity in N as there are indexicalterm s in L.(ii)Each π-collection,respectively,each
related set of phases in N is assigned to exactly one
predicate ofL.(iii)L-clauses,by stipulation,are identical if and only if they are logically equivalent. For,
cortical states are identical if and only if they are referred to by logically equivalent N -descriptions. To
ensure this non-trivialcondition,w e thus have to accept
that order is irrelevant in L. This leads to a nonstandard notion of language:Concatenation,no longer,
is the fundam ental operation of concept com position.
(iv) The tw o fundam ental operations synchrony and
sam eness are isom orphic.If so,this isom orphism then
conveys to all operations that have recursively been
defined.Since sam eness is a reflexive,sym m etric,and
transitive relation, w e have to define synchrony betw een phases as a reflexive, sym m etric,and transitive
relation, too. This is consistent w ith recent neurobiological data (cf. Eckhorn, 2000) and the com puter
sim ulations ofoscillatory netw orks m entioned above.
In previous sections w e argued that an architecture
m ight not be com positional even if it is syntactically
hom om orphic to a com positionallanguage.To preserve
sem antic com positionality,the isom orphism betw een L
and N m ust, in addition, preserve the constituent
structure of the language.If a prim itive term is a constituent of a com plex term ,the isom orphic counterpart
of the prim itive term m ust be a constituent of the isom orphic counterpart of the com plex term . The prim itives ofL are the indexicals ϕ1L,...,ϕm L and the predicates F1L,...,FnL.Every L-operation w illlead to targets
w ith those prim itives as constituents.The clause [ϕ1 ≈

G
B
B
G
IN m odule

Y
R
R
Y

Y
R
R
Y

G
B
B
G

G
B
B
G

Y
R
R
Y

C olor m odule

Figure 3:Predicted neuronalrepresentation ofrelations.
The state [ϕ1 ε G ∧ ϕ2 ε R ∧ 〈ϕ1,ϕ2〉 ε’ IN ]N is show n.
The phases ϕ1 of the G -neurons (light shading) occurs
on the IN -m odule only in superposition w ith the phase
ϕ2 of the R-neurons (dark-shading) form ing the duplex
phase {ϕ1,ϕ2} (hybrid shading).Since ϕ2 also occurs as
sim plex on the IN -m odule, the situation on the IN m odule is rendered by [{{ϕ1,ϕ2},{ϕ2}} ε’ IN ]N . By
definition,this is equivalentto [〈ϕ1,ϕ2〉 ε’IN ]N .
ϕ2]L can im possibly be tokened w ithout tokening the
indexicals ϕ1L and ϕ2L. W ith respect to constituency,
w hat is true for L is also true for N : The state [ϕ1 ≈
ϕ2]N is tokened justin case the phases ϕ1N and ϕ2N are
tokened. Tw o phases are synchronous only if both of
them actually occur w ithin the cortex.The sam e is true
m utatis m utandis forasynchrony.In L ,the indexicalϕL
and the predicate FL are constituents of the clause [ϕ ε
F]L. Therefore, the phase ϕN and the π-collection to
w hich the setFN relates m ustbe tokened,w henever the
cortex is in [ϕ ε F]N .This is obviously true because ϕN
cannotpertain to the π-collection unless both the phase
and the π-collection occur in the cortex.Figure 2 illustrates that the isom orphism preserves constituent relations for every operation:The com plex state show n can
only be tokened if,indeed,certain bursts ofactivity and
certain collections of neurons are tokened. W e m ay
infer that oscillatory netw orks are not only syntactically,butalso sem antically com positional.

R elations
The representation ofrelations poses a binding problem
ofsecond order.The sentence this red verticalobjectis
in that green horizontal object not only binds four
property representations into tw o objectrepresentations,
itm oreover binds the tw o objectrepresentations by the
relation in. The constituency preserving isom orphism
betw een L and N straightforw ardly generates a prediction of how to realize relational representation by oscillatory netw orks: A fter L has been extended by the
tools for representing relations know n from logic, N
has to be extended in a w ay that perpetuates the isom orphism and the congruence w ith respectto constituency structure.The tools needed in the extensions ofL
and N are the operation of pairing,a higher-order copula and relation constants, or, respectively, their neuronal counterparts. Follow ing K uratow ski (1967), or-

dered pairs are by com m on standards defined as asym m etric sets ofsecond order:
[〈ϕi,ϕj〉]L/N =def [{{ϕi,ϕj},{ϕj}}]L/N .
W ith the relations R 1L, ..., R kL being sets of pairs, the
higher-order copula links pairs to relations in the m anner of setm em bership.O n the neuronallevel,the R 1N ,
...,R kN can be interpreted as relationalm odules:
[〈ϕi,ϕj〉 ε’R l]L/N =def[〈ϕi,ϕj〉 ∈ R l]L/N .
The sentence this green objectis in thatred objectcan
now be paraphrased in the extension of L:
[ϕ1 ε G ∧ ϕ2 ε R ∧ 〈ϕ1,ϕ2〉 ε’IN ]L.
Its neuronal counterpart – superior “L” is replaced by
superior“N ” -is show n in figure 3.To achieve a distribution of phases thus com plex, som e neurons are required to show a superposition of tw o phases.The presented m odel,therefore,predicts m ultiplex activity as a
m eans of representing relations.G asser and Colunga’s
(1998) sim ulation, w hich also uses superposed phases
in relationalrepresentations,supports the prediction.

N either C onnectionism nor C lassicism
Cognitive architectures can be distinguished along three
features:
Syntactic Trees. There are m appings from ordered
sets of argum entrepresentations onto targetrepresentations.
Constituency (presupposes trees).For every syntactic
tree,its argum entrepresentations are constituents of its
targetrepresentation.
O rder (presupposes constituency). For every target
representation, there is a determ inate order am ong its
constituents.
These features are each realized by every standard
language: There is a syntax, w ords are constituents of
phrases, and the w ords follow a determ inate w ord order.W e can now ask w hich of these features a certain
cognitive m odel im plem ents. Turing-style com puters
typically im plem ent all three features because they
build com plex representations from prim itive representation by concatenation follow ing certain syntactic
rules. Integrated connectionist/sym bolic architectures
only im plem entsyntactic trees.They do notim plem ent
the principle of constituency and the principle of order.
O scillatory netw orks,how ever,im plem entboth syntactic trees and the principle of constituency.They do not
im plem entan orderam ong representations.
O scillatory netw orks lie in som e sense in betw een
classicaland connectionistarchitectures.They resem ble
connectionist netw orks in m any respects: They m ay
serve as associative, content addressable m em ories.
They process inform ation in parallel. They are able to
learn from exam ples. They degrade gracefully. Etc.
Still, oscillatory netw orks are stronger than traditional
connectionist netw orks because, in oscillatory netw orks, prim itive representations are constituents of
com plex representations. The prim itive representations

inherit their causal properties to com plex representations and,thereby,determ ine their sem antic properties.
O scillatory netw orks unite the virtues and avoid the
vices of classicaland connectionistnetw orks.They are
sem antically com positionaland system atic.

A cknow ledgm ents
Research for this paper w as sponsored by the N ational
G erm an Scholarship Foundation. It w as enabled by a
one-yearresearch scholarship atRutgers U niversity and
the Rutgers CenterofCognitive Science.Iow e m any of
the presented insights to sem inars and discussions w ith
A ndreas Engel,Thom as M etzinger,W olf Singer,Jerry
Fodor, Ernie LePore, Brian M cLaughlin, Bruce Tesar
and G erhard Schurz. I am grateful, also, to the Berlin
Colloquium “Philosophy M eets Cognitive Science”.

R eferences
Barnden,J.A .(1991).Encoding com plex sym bolic data
structures w ith som e unusual connectionist techniques.In J.A .Barnden & Pollack,J.B.(eds.).Advances in Connectionist and Neural Com putation
Theory Vol. 1: H igh-level connectionist m odels.
N orw ood,N J:A blex Publishing Corp.
Eckhorn, R. (2000). N eural m echanism of scene segm entation (abstract).Sym posium on Neural binding
ofspace and tim e.Leipzig:unpublished.
Engel, A . K .,K onig, P, & Singer, W . (1991). D irect
physiological evidence for scene segm entation by
tem poral coding.Proceedings of the National Academ y ofSciences,U SA,88,9136-40.
Fodor,J.A .& Pylyshyn,Z.W .(1988).Connectionism
and cognitive architecture:A criticalanalysis.Cognition,28,3-71.
Fries,P.,Roelfsem a,P.R.,Engel,A .K .,K önig,P.,&
Singer,W .(1997).Synchronization of oscillatory responses in visualcortex correlates w ith perception in
interocular rivalry. Proceedings of the National
Academ y ofSciences,U S,94,12699–12704.
G asser,M .& Colunga,E.(1998).W here D o Relations
Com e From ? (Tech.Rep.221).Bloom ington,IN :Indiana U niversity Cognitive Science Program .
G aw ne,T.J.,K jaer,T.W .,& Richm ond,B,J.(1996).
Latency: A nother potential code for feature binding
in striate cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 76,
1356-1360.
G igerenzer, G . & H ug, K . (1992). D om ain-specific
reasoning:Socialcontracts,cheating,and perspective
change.Cognition,43,127-171.
G ray, C. M . & Singer, W . (1989). Stim ulus-specific
neuronal oscillations in orientation colum ns of cat
visual cortex.Proceedings of the National Academ y
ofSciences,U SA,86,1698-702.
G ray, C. M ., K onig, P., Engel, A . K . & Singer, W .
(1989).O scilliatory responses in catvisualcortex exhibit inter-colum nar synchronization w hich reflects
globalstim ulus properties.Nature,338,334-37.

H organ, T. & Tienson, J. (1996).Connectionism and
the Philosophy of Psychology.Cam bridge,M A : The
M IT Press.
H ubel,D .H .& W iesel,T.N .(1962).Receptive fields,
binocular interaction and functional architecture in
the cat's visual cortex. Journal of Physiology, 160,
106-154.
H ubel,D .H .& W iesel,T.N .(1968).Receptive fields
and functional architecture of m onkey striate cortex.
JournalofPhysiology,195,215-243.
H um m el, J. E. & H olyoak, K . J. (1997). D istributed
representation ofstructure:A theory of analogicalaccess and m apping.PsychologicalReview,104,427 –
466.
K reiter,A .K .& SingerW .(1992).O scillatory neuronal
responses in the visualcortex of the aw ake m acaque
m onkey.European JournalofNeuroscience,4,36975.
K uratow ski,K .(1967).SetTheory.A m sterdam :N orthH oland.
Lange, T. E. & D yer, M . G . (1989). H igh-levelinferencing in a connectionist netw ork. Connection Science,1,181 –217.
Low el, S., & Singer, W . (1992). Selection of intrinsic
horizontal connections in the visual cortex by correlated neuronalactivity.Science,255,209-12.
O ’K eefe, J. & Recce, M . (1993). Phase relationship
betw een hippocam pal place units and the hippocam paltheta rhythm .H ippocam pus,3,317-330.
Rockland, K . & Lund, J. S. (1983). Intrinsic lam inar
lattice connections in prim ate visual cortex.Journal
ofCom parative Neurology,216,303-18.
Schillen,T.B.& K önig,P.(1994).Binding by tem poral structure in m ultiple feature dom ains of an oscillatory neuronal netw ork.Biological Cybernetics,70,
397-405.
Schw artz, C. & Bolz, J. (1991). Functional specificity
of the long-range horizontalconnections in catvisual
cortex: a cross-correlation study.Journal of Neuroscience,11,2995-3007.
Shastri, L. & A jjanagadde, V . (1993). From sim ple
associations to system atic reasoning:A connectionist
representation of rules,variables,and dynam ic bindings using tem poralsynchrony.Behavioraland Brain
Sciences,16,417-94.
Singer,W .& G ray,C.M .(1995).V isual feature integration and the tem poral correlation hypothesis.AnnualReview ofNeuroscience,18,555-86.
Sm olensky,P.(1995).Connectionism ,constituency and
the language of thought. In M acdonald, C., & M acdonald, G . (Eds.),Connectionism . Cam bridge, M A :
Blackw ell.
Sougné, J. P. (1999). INFERNET: A Neurocom putationalM odelofBinding and Inference.D octoralThesis,U niversité de Liège.
W ehr, M . & Laurent, G . (1996). O dour encoding by
tem poral sequences of firing in oscillating neuronal
assem blies.Nature,284,163-66.

