UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How is Abstract, Generative Knowledge Acquired? A Comparison of Three Learning
Scenarios

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8b48g8ww

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Nokes, Timothy J.
Ohlsson, Stellan

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How is Abstract, Generative Knowledge Acquired?
A Comparison of Three Learning Scenarios
Timothy J. Nokes (tnokes@uic.edu)
Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology
The University of Illinois at Chicago
1007 West Harrison Street (M/C 285)
Chicago, IL 60607, U.S.A.

Abstract
Several theories of learning have been proposed to account for
the acquisition of abstract, generative knowledge including
schema theory, analogical learning and implicit learning.
However, past research has not compared these three theories
directly. In the present studies we instantiated each theory as a
learning scenario (i.e., direct instruction, analogy training and
implicit training) and then tested all three training groups on a
common problem. Results show that the analogy training
groups and one of the direct instruction groups performed
significantly better than the other groups on problem solving
performance. The findings are interpreted in terms of
opportunity to practice generating a response of the relevant
type.

Theories of Deep Learning
In order to solve complex, novel problems one must be able
to retrieve previously learned information from memory and
apply it to the current situation. For instance, students
learning geometry need to be able to apply mathematical
formulas acquired during study to novel problems
encountered at test. Although surface features of the
problems change (e.g., specific values: a=5 to a=15) the
abstract operators used to solve the problems stay the same
2

2

2

(e.g., the Pythagorean theorem: a + b = c ). Thus, in order
for the knowledge gained from study to be helpful on the test
it must be both abstract and generative. How such deep
knowledge is acquired remains a central question for
researchers in psychology, philosophy and education.
Several theoretical explanations have been proposed as
to the origin of such abstract, generative knowledge
including: schema theory (Marshall, 1995; Thorndike, 1984),
analogical learning (Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard,
1988) and implicit learning (Reber, 1989).
Research on schema theory has shown that abstract
knowledge is constructed during various types of higherorder cognitive activities including text comprehension (e.g.,
Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978; Thorndike, 1977), problem
solving (e.g., Marshall, 1995) and direct instruction (e.g.,
Ohlsson & Hemmerich, 1999; Ohlsson & Regan, in press).
For the purposes of this paper we are not concerned with the
induction hypothesis of schema acquisition but instead with
whether a schema can be taught directly (Ohlsson &

Hemmerich, 1999). Although schema theory has provided
much insight into the nature and form of abstract knowledge
representations (e.g., Bobrow & Collins, 1975) it has done
little to articulate a specific theory for how abstract schemas
are acquired.
A second major theoretical proposal is the analogical
learning hypothesis. Research on analogical learning
suggests that one acquires deep knowledge through a
systematic process in which a person retrieves an analog
from memory and maps the underlying conceptual structure
to a novel problem (Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard,
1988). In a typical analogical learning experiment
participants first solve a source problem (e.g., story
problems: Gick & Holyoak, 1983; or algebra problems:
Reed, 1987) and then solve a test problem that has different
surface features (i.e., a different context) but retains the deep
relational features of the source problem. When participants
are given the hint to use the source problem to solve the test
problem they perform better than a control group who did
not receive prior training, indicating that explicit knowledge
of the prior solution procedure facilitates subsequent problem
solving.
In contrast to the prior two theories research on implicit
learning suggests that knowledge acquisition is a passive,
inductive process that is independent of any intention to learn
(Reber, 1989; Seger, 1994). In the training phase of artificial
grammar learning – a typical implicit learning paradigm –
the participants memorize letter strings that are generated
from an artificial grammar. Participants are not informed of
the rule-based nature of the memorization strings until after
the training phase. In the test phase, the participants are given
a classification task in which they are asked to judge whether
or not new letter strings, half generated by the relevant
grammar and half violating one or more of the rules, are like
those memorized during the training phase. A large amount
of evidence (Reber 1989; Seger; 1994; Stadler & Frensch,
1998) shows that participants perform better than chance in
the test phase, indicating that they have acquired some
knowledge of the underlying grammar.
These three theories present a complicated if not
contradictory picture of knowledge acquisition. Each theory
has a history of empirical support, experimental paradigms
and explanatory problems associated with it. In order to

further explore and understand the relationship between these
theories comparative empirical studies are essential. In the
present studies we examine all three theories via a single
experimental paradigm. This allows us to compare and
examine the type of the knowledge generated by the various
learning scenarios associated with each theory. How does
that knowledge function on subsequent tasks? Is the
knowledge representation abstract? Is it generative?
We instantiate each theory as a different type of learning
scenario (i.e., direct instruction, analogical training and
implicit training) and then test all three training groups on a
common problem, Thurstone’s sequence extrapolation task
(Thurstone & Thurstone, 1941).
Sequence extrapolation problems have been studied
from a cognitive perspective by Kotovsky and Simon (1973)
and Simon (1972), among others. In this type of problem, the
problem solver is given a sequence of symbols (usually
letters) generated in accordance with some complex pattern
and asked to extrapolate it. In order to solve the problem, he
or she must first discover the pattern in the given segment of
the symbol sequence and then articulate that pattern to
generate the next N positions of the sequence.
In the current studies, experiments were divided into a
training phase and a test phase. Participants in the implicit
training condition memorized letter strings that had the same
abstract pattern as that used in the test phase. Participants in
the analogy training condition solved source problems that
had the same abstract pattern as that used in the test
problems. Participants in the instruction condition read a
general tutorial on how to solve sequence extrapolation
problems and studied the abstract rules of the pattern for each
target problem.
In the test phase of the experiments all participants
solved two types of extrapolation problems, a target problem
and a transfer problem. The target problem had the same
deep structure (i.e., the relations between the elements of the
pattern) as that used in the sequences of the training
procedures. The transfer problem was generated from the
target problems by ‘stretching’ relations between letters, e.g.,
“forward 1 step in the alphabet” becomes “forward 2 steps”
and “backwards 1” becomes “backwards 2” (see Table 1).
The goal of the present studies is to examine the nature
and function of the knowledge created by each of the three
training scenarios. If the knowledge gained is generative (i.e.,
can articulate a sequence of temporally related actions) and
abstract (i.e., not bound to surface features) then performance
should be facilitated on the target task. If the knowledge is of
a higher level of abstraction it should facilitate problem
solving performance on the transfer problem.

Experiment 1: Analogy vs. Implicit Training
Experiment 1 compares the effect of different types of
analogical training (i.e., solving 1 problem three times vs.
solving 3 structurally similar problems once) to different
levels of implicit training (i.e., memorizing 6 vs. 18 instances

of the pattern) on problem solving task performance.

Method
Participants One hundred and twenty seven undergraduate
students from the University of Illinois at Chicago
participated in return for course credit.
Materials The target tasks were two sequence
extrapolation problems with a periodicity of six items for
problem 1 and seven items for problem 2. Each task was
instantiated as both a target and transfer problem; see Table
1. Target and transfer problems were related in that they
contain similar over-arching pattern types but differed in the
particular instantiation of the relations (i.e., manipulating
some of the relations of the target pattern by a magnitude of
2 for transfer problems). To enable participants to detect the
pattern, the given segments were 12 items long for task 1 and
14 items long for task 2. That is, they covered two complete
periods of the underlying pattern. The extrapolation
problems were created specifically for this experiment with a
design similar to the problems used by Kotovsky and Simon
(1973).
Table 1. Two sequence extrapolation problems and their
associated transfer problems.
Problem
Type

Given letter or number sequence
& the correct 8-step extrapolation

Problem 1
Target

E F D G C O F G E H D P
G H F I E Q H I

Transfer

E G D I C O G I F K E P
I K H M G Q K M

Problem 2
Target

A C Z D B Y Y D F X G E W W
G I V J H U U J

Transfer

A E Z G C X X G K V M I T T
M Q R S O P P S

There were also three extrapolation training problems
for each target task. The three training problems followed the
exact same pattern as the associated target problem; see
Table 2a for an example. Training problems were
constructed so they do not overlap (i.e., do not share any of
the surface features) with each other or the target problems.
The single analog group was trained on the first of the three
training problems and the multiple analog group was trained
on all three.
In addition, there were 36 letter training strings
consisting of 12 letters for task 1 and 14 letters for task 2,
eighteen strings for each problem. The eighteen strings

associated with each problem followed the exact same
pattern as the given sequence for that problem; see Table 2b
for an example. The low implicit participants were trained on
six strings per task and the high implicit participants were
trained on eighteen strings per task.
Table 2. Two training sequences for Problem 1.
Example
A. Source Problem:

I J H K G S J K I L H T

B. Training String:

M N L O K W N O M P L X

Each participant was tested on a Macintosh computer
with a 14’ color monitor, standard keyboard and mouse. All
stimuli were presented in black 30pt font in the center of the
screen. The experiment was designed and generated using
PsyScope software. Target and transfer problems and
associated training stimuli were counter-balanced across all
conditions.
Design and procedure The participants were randomly
assigned to one of four groups: single analog (n = 25),
multiple analog (n = 23), low implicit (n = 26), high implicit
(n = 23). In addition, a separate control group (n = 30) was
tested on the target and transfer problems to provide a
measure of baseline performance.
In the analogy training groups, participants solved letter
sequence extrapolation training problems that conformed to
the same patterns as those used in the target problems. The
single analog group solved one and the same training
problem three times and the multiple analog group solved
three different training problems once each. Each of the
multiple analog problems had different surface features but
they all shared the same underlying pattern. In both implicit
learning groups, participants memorized letter strings that
conformed to the same patterns as those in the target
extrapolation problems. The low implicit group memorized
six training strings and the high implicit group memorized
eighteen training strings. In the control group participants
received no training.
General procedure. Participants were tested in groups of
1-4 people. The procedure consisted of two cycles. Each
cycle was composed of problem training followed by solving
target and transfer problems.
Procedure for analogy groups. Participants were first
given general instructions on how to solve sequence
extrapolation problems. Next, they were presented with the
first extrapolation training problem. They were given 6
minutes to solve each problem. After participants had
finished solving a problem or max time had elapsed, they
were presented with the next problem. After participants
solved all three training problems they were presented with
the target problem instruction. Target problem instructions
were the same as the training instructions except that they

added the hint that if participants noticed a pattern on any of
the prior problems it would help them solve the target
problem. They were then presented with the target problem
and were given 6 minutes to solve it. Finally, they were
given the transfer problem and instructed to solve it in the
same manner as the target problem. The second cycle
proceeded in the same manner. The entire procedure took
between 60-80 minutes.
Procedure for implicit learning groups. The participants
were instructed to memorize and recall each letter string one
by one; six strings for the low implicit group and eighteen
strings for the high implicit group. They were then given 45
seconds to memorize each string. After 45 seconds the string
disappeared and they were given 30 seconds to recall and
type in the string. After they finished recalling the string or
30 seconds elapsed, participants were presented with the next
string. This procedure was continued through all of the
training strings. Next, participants were instructed to write
down whether or not they noticed a pattern in the
memorization strings. If they noticed a pattern they were
instructed to describe it as best they could. Participants were
then given general instructions on how to solve the sequence
extrapolation problems. They were presented with the target
sequence extrapolation problem and given the hint that if
they noticed a pattern from the memorization strings it might
help them on problem solving. They were given 6 minutes to
solve the problem. Finally, they were given the transfer
problem and were instructed to solve it in the same manner
as the target problem. The second cycle proceeded in the
same way. The entire procedure took approximately 70-90
minutes.

Results
The central question of interest is whether or not the various
training scenarios facilitated performance on the target and
transfer problem tasks. The problem solving score was the
number of letters correctly extrapolated in each problem
solving task. Because the participants were asked to continue
the sequence to eight places their problem solving scores
varied between 0 and 8.
Initial analyses revealed non-significant differences
within both the implicit and analogy groups and all
subsequent analyses collapsed across them, F (1, 46) = .922,
ns and F (1, 47) = .02, ns respectively. Figure 1 shows the
mean problem solving scores for the analogy, implicit and
control groups on target and transfer problems.
A 3 (treatment: analogy vs. implicit vs. control) by 2
(problem-type: target vs. transfer) mixed analysis of variance
(ANOVA) revealed a main effect for both treatment and
problem-type, F (1, 124) = 7.88, MSE = 12.96, p < .05 and F
(1, 124) = 14.26, MSE = 1.86, p < .05 respectively. The
interaction was not significant, F (1, 124) = .32, ns. The main
effect of problem-type shows that the participants performed
better on the target problems than on the transfer problems.
Follow up comparisons on treatment showed that the analogy

Number of Correct Extrapolations

group performed significantly better than both implicit and
control groups, F (1, 95) = 13.77, MSE = 12.35, p < .05 and
F (1, 77) = 8.39, MSE = 14.23, p < .05. The implicit group
did not significantly differ from the control F (1, 76) = 0.02,
ns.
8
Implicit
Analogy
6
Control
4

repeat and identity relations). The high instruction tutorial
had two additional pages of general instruction describing
how to extrapolate or continue sequence patterns. There was
also a general tutorial test that consisted of four recall
questions and two comprehension questions.
In addition, there were two diagrammatic illustrations of
the underlying pattern relations for each of the target
problems as well as two blank diagrammatic recall sheets
(see Table 3 for an example of a diagrammatic pattern
illustration). There were also two distractor tasks that
consisted of three multiplication problems each.
Table 3. A sample diagrammatic pattern illustration.
Example: square boxes represent letter positions

2

forward 1

0

Target

repeat

Transfer
Problem Type

Figure 1: Problem solving as a function of
training condition.

In addition, a simple comparison of target vs. transfer
was conducted for the control group to provide a measure of
baseline performance for problem-type. The analysis
revealed a non-significant difference indicating that control
participants performed equally well on both target and
transfer problems, F (1, 29) = 2.77, ns.
We next compare analogy training to direct instruction.

Experiment 2: Analogy vs. Direct Instruction
Both analogy and implicit learning are indirect training
methods. Is it possible to teach a sequential schema directly,
by simply telling the participants what the pattern is?
Experiment 2 compares different types of analogy training
(single vs. multiple analog training) to different levels of
direct instruction (high vs. low) on problem solving task
performance.

Method
Participants One hundred and nineteen undergraduate
students from the University of Illinois at Chicago
participated in return for course credit.
Materials The test problems and the analogy training
problems were exactly the same as those used in experiment
1.
In addition, there were two extrapolation problem
tutorial booklets, one for low instruction training (12 pages)
and one for high instruction training (14 pages). Both
tutorials consisted of general instructions for how to find
pattern sequences as well as detailed descriptions of the
component relations of patterns (e.g., forward, backward,

forward 2

backward 1

The test problems and analogy training problems were
presented via computer with the same specifications as
experiment 1. Direct instruction training material was
presented on sheets or in booklet form. Target and transfer
problems and associated training stimuli were counterbalanced across all conditions.
Design and procedure The participants were randomly
assigned to one of four groups: single analog (n = 30),
multiple analog (n = 31), low instruction (n = 28), high
instruction (n = 30). The same control condition (n = 30)
was used from experiment 1 as a measure of baseline
performance.
In the instruction training conditions participants first
read general tutorials, then memorized and recalled the
abstract patterns for each target task. The only difference
between high and low instruction groups was that the high
instruction participants were given two additional pages in
the tutorial which provided specific step by step instructions
for how to extrapolate a problem.
Procedure for analogy groups. Procedure was exactly the
same as in experiment 1.
Procedure for direct instruction groups. Participants
were tested in groups of 1-4 people. The procedure consisted
of two cycles, a training phase and a test phase. Before the
training phase cycle all participants were given the general
tutorial text to read (max time allowed = 18 minutes) after
which they were given the tutorial test (max time = 6
minutes). At the beginning of the training cycle participants
were given 3 minutes to memorize the first diagrammatic
pattern illustration. Next, participants were presented with

the diagrammatic blank recall sheet and instructed to recall
and write down the relations of the pattern (max time = 3
minutes). Participants were then given the distractor task
(max time = 3 minutes). Next, participants were presented
with the general instructions for the test problems. They were
then given 6 minutes to solve the target problem. Finally,
they were given the transfer problem and were instructed to
solve it in the same manner as the target problem. The
second cycle proceeded in the same way. The entire
procedure took approximately 70-90 minutes.

Results

Number of Correct Extrapolations

Again, the question of interest pursued here is whether or not
training facilitated problem solving performance on the test
tasks. The problem solving score was calculated in the same
manner as experiment 1.
Initial analysis revealed a non-significant difference
between analogy groups and all subsequent analyses
collapsed across them, F (1, 59) = .51, ns. Figure 2 shows the
mean problem solving scores for the analogy, high
instruction, low instruction and control groups on target and
transfer problems.
8

Low Instruct

High Instruct

Analogy

Control

Target

Transfer

6

4

2

0

Problem Type
Figure 2: Problem solving as a function of
training condition.

A 4 (treatment: analogy vs. high instruction vs. low
instruction vs. control) by 2 (problem-type: target vs.
transfer) mixed ANOVA revealed a main effect for both
treatment and problem-type, F (1, 145) = 6.18, MSE = 14.45,
p < .05 and F (1, 145) = 18.56, MSE = 1.49, p < .05
respectively. The interaction was not significant, F (1, 145) =
.70, ns. The main effect of problem-type shows that the
participants performed better on the target problems than on
the transfer problems. Follow up comparisons on treatment
showed that both the analogy and high instruction group
performed significantly better than the low instruction and
control groups, F (1, 87) = 9.19, MSE = 15.13, p < .05, F (1,

89) = 13.11, MSE = 14.77, p < .05, and F (1, 56) = 4.37,
MSE = 13.94, p < .05, F (1, 58) = 6.78, MSE = 13.43, p < .05
respectively. The analogy group did not significantly differ
from the high instruction group and the low instruction group
did not significantly differ from control, F (1, 89) = .60, ns
and F (1, 56) = .15, p = ns respectively.

Discussion
So how is abstract, generative knowledge acquired? The
present study suggests that there are at least two ways to
acquire such knowledge, one through analogical problem
solving and the other through direct instruction.
Experiments 1 and 2 showed that participants in the
analogy and high instruction training conditions performed
better than participants in the implicit, low instruction and
control conditions on both target and transfer problems.
Target problem performance indicates that the knowledge
acquired from analogy and high instruction training was both
generative, in that the representation could be used to
continue a sequence of temporally related actions, and
abstract, in that the knowledge was flexible and could be
applied to novel stimuli. This result supports typical findings
on analogical transfer in problem solving (e.g., Gentner &
Markman, 1998; Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Reed, 1987).
The analogy and high instruction groups also performed
better than implicit, low instruction and control groups on the
transfer problems indicating that the knowledge
representation was generalizable to similar types of problem
structures. However, there was a main effect for problemtype showing that analogy and high instruction participants
performed better on target than on transfer problems. In
contrast, the control group performed no differently on target
than on transfer. These results show that the difference in
performance on the target and transfer problem was a
function of knowledge gained from training and not of
differences in problem stimulus.
These results suggest at least two plausible explanations.
One possibility is that some of the participants in the analogy
and high instruction groups acquired a knowledge
representation of a higher-level abstraction that facilitated
their performance on the transfer problem whereas the others
did not. Individual differences within the groups would
account for the acquisition of a more abstract representation
for only a portion of the participants. A second possibility is
that participants in addition to learning the abstract pattern
from the training stimuli also learned general problem
solving heuristics for solving sequence extrapolation
problems (i.e., employing specific pattern finding strategies
such as searching for repetitions or backward relations). In
this case, although knowledge of the specific abstract pattern
facilitated performance on target problems it failed to
transfer to the transfer problems and participants resorted to
more general (and less accurate) problem solving heuristics.
Why did analogy and high instruction training facilitate
problem solving and the other training conditions fail? The

prior analysis of the properties of a successful knowledge
representation – abstraction and generativity – also reveals
the potential components for failure in problem solving
including failures of generativity and abstraction.
The failure of implicit training can be explained by
either of the above components. Previous research does not
provide definitive support for either component. For
example, in a prior study we investigated implicit learning in
sequence extrapolation problems and found that the
knowledge created from the training procedures was of a
moderate level of abstraction but was also potentially
generative (Nokes & Ohlsson, 2000). Further research is
needed to differentiate between each of these components.
The reason for the failure of low instruction can be
investigated by examining the differences between the high
and low instruction training materials. The only difference
between the two training scenarios was that the high
instruction tutorial had two additional pages of instruction
describing in detail how to extrapolate sequence patterns.
This description included one example problem that was
worked through step by step in detail. This difference in
training materials suggests that the low instruction group
failed to construct a knowledge representation that was
generative.
This hypothesis is also supported by other results in the
literature. For example, Ohlsson and Regan (in press) used
an intervention paradigm to teach participants several
abstract concepts relating to the structure of DNA and
facilitated subsequent use of those concepts on a discovery
problem. They had participants practice generating their own
concrete examples of the concepts in the training phase in
addition to being given an example from the experimenter.
Since low instruction participants in the current study never
practiced articulating the abstract schema this component of
the knowledge representation was not strengthened.
Thus a commonality that ties both implicit and low
instruction together is the lack of practice in articulating the
abstract schema. Although both learning scenarios had
participants memorizing and recalling exemplars, whether
they were letter strings or abstract rules, the participants
never studied or practiced using these knowledge
representations. In contrast, the analogy groups practiced
generating pattern sequences on three separate occasions and
the high instruction group studied pattern articulation in
depth. It is proposed here that it is the practice of pattern
articulation of an abstract schema that gives the analogy and
high instruction groups their advantage over the other two
learning scenarios.

References
Bobrow, D., & Collins, A. (Eds.), (1975). Representation
and understanding. New York: Academic Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy, Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.

Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1998). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. In P. Thagard (Ed.), Mind
readings (pp. 127-156). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping
by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295355.
Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. (1978). Toward a model of text
comprehension and production. Psychological Review,
85, 363-394.
Kotovsky, K., & Simon, H. (1973). Empirical tests of a
theory of human acquisition of concepts for sequential
patterns. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 399-424.
Marshall, S. (1995). Schemas in problem solving.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Nokes, T. J., & Ohlsson, S. (2000). An inquiry into the
function of implicit knowledge and its role in problem
solving. In L. R. Gleitman and A. K. Joshi, (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty Second Annual meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 829-834), Mahaw, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Ohlsson, S., & Hemmerich, J. (1999). Articulating an
explanatory schema: A preliminary model and
supporting results. In M. Hahn and S. Stoness, (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty First Annual meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 490-495), Mahaw, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Ohlsson, S., & Regan, S. (in press). A function for abstract
ideas in conceptual learning and discovery. Cognitive
Science Quarterly.
Reber, A. S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 219235.
Reed, S. K. (1987). A structure mapping model for word
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 13, 127-139.
Seger, C. A. (1994). Implicit Learning. Psychological
Bulletin, 115, 163-196.
Simon, H. (1972). Complexity and the representation of
patterned sequences of symbols. Psychological Review,
79, 369-382.
Stadler, M., & Frensch, P, (Eds.), (1998). Handbook of
implicit learning. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Thorndike, P. W. (1977). Cognitive structures in
comprehension and memory of narrative discourse.
Cognitive Psychology, 9, 77-110.
Thorndike, P. W. (1984). Applications of schema theory in
cognitive research. In J. R. Anderson & S. M. Kosslyn
(Eds.), Tutorials in learning and memory: Essays in
honor of Gordon Bower (pp. 167-192). New York:
Freeman & Company.
Thurstone, L. & Thurstone, T. (1941). Factorial studies in
intelligence. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

