UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Imagery, Context Availabilty, Contextual Constraint and Abstractness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9tm6p2rd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Wiemer-Hastings, Katja
Krug, Jan
Xu, Xu

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Imagery, Context Availability, Contextual Constraint and Abstractness
Katja Wiemer-Hastings (K ATJA@NIU.EDU)
Jan Krug (JKDKRUG@YAHOO.COM)
Xu Xu (Z015504@STUDENTS.NIU.EDU)
Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL 60115, USA

Abstract
A constraint-based theory of abstractness was
investigated according to which abstractness of entities is
a function of (i) perceptual observability and (ii)
characteristics of contextual constraints. Participants
performed ratings of context availability, imagery, and
abstractness for 36 nouns that varied in abstractness and
familiarity. The ratings were used to compare the
predictions of abstractness ratings by context
availability, dual coding theory and the constraint-based
approach outlined in this paper. We found that only
constraints explain variation of perceived abstractness
for abstract concepts, whereas context availability and
imagery are good predictors of the dichotomous
distinction of concrete-abstract, and of variations of
concreteness for concrete concepts only. A second study
shows that introspection-based constraints are most
critical for abstractness ratings.
Implications are
discussed.

Abstractness
Every-day communication is pervaded by references to
abstract entities, such as explanation, regret, and
intention. Typically, we think of an entity as abstract
when it cannot be perceived. However, there are no
clear-cut criteria for what makes entities abstract or
concrete. Several theoretical approaches exist to
predicting perceived abstractness. This paper compares
three theories: dual-coding theory, context-availability
theory, and our approach, called the contextual
constraint theory.
We propose that perceived abstractness depends on
two factors. First, entities are abstract or concrete,
depending on whether they are physical in nature (i.e.,
perceivable through vision, touch, etc.). Second, within
these groups, abstractness varies according to more
specific types of information. Together, we call this the
two-factor model of abstractness. We will start by
reviewing the plausibility of the dichotomy of abstract
and concrete, as proposed by the first factor. The
remainder of this paper will address the factors
underlying abstractness variation within the groups of
abstract versus concrete entities.

Abstract and
Continuum?

Concrete:

Dichotomy

or

Concrete and abstract nouns are commonly defined by
reference to perceivability: Concrete entities are
considered to be physical entities with characteristic
shapes, parts, materials, etc., whereas abstract entities
lack physical attributes (e.g., Crystal, 1995). The first
proposed factor follows this broad distinction.
Some entities challenge the notion of a dichotomy of
abstract and concrete entities. Examples for entities that
cannot clearly be classified as abstract or concrete are
government, officer, or anger. A government is abstract
in that we cannot really point to who or what it is, but it
is also concrete in that it involves a number of specific,
concrete entities, such as people, buildings, and
particular locations. Officer is a social agent term,
referring to concrete individuals with characteristics
defined by a particular social role or profession. Their
roles are not obvious characteristics, but are inferred
from more complex information, such as behavior
patterns in specific situations.
Finally, emotion terms such as anger are a special
group of entities. Emotions can be perceived within
individuals who experience them. Outwardly, we can
perceive emotion through nonverbal and verbal
behavior. Still, emotions are qualitatively different
from concrete entities such as cups and office chairs. In
fact, they have been proposed to constitute a distinct
group from both concrete and abstract entities
(Altarriba, Bauer, & Benvenuto, 1999). The alternative
view suggested by these challenges is a contiuum view,
according to which all entities vary in concreteness, and
the distinction of abstract versus concrete is an
oversimplification.
A simple way to test both views is to ask people to
rate the concreteness of a large sample of entities,
including abstract and concrete ones. If concreteness is
one dimension and all entities vary along this
dimension, then ratings should be distributed pretty
evenly across the entire scale. In contrast, if abstract
and concrete entities were two distinct classes of
entities, ratings should fall into two clusters. There
would be a lot of entities rated as abstract, versus a lot
of entities rated as concrete. That is, the distribution of

concreteness ratings would assume the shape of a
bimodal distribution.
What is found is, in fact, that the ratings form two
fairly distinct clusters with a different mode each. One
mode is centered over the abstract half of the scale, the
other mode is located over the middle of the concrete
half. This finding has first been reported for 2172
words by Nelson and Schreiber (1992), and has been
replicated here for an independently sampled set of
1660 nouns (see Figure 1).

factor. This intends to replace the commonsense notion
that abstract concepts get more abstract to the degree
that they get less perceivable (concrete). Second, it is
quite likely that the difference between abstract and
concrete is not so much a quantitative distinction, but a
qualitative one. That is, it is conceivable that the factor
or factors that make abstract entities more or less
abstract are distinct from the factors that make concrete
entities differ in concreteness. To identify possible
factors, we next review theories that have been
proposed to understand abstractness.

200

Theories of Abstractness
Theories pertinent to explaining abstractness include
dual coding theory, context-availability theory, and
contextual constraint theory. The predictions of each
are discussed in turn.

100

Dual-Coding Theory / Imagery

0

0
0.
64
0
0.
60
0
0.
56
0
0.
52
0
0.
48
0
0.
44
0
0.
40
0
0.
36
0
0.
32
0
0.
28
0
0.
24
0
0.
20

Figure 1
Distribution of concreteness ratings for 1660 nouns
The bimodal distribution is consistent with the view
that abstract and concrete entities fall into two big
clusters according to particular characteristics (e.g.,
tangibility or visibility). It is also obvious that, within
these two clusters, entities vary in concreteness. What
factors are causing this variance? The remainder of this
paper addresses this question.

Variation in Abstractness
What information underlies the variance of abstractness
in abstract entities? If an entity cannot be perceived, it
is abstract. The lack of concreteness can account for it
being abstract, but the same information cannot explain
why some abstract entities are more abstract than
others. For example, lack of perceptual information
cannot explain why principle is rated more abstract than
idea.
Our research aims to specify what factor(s) cause
concrete entities to vary in perceived concreteness, and
what factor(s) cause variance in the perceived
abstractness of abstract concepts. Our studies are
motivated by two lines of reasoning. The first directly
follows from the two-factor model of abstractness. We
do not think that perceivability accounts for the entire
variation in concreteness. Instead, we assume a second

The dual-coding model (Paivio, 1986) is one of the
oldest theories about differences of abstract and
concrete concepts. It proposes that the fundamental
difference between abstract and concrete concepts is
that only the concrete ones they are associated with
imagery (henceforth IM) information, whereas both
abstract and concrete concepts can be processed in a
language-like code. The availability of two codes for
the representation and processing of concrete concepts
results in their processing advantage in many tasks, such
as comprehension, word recognition and recall.
Applying the dual-coding theory to the prediction of
perceived abstractness is fairly straightforward. The
model is essentially dichotomous in its division of
abstract and concrete, but one could derive the
prediction from it that more concrete entities have
higher imageability. If the dual-coding theory can be
applied to variation of abstractness within the group of
abstract entities, then one should find that abstract
entities rated as most abstract are the entities that elicit
the least imagery.

Context Availability Theory
The context availability theory (henceforth CA;
Schwanenflugel & Shoben, 1983) argues that it is easier
to think of a context for concrete objects than for
abstract ones. The issue here is not whether a context
can come to mind at all, but how long it takes to retrieve
or construct it based on information in memory.
Typical studies instruct participants to rate CA based on
the time it takes to think of a context. If it takes a long
time, then the rating should be low. If they can think of
a context immediately, they should give a high rating.

Research has shown that CA ratings can account for a
lot of effects labeled as concreteness effects, often even
better than concreteness ratings themselves. If abstract
words are more difficult to process because of less
available context, then the prediction for abstractness
ratings is that a word will be rated the more abstract, the
less context is available for it.

Evidence Related to Context Availability
Rated CA has been shown to correlate highly with rated
abstractness. Thus, it may offer a theoretical basis for
predicting abstractness. However, Altarriba et al.
(1999) found that the correlation of CA with
concreteness differed for abstract, concrete, and
emotion terms. Interestingly, the correlation was
highest for concrete words (r = 0.68), second for
emotion terms (r = 0.41), and lowest for abstract terms
(r = 0.25). All three correlations were significant, but it
is clear that the concreteness ratings for abstract words
were only weakly related to CA, in comparison with the
other groups.
The results cannot be applied directly to this work,
because the sample used by Altarriba et al. was not
limited to nouns. Another goal of the present study was
to compare the correlations of ratings separately for
abstract versus concrete entities, to examine whether the
findings of Altarriba et al. hold up for a sample of
nouns exclusively.

Contextual Constraint Theory
Abstract entities are associated with contexts
(Schwanenflugel, 1991; Wiemer-Hastings & Graesser,
1998).
They “apply” to, or are manifested in,
situations. This application is contingent on particular
events and circumstances in the situation. For example,
an idea is contingent on an agent with a mental event,
which will be expressed verbally or in some kind of
behavior, and can be evaluated. An idea is thought of in
one moment, expressed in another, maybe rejected in a
third.
As such, many abstract entities have
characteristics akin to verbs: they are related to
observable events in a situation, which are defined
temporally.
Depending on the situation aspects that an abstract
entity is contingent on, it can occur in many or few
kinds of context. Roughly, the more particular situation
elements are necessarily involved in its manifestations,
the more constrained its occurrence is. An entity that is
contingent only on few, and rather abstract situation
characteristics (such as the presence of some entity) can
occur in all kinds of situations.
Do contextual constraints affect the abstractness of
abstract entities? Conceivably, an entity that is not
strongly constrained is more abstract than an entity that

is contingent on a fairly extensive set of constraints.
Additionally, entities that only occur when concrete
situation aspects are present may be less abstract than
entities that are contingent on abstract, unobservable, or
complex temporal elements of situations, or of
information that is only accessible to introspection
(such as a mental process). To test this contextual
constraint theory, the materials for the study were coded
for contextual constraints.
Constraints Naturally, situations vary. For example,
ideas occur in various settings, through different agents,
related to different problems, and varying in quality.
However, the underlying constraints, such as the
presence of an agent, remain largely unvaried. To
examine the influence of such constraints, a list of
contextual constraints was derived from a simplistic
situation model, as exhaustive as possible. The list
consists of agents, objects, “issues”, mental states,
relations, and temporal information. The constraints
were selected to be relevant to abstract concepts (see
Table 1). These constraints are not intended to describe
situations with all the richness of information they
contain, but to identify abstract building blocks of
situations, without regard to their specific contents.
Table 1: Contextual constraints on abstract entities
Concrete elements Introspective elements
Agent
Goal
Agent 2
Knowledge / memory
Group (people)
Belief / attitude
Object
Feeling
Location
Mental event / thought
Utterance
Relations
Action
Agent-agent
Object attribute
Agent-other people
Nonverbal behavior Agent-object
Situation elements Agent-thematic subject
Issue / topic
Relation between two entities
Obstacle
Utterance-issue relation
Temporal aspects
Relevance of past
Relevance of future
Changes between time slices (Event)
Continuity of change between time slices (Process)
Continuity of state between time slices (State)
Time-adjacency of events (causality)
Such constraints can play a powerful role in the
processing of abstract concepts. Assuming that context
information must be accessed to comprehend the
concept (e.g., Schwanenflugel, 1991; Schwanenflugel &
Shoben, 1983), constraints can be used to guide the

mental construction of a context example. As such,
they functionally resemble schemata and scripts
(Schank & Abelson, 1977). Constraints fall into several
groups, including concrete situation elements, object
attributes, agent characteristics, situation elements,
relations,
and
information
about
temporal
characteristics and sequences.

Study 1: Comparing Accounts for
Abstractness
The experiment systematically compared to what extent
different theories can predict abstractness ratings.
Participants were asked to make ratings of the predictor
variables for a set of 36 words.

Materials
Words were randomly sampled from about 2000 nouns
collected from the MRC2 database (Coltheart, 1981).
An exhaustive search was made for nouns for which
frequency estimates (Kucera & Francis, 1967),
familiarity, and abstractness ratings (Gilhooly & Logie,
1980; Paivio, Yuille, & Madigan, 1968; Toglia &
Battig, 1978) were available.
The sample was divided into 6 sets of different levels of
abstractness, based on the abstractness ratings from the
MRC2 database. The range was divided into six equalsized parts, regardless of the number of words falling
into each section. Words were matched in familiarity
across groups to control for familiarity effects (see
Kacinik, Shears, & Chiarello, 2000). From each of the
groups, six words were randomly selected to be
included in the study. The words were the concrete
words bass, beehive, blossom, hairpin, insect,
labyrinth, lace, mackerel, morass, nectar, owl, pest,
prize, sedative, tree, venom, vine, and zone and the
abstract words aspect, day, daybreak, desperation,
emancipation, exception, formation, happiness, hope,
inaction, ingratitude, jeopardy, mischief, pity,
possession, removal, saga, and story.

Instructions
Instructions varied to elicit different kinds of
information associated with the words presented.
Participants
performed
abstractness
ratings,
imageability ratings, and CA ratings of all 36 words.
The words were presented in random order in each task.
All the ratings were made on a 7-point scale.
The predictions of the dual-coding theory were tested
by having participants rate the imageability of each
entity. For CA, we used instructions used in previous
research. We asked participants to rate how difficult it
would be to mentally generate a context for the entity.
For all tasks, participants were encouraged to make

ratings according to their personal understanding of the
words.

Results
Manipulation Check
The word sample was constructed based on the MRC2
abstractness ratings.
We checked whether the
perception of our participants agreed with these
abstractness ratings. Abstractness ratings performed by
the participants were highly correlated with the MRC2
abstractness ratings (r = 0.94, p < 0.001). This
indicates that participants in our study in fact perceived
entities selected as most abstract as most abstract, and
the most concrete entities as most concrete.

Predicting Abstractness of Overall Sample
Multiple regression analyses for the three predictors
found that CA (r = 0.66) and IM (r = 0.77) both
predicted concreteness ratings for the entire sample (p <
0.01), and for the concrete sub-sample. Ratings for
these two variables were also significantly different for
abstract versus concrete words in t-tests (t (34) = 4.41, p
< 0.01 for CA and t (34) = 6.33, p < 0.01 for IM.) The
number of contextual constraints was not a significant
predictor; however, the percentage of abstract
constraints was a good predictor (r = 0.47, p < 0.05).
Some of the predictor variables, especially ratings for
CA and IM, were highly correlated. Therefore, a
stepwise regression with all predictors was performed to
examine their relative contribution towards explaining
the variance in abstractness ratings. Only 23 cases were
valid for this analysis because for some entities, none of
the contextual constraints applied.
Predictors in this analysis included (i) CA ratings, (ii)
IM ratings, (iii) the number of contextual constraints
(CC), and the percentage of abstract constraints (ACC).
The two highest predictors, which both contributed
significantly to the regression, were IM and ACC.
Together, these variables explained more than half of
the variance (R2 = 0.56). The change in the amount of
variance explained by IM was 0.36 (F (1, 21) = 11.99, p
< 0.01); the change due to ACC was 0.2 (F (1, 20) =
8.89, p < 0.01). The other variables did not add any
significant changes in the amount of variance explained.

Predicting Abstractness of Abstract Sample
The only substantial predictor for ratings on the abstract
nouns was the percentage of abstract contextual
constraints (marginally significant; r = -0.47, p = 0.52).
This measure was computed as the percentage of
constraints for an entity that are not directly observable,
such as mental / introspective constraints and relations.

This suggests that constraints play an important role
for abstract entities over and beyond CA and IM.
However, the number of words in this study was very
limited. A second study was conducted to examine
whether this finding holds up for a large set of abstract
entities. Further, the second study involved entities of
relatively high abstractness only, with less variance than
in Study 1. Abstractness ranged from 2.2 to 3.6 on a 7point scale, with a mean of 2.88 (SD=0.35). The result
is a critical test of whether contextual constraints are
discriminating enough to predict variation at such a fine
level.

Study 2: Constraints and Abstractness
A total of 121 abstract nouns were coded for the
contextual constraints described above. The coding
indicated whether each constraint was by necessity part
of a context in which the entity could occur. For
example, determination requires an agent (who is
determined), an agent goal, a certain attitude, and a
stretch of time during which the attitude and goal do not
vary (a state). Coding reliability on a 25% subset of the
words, measured as correlation and Cohen’s kappa, was
significant (p<0.01) for three independent coders.
Based on the codes, we computed the number of
constraints and the percentage of abstract constraints for
each noun. Additionally, the codes were summarized
across types of constraints to test whether particular
kinds of constraints would yield particularly strong or
weak predictions. The constraint groups were (1)
concrete entities, (2) temporal constraints, (3) relational
constraints, and (4) introspection-related constraints.

Results
All measures were submitted to a correlation with
abstractness ratings from the MRC2 database. The
astonishing result was that only the group of
introspection-based constraints was significantly
correlated (r=-0.21, p<0.05). This group includes
mental constraints (goals, feelings, attitudes and beliefs,
knowledge, and thoughts) and relational constraints
between agents and other agents, objects, or issues. The
percentage of abstract constraints yielded the second
highest correlation (r=-0.14), but it was not significant.
The finding for introspective constraints is interesting
because it supports the recent proposal by Barsalou
(1999) that introspection plays a central role in the
processing of abstract concepts.
Overall, the result is consistent with the finding in
study 1 that constraints play a role in our perception of
abstractness. Importantly, the second study shows that
constraints -- at least some of them – are good
predictors even when fine discrimination is required.

Discussion
The results show that IM and CA are limited in
explaining abstractness variations. Whereas ratings for
both can account for the differences between abstract
and concrete in general, they do not explain the
variance in abstractness for different abstract concepts.
This replicated the finding by Altarriba et al. (1999).
The number of contextual constraints did not
significantly predict abstractness ratings, but the
abstractness of the constraints was a relatively strong
predictor.
The findings are consistent with the two-factor model
of abstractness, according to which abstractness and
concreteness are determined by two different kinds of
information. For concrete entities, both CA and IM
were good predictors of the variation of ratings. For
abstract concepts, the most critical type of information
was the type of contextual constraint involved.
Research focusing on abstract concepts, rather than
mere differences between concrete and abstract
concepts, should presumably not be conducted on the
basis of the assumptions made by CA and IM alone,
since apparently these theories account mostly for the
differences of the dichotomous classes of abstract and
concrete entities.
Research aiming to reveal
characteristics of abstract entities should additionally
take into account information that is specifically
relevant to them, such as a system of context constraints
that may guide our identification of these entities in
context. The present results suggest that introspective
processes and information, and to some extent abstract
constraints in general, may be a good candidate for this
abstract concept-specific information.
A system of constraints such as the one presented in
Table 1 may further be useful in investigations of
context effects, as they have been reported in previous
research on abstract concepts. For example, some
studies on CA effects produced the inconsistent result
that abstract concepts were not processed faster when
presented in context. A principled way to predict what
context information is relevant to an abstract entity may
account for such findings: Perhaps, the abstract words
were presented in contexts that did not instantiate the
relevant constraints.

Concrete versus Abstract
Maybe one of the most interesting implications of the
findings is that constraints put the relevant information
outside of the rated entity. That is, it is not an aspect of
the entity itself that makes it abstract, but it is the
abstractness of the constraints on situations in which it
is used. This point offers a nice bridge to the CA
theory, which argues that abstract concepts are abstract

because less context for their processing is available in
memory.
The constraints may offer an explanation for this
phenomenon. The more abstract the constraints are, the
less guidance we have in constructing a mental context
(or a simulation, see Barsalou, 1999). The constraints
are there but they leave open most aspects of the
concrete context. For example, the concept comparison
requires (among other abstract constraints) the presence
of two entities to be compared. The constraint does not
dictate these entities to be of any particular nature, thus,
they could be people, essays, houses, laws, feelings, etc.
In the case of a less abstract entity, such as arrival,
the constraints involved are of a more concrete nature,
and thus more effectively constrain the number of
contexts we could construct to process the concept. An
arrival involves an agent, an action (movement), and a
particular location that the agent moves towards. These
constraints can readily be used to simulate a fairly
concrete situation in which an arrival takes place.

Features and Constraints
An interesting thought to pursue in future research is
that features may fulfill the same function for concrete
entities as abstract contextual constraints do for abstract
entities. Thus, it is possible that the number of features
/ concreteness of features decrease from the concrete to
the abstract pole, whereas the abstractness of the
contextual constraints decreases from the abstract to the
concrete end.

Familiarity Effects
This study controlled for familiarity effects through
strategic sampling. Future research could examine an
interesting question in connection to CA: It is likely that
highly familiar concepts are represented with default
contexts, which can easily be accessed, whereas
contexts for other concepts have to be constructed.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Xu Xu, Jan Krug, and Priscilla
Fernandez for assistance with material construction,
data collection, and constraint coding, and to Larry
Barsalou for productive discussions of some of the
ideas reported here.

References
Altarriba, J., Bauer, L.M., & Benvenuto, C. (1999).
Concreteness, context availability, and imageability
ratings and word associations for abstract, concrete,
and emotion words. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 31, 578-602.

Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic
Database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 33A, 497-505.
Crystal, D. (1995). The Cambridge encyclopedia of the
English language. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Gilhooly, K.J., & Logie, R.H. (1980). Age of
acquisition, imagery, concreteness, familiarity and
ambiguity measures for 1944 words. Behaviour
Research Methods and Instrumentation, 12, 395-427.
Kacinik, N., Shears, C., & Chiarello, C. (2000).
Familiarity for nouns and verbs: not the same as, and
better than, frequency. In L.R. Gleitman & A.K.
Joshi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p.
1035). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kucera and Francis, W.N. (1967). Computational
Analysis of Present-Day American English.
Providence: Brown University Press.
Nelson, D.L., & Schreiber, T.A. (1992). Word
concreteness and word structure as independent
determinants of recall. Journal of Memory and
Language, 31, 237-260.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual
coding approach. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Paivio, A., Yuille, J.C., & Madigan, S.A. (1968).
Concreteness, imagery and meaningfulness values for
925 words. Journal of Experimental Psychology
Monograph Supplement, 76 (3, part 2).
Schank, R.C., & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans,
goals, and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Schwanenflugel, P. (1991) Contextual constraint and
lexical processing.
In G. B. Simpson (Ed.),
Understanding word and sentence. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Schwanenflugel, P.J., & Shoben, E.J. (1983).
Differential context effects in the comprehension of
abstract and concrete verbal materials. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 9, 82-102.
Toglia, M.P. and Battig, W.R. (1978). Handbook of
Semantic Word Norms. New York: Erlbaum.
Wiemer-Hastings, K., & Graesser, A.C. (1998).
Abstract noun classification: A neural network
approach. Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1036-1042).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

