UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inferences About Personal Identity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15t6g47n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Blok, Sergey
Newman, George
Behr, Jennifer
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inferences About Personal Identity
Sergey Blok (s-blok@northwestern.edu)
George Newman (g-newman@northwestern.edu)
Jennifer Behr (jennifer.behr@yale.edu)
Lance J. Rips (rips@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University,
Evanston, Illinois 60208 USA
Abstract

Features of Person Identity
We investigate the features people use in making inferences
about continuity of individual persons. Using a transformation paradigm, we show that people weigh both continuity of
the brain and continuity of mental content. Across experiments, we document instances in which participants are more
likely to assert individual continuity than continuity of personhood. We discuss these results in terms of a hierarchical
view of concepts and philosophical work on personal identity.

Introduction
People are sensitive to the effects that transformations have
on membership in basic-level categories (e.g., Gelman &
Wellman, 1991; Keil, 1989; Rips, 1989). For example, Rips
(1989) asked participants to read stories about creatures of
one category (e.g., birds) that came to resemble those of
another (e.g., insects). If the transformation was due to accidental factors, participants believed that the creature remained a member of the original category. If the
transformation was part of normal maturation, however,
participants judged the creature a member of the second
category. In general, transformations that alter an object’s
core properties also tend to change the object’s category,
while transformations that alter an object’s surface or
incidental properties tend to preserve its category.
Despite the relatively large number of studies that address
questions of category membership continuity, there have
been few studies addressing reasoning about individual continuity (see Hall, 1998, Johnson, 1990 and Liittschwager,
1994, for exceptions in the developmental literature). The
central question is how we decide that a particular individual – for example, my dog Fido – is the same individual
(still Fido) across transformations. This question is potentially different from the one about membership – whether
this individual is still a dog.
We investigate here two issues concerning reasoning
about individuals. First, we explore the kinds of features
people use in judging continuity of identity. Second, we
contrast the ways in which people reason about class membership and about identity continuity.

What properties does a person at time t1 need to share with
one at time t2 in order for that individual to be the same at
both temporal markers? In making such judgments, people
may be phenomenalists, relying on continuity of appearance.
In a preliminary experiment, we created stories that varied
the type of transformation that a hypothetical target person
undergoes. One set of participants -- the Plastic Surgery
group -- read a scenario about Jim, a male accountant, who
receives plastic surgery to alter his appearance cosmetically
to resemble that of Marsha, a female actress. Another set of
participants -- the Brain Transplant group -- read a similar
story in which Jim’s brain is replaced with that of Marsha.
After reading the story, both groups supplied judgments of
Jim’s identity change – whether the individual was still Jim
or had become Marsha after surgery. Results indicated that a
greater proportion of participants in the Brain Transplant
group believed Jim’s identity had changed than in the Plastic Surgery group (45% and 15%, respectively, 2(1, 39) =
4.29, p < .05).
These results suggest that changes in appearance are ordinarily not enough to warrant change in identity. The finding
parallels earlier studies of natural kinds that show that people tend to reject mere appearance as evidence for category
membership when appearance conflicts with deeper properties of the category in question. It has often been suggested
that natural kinds’ hidden, causally central properties are
used for categorization and induction (Ahn, 1998; Gelman
& Hirschfeld, 1999), while surface features such as appearance are used for similarity judgments (Keil, 1989; Rips,
1989). But although our results hint that our participants are
not folk-phenomenalists, they leave open the question of
what criteria they do use to assess personal identity.
The question of criteria for identity is one of the oldest in
metaphysics. Writers on the physicalist side (e.g., Aristotle,
Wiggins) argue that continuity of the body, or, more importantly, the brain, is critical to identity. According to this
view, a person P2 at time t2 is the same person as P1 at t1 if

P2 has the brain of P11. Philosophers arguing from a functionalist position (e.g., Locke) propose that what matters for
identity is not the physical brain, but rather the mental content – the person’s unique memories, habits, and personality.
If people are folk-physicalists, then a brain transplant that
does not preserve the mental content of the original person
should be judged to be as person-preserving as a transplant
that retains the original memories. We test this hypothesis in
Experiment 1. In Experiment 2 we test the alternative hypothesis that people are folk-functionalists.

Individuals and Hierarchies
A prevalent assumption in the cognitive-psychology literature on categories is that individuals inherit properties of the
categories to which they belong. For example, if Fido is a
dog, then properties of dogs are true of Fido. (However, see
Sloman, 1998, for some exceptions.)
A number of philosophical positions also imply that
judgments of identity (Fido vs. Rover) and category membership (dog vs. cat) are related. According to these accounts, criteria of identity for an object (whether phenomenal, physical, or functional) are given by membership in a
category to which the object belongs (e.g., Geach, 1962;
Gupta, 1980; Wiggins, 1980). If a dog, Fido, is somehow
transformed so that it is no longer a dog, it must be true that
it is no longer the same individual. In some of these theories
(Geach, 1962), different categories to which Fido belongs
(e.g., dog vs. pet) yield different criteria of identity, whereas
in others (Wiggins, 1980) there can be only one set of criteria. In the experiments that follow, we show that people’s
reasoning about continuity of identity need not follow any
obvious category. Instead, participants sometimes rely on
distinct sets of features when reasoning about continuity of
identity and continuity of category membership.

Experiment 1: Memories and Causality
One goal of Experiment 1 was to determine whether participants perceive continuity of memories as necessary for identity. For the purposes of this paper, we consider “memories”
to be unique sets of personal mental representations.
We presented stories that manipulate whether a target person undergoing a brain transplant retains or loses memories
in the process. If what matters for identity is continuity of
physical parts, such as the brain, then participants should
perceive brain transplants that retain memories and those
that lose memories as equally conducive to sameness of
identity. By contrast, if continuity of memories is essential
to continuity of identity, then a brain transplant that retains
memories should be more likely to elicit perceptions of
sameness than a transplant that does not retain memories.
We also varied whether the memories in question could
affect the person’s behavior. Because the more essential
features of concepts may be those that are causally central
1

A qualified physicalist position need not require strict sameness of matter, just that there be an unbroken chain of intermediate
states between the matter that makes up the body now and the matter that made it up in the past.

(Ahn, 1998), we expected memories that have causal efficacy to be more individual-preserving than memories that
could not cause behavior.
One methodological limitation of the preliminary study
discussed in the introduction is that participants were never
queried about whether the target person was still a member
of the same category after the transformation (e.g., whether
he was still a person, as opposed to still being Jim). We
were therefore not able to determine whether participants’
judgments of identity change correlated with their judgments of change in category membership – a correlation that
we would expect given the philosophical theories cited earlier. We address this question in Experiment 1 by asking
participants to judge the extent to which the posttransformation individual is still a member of his original
categories. The category most likely to confer identity on
our target individual is the category PERSON itself. However, to determine whether PERSON has special status in
this regard, we contrast it with other possible categories, in
this case occupation (ACCOUNTANT) and gender
(MALE).

Method
Thirty-eight Northwestern University undergraduates read a
science fiction story about Jim, a male accountant undergoing a lifesaving brain transplant. Specifically, Jim’s brain
was transplanted into a robot body. In a between-groups
design, we varied whether Jim’s memories were the same or
different after the transformation. In addition, half the participants in each group answered questions about a situation
in which the memories could cause behavior in the robot,
and half answered questions about a situation in which the
memories could not cause behavior. The full story appears
in Figure 1.
The Preserved Memory group read a version of the scenario in which the robot received an unaltered version of
Jim’s brain. The Altered Memory group read a version of
the story in which the memories were significantly altered
during the transformation process.
After reading the story, participants rated their confidence
in a number of statements relating to Jim’s continuity.
Causal efficacy -- whether the memories were able to affect
behavior -- was manipulated by varying whether the questions that followed related to events on Monday (when the
robot was off) or Wednesday (when the robot was functional). For example, in the Low Causal Efficacy condition,
a probe statement read:
On Monday, before the scientists switch it on, the robot is
Jim.
0—1—2—3—4—5—6—7—8—9
strongly
strongly
disagree
agree

The Transplant
Jim is an accountant living in Chicago. One day,
he is severely injured in a tragic car accident. His
only chance for survival is participation in an advanced medical experiment. Jim agrees.
A team of scientists remove his brain and carefully
place it in a highly sophisticated cybernetic body
(robot). The robot is powered by electricity. The scientists connect the brain to the robot controls.
Though all the right connections between the robot
and the brain have been made, the scientists cannot
“plug” the robot in because they are waiting for a
power adapter they have ordered.
On Monday, the scientists come in to work and the
power adapter still has not arrived. While they wait,
the scientists scan the brain inside the robot and note
that [THE MEMORIES / NO MEMORIES] in it
are the same as those that were in the brain before the
operation.
Finally, on Wednesday, the power adapter arrives
and the scientists turn on the robot. The robot appears
human-like in its behavior. The robot has senses and
can move and talk. Again, the scientists scan the
brain inside the robot and find that [THE
MEMORIES / NO MEMORIES] in it are the same
as those that were in the brain before the operation.
Figure 1: Stimulus story for Experiment 1 showing
the memory manipulation.
By contrast, in the High Causal Efficacy condition, participants evaluated the statement:
On Wednesday, after the scientists switch it on, the robot is
Jim.
0—1—2—3—4—5—6—7—8—9
strongly
strongly
disagree
agree
Each participant provided judgments about four kinds of
continuity: individual continuity (“… the robot is Jim”),
personhood continuity (“… the robot is a person”), gender continuity (“… the robot is a male”), and occupational
continuity (“… the robot is an accountant”). Question order was fully counterbalanced across participants.

Results
Individual Continuity Table 1 summarizes the results of
this experiment. As expected, continuity of memory was
important for identity. Participants gave higher ratings when
the transplanted brain retained the old memories than when
it did not (mean ratings on a 0-9 scale were 5.28 and 1.70,
respectively; F(1, 34) = 21.21, p < .001). The capacity of
memories to cause behavior also had an effect on continuity.
When the robot was described as being “off,” continuity
judgments were lower than when the robot was “on” (M =
2.15 and 4.83, respectively; F(1, 34) = 11.83, p < .001). The
interaction between Memory and Causal Efficacy was reli-

Continuity
Individual
Personhood
Gender
Occupation

Memories
Altered
Preserved
Low CE High CE Low CE High CE
1.30
2.10
3.00
7.56
1.90
3.60
2.00
4.56
3.80
4.20
2.56
7.00
1.30
1.60
2.78
6.78

Table 1: Mean continuity ratings (Experiment 1) as a
function of memory continuity and causal efficacy
(CE).
able, F(1, 34) = 5.82, p < .05. Causal efficacy had a larger
effect when Jim’s memories were retained rather than altered, suggesting that when Jim’s old memories were no
longer present, it did not matter for identity per se whether
the altered memories were able to cause behavior.
Personhood Continuity A similar analysis of personhood
ratings showed that, in contrast to identity findings, there
was no main effect of Memory, suggesting that continuity of
memory was not important for continuity of personhood, F
(1, 34) < 1. However, there was a main effect of Causal Efficacy, F(1, 34) = 5.45, p < .05. Participants answering
questions about a post-transformation robot in the “on” state
were more likely to judge the robot as being a person than
those who responded to queries about an “off” robot (M =
4.08 and 1.95, respectively). The interaction between Memory and Causal Efficacy was not reliable, F(1, 34) < 1.
Responses to the personhood question were predictive of
identity judgments, but the magnitude of the effect was secondary to that of memory continuity. When memory continuity, causal efficacy and personhood were simultaneously
regressed onto identity judgments, the standardized regression coefficient for personhood ( = 0.30) was relatively
small compared to that for memory ( = 0.51). Adjusted R2
for the overall model was .56.
Gender and Occupation Continuity Gender continuity
(“Still a male?”) did not fit the pattern of identity judgments.
In contrast to identity results, there was no main effect of
memories, F (1,34) < 1. People’s continuity ratings in altered and preserved memory conditions tended towards the
middle of the scale (M = 4.00 and 4.7, respectively), indicating that people were not confident about the right way to
think about gender continuity. Causal efficacy, however, did
play a role in these judgments. When the brain was able to
cause behaviors, the object was rated more likely to retain
gender than when the brain was unable to cause action (M =
5.60 and 3.18, respectively; F(1, 34) = 6.62, p < .05). Also,
the effect of causal efficacy was greater when memories
were retained, as suggested by a reliable interaction between
memory and causal efficacy, F (1, 34) = 4.62, p < .05.
By contrast, occupation ratings (“Still an accountant?”)
did appear to follow the pattern of the identity ratings. An
analysis of variance similar to the one performed on identity
continuity judgments revealed parallel effects. We found a
main effect of memory continuity such that a brain transplant that preserved memories was also more likely to pre-

serve occupation, F(1, 34) = 22.35, p < .001. Also, when
the brain had an effect on behavior, occupation was more
likely to be preserved than if the brain had no effect, F(1,
34) = 9.33, p < .01. Furthermore, as in the case of the identity ratings, there was an interaction between memory continuity and causal efficacy such that causal efficacy was more
important for occupation continuity when memories were
preserved, F(1, 34) = 6.91, p < .05.

Discussion
This experiment provided evidence for the role of memory
continuity in perceived identity. Participants who read about
a memory-preserving transplant gave higher individual continuity ratings than did participants who read about a transplant that did not preserve memories. This supports the
widely held view in the philosophical literature that personal
mental representations are central to individual identity.
Moreover, our participants granted the highest level of identity continuity to a transplant if these memories had the capacity to cause behavior.
Perhaps the most striking finding is the relative independence between judgments of identity continuity and personhood continuity. People’s reasoning about continuity of
identity does not appear tightly bound to sameness of membership in normal categories. In fact, participants in some
conditions were more likely to agree that the individual was
still Jim after the transformation than that he/it was still a
person. Specifically, in the condition judged optimal for
individual continuity (Preserved Memories, High Causal
Efficacy), participants gave a high mean rating of 7.56 when
asked if the individual was the same, but a much lower rating of 4.56 when asked if it was still a person, t(8) = 2.63, p
< .05.
We used gender and occupation categories as foils for
personhood. As expected, we found only a poor fit between
gender continuity and identity. Occupational continuity
fared better in terms of reflecting identity judgments, though
it seems likely that individual identity was driving occupation identity rather than the reverse. On intuitive grounds,
occupational categories are hardly viable as granting identity to individuals. I can cease being a student, without any
significant loss of identity. We revisit the issue of individual and occupation identity in Experiment 2.
In general, it seems possible that our participants used different criteria to judge identity, gender, and occupation.
Most importantly, people decided about identity and personhood using different criteria. While the critical property
of identity appears to be continuity of memories, personhood may depend more heavily on typical properties of persons, such as having a human body and engaging in human
behaviors.
Experiment 2 pursues this issue, asking whether perceived
identity continuity can be maintained through a transformation that does not preserve any of the physical parts of the
original person.

possible, however, that the brain may be a necessary but not
sufficient property of individuals. In this case, memories
would have to be transmitted in the physical stuff in which
they arose. By contrast, if memories are the “software” that
is merely running on the brain “hardware,” then it is conceivable that physical brains are not even necessary for
identity – any computationally adequate device would do.
This is the issue that separates physicalists and functionalists. Will people infer individual continuity even if the
original person’s memories are “implemented” on a machine that is not the original physical brain?
If the answer is “yes,” then we may conclude that people’s beliefs about identity are relatively unconstrained, allowing for identity to be preserved through a wide range of
fairly extreme transformations. Such a folk-functionalist
position is at least intuitively sensible. For example, body
cells die and regenerate multiple times throughout the lifespan. It seems odd to consider such physical changes as
threatening to personal identity. The competing folk physicalist theory sees brain tissue as at least necessary for identity.

Method
To address the question of physicalism versus functionalism, we modified the brain-transplant scenario from Experiment 1 to include a condition in which the memories in
Jim’s brain are copied onto a computer designed to control
the robot (Computer Copy condition). The story for this
condition appears in Figure 2. We also ran a replication of
the Brain Transplant scenario from Experiment 1 (Brain
Transplant condition) without the passages relating to causal
efficacy.
The second factor in the design was whether the memories in the brain (computer) were altered or preserved. This
design thus generated four scenarios, which we gave to
separate groups of participants. After reading the scenario,
participants answered the same set of questions as in Experiment 1. Judgments of individual, personhood, gender,
and occupational continuity were made on a 10-point scale.
Jim is an accountant living in Chicago. One day, he
is severely injured in a tragic car accident. His only
chance for survival is participation in an advanced
medical experiment. Jim agrees.
A team of scientists copy the memories in his brain
onto a state-of-the-art computer. The computer is
placed in a highly sophisticated cybernetic body (robot). All the right connections between the robot and
the computer have been made, and the computer is
able to control the robot. The scientists scan the
computer and note that [NONE OF] the memories in
it are the same as those that were in the brain before
the operation.
When the scientists turn on the robot, the robot appears to be human-like in its behavior. It has senses
and can move and talk.

Experiment 2: Necessary Features of Identity
Experiment 1 showed that a brain without the right memories does not guarantee identity of individuals. It is still

Figure 2: Stimulus story for the computer copy condition in Experiment 2.

M emories
Continuity
Individual
Pers onhood
Gender
Occupation

A ltered
Computer Copy
Brain
0.89
1.11
2.23
3.17

Trans plant
1.53
2.83
4.77
0.91

Pres erved
Computer Copy
Brain
1.97
2.08
4.34
5.78

Trans plant
5.27
2.69
4.58
4.16

Table 2. Mean continuity ratings (Experiment 2) as a function of memory continuity and transplant type.
Questions were presented in two different random orders
across participants. Sixty-four Northwestern University undergraduate students took part in the study.

Results
Table 2 presents a summary of the results, which appear to
favor a folk-physicalist over a folk-functionalist position.
Individual Continuity Participants in this experiment were
more likely to think that the post-transplant individual was
still Jim if the transplant included Jim’s brain than if it
merely included Jim’s memories. A Brain Transplant elicited higher continuity ratings than a Computer Copy, F(1,
56) = 17.95, p < .001. As in Experiment 1, there was also an
effect of the memories themselves. Participants who read
about a transformation that preserved memories gave higher
continuity ratings than those reading about a transformation
that altered memories, F(1, 56) = 26.81, p < .001. Most
importantly, however, there was also an interaction between
transformation type and memory factors: Preserved memories facilitated continuity to a greater extent when the transformation was a Brain Transplant than when it was a Computer Copy, F(1, 56) = 8.17, p < .01. There were no reliable
effects of question order.
Personhood Continuity As in the case of individual continuity, participants who read the Brain Transplant scenario
viewed the robot as more likely to be a person than people
who read about a Computer Copy, F(1, 56) = 4.13, p < .05.
However, there was no reliable effect of memory continuity
on personhood judgments: Participants were about as likely
to think that the robot was a person whether or not the
memories were the same as Jim’s, F(1, 56) < 1.
As this result suggests, personhood continuity ratings did
not fully predict judgments of identity continuity. That is,
participants were not simply basing their identity judgments
(Still Jim?) on whether they believed the object in question
is still a person. We tested this claim as we did in the previous study, by running a simultaneous regression with personhood ratings, transplant type, memory continuity, and
the interaction between them as predictors of identity responses. The pattern of regression weights closely resembled those in Experiment 1. Memory continuity ( = .46)
was a better predictor of identity judgments than personhood ( = .32). Adjusted R2 for the overall model was .54.
Gender and Occupation Continuity A similar analysis of
variance on gender continuity ratings revealed no reliable
effects. There was a trend for readers of the Brain Trans-

plant story to assert a higher level of gender continuity than
participants reading a Computer Copy story (M = 4.67 and
3.29, respectively; F(1, 56) = 3.33, p = .07, n.s.)
Occupational continuity revealed a main effect of transformation type, F(1, 56) = 8.25, p < .01. It is important to
note, however, that the direction of the effect was reversed
relative to the identity findings. A Computer Copy was
more convincing than a Brain Transplant in allowing Jim to
retain the status of an accountant (M = 4.48 and 2.53, respectively). As in the previous study, there was also a main
effect of memory continuity, F(1, 56) = 18.71, p < .001.
Continuity of memory positively predicted retention of an
occupation.

Discussion
These data support the hypothesis that people’s naïve construal of individual identity is roughly compatible with folkphysicalism. Continuity of the physical brain had an effect
on continuity that went beyond that of functionally equivalent brain content. As in the previous experiment, our data
speak against the possibility that this was due entirely to
people’s beliefs about personhood. While our participants
did indicate that a computer copy was less of a person than a
Brain Transplant, a regression analysis showed that personhood ratings were not as good a predictor of identity judgments as memory continuity.
We have also replicated the results of Experiment 1 showing that when continuity conditions were optimal (Brain
Transplant, Preserved Memories), identity ratings were
higher than personhood judgments (M = 5.27 and 2.69, respectively; t(15) = 4.22, p < .01).
Gender and occupation continuity were not good candidates for granting identity to individuals. Both gender and
occupation ratings exhibited a poor fit with identity judgments. Occupation continuity actually exhibited a reverse
pattern on the criteria people used for continuity judgments.
In a number of conditions people were more certain about
the continuity of an occupation than they were about individual continuity. For example, in the Computer Copy -Preserved Memories condition, participants were more
likely to say that the object in question is still an accountant
than they were to assert that Jim is still in existence (M =
5.78, 1.97, respectively; t(15) = 3.81, p < .01).
One potential limitation of the current study is that the
Computer Copy story was ambiguous as to the fate of Jim’s
original brain. If our participants assigned identity status to
whichever object inherits the original brain, and they believed that Jim’s brain survived the accident (even if damaged), then we would expect low continuity ratings in the

Computer Copy condition because Jim’s brain is a better
candidate for being Jim than the computer containing his
memories. This kind of view is proposed by Williams
(1973; see Nozick, 1985 for a reply).
While the data can not rule out this possibility, a free response questionnaire administered after the experiment
showed that none of our participants explicitly considered
Jim’s original brain as a factor in their continuity judgments.
Furthermore, a related study (in preparation), addressing the
question of two possible continuers, showed that people are
relatively insensitive to the existence of an identity competitor, preferring to base their judgments on sameness of substance.

Summary and Conclusions
In these studies, we explored the set of features people consider important to personal identity. We showed that when
people reason about identity continuity, they take into account continuity of the physical brain and its causally efficacious mental content.2 People are not phenomenalists, in
that appearance is not a necessary feature of an individual’s
continuity. People are also not unconstrained functionalists,
in that they do not assign full continuity if an object only
implements a person’s unique mental content.
What can a description of a folk theory tell us about the
way people form and use concepts? A common assumption
is that an individual’s identity conditions are given by one
or more of the categories to which it belongs. While this
provides a convenient way to link categories and individuals, our data show that people do not always use the same
sets of characteristics in deciding continuity of an individual
and continuity of membership in even its most obvious superordinate category. We have documented instances in
which an individual who is viewed as having ceased to be a
person is still seen as the same individual.
This finding presents a challenge to the theory that identity conditions are dictated by the superordinate category (or
sortal concept) to which that individual belongs. This theory incorrectly predicts that any doubt about proper membership in the category should be reflected in doubt about
the individual’s survival.
Whether this finding is restricted to reasoning about persons or can be generalized to a wider range of objects remains to be seen. Although relatively minor changes to objects can often cause them to change basic category membership, their individual continuity appears to be much more
rigid. Keil (1989) used the example of a coffee pot that was
2

A strict physicalist position may be question-begging. If being
the same individual depends on having the same physical material,
how do we decide about whether physical material is the same? As
philosophical theories, both the physicalist and functionalist approaches have some important deficiencies, particularly with respect to possible circularity. However, our purpose here is simply
to see whether either theory approximates the reasoning of untrained participants. We leave to further research the question of
what would happen if our lay-physicalists were confronted with
difficulties for their view.

reshaped as a birdfeeder to show that changes in intended
function cause shifts in basic-level categorization for artifacts. Despite this change at the category level, however, the
object is likely to be judged as the same individual as the
one before the transformation.
Finally, reasoning about individuals may turn out to be
fundamentally different than reasoning about categories.
Individuation often takes into account the history of an object in a way that category membership does not. Whether
Jim is still a person after a transformation may depend on
whether the causal forces responsible for personhood are
still intact. Whether Jim is still Jim, however, may depend
on the trajectory of his parts across time.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF grant SES-9907414.
The authors would like to thank three anonymous reviewers
for their comments.

References
Ahn, W. (1998). Why are different features central for natural kinds and artifacts? Cognition, 69, 135-178.
Geach, P. T. (1962). Reference and generality. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and essences: Early understanding of the nonobvious. Cognition, 38, 213-244.
Gelman, S. A., & Hirschfeld, L. A. (1999). How biological
is essentialism? In D. L. Medin & S. Atran (Eds.), Folkbiology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gupta, A. (1980). The logic of common nouns. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Hall, D. G. (1998). Continuity and the persistence of objects. Cognitive Psychology, 37, 28-59.
Johnson, C. (1990) If you had my brain, where would I be?
Children's understanding of the brain and identity. Child
Development. 61, 962-972.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Liittschwager, J. C. (1994). Children’s reasoning about
identity across transformations. Doctoral dissertation,
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford
CA.
Nozick, R. (1981). Philosophical Explanations, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical reasoning. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Sloman, S. A. (1998). Categorical inference is not a tree.
Cognitive Psychology, 35, 1-33.
Wiggins, D. (1980). Sameness and substance. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press.
Williams, Bernard (1973): Problems of the Self. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

