UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactive Models of Collaborative Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3th5z6kh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Matessa, Michael

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactive Models of Collaborative Communication
Michael Matessa (mmatessa@arc.nasa.gov)
NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 262-4
Moffett Field, CA 94035 USA

Abstract
The collaborative nature of communication has been
demonstrated by research on the increased efficiency
(Hupet & Chantraine, 1992) and the adaptive behavior
(Giles, Mulac, Bradac, & Johnson, 1987) of interacting
pairs, but these two lines of research have never been
explicitly related. This paper reports empirical results
showing that adaptively matching word use can increase
communication efficiency and also gives an ACT-R
(Anderson & Lebiere, 1998) modeling account of the
processes involved.

Efficient Communication
Imagine that two people have to communicate a number
of times about abstract figures that are difficult to name.
Typically, the pair will initially use a long referential
phrase and with subsequent references shorten that
phrase to one or two words (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986; Krauss & Fussell, 1991; Krauss & Weinheimer,
1966). For example, in an experiment run by Krauss
and Fussell (1991), a pair shown the figure in Figure 1
referred to it over five trials as
a Martini glass with legs on either side
Martini glass with the legs
Martini glass shaped thing
Martini glass
Martini

communication task. If subjects are asked to create
referential phrases for an imagined partner who will
later read the phrases, the phrases tend not to decrease
over time (Hupet & Chantraine, 1992). If a partner is
present but not allowed to give feedback, the rate of
decrease is slowed (Krauss & Weinheimer, 1966).

Accommodating Communication
In this discussion, accommodation is the matching of
partner behavior in a conversational setting. These
behaviors can include lexical choice (Fais, 1998;
Garrod & Anderson, 1987; Garrod & Doherty, 1994)
and syntactic choice (Bock, 1986; Fais, 1994) as well as
speech styles, dialect, non-verbal behavior, vocal
intensity, prosody, speech rate and duration and pause
length (Giles, Mulac, Bradac, & Johnson, 1987).
Examples of accommodation can be seen in the maze
game of Garrod and Doherty (1994), where subjects
must decide how to describe their positions in a twodimensional maze. Some subjects came to describe
their positions in a line notation, giving first the line
and then their location in that line:
A: Third row two along.
B: Second row three along.
Other subjects developed a matrix notation, giving
horizontal and vertical locations:
A: Correct, I’m presently at C5.
B: E1.

Figure 1: An abstract figure
This process is evidence of the collaborative nature of
communication since subsequent phrases tend to make
reference to previous phrases and since the phrase
eventually agreed on to describe the object would not
likely be able to describe the object without the benefit
of the prior history of the evolution of the phrase.
Several partner-related factors have been shown to
influence the number of words used in the referential

Most research on accommodation has focused on
dependent measures of converging/diverging behavior
or recipient evaluations of that behavior. One
hypothesis of this paper is that diverging behavior (nonaccommodation) can not only influence the evaluation
of behavior, but can also reduce the efficiency of
referential communication. Support for this hypothesis
would be shorter messages for subjects interacting with
accommodating partners as compared to subjects
interacting with non-accommodating partners. To do
this manipulation with human partners, either
confederate partners or partners motivated with positive
and negative social group pressures would need to
converge or diverge to communication behavior. Either
choice would introduce extraneous social complications

into a question about informational processing. Ideally,
the decision to diverge or converge should be
independent of other communication processing in the
partner. One solution is to use computational agents as
partners. Two agents could be created that would either
converge to or diverge from word choice of a human
partner, with other communication processing being
exactly the same. If both agents accommodated to the
message length used by the human partner, then
message length could be used as a dependent measure
of efficiency. This would then test the effect of lexical
accommodation on message length. The generality of
the results would be greater if the behavior of the agents
were psychologically plausible. One line of research
involving computational theory of human cognition is
ACT-R.

ACT-R & Communication
ACT-R (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998) is a computational
theory of human cognition incorporating both
declarative knowledge (e.g., addition facts) and
procedural knowledge (e.g., the process of solving a
multi-column addition problem) into a production
system where procedural rules act on declarative
chunks. At a subsymbolic level, facts have an activation
attribute which influences their probability of retrieval
and the time it takes to retrieve them. Rules have a
reliability attribute which influences their probability
of being used.
Support for this declarative/procedural viewpoint has
been found in many ACT-R language projects. One
project emphasizing declarative representation is
Boyland and Anderson’s (1997) model of syntactic
priming. Research has shown that the use of a specific
syntax can be primed in experimental settings if a
subject repeats presented sentences (Bock, 1986).
Boyland and Anderson created a model that explained
this phenomenon as priming of declarative structures
built from the comprehension of sentences.
With a procedural representation, Matessa and
Anderson (2000) showed that the ACT-R rule
reliability learning mechanism predicts a blocking
effect in cue learning where the use of highly available
cues can block the learning of more reliable cues, since
the sequential nature of productions allows only one
cue to be chosen at a time. This prediction was
supported by experimental evidence of blocking for
linguistic actor choice cues such as word order, case
marking, and verb/noun matching. Taatgen and
Anderson (2000) used a model that combined both
declarative and procedural learning to explain the Ushaped learning of irregular verbs, and Lewis (1998)
created a parsing model with retroactive and proactive
interference of declarative knowledge and procedural
attachment processes.

Any interactive model of communication must be able
to establish mutual knowledge, interpret the
communicative intent of a partner, follow basic
communicative obligations, and use communication to
further some goal. These abilities have been the focus
of a number of lines of research in the communication
literature (Clark & Schaefer, 1989; Core & Allen, 1997;
Poesio & Traum, 1998; Traum & Allen, 1994) and the
ACT-R model of communication presented in this
paper is guided by theories in this literature. ACT-R
itself is a method for describing human cognition in
terms of facts and rules, but the content of the facts and
rules used in communication must be guided by current
theories of communication. This model of
communication was used to test the effect of
accommodation (the matching of partner vocabulary)
on communication efficiency by having two ACT-R
models created from the basic communication model,
one accommodating to word use and one nonaccommodating.

Experiment
Communication is usually motivated by the desire to
complete a certain task. Subjects were given parts of a
graph with the goal of creating a whole graph. The
graphs are colored objects connect by lines (similar to
those used by Levelt (1982) to study communicative
reference) and are designed so that similarly colored
objects on the parts can overlap and form a larger
graph.
Communication using text is more conducive to
modeling, so the subjects send messages by way of a
chat window from two different computers. In addition
to creating a whole graph from two parts, subjects also
have the goal of confirming each of the circles. This is
done by each subject selecting one circle at a time -- if
the circles are the same, their score is increased, but if
the circles are different, the score is decreased. This
confirmation goal gives an objective measure of task
performance in terms of a score, and it allows for the
use of more complicated dialogue acts such as
requesting that the other person confirm a circle or
committing to confirming a circle.
In a similar spirit to the COLLAGEN project (Rich &
Sidner, 1998), this modeling effort is not aimed towards
the processing of unrestricted English syntax but in
modeling the higher-level communicative acts
accomplished with English. So like the COLLAGEN
project the models interact with people with a restricted
set of English phrases. This restricted interface need not
drastically hinder the communication process or task
performance. In a study comparing a restricted interface
to an unrestricted interface for students solving physics
problems, Baker and Lund (1997) showed that the
restricted communication interface did not interfere
with task performance. In fact, it promoted a more task-

focused and reflective interaction.1 Still, for the current
task, unrestricted and restricted communication were
compared to see if the restricted interface had any effect
on task performance. The restricted interface allows the
composition of a text message by first choosing a topic
of discussion and dialogue act to address the topic. The
topics of conversation are paired connections (how one
circle relates to another), multiple connections (rows or
columns of circles), numbers (how many of a specific
kind of circle there are), correspondences (what circle
in one person s graph corresponds to in the other
person s graph), confirmations (talking about mutually
confirming a circle), and experiment phases.
Also, to allow more problems to be solved in a single
experimental session which would allow the
development of communication over time, the problems
were simplified to have six total objects with one
marked as common. From previous research (Clark &
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Krauss & Fussell, 1991; Krauss &
Weinheimer, 1966) it was expected that the message
length would decrease over time. To facilitate this
decrease in the restricted interface, the manner of
composing messages in the template was changed from
choosing words from a pull-down menu to typing
words that were displayed in a menu. The menu for the
word choice could be skipped over with the Tab key,
and in this way shorter messages could be produced.
This new method permits a closer correspondence to
the unrestricted interface (unrestricted typing) and gives
a time benefit to skipping words by not having to spend
time in typing them. Additional dimensions of size and
shape were added to the color dimension of the circles
in order to provide more redundant information in the
problem that could later be left out of messages,
resulting in a shorter message length. These dimensions
were redundant, so that red objects were always small
and thin, green objects were always medium and round,
and blue objects were always large and fat.

Method
Each pair was told that they would each be given part
of a graph and their goal was first to create a whole
graph as a result of circles overlapping from each part
of the graph, and then to confirm each circle in the
whole graph. They were told they would be sitting in
different rooms and would be using a chat window to
talk to each other. They were shown a drawing pad
which contained an example graph part consisting of
connected colored circles, and were shown how to add
and erase circles representing circles from the partner s
graph. They were also shown a chat window which
could send eighty-character messages and only
displayed the partner s last message. In the restricted
interface condition, subjects were told that messages
were composed in a communication window that
allowed the creation of restricted sentences and were
led through the creation of each kind of message. After
making sure subjects understood the task, they were
then given individual practice problems which used the
adding, erasing, and confirming functions of the
drawing pad. Finally, the subjects were given their
graph parts and were told there were no time constraints
in solving the problem.

Results
Figure 2 shows the average time that pairs in each
condition took to solve problems. Error bars in this and
subsequent figures represent standard error. Results are
averaged for the first three problems, the second three,
third, and fourth. Since there were an unequal number
of pairs in each condition for any particular problem,
statistics are performed on each group of three
problems.
Time to Solve Problem
20
18

Subjects

1

For an alternate viewpoint, see Suchman (1997).

16
14
time (min)

One hundred Carnegie Mellon University
undergraduates attempted the graph completion task.
Twenty-two were paired and used the unrestricted
interface, thirty-two were paired and used the restricted
interface, twenty-two were paired with an
accommodating ACT-R model, and twenty-four were
paired with a non-accommodating ACT-R model. This
created eleven pairs in the unrestricted interface
condition, sixteen pairs in the restricted interface
condition, twenty-two pairs in the accommodating
model condition (pairs consisting of a subject and a
model), and twenty-four pairs in the nonaccommodating model condition.

12

unrestr

10

restr
accom
non

8
6
4
2
0
1-3

4-6

7-9

10-12

problem

Figure 2: Time to solve problem
There was no significant effect of condition on time to
solve problems in the first two groups of three problems
(F(3,65)=2.12; F(3,56)=1.72), but there was an effect in
the last two groups of three problems (F(3,37)=8.58,
p<.0005; F(3,28)=5.76, p<.005). This effect is driven

Human Model
The accommodating and non-accommodating models
are able to solve the communication task, but cannot by
themselves explain the effect of accommodation. This
is because they are "passive" in that they are not the
first to decide to skip words in messages descriptions or
to skip messages describing confirmation actions.
Instead, they follow the lead of their partner and skip
words when their partner skips words and skip
messages when their partner skips messages. What is
needed is an "assertive" "human" model that can decide
to skip words and messages first. This model should
also be able to account for differences found when
subjects interact with accommodating and nonaccommodating models.
This "human" model was created by extending the
accommodation model with extra rules for actively
skipping words. Since time is saved by not typing, these
rules make solving the problem more efficient. This
effect is achieved in the current situation by having the
efficiency rules be sensitive to cooperative actions of
the partner (with accommodative word matching
signaling cooperative behavior). Two of the rules, skipword-match-eff and skip-confirm-match-eff, attempt to
retrieve memories of their partner matching their own
word use. This gives these rules a sensitivity to whether
their partner is accommodating or non-accommodating.
The other rules do not attempt to retrieve matching
memories. The rationale behind these rules is that the
decision to skip a word or confirmation message will
more likely lead to success if the partner has been
cooperative in their behavior, and memories of word
matching by the partner give evidence of this
cooperation. Rules that find this evidence have a higher

reliability because the evidence increases the
probability that skipping will lead to success. The rule
to continue confirmation
These rules have a subsymbolic value, reliability,
associated with them that affects the probability with
which they will be used -- rules with higher reliabilities
have a higher probability of being used. The efficiency
rules added to the accommodation model were skipword-match-eff (skips a nonessential word if partner
matches word) with a reliability of .735 and skip-wordnomatch-eff (skips a nonessential word) with a
reliability of .730. The reliability values were set with
regard to subject performance with the accommodating
and non-accommodating models. These values were
then used in runs of the human model with another
human model to make zero-parameter predictions of
subject performance with other subjects in the restricted
interface condition.
Looking at message length, Figure 3 shows results of
twenty runs of the "human" model (shown as a dashed
line) interacting with the accommodating model, the
non-accommodating model, and another human
model compared to the results of subjects interacting
with the accommodating model, the nonaccommodating model, and another human subject.
Connection

Message

Length

14
12
number of words

by slower times in the non-accommodation condition,
which was significantly slower than the accommodation
condition in the last two groups of three problems
(t(24)=3.71, p<.001; t(18)=2.61, p<.05). Since the
results were similar between the restricted and
unrestricted conditions for errors and time to solve
problems, the unrestricted condition will not be
included in subsequent discussions.
Figure 3 shows how many words were typed, or
message length, for sentences concerning connections
of objects. Message length tended to decrease with
time, for example, a message such as The small thin
red object is above our large fat blue object in the first
problem could be reduced to messages such as red
above blue by the twelfth problem.
Messages in the non-accommodation condition
tended to be longer than those in the accommodation
condition, not significantly in the first two groups of
three problems (t(43)=0.55; t(39)=0.83) but
significantly in the second two groups of three
problems (t(24)=1.97, p<.05; t(18)=1.81, p<.05).

non
accom
restr
model/non
model/accom
model/model

10
8
6
4
2
0
1-3

4-6

7-9

10-12

problem

Figure 3: Connection message length

Conclusions
Data from the main experiment show that subjects
interacting with accommodating models that match
their word choice can solve problems faster than
subjects interacting with non-accommodating partners.
This result ties together results from the referential
communication literature showing partner-based effects
on efficiency with results from the accommodation
literature showing accommodating behavior motivated
by efficiency.
Having a theory of communication in a
computational form allowed testing of the theory by
having it directly interact with subjects. In terms of
errors and time to solve problems, subjects generally

reacted to the accommodating model incorporating the
theory much like any other human. In fact, in a postexperiment questionnaire subjects guessed they were
interacting with a human 43% of the time they were
interacting with the accommodating model (subjects
guessed the non-accommodating model was human
48% of the time, but the difference is not significant).
There is still room for improvement however, since
only 10% of subjects interacting with human partners
thought their partners were computers.
The computational nature of the theory also allowed
predictions to be made without the use of human
subjects. The reliability of the efficiency rules for the
human model were set based on human performance
with the accommodation and non-accommodating
models, but the results of the human model
communicating with another human model represent
a zero-parameter prediction that closely matched human
performance in the restricted interface condition.

Acknowledgments
This research was sponsored as part of the author s
doctoral thesis by the Office of Naval Research under
contract number N00014-95-10223 to John Anderson at
Carnegie Mellon University.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The Atomic
Components of Thought: Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Baker, M., & Lund, K. (1997). Promoting reflective
interactions in a CSCL environment. Journal of
Computer Assisted Learning, 13(3), 175-193.
Bock, K. J. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18(3), 355-387.
Boyland, J. T., & Anderson, J. R. (1997).
Comprehension and production as avenues of
syntactic priming. Paper presented at the 19th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Budiu, R., & Anderson, J. R. (2000). Integration of
Background Knowledge in Sentence Processing: A
Unified Theory of Metaphor Understanding,
Semantic Illusions and Text Memory. Paper presented
at the 3rd International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling, Groningen, Netherlands.
Clark, H., & Schaefer, E. (1989). Contributing to
Discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259-294.
Clark, H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Core, M. G., & Allen, J. F. (1997). Coding dialogs with
the DAMSL scheme. Paper presented at the AAAI
Fall Symposium on Communicative Action in
Humans and Machines, Boston, MA.
Fais, L. (1994). Conversation as collaboration: Some
syntactic evidence. Speech Communication, 15, 231242.

Fais, L. (1998). Lexical accommodation in human- and
machine-interpreted dialogues. International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 48, 217-246.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you
mean in dialogue: A study in conceptual and
semantic co-ordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Garrod, S., & Doherty, G. (1994). Conversation, coordination and convention: an empirical investigation
of how groups establish linguistic conventions.
Cognition, 53, 181-215.
Giles, H., Mulac, A., Bradac, J. J., & Johnson, P.
(1987). Speech accommodation theory: The first
decade and beyond. Communication Yearbook, 10.
Hupet, M., & Chantraine, Y. (1992). Changes in
repeated references: Collaboration or repetition
effects? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 21(6),
485-496.
Krauss, R. M., & Fussell, S. R. (1991). Constructing
shared communicative environments. In L. B.
Resnick & J. M. Levine (Eds.), Perspectives on
socially shared cognition (pp. 172-200).
Krauss, R. M., & Weinheimer, S. (1966). Concurrent
feedback, confirmation and the encoding of referents
in verbal communication. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 4, 343-346.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1982). Linearization in describing
spatial networks. In S. Peters & E. Saarinen (Eds.),
Processes, beliefs, and questions (pp. 199-220):
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Lewis, R.L. (1998) Working Memory in Sentence
Processing: Retroactive and Proactive Interference in
Parsing. Talk presented at CUNY 98, New
Brunswick, New Jersey.
Matessa, M., & Anderson, J. R. (2000). Modelling
Focused Learning in Role Assignment. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 15(3), 263-292.
Poesio, M., & Traum, D. (1998). Towards an
Axiomatization of Dialogue Acts. In J. Hulstijn & A.
Nijholt (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twente Workshop
on the Formal Semantics and Pragmatics of
Dialogues (13th Twente Workshop on Language
Technology) (pp. 207-222). Enshede, NL.
Rich, C., & Sidner, C. L. (1998). COLLAGEN: A
Collaboration Manager for Software Interface
Agents. User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction, 8(3/4), 315-350.
Suchman, L. (1997). Do categories have politics? In B.
Friedman (Ed.), Human values and the design of
computer technology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Taatgen, N., & Anderson, J. R. (2000). Why do children
learn to say "broke"? A model of learning the past
tense. Paper presented at the Seventh Annual ACT-R
Workshop, Pittsburgh, PA.
Traum, D., & Allen, J. (1994). Discourse Obligations in
Dialogue Processing. Paper presented at the 32nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.

