UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investigating Dissociations Betweend Perceptual Categorization and Explicit Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2x14s9j0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Flanery, Marci A.
Palmeri, Thomas J.
Schaper, Brooke L.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investigating D issociations Betw een Perceptual
C ategorization and ExplicitM em ory
M arciA .Flanery (m arci.flanery@ vanderbilt.edu)
Thom as J.Palm eri(thom as.j.palm eri@ vanderbilt.edu)
Brooke L.Schaper (brooke.l.schaper@ vanderbilt.edu)
D epartm entofPsychology;V anderbiltU niversity
N ashville,TN 37240 U SA

A bstract
A re dissociations betw een categorization and explicit
m em ory in tests of am nesics and norm als evidence for
m ultiple m em ory system s? O r could these dissociations
be artifacts arising from m ethodologies used in som e experim ents? W e report a series of studies exploring this
issue.U sing norm als in various states of sim ulated am nesia w e show that categorization at test is w ell above
chance even in the absence ofpriorexposure to category
m em bers.W e also show thatsubjects perform w ellw hen
tested w ith item s that conflict w ith categories they had
studied earlier. W e argue that subjects in som e paradigm s can extractinform ation aboutcategories from the
test rather than rely on m em ory for studied category
m em bers.In furtherstudies,w e generalize these findings
to other stim uli and other category structures that have
been used in tests ofam nesics and norm als.

Introduction
D o categorization and explicit m em ory rely on independentneuralm em ory system s? Evidence for m ultiple
system s com es from dissociations between categorization and explicitm em ory in studies ofnorm als and am nesics. A m nesics are reported to categorize at levels
com parable to norm als but are significantly worse at
explicitm em ory.Such dissociations seem to im ply that
separate system s m ay existand pose clear problem s for
theories that assum e a single underlying m em ory system ,such as well-known exem plarm odels.
The evidence is clear that am nesics have im paired
explicitor declarative m em ory.The focus of this paper
is on whether data from studies testing am nesics clearly
provide evidence for intact abilities to learn new perceptual categories. O ur goal is to exam ine whether
som e categorization perform ance can be explained in
the absence of positing a separate im plicit system for
category learning that is spared in am nesia. O ur approach has been to utilize the sam e paradigm s and
m ethodologies found in the am nesia literature to study
norm al subjects under conditions that sim ulate aspects
of am nesia.To create “am nesia” in norm als,we used a
variety of techniques such as elim inating the study session altogether, introducing delays between study and
test, and surreptitiously switching the test stim uli to
those from an unstudied category.W e follow the am ne-

sia literature in testing these effects using a variety of
stim uli,including distortions ofdotpatterns,object-like
stim uli with discrete features,and sim ple form s placed
in categories separated by quadratic boundaries.
In this paper,we review som e behavioralevidence for
dissociations from studies ofam nesics and norm als.For
each case, we present data from studies we conducted
thatprovide a possible alternative explanation forintact
categorization by am nesics. D ue to space constraints,
we will only present our results in sum m arized form
withoutdetailed description ofthe m ethods orstatistical
analyses. A fter sum m arizing our initial work along
these lines reported by Palm eriand Flanery (1999),we
describe several new experim ents that expanded upon
these initialresults in severalim portantways.

Learning C ategories ofD otPatterns
A classic m ethodology for studying categorization and
recognition has been the Posner and K eele (1968) dot
pattern paradigm .To create a pattern,a sm allnum berof
dots are random ly scattered on a grid.To create a category, a pattern is random ly generated and designated
the prototype.Category m em bers are generated by random ly distorting the prototype by varying degrees.
K nowlton and Squire (1993) used a variant of this
paradigm to testam nesics on categorization and recognition.For categorization,subjects were exposed to 40
high distortions.Subjects were tested on judging m em bers and nonm em bers of that category.For categorization, m em bers were 4 repetitions of the prototype, 20
low distortions, and 20 high distortions. N onm em bers
were 40 random ly generated patterns. For recognition,
subjects were exposed to five random patterns eight
tim es each. In the recognition test, they were asked to
discrim inate between the five old patterns and five new
patterns.N o corrective feedback was provided in either
condition.K nowlton and Squire (1993) reported a dissociation between categorization and recognition when
com paring am nesics and norm als. A s shown in Figure
1, am nesics categorized as well as norm als but were
significantly im paired atrecognition m em ory.
This dissociation seem ed to provide evidence for
separate system s.H owever, N osofsky and Zaki(1998)
showed thata single-system m odelcould accountfora

K now lton & Squire (1993)
0.9
0.8

0.9
0.8

C ontrol
Am nesic

Exposure
N o Exposure

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

C ategorization

C ategorization

R ecognition

Figure 1. Categorization and recognition accuracy
forcontrols and am nesics.
dissociation by sim ply assum ing that am nesics had degraded m em ory.A challenge for this theoretical possibility was an extrem e dissociation observed by Squire
and K nowlton (1995). Their patient, E.P., was able to
categorize as well as norm als but recognition was entirely atchance.Itwould be very difficultto form ulate a
single-system m odel along the lines of N osofsky and
Zakithatcould predictchance recognition perform ance
in the presence ofnorm alcategorization perform ance.
To better understand the categorization perform ance
of am nesics, Palm eri and Flanery (1999) investigated
whether prior exposure was even necessary to categorize attest.O ne explanation for above-chance categorization by am nesics is that it m ay be possible to group
item s during the testthatlooked sim ilar(prototypes and
distortions) into the m em ber category and group item s
that did not look sim ilar (random patterns) into the
nonm em ber category. W hereas, it is im possible to tell
apartold from new patterns withoutm em ory.
Palm eriand Flanery tested this possibility by producing a state of profound am nesia in norm als.A s a ruse,
subjects were told that patterns had been sublim inally
presented during an initialword identification task.N o
dot patterns were ever really presented. Subjects then
com pleted the sam e categorization and recognition tests
used by K nowlton and Squire. Sim ilar to E.P., our
sim ulated profound am nesics showed chance recognition. Y et, they showed above chance categorization.
A pparently,our subjects were able to figure outhow to
categorize m em bers versus nonm em bers by picking up
on the category structure clearly em bedded within the
test.They had no priorm em ories ofany sortto rely on.
Experim ent 1.W e extended this paradigm by directly
com paring the perform ance of sim ulated am nesics (N o
Exposure) to that of subjects who were exposed to the
study item s (Exposure).H alfofthe subjects were given
sublim inal exposure, as in Palm eri and Flanery, and
were tested on categorization or recognition; the other
half were given actual exposure, as in K nowlton and
Squire,and tested on categorization or recognition.Results are shown in Figure 2.A s expected,the exposure
group could recognize item s wellabove chance butthe
no exposure group could only guess. Replicating
Palm eri and Flanery (1999),subjects in a no exposure
group could categorize wellabove chance. Subjects re-

R ecognition

Figure 2. Categorization and recognition accuracy
in Experim ent 1 for subjects exposed and not exposed to category item s (Palm eri& Flanery,2001).
ceiving no exposure did not categorize significantly
worse than subjects who were actually exposed to category item s.A pparently,priorexposure to a category did
notprovide m uch,ifany,benefit.
Experim ent 2.O ne criticism ofthese studies is thatthe
ruse used to induce am nesia m ay have placed subjects
in a different m ind set from that of subjects who were
exposed to m em bers.O ur “profound am nesics” m ay realize they neversaw any patterns and m ay think the task
is to discover the hidden category structure,som ething
they appear to do quite ably. So, one goal of this experim ent was to use a different paradigm for dem onstrating thatsubjects m ay categorize based on inform ation they acquire during the categorization test.In this
experim ent,we surreptitiously switched the teststim uli
forsom e subjects to thatofan unstudied category.
In addition,we clearly do notwantto draw the conclusion that people always ignore inform ation about a
previously studied category in favorofinform ation presented during a test. A second goal was to show that
when initial exposure provides evidence for a clear
category structure,subjects willuse thatinform ation to
m ake category decisions irrespective of the m akeup of
the categorization test.To dem onstrate this,we adapted
a paradigm used by Squire and K nowlton (1995).In one
condition, subjects were initially exposed to 40 high
distortions of the prototype (40H ),exactly as was done
in earlierstudies.In anothercondition,subjects were instead exposed to 40 repetitions of the prototype (40P).
W e reasoned that subjects in the 40P condition should
have acquired clearknowledge ofthe category structure
and should protest any surreptitious changes during a
test.By contrast,subjects in the 40H condition should
have acquired little knowledge ofthe category structure
and should go along with oursurreptitious changes.
To verify that different exposure conditions had a
significanteffecton perform ance,we tested subjects in
the sam e way as ourearlierstudies aftera one week delay.O verall,40P subjects achieved 75.3% accuracy and
40H subjects achieved 65.1% accuracy. A s expected,
categorization accuracy was influenced by the type of
inform ation presented during initial category exposure,
as was reported by Squire and K nowlton (1995).O verall perform ance of our 40H subjects was quite com parable to whatwe and others have observed in this para-

digm ;perform ance ofthe 40P subjects was significantly
better than whatwe have observed before.So,inform ation presented during initial exposure can have a significanteffecton categorization perform ance.
A s a way ofsim ulating am nesia,we tested a subsetof
subjects after a severalweeks delay.Butnow we tested
halfon item s generated from the prototype used to generate item s they had seen before (Sam e condition) and
tested half on item s generated from a novel prototype
(D ifferentcondition).Thus,each subjectwas in one of
four conditions: 40P-Sam e, 40P-D ifferent, 40H -Sam e,
and 40H -D ifferent.Since allsubjects viewed a different
random ly generated set of stim uli,we can characterize
subjects in the D ifferent condition as receiving a categorization testintended foranotherindividual.
A s illustrated in Figure 3, we found that subjects in
40P-Sam e perform ed quite well,correctly categorizing
77.4% ofthe item s.H owever,subjects in 40P-D ifferent
were com pletely at chance categorizing the test item s.
W e suspectthatthese subjects tried to use the category
inform ation they clearly had acquired earlier and could
notapply thatknowledge when given a testcom prised
of entirely novel item s.For subjects in the 40H conditions, as we predicted, there was no significant difference in perform ance between subjects who were tested
on the sam e structure they were initially exposed to and
subjects who were tested on a com pletely different
structure. Consistent with our previous results, these
subjects appear to be m aking categorization decisions
based on what they acquired during the categorization
test,noton whatthey m ay have acquired during earlier
phases ofthe experim ent.
Sum m ary.The dissociation between categorization and
recognition reported by K nowlton and Squire (1993)
initially appeared to presentstrong evidence supporting
m ultiple m em ory system s theory.W e reported how the
observed dissociations between categorization and recognition using distorted dot patterns m ay be explained
as a result of the particular m ethodologies used to test
these individuals.W e showed that very good categorization perform ance can be achieved in the absence of
any prior exposure to the category m em bers. W e also
showed that very good categorization perform ance can
be achieved when people are tested on item s thatare
0.9

Sam e
D ifferent

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
40P

40H

Figure 3. Categorization accuracy in Sam e condition and D ifferent condition for subjects studying
40 repetitions ofa prototype (40P)and 40 high distortions ofprototype (40H )in Experim ent2.

different from what they had actually studied.But this
seem s to only occur when subjects have been initially
exposed to a very diffuse category structure consisting
of high distortions that are not very sim ilar to one another.W hen subjects have been exposed to a clearcategory structure through repetition of a single prototype,
they attem ptto categorize item s based on thatacquired
category knowledge,not on inform ation presented during the categorization test.

Learning C ategories ofO bject-Like
Stim uliw ith D iscrete Features
Reed etal.(1999) aim ed to generalize the investigation
of preserved categorization by am nesics by using object-like stim uliwith discrete features.The stim ulithey
used,called Peggles,were drawings ofanim als thatvaried on nine binary-valued dim ensions.To create a category,som e Peggle was designated the prototype.Category m em bers were distortions of the prototype. Low
distortions shared 7 or8 features ofthe prototype.H igh
distortions shared only 1 or 2 features.In the extrem e,
an antiprototype had allnine features opposite to thatof
the prototype.Stim ulithatshared 4 or 5 features of the
prototype were designated neutral item s that were half
way between the prototype and the antiprototype.
Subjects viewed 40 low distortions of the prototype.
A fter exposure,subjects were told thatthe anim als they
saw were allm em bers ofa category,called Peggles,and
w ere then asked to m ake m em ber/nonm em ber judgm ents,withoutfeedback,of 96 new item s.The testincluded 12 repetitions of the prototype, 24 low distortions,24 neutralitem s,24 high distortions,and 12 repetitions ofthe antiprototype.Subjects were also tested on
their ability to com plete a cued-recall test identifying
both values ofthe 9 dim ensions ofthe Peggles.
Reed etal.(1999)found thatam nesics were im paired
at an explicit cued-recall task but could categorize at
levels com parable to norm als. But,two of their am nesics actually categorized stim uli opposite to the way
they should have. That is, they m istakenly called the
prototype and low distortions nonm em bers and called
the antiprototype and high distortions m em bers.Reed et
al. suggested that am nesics had a spared im plicit category learning system that partitioned m em bers and
nonm em bers but that perhaps declarative m em ory was
needed to rem em ber which partition corresponded to
the item s they had previously been exposed to.
Experim ent 3. Following the them e of this paper, we
propose an alternative explanation.D uring the categorization test, subjects were shown the prototype m any
tim es and were shown low distortions that were very
sim ilarto the prototype.They were also shown the antiprototype m any tim es and were shown high distortions
that were very sim ilar to the antiprototype. In other
words,there were two clear clusters of item s presented
during the categorization test.If subjects could pick up
on the category structure em bedded within the testing

0.85
0.80
PercentC orrect

sequence to cluster stim uliinto two groups,they would
be able to correctly partition the stim uliinto two categories.But,they would notbe able to unam biguously decide which cluster corresponded to the category they
were initially exposed to withoutrelying on m em ory of
som e sort.M ightthis be a m ore reasonable explanation
of the category switching by am nesics previously reported by Reed etal.?
The goalof this experim entwas to testwhether subjects m ight be categorizing in part by extracting inform ation from the structure ofthe categorization test.W e
tested subjects in three conditions:Im m ediate,D elayed,
and N ovel. The Im m ediate condition was essentially a
replication of Reed etal.(1999).In the D elayed condition,subjects were exposed to the category and then returned one week later to be tested in the sam e way as
subjects in the Im m ediate condition.In the N ovelcondition,subjects were also exposed to the category and returned one week later.The stim ulipresented forcategorization in the N ovelcondition contained an em bedded
category structure thatcontradicted whatwas presented
during initial exposure.To do this,a neutral item with
respectto the prototype thatwas used to generate stim uli from the original exposure session was picked at
random and designated the "prototype" for purposes of
creating a new categorization test sequence. From this
novelprototype,low distortions,neutralitem s,high distortions, and an antiprototype were created. N ote that
the “antiprototype” for this new structure would also be
considered a neutral item with respectto the prototype
thatwas used to generate item s subjects were originally
exposed to. The novel categorization test consisted of
12 repetitions of the novel prototype, 24 low distortions,24 neutralitem s,24 high distortions,and 12 repetitions ofthe novelantiprototype.
Letus generate som e predictions forthe N ovelcondition.Ifsubjects are categorizing based on whatthey had
been previously exposed to,they should categorize the
“prototype” and the “antiprototype” in this novel test
sequence equally,as half way between the m em ber and
nonm em ber category with respect to what they had
originally studied. H owever, if subjects are instead
picking up on the clear category structure em bedded
within this novel test sequence, they should group the
“prototype” and its distortions in one category and
group the “antiprototype” and its distortions in another
category. H alf of the subjects would call the “prototype” group the m em bers and half would callthe “antiprototype” group the m em bers.
N ow to the results.First,as shown in the rightportion
of Figure 4,perform ance in the recalltask was significantly im paired in the D elayed and N ovel condition
com pared to the Im m ediate condition.A lso,as shown
in the left of Figure 4, subjects in the Im m ediate and
D elayed conditions showed com parable categorization.
Scoring categorization data for subjects in the N ovel
condition was som ewhatm ore com plicated (Palm eri&
Flanery, 2001). Essentially, what we first did was to

Im m ediate
D elayed
N ovel

0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
C ategorization

R ecall

TestType

Figure 4. Categorization and cued-recall accuracy
in the Im m ediate, D elayed, and N ovel conditions
ofExperim ent3 (Palm eri& Flanery,2001).
m easure the difference in m em bership endorsem ents for
the “prototype” and the “antiprototype.” Recall that if
subjects were categorizing these two critical stim uli
with respectto whatthey had actually been exposed to,
they should be indifferentatcategorizing these item s as
m em bers or nonm em bers.To the contrary,we found a
53.6% difference in m em bership endorsem ents for the
“prototypes” and the “antiprototypes.” Subjects were
clearly discrim inating between these item s when m aking
category m em ber judgm ents. N ext, if a particular subjectjudged the “prototype” m ore often to be a m em ber
then we judged categorizations ofthe low distortions as
m em bers and high distortions as nonm em bers to be
“correct” responses; if a particular subject judged the
“antiprototype” m ore often to be a m em ber then we
judged categorizations of the high distortions as m em bers and low distortions as nonm em bers to be “correct”
responses.Figure 4 displays categorization accuracy for
the N ovelcondition using this scoring m ethod (actually,
we scored the Im m ediate and D elayed conditions in the
sam e way to m ake the reported results consistent).W hat
should be clear from the figure is that subjects in the
N ovel condition discrim inated between m em bers and
nonm em bers in a way thatwas consistentwith the structure em bedded within the testing sequence and not on
m em ory for whatthey had seen a week earlier.A s with
Experim ent 2, we found com parable perform ance between subjects who were tested on categories they actually studied and subjects who were tested on categories
thatcontradicted whatthey had actually studied.
Sum m ary.In this experim ent,we extended a paradigm
used by Reed et al. (1999) to contrast categorization
and recallby am nesics and norm als.They observed im pairm ents in cued recallby am nesics com pared to norm als,butthere was little difference in categorization between the two groups. H owever, they did observe that
two of their am nesic individuals categorized m em bers
of the previously studied category as nonm em bers and
nonm em bers as m em bers.W hile Reed etal.interpreted
these results in term s of an im plicit m em ory for the
category,we instead provided evidence thatthis ability

to discrim inate m em bers from nonm em bers m ight
em erge from a clear category distinction em bedded
within the testing sequence.

Learning C ategories D escribed by
a C om plex Q uadratic R ule
Can individuals with explicitm em ory im pairm ents learn
to categorize stim uli in accordance with a com plex
categorization rule? Filoteo etal.(in press)had norm als
and am nesics learn categories described by what they
characterized as a com plex quadratic rule. Subjects
learned two categories thatwere defined by m ultivariate
norm aldistributions.Figure 5 displays the equallikelihood contours for the category structures utilized by
Filoteo et al.(in press).Because the categories are defined by norm al distributions,the two categories overlap, so perfect perform ance is im possible. A lso as
shown in the figure, learning the categories required
subjects to integrate inform ation across both stim ulus
dim ensions; in the language of decision boundary theory,learning these categories required the form ation of
a quadratic (nonlinear) decision rule.This m anipulation
was of theoretical im portance because som e work has
suggested that am nesics cannot integrate inform ation
across m ultiple dim ensions (Rickard & G rafm an,1998).
The stim uliused by Filoteo etal.(in press) consisted
of a horizontal and a vertical line connected atthe top
left corner. The length of the horizontal and vertical
lines varied in accordance with the distributions shown
in Figure 5.It is im portant to note that the “diagonal”
distribution consisted of stim uli for which the line
lengths are highly correlated;in other words,they form
the leftand top portions of a square (square category).
The “circular” distribution consisted of stim uli for
which the line lengths are uncorrelated;in other words,
they form the leftand top portions ofvarious rectangles
(rectangle category). O n each trial of the experim ent,
subjects were presented with a stim ulus random ly
drawn from either the square or the rectangle category,
categorized itas a m em berofcategory A orcategory B,
and received corrective feedback.
Filoteo etal.observed the accuracy in the last100 trials to be 85% for norm als and 84% for am nesics.They
concluded that am nesics appear to be able to acquire
categories defined by a com plex quadratic rule.To test
whether an am nesic could retain thatrule over a delay
period,they tested one am nesic and one norm alafter a
one day delay.Subjects com pleted a single block of100
trials in which they received corrective feedback on
every trial,justas in the originaltraining.A ccuracy was
92% forthe norm alindividualand 89% forthe am nesic.
Thus,am nesics and norm als appear to be able to learn
and retain a quadratic categorization rule.
Experim ent 4. The Filoteo et al. results suggest that
am nesics can learn and retain a category described by a
com plex quadratic rule that requires integrating inform ation from two stim ulus dim ensions,heightand width.

H owever,these stim uli can also be described in an alternative way by rotating the dim ensions by 45 degrees.
Thatis,we can alternatively describe the dim ensions as
shape and size. The square and rectangle categories
contain stim uli of the sam e shape and can be categorized by a very sim ple shape rule ratherthan a com plex
quadratic rule.Filoteo etal.rejected this possibility,arguing thattheir subjects were learning a com plex quadratic rule requiring an integration of inform ation along
two independentstim ulus dim ensions.But,we are puzzled by how these subjects were able to learn a com plex
categorization rule so quickly,reaching asym ptotic perform ance afterless than 100 trials,when othercategorization experim ents exam ining quadratic boundaries
have required m any days oftraining to reach asym ptote.
To illustrate thatsubjects m ay notbe learning a com plex quadratic rule,butm ay instead m ay be learning a
sim ple shape rule, we replicated and extended the
Filoteo et al. study using three conditions. In the first
condition,we used the sam e stim uliand category structures as Filoteo et al. (Square/Rectangle condition).In
the second condition, subjects were trained on sim ilar
stim uli, but both m ultivariate category distributions
were shifted along dim ension 1.In this way,the diagonalcategory distribution stillhad heightand width correlated,buttheirvalues were notequal– in otherwords,
the stim uliwere rectangles ofthe sam e shape thatvaried
in size (Rectangle/Rectangle condition). In the third
condition, we used very different stim ulus dim ensions
of circle size and angle of a diam eter line (CircleLine/Circle-Line condition) that cannot be integrated
like the heightand width ofline segm ents;these dim ensions were roughly equated fordiscrim inability with the
heightand width dim ensions.
Perform ance in the Squares and Rectangles conditions were com parable (81% and 78% accuracy,respectively). Perform ance in the Circle-Line condition was
far worse (58% accuracy). These results suggest that
am nesics m ay nothave been learning a com plex quadratic categorization rule at all, but m ay have instead
been learning a very sim ple shape rule.
A nother issue with the Filoteo etal.(in press) results
regards the retention of the categorization rule aftera

Figure 5.Equalprobability contours for categories
used by Filoteo etal.and used in Experim ent4.

delay. In the second session of their experim ent, subjects received feedback after each trial,sim ilar to what
they had experienced during training.D id the am nesics
display a realm em ory for the categorization rule or did
they express a savings in relearning a very sim ple categorization rule? To show thatdifferentkinds ofcategorization tests can reveal different levels of knowledge
aboutcategories,we broughtoursubjects back afterone
day and tested them in three different ways. First, we
tested them without feedback on stim uli drawn from a
uniform distribution across the entire set of possible
stim uli. Second, we tested them without feedback on
stim ulidrawn random ly from the two category distributions. Third, we retrained them with feedback, as was
done by Filoteo et al.A lthough subjects reached com parable levels of perform ance in the Squares and Rectangles condition on the first day, subjects were m uch
better when tested on the uniform distribution without
feedback in the Squares condition (96% ) than the Rectangles condition (79% ). By contrast, in the other two
testing conditions (without feedback and with feedback),perform ance was com parable forthe Squares and
Rectangles condition (82% and 80% accuracy,respectively).It appears thatthe differentcategorization tests
can revealdifferentialknowledge ofthe categories.

Sum m ary and C onclusions
W e found evidence thatnorm alsubjects can acquire inform ation aboutcategories in the absence ofpriorstudy
and in opposition to prior study. In our experim ents,
perform ance by subjects in these conditions was not
significantly different from perform ance by subjects
who actually received prior study and who were tested
on item s consistent with their prior study. O ur results
dem onstrate thatclassification decisions m ade during a
categorization testm ay notbe based solely on inform ation acquired during a study task,butm ay also be based
on inform ation acquired during the testitself.A s a generalpoint,we argue thatcare m ustbe taken in selecting
item s fora categorization testso as notto provide additional inform ation about the categories being tested or
so as notto change the inform ation aboutthe categories
thatm ay have been previously acquired.In the present
experim ents,subjects were tested in such a way that it
was possible to extractinform ation aboutthe categories
from the tests them selves. Subjects were repeatedly
tested on the category prototype (four tim es in Experim ent1,twelve tim es in Experim ent2) and were tested
on m any low distortions that were very sim ilar to the
category prototype, conditions particularly am endable
to unsupervised category learning.A preferable way to
testindividuals in an neutralm annerm ightbe to sam ple
all possible test stim uli from a uniform distribution,as
we did in the lastexperim ent.A lthough itm ay be possible to partition such teststim uliinto som e arbitrary set
ofcategories,only by chance m ightthis partition m atch
the correct category discrim ination without relying on
m em ory forstudied item s.

A s we stated at the outset,our results m ay have im plications for understanding the relationship between
categorization and other form s of m em ory.The ability
ofam nesics to categorize stim ulicoupled with theirim pairm ent at recognizing or recalling stim uli has been
taken as evidence for m ultiple m em ory system s (e.g.,
K nowlton & Squire,1993;Reed etal.,1999;Squire &
K nowlton, 1995; see, however, N osofsky & Zaki,
1998). If the paradigm s used by som e investigators
perm itcategory acquisition from the categorization test
(by contrast, the explicit m em ory tasks used in these
experim ents cannot be accurately perform ed without
m em ory for the studied item s),then the strength of this
dissociation m ay be questioned. It seem s prudent to
forgo strong conclusions aboutindependence or nonindependence of fundam entalaspects of hum an cognition
untilm ore convincing paradigm s are em ployed.

A cknow ledgm ents
This work was supported by V anderbiltU niversity Research Council G rants, G rant BCS-9910756 from the
N ational Science Foundation, and G rant M H 61370
from the N ationalInstitute ofM entalH ealth.

R eferences
Filoteo,J.V .,M addox,W .T.,& D avis,J.D .(in press).
Q uantitative m odeling of category learning in am nesic patients. Journal of the International NeuropsychologicalSociety.
K nowlton,B.J.,& Squire,L.R.(1993).The learning of
categories: Parallel brain system s for item m em ory
and category knowledge.Science,262,1747-1749.
N osofsky,R.M .,& Zaki,S.R.(1998).D issociations between categorization and recognition in am nesic and
norm al individuals: A n exem plar-based interpretation.PsychologicalScience,9,247-255.
Palm eri,T.J.,& Flanery,M .A .(1999).Learning about
categories in the absence oftraining:Profound am nesia and the relationship between perceptualcategorization and recognition m em ory. Psychological Science,10,526-530.
Palm eri,T.J.,& Flanery,M .A .(2001).Category knowledge acquired during categorization testing.
Posner,M .I.,& K eele,S.W .(1968).O n the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experim ental Psychology,
77,353-363.
Reed,J.M .,Squire,L.R.,Patalano,A .L.,Sm ith,E.E.,&
Jonides,J.(1999) Learning aboutcategories thatare
defined by object-like stim uli despite im paired declarative m em ory. Behavioral Neuroscience, 113,
411-419.
Rickard,T.C.,& G rafm an,J.(1998).Losing theirconfiguralm ind:A m nesic patients failon transverse patterning.JournalofCognition Neuroscience,10,509524.
Squire,L.R.,& K nowlton,B.J.(1995).Learning about
categories in the absence of m em ory. PNAS, 92,
12470-12474.

