UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Kinds of Kinds: Sources of Category Coherence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0fz3v72h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Kurtz, Kenneth Jeffrey
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Kinds of Kinds: Sources of Category Coherence
Kenneth Jeffrey Kurtz (kjk@northwestern.edu)
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, 2029 Sheridan Rd
Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA
Abstract
A fundamental question in the study of concepts is what
makes sets of examples cohere as categories. We present
results of three studies designed to compare standard
taxonomic categories with categories that take their
meaning from relationships extending outside of the
individual example. An exemplar generation task is used
to differentiate relational categories from taxonomic
kinds and to compare possible subtypes of extrinsically
cohering categories based on goals or thematic contexts.
Results provide strong support for the intrinsic—
extrinsic distinction and reveal signatures of underlying
organization among the types of categories investigated.

Introduction
Categories play a fundamental role in cognition. The
internal structure of categories supports numerous
functions including classification, prediction, and
reasoning. Categories give rise to an extension: the set
of examples in the world that are members. The
coherence of a category is the meaningful basis
according to which these members go together.
One traditional view holds that the correlational
structure of the environment determines category
coherence due to systematic patterns of within-category
similarity and between-category difference (Rosch &
Mervis, 1975). Murphy and Medin (1985) propose the
theory-based view that challenges the idea that
similarity itself explains category coherence. ‘Respects’
for similarity (i.e., a basis for the selection of features
and weights) must be specified in order for concepts to
exist as groups of like examples. Additionally, they
argue that category representations are richer than lists
of features and must include relationships that hold
within and between examples of categories. The tension
inherent in the need for a constrained, yet rich basis of
category coherence poses a continued challenge to
theorists (Goldstone, 1994).
A useful source of inspiration is structural alignment
theory—which has proven successful as an account of
comparison processes such as similarity and analogy
(Gentner, 1983; Markman & Gentner, 1993; Gentner,
Rattermann, & Forbus, 1993). This framework offers a
perspective for addressing the question of category
coherence in a manner in keeping with the theory view.
Respects for similarity can arise from the process of
aligning corresponding predicates of two structured
representations (Gentner & Markman, 1997; Medin,

Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993; Markman & Wisniewski,
1997). Relational similarity drives the alignment
process and largely determines the quality of a match.
In the same way that structural alignment theory looks
to shared relations (more than attributes or objects) to
explain similarity, we can look to relationships between
objects as a source of category coherence. While
theory-based categories may cohere around intrinsic
relationships (like the causal link between genetic
material and physical features), we focus here on
relationships extending beyond the individual example.
For instance, the category barriers consists of examples
that conform to the relationship: BLOCKS (X, Y).
Barr and Caplan (1987) distinguish between the
intrinsic properties of a category which are true of an
example in isolation versus extrinsic features which
hold only in relation to other objects. As an alternative
to category members bound together by common
intrinsic structure (relations or attributes), category
coherence can be derived from relations extrinsic to
individual examples. The extreme case of extrinsic
coherence is relational categories like barriers—
members cohere based on fulfilling a core relationship.
The roles of X and Y in the blocking relation can be
filled by anything—so as long as the relationship holds,
membership is secure. The examples of a relational
category may have few or no intrinsic properties in
common with one another. In this sense, relational
categories are akin to analogies. Both ‘prison bars’ and
‘raging river’ are members of the category barrier,
despite their sharing no intrinsic similarity.
Another case in which the category coherence is
extrinsic is Barsalou’s (1983, 1985) ad-hoc or goalderived categories which are organized around ideals
(properties that optimally promote goal resolution)
rather than central tendency. Again, categories such as
things to take out of the house in case of fire violate the
correlational structure of the environment since member
examples have few properties in common. Goldstone
(1995) makes a useful distinction between default and
directed similarity; where the former is the basis of
graded structure and broad inferential power of
taxonomic categories, while the latter is the focal,
context-specific sense of similarity underlying ad-hoc
categories or analogical relationships.
Categories may also be grounded by properties
beyond the individual example that are not specific
relationships. As an example, consider items associated

with working at an office desk. Thematic categories
consist of examples that tend to cluster or co-occur in
particular contexts. As Wisniewski et al. (1996) noted,
such categories are often expressed as mass noun
superordinates – e.g., groceries or workout equipment.
There may be other relations in addition to
spatiotemporal contiguity between particular pairs
within a thematic category, but the members need not
share any particular similarity.
In the present work, we use an exemplar-generation
task to investigate and compare these possible bases for
what makes things “go together” as a category. The
sources of category coherence are: default similarity to
the central tendency, directed similarity to ideals or to a
core relationship, and patterns of contiguity in spatiotemporal contexts. We believe that there are kinds of
categories that are best explained in terms of each of
these sources of coherence, while there are also
categories that are grounded in mixed forms of
coherence. Barsalou (1985) shows that ideals account
for a significant portion of the variance in typicality not
only for goal-derived categories, but also taxonomic
categories. Furthermore, different kinds of experts have
been shown to organize the taxonomic category tree in
terms of ideals derived from their experience (Lynch,
Coley, & Medin, 1999).
Our main goals are: 1) to assess the psychological
reality of extrinsically cohering categories in contrast
with the intrinsic coherence attributed to standard
taxonomic categories; 2) compare types of extrinsically
cohering categories; and 3) address the non-uniformity
of coherence in real-world categories. We use an
exemplar generation task along with several follow-up
measures to determine whether these different posited
sources of category coherence are made evident in the
behavior of the category.

Experiment 1: Exemplar generation
We begin by using exemplar generation as a means
of indexing category coherence. Through measuring the
content and dynamics of responding, a picture can
develop of the organization of the knowledge being
accessed. This technique has been used sporadically in
the categorization literature. Goal-derived categories
have been shown to support exemplar generation, but
produce less output and show a lesser degree of
correlation of output dominance with typicality than
taxonomic categories under short time intervals
(Barsalou 1983, 1985; Vallee-Tourangeau, Anthony, &
Austin, 1998). In addition, greater output consensus
was found for taxonomic than ad-hoc categories.
Several lines of evidence lead to the prediction that
taxonomic categories should be easier and more natural
than relational categories. As noted above, relational
categories are akin to analogies: their members need

share only relational similarity, not overall literal
similarity. In contrast, the members of taxonomic
categories share overall similarity. For example, two
instances of vegetable are likely to have considerable
intrinsic similarity (seeds, skin, etc.), as well as some
extrinsic similarity (sold in stores, provide nourishment,
for people, etc.). There is considerable evidence that
relational similarity is more difficult to access in
memory than object similarity (Gentner et al, 1993;
Holyoak & Koh, 1995); and acquired later in
development (Gentner & Rattermann, 1991). Further,
Barr & Caplan (1987) showed that categories
characterized by extrinsic features possess a greater
degree of graded structure—possibly due to lower
category validity of extrinsic properties. Thus we
expect that relational categories will be less fluent
(fewer runs of responses with minimal inter-item
delay), less generative (fewer responses produced), and
less consistent (lower agreement between participants)
than taxonomic categories.
Evidence on the behavior of goal-derived categories
leads us to expect that they should also be less
generative than taxonomic categories. The investigation
of thematic categories is more exploratory. The fact that
members of thematic categories – such as ‘ticket’ and
‘popcorn’ for things associated with going to the
movies -- lack not only intrinsic, but even relational
similarity, might lead one to expect low generativity.
On the other hand, the fact that thematic associates
share spatiotemporal contiguity suggests that members
might readily prime one another.

Method
Participants. 75 undergraduates from Northwestern
University served as participants in order to fulfill an
introductory course requirement.
Materials and design. Eight category cues (see Table
1) were selected for four different types of categories:
taxonomic (all count noun superordinates), thematic,
goal-derived, and relational. Natural language labels for
the categories were determined for optimal clarity. Each
participant generated exemplars for two category cues
of each type. Item assignment was accomplished by
random selection. The experiment used a within-Ss
design with four item conditions corresponding to the
types of categories.
Procedure. Participants read a set of instructions
appearing on the computer screen. They were told they
would be shown category cues (words or phrases) and
asked to generate as many examples as they could
during 4-minute intervals. To illustrate the nature of
the task, a sample was shown: examples of beverage
include water and milk. Participants were asked to work

as quickly and accurately as possible. The category cue
remained visible for the duration of the trial.
Participants typed into a response window on the
screen. For each response, the time of the initial
keystroke and the time of typing the return key were
recorded. All responses entered for that cue remained
accessible to the participant in a history window. This
is comparable to a pencil-and-paper version of a listing
task, but allowed recording of precise timing
information. The eight category cues were presented in
a random order. The entire experiment took
approximately 35 minutes.
Table 1: Categories used.
Taxonomic

Thematic

Goal-derived

Relational

an animal
a plant
a fruit
a vegetable
a vehicle
a household appliance
a type of dwelling
a musical instrument
an item associated with:
dining out at a restaurant
going to the movies
working at an office desk
preparing for sleep at night
working out at the gym
going to the beach
a party
taking an airplane trip
an item to take on a camping trip
an item to remove from the
house in case of fire
an item not to eat while dieting
a picnic activity
a thing to do for weekend entertainment
a way to advertise something
an item to sell at a garage sale
a thing that makes someplace desirable
to live
a weapon
a trap
a guide
a signal
a barrier
a tool
a filter
a shield

Results
The results are summarized in Table 2. All analyses
were conducted by item since each participant only
responded to two out of the eight items in each
condition. The number of presentations of each item
was not equal due to the random selection, but the

number of presentations of each type of item was equal.
All items were presented at least seven times.
Two analyses of response dynamics were performed
on the entire data set (N = 75): response fluency and
clustering. Response fluency was a measure of how
long it took to
generate each response. The
“downtime” between any two responses was computed
as the amount of time between the initial keystroke of
each response. Item fluency was determined by the
median downtime between responses. Mean fluency (in
milliseconds) varied across item condition, as shown in
Table 2. Comparison of the means using a one-way
ANOVA showed a reliable difference between
conditions, F(3,31) = 6.44, p = .002. As predicted, the
Relational condition (M = 10832) was significantly less
fluent according to post-hoc comparisons (all such tests
we report were performed using the Bonferroni
correction) than both the Taxonomic (M = 6370), p <
.01) and the Thematic (M = 6793), p < .01) conditions.
We assessed clustering of responses in several ways
yielding convergent results. In one analysis, any two
responses that occurred within less than 67% of the
median downtime for all responses by that participant
were considered to be clustered together. To measure
the degree of clustering, a ratio was constructed
between the number of clustered responses and the
number of isolated responses. A value greater than one
indicates more clustered than isolated responses.
The clustering ratios are shown in Table 2. A oneway ANOVA was used to assess the differences
between conditions, F(3,31) = 6.76, p = .001. Post-hoc
comparisons showed reliably less clustering for
Relational (M = .64) than for Taxonomic categories (M
= 1.38), p < .02. In addition, significant differences
were found between Relational and Thematic (M =
1.48), p < .01, as well as between Goal-derived (M =
.82) and Thematic (p < .04).
Table 2: Summary of Results of Experiment 1.

Productivity
Consensus
Paragons
Easy-Access
Fluency
Clustering

Tax
23.2
25.8
5.1
2.5
6370
1.4

Thematic
21.9
18.1
2.1
3.0
6793
1.5

Goal
19.1
17.3
1.1
1.5
8140
0.8

Relation
14.2
13.8
0.8
0.6
10832
0.6

Analyses of response content. A subset of the
responses (the first 46 of the 75 participants) was
analyzed intensively using a scoring procedure
performed by trained undergraduate research assistants.
Responses were removed from the analysis on the basis
of a clear failure to understand the task or to undertake
it seriously. Repeated and blank responses were also
removed. A conservative coding of responses was
performed: pure synonyms, abbreviations, and minor

syntactic variations (e.g., singular versus plural) were
treated as the same response.
Productivity or item output was measured as the
mean number of responses produced. A one-way
ANOVA was performed to test for differences between
Goal-derived (M = 19.1), Relational (M = 14.2),
Taxonomic (M = 23.2), and Thematic (M = 21.9). An
effect of item condition on productivity was found
F(3,31) = 3.87, p = .02. The effect appears to be driven
by the low mean productivity in the Relational
condition. Post-hoc comparisons revealed a significant
difference between Relational and Taxonomic (p < .03).
A marginal difference was also found between
Relational and Thematic (p < .07).
In order to evaluate whether participants tended to
generate the same responses to the categories, output
consensus was measured in two ways. For each item,
the percentage of participants who produced each
response was computed and the mean was taken across
all responses generated for that item. By this measure,
output consensus varied as follows: Goal-derived (M =
17%), Relational (M = 14%), Taxonomic (M = 26%),
and Thematic (M = 22%). A one-way ANOVA showed
a reliable difference between item conditions F(3,31) =
6.41, p = .002.
Post-hoc comparisons showed
significant differences between Taxonomic and both
Relational (p = .001) and Goal-derived (p < .03). The
difference between Taxonomic and Thematic was
marginally significant (p < .07).
As a convergent measure, output consensus was also
analyzed by computing the percentage of responses that
occurred frequently (generated by at least 60% of the
participants receiving the item). Few responses were
widely agreed upon by participants: Goal-derived (M =
4%), Relational (M = 2%), Taxonomic (M = 12%), and
Thematic (M = 5%). Group means were compared
using a one-way ANOVA that revealed an effect of
condition on output consensus F(3,31) = 4.50, p = .01.
On both measures, agreement was greatest for
Taxonomic and lowest for Relational.
The content of the exemplar generation data showed
particular responses that occurred with great regularity
(produced by at least 85% of participants). To give an
example from each type of category: ‘car’ was a
paragon of the Taxonomic category vehicle, ‘wall’ was
a paragon of the Relational category barrier, ‘tent’ and
‘sleeping bag’ were paragons of the Goal-derived
category an item to take on a camping trip, and ‘check’
was a paragon of the Thematic category an item
associated with dining out at a restaurant. The
prevalence of such high-agreement responses was
computed by counting the number of paragons for each
item. This measure is reported as a frequency, not as a
percentage of the total set of responses, since the
presence of special responses is not likely to follow
from the overall breadth of responding. The mean
number of paragons is shown in Table 2. A one-way
ANOVA showed a significant difference between

groups, F(3,31) = 4.36, p = .01. As confirmed by posthoc comparisons, Taxonomic categories yielded
significantly more paragons than Relational (p < .02) or
Goal-derived (p < .04).
In addition, certain responses were found to occur
both early and often in the exemplar generation task.
The presence of such easy-access items was determined
according to mean list position (normalized by list
length). Frequent responses with a mean position score
of less than 0.3 were considered easy-access responses.
Easy-access responses sometimes, but not always,
corresponded with category paragons. For example, the
easy-access responses for the Taxonomic category
vehicle included the paragon ‘car’ plus ‘truck.’ ‘Wall’
was the only paragon as well as the only easy-access
response for the Relational category barrier. ‘Tent’ and
‘sleeping bag’ were both paragons and easy-access
responses for the Goal-derived category an item to take
on a camping trip. For the Thematic category an item
associated with dining out at a restaurant, the paragon
was ‘check’, but the easy-access responses were
‘waiter’ and ‘menu’. A one-way ANOVA showed an
effect of item condition on the frequency of easy-access
responses, F(3,31) = 5.98, p < .005. Post-hoc
comparisons showed Relational categories produced
reliably fewer easy-access items than Thematic (p <
.005) and Taxonomic (p < .03) categories.

Discussion
A basic pattern can be discerned across the set of
results. The Relational and Taxonomic categories are
reliably different on nearly every measure tested. This
provides strong support for the predicted differentiation
of intrinsic and extrinsic forms of category coherence.
The analysis of response content reveals that Relational
categories (and to a lesser degree Goal-derived
categories) are less productive, less consistent, and less
likely to have paragons or easy-access responses. The
thematic categories are distinct in the high frequency of
easy-access responses.

Experiment 2a: Pairwise Similarity of
generated exemplars
We suggested above that only the Taxonomic
categories possess coherence based on intrinsic
similarity. To confirm this claim in terms of the actual
responses generated by participants, we obtained
similarity ratings for within-category pairs.

Method
Participants. 37 undergraduates from Northwestern
University served as participants in order to fulfill an
introductory course requirement.

Materials. Stimulus materials were sets of the six
responses generated with the highest consensus on half
of the category items in Experiment 1 (the half selected
were those items yielding the most high-consensus
responses). All within-category pairs were tested.
Procedure. Participants received instructions to rate
the similarity of pairs of items on a scale from low (1)
to high (5). An example of both high and low similarity
was provided. All possible within-category pairs were
presented in pseudo-random order (no pairs from the
same category were presented consecutively). Each pair
was presented in random left-right order. Participants
used the mouse to click on the button labeled with the
numerical rating. A response could be changed by reselecting before clicking “OK” to continue.

Results and Discussion
Mean pairwise similarity was computed across the
fifteen within-category response pairs for each item.
Across all participants, Taxonomic (M = 3.8) pairs
showed the highest mean similarity while the other
conditions were nearly equal: Relational (M = 2.3),
Goal-derived (M = 2.4), Thematic (M = 2.4). This
difference was confirmed by a one-way ANOVA,
F(3,15) = 13.31, p < .001. Post-hoc comparisons
showed highly significant differences between
Taxonomic and the other conditions (all p < .01).
The results are consistent with our prior findings in
showing an advantage for Taxonomic categories over
Relational categories. In addition, neither Thematic nor
Goal-derived categories showed high within-category
similarity. This pattern is consistent with the view that
taxonomic categories are based on overall default
similarity while the other types are grounded in
alternate forms of category coherence.

Experiment 2b: Category transparency of
generated exemplars
A measure of the nature of a category’s coherence is
how readily the common basis can be perceived given a
large set of examples. In this study, participants were
presented with sets of generated category examples and
asked to say what they had in common. As before, an
advantage was predicted for Taxonomic categories.

Method
Participants. 25 undergraduates from Northwestern
University served as participants in order to fulfill an
introductory course requirement.
Materials. The same materials were used as in
Experiment 2a. Instead of pairs, the six high-consensus
responses for each category were presented together. A

packet was prepared with one page for each category.
The six responses were displayed on the page in three
staggered columns of two to minimize spatially
organized sub-groups within the set. The order of the
six responses was fixed (alphabetical). The pages of
each packet were randomly ordered.
Procedure. On each page of the packet to be
completed, participants were given a blank line on
which to answer: “What would you say the following
examples have in common?” Additionally, three blank
lines were provided to: “Try to think of a few more
examples that fit well with the group.”

Results and Discussion
The results of the commonality task are of principle
interest since participants were almost always able to
generate consistent additional examples. Participants
routinely interpreted the commonality judgement as if
the task were to induce the category from the examples.
Category transparency for each item was computed as
the percentage of participants whose response was
scored as a match to the initial category cue used in
Experiment 1. Responses that captured the meaning of
the category, but differed in word choice, were accepted
as matches. Taxonomic (M = 100%) and Thematic (M
= 97%) items showed very high mean category
transparency. Relational (M = 74%) and Goal-derived
(M = 68%) items showed considerably less
transparency. A one-way ANOVA revealed an effect
of item condition, F(3,15) = 3.71, p < .05. A planned
contrast between Relational and Taxonomic showed a
reliable condition difference, t(12) = 2.19, p < .05.
Taxonomic categories are highly transparent, as
should follow from their high intrinsic similarity. In
contrast, Relational categories, as expected from their
extrinsic
similarity
grounding,
show
lower
transparency—likewise for Goal-derived categories.
While participants were sometimes able to instantiate
these original categories from the bottom-up, there were
frequent failures as well. The above three types
behaved consistently on pairwise similarity and
category transparency tasks. However, Thematic
categories showed a marked difference: despite low
inter-item similarity (Experiment 2a), the connection
among the group as a whole was highly transparent. We
conjecture that the multiple examples in the current task
invited
participants
to
instantiate
unifying
spatiotemporal contexts.

General Discussion
Results across the two studies strongly bear out our
predictions. Taxonomic categories show high intrinsic
similarity and all the many advantages in terms of
fluency and generativity which follow. Relational
categories are markedly less similar, less transparent,

and less generative. The remaining two kinds of
categories are intermediate. Goal-derived categories
often pattern with Relational categories—not
surprisingly, since relations link objects to goals.
Thematic categories are in some sense the outlier; while
they are highly fluent, they are grounded not in
commonality, but in associativity.
Before discussing the implications of these data,
there are some concerns to be addressed. Our choice of
items represents our best effort to capture each type, but
some factors were not precisely controlled. One issue is
whether lower production can be attributed to smaller
set size. Unfortunately, establishing the size of a
relational category is not straightforward; e.g., should
examples such as ‘lack of education’ (listed under
barrier) be included? Relational categories may include
more abstract or less familiar examples. These factors
could play a role in generation.
To summarize, traditional explanations of real-world
categories have appealed to feature overlap and the
correlational structure of the environment. The
emphasis suggested by the theory view of concepts on
relations within and between category examples and the
success of the structural alignment account of
psychological similarity point toward a key role for
relations underlying category coherence. The research
reported here shows that extrinsic coherence can
support categorical organization and points to
individual signatures for different kinds of categories.
Given that relational categories appear to bring up the
rear on all our measures, should we draw the
implication that such categories are not psychologically
real or natural? We would answer No, and Yes.
Relational categories are indeed less natural than
categories based on overall similarity; they do not
provide a first-order basis for making sense of the
world. But they provide structural organizers for
understanding the world in ways that cross-cut objectbased categories. We suggest that categories such as
barrier, operator, and catalyst, though they may never
be as facile as object categories, pay their way as tools
of cognition.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an NIH-NRSA postdoctoral fellowship to Ken Kurtz and by NSF Grant
SBR-95-11757 to D. Gentner. This paper was partially
prepared while D. Gentner was a fellow at the Center
for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences with
support from the William T. Grant Foundation, award
#95167795. We thank Melissa Wu for contributions to
the design of experiment, Adrienne Rosen, Evan
Ransom, and Jessica Goethals for help in processing the
data, Jeremy Cloud for software design, and Kathleen
Braun for her help throughout the project, and the
Similarity and Analogy group at Northwestern.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 211-227.
Barsalou, L.W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded
structure in categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 11,
629-649.
Barr, R.A, & Caplan, L.J. (1987). Category
representations and their implications for category
structure. Memory & Cognition, 15, 397-418.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155170.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure
mapping in analogy and similarity. American
Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D.
(1993). The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability and inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 524-575.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). The role of similarity in
categorization: Providing a groundwork. Cognition
52, 125-157.
Goldstone, R.L. (1995). Mainstream and avant-garde
similarity, Psychologica Belgica, 35, 145-165.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and
structural similarity in analogical transfer. Memory &
Cognition, 15, 332-340.
Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., and Medin, D. L. (1999).
Tall is typical: Central tendency, ideal dimensions,
and graded category structure among tree experts and
novices. Memory & Cognition, 28, 41-50.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Markman, A. B., & Wisniewski, E. (1997). Similar and
different: The differentiation of basic-level
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 54-70.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100,
254-278.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of
theories in conceptual coherence. Psychological
Review, 92, 289-316.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C.B. (1975). Family
resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Wisniewski, E. J., Imai, M., & Casey, L. (1996). On the
equivalence of superordinate concepts. Cognition, 60,
269-298.
Vallee-Tourangeau, F., Anthony, S.H., Austin, N.G.
(1998). Strategies for generating multiple instances of
common and ad hoc categories. Memory, 6, 555-592.

