UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Meaning, Communication and Theory of Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8c94r9c7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Breheny, Richard

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

M eaning,C om m unication and Theory ofM ind.
R ichard Breheny (reb35@ cam .ac.uk)
RCEA L,U niversity ofCam bridge,Trum pington Street
Cam bridge,CB2 1Q A U K

A bstract
The study of language, m eaning and com m unication in
the cognitive sciences has undergone a kind of
conceptual inflation in the past tw enty years or so.N ot
only has the very nature of hum an com m unication com e
to be seen as, in m any respects, G ricean, but also
linguistic m eaning itself has com e to be w idely regarded
in term s of the effect of language use on m ental states.
A s a result,a m ore or less explicitassum ption aboutthe
conceptual abilities of agents w ho have linguistic and
com m unicative com petence has been adopted in a
variety of disciplines ranging from language acquisition
to form al sem antic theories: that these agents have the
ability to representand m ake inferences aboutthe m ental
states ofothers.The purpose ofthis paperw illbe to offer
considerations in support of the contrary, m ore
m inim alistview thatneitherm eaning norcom m unication
involve the representation of m ental states essentially.
Correspondingly,agents w ho are com petentw ith regards
language use and com m unication need notpossess m etacognitive abilities.

Introduction
The study of language,m eaning and com m unication in
the cognitive sciences has undergone a kind of
conceptualinflation in the pasttw enty years or so.N ot
only has the very nature of hum an com m unication
com e to be seen as,in m any respects,G ricean,butalso
linguistic m eaning itself has com e to be w idely
regarded in term s of the effect of language use on
m ental states. A s a result, a m ore or less explicit
assum ption aboutthe conceptualabilities ofagents w ho
have linguistic and com m unicative com petence has
been adopted in a variety of disciplines ranging from
language acquisition to form al sem antic theories: that
these agents have the ability to represent and m ake
inferences about the m ental states of others. The
purpose of this paper w illbe to offer considerations in
support of the contrary, m ore m inim alist view that
neither m eaning nor com m unication involve the
representation
of m ental states essentially.
Correspondingly, agents w ho are com petent w ith
regards language use and com m unication need not
possess m eta-cognitive abilities.

The D ilem m a.
D ifferent theories of language and com m unication
presuppose different kinds of cognitive capacities -

either explicitly or im plicitly. A m ong the m ore
prom inent and m ost influential pragm atic theories theories of speech acts,conversational im plicature and
the like -are theories w hich are broadly G ricean in their
stance.G ricean theories can be defined as those theories
w hich analyse utterances as acts by one agent w hich
seek to alter the m ental states or attitudes of other
agents in part by getting the other agent to recognise
their intention to so do. It follow s that G ricean
approaches to pragm atics presum e that com m unicating
agents posses the cognitive ability to represent the
m entalstate or attitudes of other agents and/or to m ake
inferences aboutthese.
O fcourse,G rice's theory ofconversation as presented
in his "Logic and Conversation" (G rice 1975)contains a
w orking-out schem a for conversational im plicature
w hich is a piece of pure belief-desire psychology,w ith
inferences being explicitly m ade about the attitudes of
another agent. A t a perhaps m ore fundam ental level,
influential theories of basic speech acts such as
assertions adopt a m ore or less G ricean stance.
Stalnaker's speaker presupposition fram ew ork, in
particular, presum es that agents involved in
conversation assum e a com m on ground.A proposition
is com m on ground, or presupposed by the speaker, if
the speaker is disposed to act as if she believes it or
assum es it is true and believes that her audience
believes or assum es it is true. A ssertions and
suppositions are acts w hich seek "to change the
presuppositions of the participants in the conversation
by adding w hat is asserted to w hat is presupposed".
(Stalnaker 1978:323). Thus, according to Stalnaker’s
m odel of assertion,in order to engage in conversation
one m ust be able to represent speaker presupposition.
A nd the structure of this presupposition "can be
represented by a K ripke sem antics in w hich the
accessibility relation is serial,transitive and Euclidean,
but not necessarily reflexive" (Stalnaker 1996:282).In
other w ords, putting aside certain idiosyncrasies,
speaker presupposition is structurally sim ilar to other
attitudes and therefore requires sim ilar conceptual
abilities to represent it. O ther influential accounts of
speech acts fundam entally incorporate som e notion of
com m on ground w ith basically the sam e structure- see
Searle (1969), Lew is (1969),Schiffer(1972),and m ore
recently Clark (1996).Sperber and W ilson's Relevance
Theory (1986/95) also supposes that basic assertive

speech acts involve the recognition of com plex
intentions involving the intention to getthe audience to
believe w hatthe speakeris saying.
These G ricean pragm atic theories have also inspired
an approach to m eaning w hich has been popular in the
recent past. Consider again Stalnaker's proposal
regarding assertions.They are seen as m oves w hich are
m ade on the com m on ground,a proposalto reduce the
set of live possibilities consistent w ith w hat is
presupposed in accordance w ith the content of w hat is
said. In this fram ew ork, the m eaning of the linguistic
expressions used w as thoughtaboutin traditionaltruthconditional term s. D ynam ic sem antics (K am p 1981,
H eim 1982,G roenendijk & Stokhof 1990,1991) takes
the further step of supposing that the m eaning of a
sentence consists in its potential for transform ing the
input context set into the resultant output state. Thus
m eaning of sub-sentential elem ents lies in their
contribution to the update potentialofthe sentences.So
w e could say thatin dynam ic approaches,the m eaning
of a predicate like "sleeps" no longer m akes reference
just to the property of sleeping or som e such notion
w hich w ould be central in stating the predicate's
contribution to truth-conditions (say, a function from
individuals to truth-values),butthe predicate's m eaning
also involves an input state - som ething w hich has the
sam e structure as Stalnaker's speaker presupposition.
That is, it w ould be a function from individuals to a
function from input states to output states. Thus
dynam ic sem antics im putes to language users w ho can
be said to know or grasp the m eanings of basic
expressions in their language,this sophisticated ability
to representm entalstates.
In sum m ary, both at the level of sem antic and
pragm atic theory, it is a w idely held assum ption that
agents w ho engage in basic com m unication are capable
of thinking about or representing other agents as
bearing propositional attitude-type relations to w hat is
being com m unicated.H ow ever,itis also a w idely held
assum ption in psychology thatchildren underthe age of
fouryears do notposses this ability.This assum ption is
founded on a fairly im pressive and largely conclusive
body of experim entalw ork over the pastdecade or so,
starting w ith W im m er & Perner (1983). So there is a
tension betw een w hat these influential sem antic and
pragm atic theories assum e about language users in
generaland w hatexperim entalevidence suggests about
a significant m inority of them . In the balance of this
paper,w e w ill consider three options for relieving this
tension.O ption I: W e could argue that young children
do not ever properly engage in com m unication and
(optionally), that young children do not really
understand the m eaning of the expressions they use.
O ption II: W e could challenge the results concerning
so-called theory of m ind abilities in young children.
O ption III: W e could say that the above assayed

theories do not capture the essence of com m unication
but, at best, only the norm am ong sophisticated
language users w ho have theory ofm ind abilities.

A re young children com petent
com m unicators?
The viability ofO ption Idepends on how easily one can
overturn the prim a facie intuition that young children,
aged tw o to three years,are capable com m unicators in
the follow ing sense:in atleastsom e cases,their use of
language or their understanding of others' use of
language is ata levelof perform ance equivalentto that
of an adult.Thatis,in atleastsom e situations w hen a
child utters a sentence,S,their intentions w ith regards
the contentof the utterance are clearly com prehensible
and are the sam e as those a norm al adult w ould be
attributed w ith ifituttered S in the sam e circum stances.
Sim ilarly,in atleastsom e cases w here a child is faced
w ith an utterance of S by another agent,their grasp of
thataction is the sam e as thatofan adultfaced w ith the
sam e utterance.
O f course,w e agree thatchildren of this age are not
nearly as good at com m unication as adults. They are
m uch m ore prone than adults to m isunderstanding,m iscom m unications, irrelevancies and so on. A lso their
linguistic proficiency is in m any w ays notthe sam e as
adults. In particular they have a m uch m ore lim ited
vocabulary.Butthis is a m atterofdegree.They do have
the basic w herew ithal to engage in linguistic
com m unication,in spite of the fact that their cognitive
capacities lim itthe degree ofsuccess in this m atter.
Forus to take O ption Iseriously,w e w ould need a lot
m ore evidence thatchildren are notcom petentw hen it
com es to basic com m unication. Presently, it does not
seem all that likely that this evidence w ould be
forthcom ing. Consider for instance personal pronouns
(“she”,“he”,“it” etc).These are am ong the firstw ords
children learn (Bloom 2000).M oreover,their usage of
these form s evinces a m ore or less adultcom petence in
circum stances w here there are no extra dem ands placed
on the child w hich are beyond theirconceptualabilities.
This particular fact is significant, given that G riceanStalnakerian theories of pronoun usage by and large
attach sophisticated presuppositions (involving the
com m on ground)to pronouns.
In the absence of any strong argum ents for this
option,w e w illputitaside and m ove on to considerthe
othertw o.

C hallenging the theory ofm ind orthodoxy.
O ption II seem s far m ore prom ising in the light of
recentresearch into w ord learning.H ere the suggestion
is that children younger than four years old have a
m uch m ore sophisticated appreciation of others'm ental

states than the classic Sally-A nne experim ents suggest.
There are tw o im portantstrands to this argum entw hich
w e need to consider here.Both are raised in Bloom &
G erm an (2000).
The first line of attack w ould be to question the
assum ption thatthe Sally-A nne task probes the onsetof
full theory of m ind abilities. Bloom & G erm an argue
thatthis kind offalse belieftask involves abilities other
than theory of m ind (ibid:B26). In particular, they
claim ,citing a variety of experim entalevidence,thatit
is reasoning aboutfalse beliefs thatcauses difficulty for
children w ho otherw ise m ight reasonably be supposed
to have theory ofm ind ability.Thatis,false-belieftasks
are difficult for young children because of the
difficulties generally attached to reasoning about
falsehoods ratherthan because they lack theory ofm ind
abilities.
Experim ents w hich are designed to lighten subjects'
processing load have been found to facilitate
perform ance. For exam ple, G erm an & Leslie's (2000)
m odified false belieftasks low ered the passing age by a
few m onths.These results could be seen as significant
in the context of theories w hich suggest that theory of
m ind abilities are in som e sense m odular. In the
tradition of m odular approaches to the m ind,one could
argue that young children's theory of m ind m odule is
'sw itched on'or ‘m atures’ earlier than classical SallyA nne tasks suggest,butthatdue to the processing load
dem anded by reasoning about false beliefs, children
fail.
Bloom & G erm an argue that results from other
experim ents provides support for this view . These
experim ents involve thinking aboutnon-actualstates of
the w orld but do not involve folk-psychological
reasoning as such. The 'false photograph task'has the
sam e structure as the false belieftask exceptthatitdoes
not involve thinking about m ental states. That is,
children are asked about the content of a photograph
w hen it does not m atch the current state of the w orld.
Three year old children w ho failfalse-belief tasks also
fail the false photograph task (Leslie 2000). O ther
related evidence m entioned by Bloom & G erm an
involves children's perform ance on tasks involving
counterfactuals. Their conclusion is that it is not
necessary that children fail false-beliefs tasks because
they do not have a w orking theory of m ind.M oreover
they suggestthatitis m ore the generaldifficulty of the
task w hich bars success. Bloom and G erm an go on to
cite positive evidence for younger children's theory of
m ind ability. Before w e consider this im portant
evidence, let us consider this first line of attack:
Children failfalse belief tasks because certain elem ents
of the task are beyond them . These elem ents arise in
non-theory of m ind tasks such as the false photograph
task and tasks involving counterfactuals so itis notlack
of theory of m ind abilities w hich is responsible.If this

line of argum ent seem s appealing at first, a m om ent's
thoughtshould revealthatithas things the w rong w ay
around.
The false belief task w as originally designed on
reflection aboutthe nature of theory of m ind.H aving a
theory of m ind m eans (at least) having an ability to
think about the actions of other agents as governed by
causally active, but unobservable, m ental states. This
ability presupposes having an ability to represent an
agentas having propositionalattitudes.Even if another
agent has a true belief, representing that fact requires
conceptual abilities far different from representing the
content of that belief. The conceptual abilities involve
an appreciation of the different accessibility relations
thatneed to be associated w ith differentagents.Thatis
to say,according to one popularm etaphor,one needs to
set up different belief boxes (and desire boxes etc) for
differentagents.
O ne could argue thatcertain cognitive and conceptual
abilities required forthe false photograph task,fortasks
involving counterfactualstates and others are the sam e
as those required for theory of m ind tasks. In
particular, there is a strong case to be m ade for the
claim that to perform these latter tasks, one needs to
think w ith differentfram es,using differentaccessibility
relations. W hat this m eans in cognitive term s is
som ething ofan open question.A ta m inim um ,itm eans
over-riding basic dispositions regarding the
representation of tw o situations.Consider,for instance,
the false photograph task (Zaitchik 1990) .The subject
sees a Polaroid photo being taken ofa scene in w hich a
cat is on the m at. A s the photo is developing, the
subjectsees the experim enterchange things in the scene
so that the cat is no longer on the m at. The child is
asked,“In the photograph,w here is the catsitting?”.In
order to successfully com plete the task,the child has to
represent the situation in the photo, s’, as w ell as the
current situation, s. N ow , norm ally if the child
represents s and s’ then it can infer that there is a
situation, s’’, w hich contains both. It w ould also be
disposed to reject (or suppress) representations of one
of tw o incom patible situations. To perform the task,
these basic dispositions have to be overridden. It does
not seem plausible that such basic inferences or
processes w ould be overridden except w here there are
tw o different fram es under consideration.That is,w hy
else w ould the cognitive system develop a m echanism
w hereby these fundam entaldispositions are forestalled?
So, contrary to Bloom & G erm an, w e should
conclude from these experim ents that there is no
evidence thatthree year-olds posses the kind ofabilities
w hich are pre-requisite forhaving theory ofm ind.
Bloom & G erm an’s second line of argum ent has
m ore substance. It is based on a grow ing body of
experim ental w ork in w ord learning and other
developm ental research w hich is at least as im pressive

as the false-beliefliterature.Iw illm ention briefly som e
key results here before discussing the third alternative.
In the lightof thatdiscussion,I w illpropose thatw hat
m ay seem to be evidence of genuine theory of m ind
ability could equally w ellbe accounted for in term s of
an independently m otivated ability of children to keep
track of an objectof jointattention betw een them selves
and otheragents.This ability does notpresuppose those
required fortheory ofm ind tasks.
The crucial data for precocious theory of m ind
abilities com es from investigations w hich seek to
establish the role in w ord learning of the interactional
dim ension of com m unication (joint attention etc) and
children's appreciation of other agents as intentional w hat Tom asello calls ‘social cognition’. The data
review ed in Tom asello (1995), Tom asello (2000),
Bloom (2000) involves experim ents w here young
children (2-3 years) display an appreciation of others'
intentions and apparently of others’ m ental states
(ignorance) w hen learning w ords. For instance,
Tom asello and Barton (1994) discuss an experim ent
w here an adultannounces thatitis going to find a tom a
(a novel w ord) standing over a num ber of opaque
containers.From each,the adultproduces novelobjects
and reacts in a disappointed fashion to all but one to
w hich she responds in a m anner appropriate to
successful finding. A fterw ards, the child subject is
tested to see w hetherithas learned the w ord 'tom a'.The
results are that the subjects learn the w ord as applying
to the 'found' object, suggesting that the children are
sensitive to the adult's intentions in such situations.
M ore interestingly, in their com m unicative
behaviour, children seem to show an appreciation of
adults' ignorance in both w ord learning scenarios
(A khtar, Carpenter & Tom asello 1996) and other
scenarios (O 'N eill 1996). In the form er case, a child
learns a w ord w hen it is m entioned by a parent in a
contextw here there is one novelitem forthe parentand
three other item s w hich the parent and child had just
played w ith but w hich had rem ained unnam ed. In
m atching the novelw ord to the novelitem ,the children
seem to be displaying an appreciation of the m ental
states of the parent. Perhaps even m ore interestingly,
H appe & Loth (in press) have results from a w ord
learning task based on the structure of Sally-A nne
w hich suggests that children w ho fail the false-belief
task m anage to learn a w ord underthe sam e conditions.
I.e. Sally and child subject play w ith novel toy. Sally
puts toy in container A and goes aw ay. A nne com es
w ith herow n novelobject.A nne m akes the sw itch w ith
her toy and Sally's.Sally returns and says,pointing to
w here she left her object, "Let's play w ith the m odi".
Children w ho failbasic false-belieftasks perform better
atlearning 'm odi'as applying to notw hatis in the box
butw hatSally had putin there.W hat,then,can explain
this apparent sensitivity on the part of children to the

intentions and m entalstates of other agents,other than
theory of m ind? The answ er to this question does not
involve any kind of m ysterious interim ability on the
part of children. It can be found by thinking carefully
through a developm ental path com m ensurate w ith
children's developing com m unicative and linguistic
abilities.

Basic com m unication.
A lthough Sperber & W ilson are som ew hat culpable in
this conceptual inflation w hen it com es to
com m unication, the essence of their theory is built
around a m uch m ore parsim onious view : an act of
com m unication is sim ply an act w hereby one agent
attem pts to draw anotheragent's attention to som ething.
They contend that agents to w hom this kind of
behaviour is directed decide on w hat their attention is
being directed to by processing input stim uli for
relevance - w hich is defined in term s of a kind of
cognitive nutrition and processing effort. The food
m etaphor is apposite w hen w e consider how a prelinguistic child m ight com e to respond to ostensive
behaviour in this w ay and to eventually produce such
behaviours itself.
The key to com m unicative developm ent com es w ith
conceptual developm ent around 9-12 m onths. This
developm ent (surveyed in Tom asello 1995) involves
the form ation of concepts of actions. A t this stage a
child begins co-ordinating first person experience w ith
m em ories of observed behaviour of others, w ith
kinaesthetic m em ories etc. It is im plicit in this
abstraction over experience thatthere is an agentof the
action (am ong other participants) and there are
constituent acts in the action. A lso, an action concept
w ould be associated w ith episodic m em ory of
prototypical situation types in w hich the action takes
place. These in turn have constituent eventualities,
including typical end states. Eating, for exam ple, w ill
be conceptualised as consisting ofcertain actions,and it
w illbe associated w ith certain typicaltypes ofsituation,
including the end state associated w ith tasting and
sw allow ing the food. Form ing concepts of actions
w hich are directed tow ard another agent presum ably
does notinvolve any extra conceptualabilities.Feeding,
fora typicalexam ple,w ould be conceptualised in term s
of constituent acts on the part of one agent directed
tow ards another.
In general,recognising an action A as such does not
presuppose any special abilities beyond this ability to
break itdow n into constituentacts and to keep track of
inform ation aboutthe typicaleventualities involved.In
particular, it does not involve theory of m ind. A lso, it
does notpresuppose thatone w itness the w hole act,just
som e constituents of the action w ould norm ally suffice
to trigger recognition. H ence a child can recognise a

failed attem ptatA as such.This factcould be used to
accountforthe data in Barton & Tom asello (1994).
Looking (or attending to) is an act w hich w e can
suppose that children w ith these basic abilities can
conceptualise.Itis an actdirected tow ard a situation (in
the sense of a chunk of the w orld as per Barw ise and
Perry 1983) w hich results (potentially) in certain
cognitively nutritional effects. Contrary to Tom asello
(1995) and others, joint attention need not involve
m utualknow ledge orany specialsocial-cognitive skills.
Itis justa m atter of follow ing into the gaze of another
(presum ably in the hope of cognitive effects). G aze
m onitoring is justa m atter of m onitoring the actions of
another (again, possibly for reasons of self-interest).
Show ing and other ostensive acts,like feeding,are just
actions on another. The third participant role in this
kind of act is not filled by food but a situation. A s
m entioned above, as w ith gaze m onitoring, children
w ould naturally process such acts forrelevance.So like
feeding, it is a benevolent act. W hy it is that children
them selves com e to show things to others is notclear butnoris itclearw hy they offerfood orengage in other
reciprocating benevolent behaviours. That children do
offer up things for attention w ould explain their
inclination to indicate new things to their parents and
othercarers.Itw ould provide foran alternative account
of A khtar,Carpenter & Tom asello’s (1996) finding,if
w e assum e the child can keep track of w hatobjects the
relevance of w hich it has and has not shared w ith
significantothers.W e w illsee briefly thatthere is good
independent evidence for this. In that case, w hen the
adult returns in A khtar et al’s crucial condition, the
child w ould be focussing on the new esttoy since thatis
som ething yetto be shared.Thus the child w illassum e
that the adult’s (purposely vague) indicating w ill be
directed tow ard the new toy since that w ill be its first
accessible interpretation. (See Sperber 1994 for a
discussion of different relevance-based interpretation
strategies for individuals w ith differentlevels of theory
ofm ind abilities).
W ith jointattention and w ith directing attention,there
is not only a situational object but a larger situation
involving the tw o agents. W ith Tom asello, w e agree
that language is acquired in the context of such
interactions. W ords and sentences are constituents of
ostensive acts,being descriptive of the type of situation
being indicated.Pronouns are learntas acts of pointing
at objects in the situation being indicated. There need
be no Stalnakerian presupposition for the proper
m astery of these form s (although sophisticated adults
can optionally m ake such presuppositions -to the effect
that the referent of a pronoun is in the object of joint
attention).Thus children,like anyone else,can engage
in com m unicative activities w ithout concerning
them selves w ith speakerpresuppositions.Indeed,w here
young children need to take com m on ground into

account to succeed, they tend to fail. For instance,
M itchell et al (1999) devised a Sally-A nne task w ith
referring expressions (descriptions)and the results w ere
predictably that three year-olds failed and four yearolds passed.So w hatis the difference betw een this and
H appe and Loth's w ord learning case? Crucially,in the
latter,it can be argued that the child can com plete the
task successfully sim ply by being able to track w hatthe
objectof jointattention is betw een itself and a num ber
of agents.In M itchell et al's task,as w ith Sally-A nne,
success depends on thinking about the m ental state
(com m on ground) of another agent.N otably,in H appe
and Loth's study, they did a so-called 'true belief'
version ofthe w ord learning task.O n this task,children
under four perform ed w orse than in the corresponding
true-beliefSally-A nne task butthey perform ed w ith the
sam e level of success as w ith the false-belief w ordlearning task.H appe and Loth have no explanation for
this but there is an explanation given the focus of
attention account: The 'true-belief' w ord-learning task
involves exactly the sam e skills and dem ands as the
'false-belief'w ord-learning task.Sally puts object X in
A and along com es A nne and introduces objectY .She
replaces X w ith Y in A in Sally's presence.W hen Sally
stands over A and says, "Let's play w ith the m odi",
there is understandable confusion since the child has
presum ably been tracking A nne's gaze on Y and not
Sally's.
W ith other cases w here children seem to be sensitive
to w hat other agents do and do not know , proper
attention to their abilities to track the objects of joint
attention and their relevance guided abilities to lock
onto w hatis being indicated w ould revealthatthey are
notso sophisticated afterall.

C onclusion.
It seem s fairly clear-cut w hat theory of m ind is and
w hat conceptual abilities it entails. The dom inant
tradition in pragm atics and the dynam ic tradition in
sem antics presum es thatlanguage users have theory of
m ind or, at least, the conceptual abilities w hich
underpin theory ofm ind.Y oung children do notpossess
these abilities and yet they seem to com m unicate
perfectly adequately and they seem to have a firm grasp
on the m eaning of at least som e basic expressions in
their language. If w e accept this, then w e have to say
that G ricean ideas about language use only apply to
m ore sophisticated language users. A m ore m inim al
theory of basic com m unication has been offered here
based around som e ideas from situation theory and
relevance theory. To be sure, according to the
alternative suggested here, no com m unicative abilities
can get off the ground w ithout a child having certain
affinities w ith other agents. In particular, the
developm ent of concepts of actions clearly entails coordinating first person and third person experience.

H ow ever, w e have suggested here a w ay of thinking
through socialdevelopm entw hich does notcallforany
m ysterious interim psychologicalappreciation.

R eferences
A khtar,N .,M .Carpenter & M .Tom asello (1996).The
role of discourse novelty in children's early w ord
learning.Child D evelopm ent.67:635-645.
Barw ise,J.& J.Perry (1983).Situations and Attitudes.
Cam bridge M ass.:M IT Press.
Bloom ,P.(2000).H ow Children Learn the M eanings of
W ords.Cam bridge M a.M IT Press.
Bloom , P. & T.P. G erm an (2000). Tw o reasons to
abandon the false belief task as a test of theory of
m ind.Cognition 77:B25-B31.
Clark,H .(1996).U sing Language.Cam bridge,CU P.
G erm an, T.P. & A . Leslie (2000). A ttending to and
learning about m ental states. In P. M itchell & K .
Riggs (eds) Children's Reasoning and the M ind.
H ove:Psychology Press.
G rice, H .P. 1975. Logic and Conversation, in Syntax
and Sem antics 3: Speech Acts. (eds) P. Cole and J.
M organ,A cadem ic Press,N Y .pages 41 -58.
G roenendijk, J. & M . Stokhof (1990). D ynam ic
M ontague G ram m ar.In K álm án L.& L.Pólos (eds.)
Papers from the Second Sym posium on Logic and
Language.Budapest:A kadém iaiK iadó.
G roenendijk, J. & M . Stokhof (1991). D ynam ic
predicate logic.In Linguistics & Philosophy 14: 39100.
H appe, F. & E. Loth (m s) W ords speak louder than
actions: children track false beliefs to learn new
w ords before they can pass 'false belief tasks'. (to
appearin Cognition)
H eim I.1982.The Sem antics ofD efinite and Indefinite
Noun Phrases.PhD diss.U .M ass.A m herst.
K am p, H . (1981). A Theory of Truth and Sem antic
Representation.In J.G roenendijk et al.(eds.) Truth,
Interpretation and Inform ation.D ordrecht:Foris.
Leslie, A . (2000). H ow to acquire a 'representational
theory of m ind'. In D . Sperber & S. D avies (eds)
M etarepresentation.O xford :O U P.
Lew is,D .(1969).Convention.Cam bridge,M a:H arvard
U niversity Press.
M itchell, P., E.J. Robinson & D .E. Thom pson (1999)
Children's understanding that utterances em anate
from m inds:using speakerbeliefto aid interpretation.
Cognition.72:45-66
O 'N eill, D .K . (1996). Tw o year-old children's
sensitivity to parent's know ledge state w hen m aking
requests.Child D evelopm ent.67:659-677.
Schiffer,S.(1972).M eaning.O xford:Clarendon Press.
Searle,J.(1969).Speech Acts.Cam bridge:CU P.
Sperber, D . (1994). U nderstanding
verbal
understanding. In Jean K halfa (ed.) W hat is
Intelligence? Cam bridge, Cam bridge U niversity
Press.179-198.

Sperber D . & D . W ilson (1986). Relevance:
com m unication and cognition. O xford: Blackw ell.
(2nd edition 1995).
Stalnaker,R.(1979).A ssertion.In P.Cole (ed.) Syntax
and Sem antics vol. 9: Pragm atics. N ew Y ork:
A cadem ic Press.
Stalnaker,R.(1996).O n the representation of context.
In T. G allow ay & J. Spence (eds.), Proceedings of
SALT VI.CornellU niversity Press.pp279-294
Tom asello, M . (1995). Joint attention as social
cognition. In C. M oore & P. D unham (eds), Joint
Attention: Its O rigins and Role in D evelopm ent.
H illsdale,N J:Law rence Erlbaum .
Tom asello, M . (2000) Perceiving intentions and
learning w ords in the second year of life. In M .
Bow erm an & S. Levinson (eds) Language
Acquisition
and
Conceptual D evelopm ent.
Cam bridge:CU P.
Tom asello,M .& Barton,M .(1994).Learning w ords in
non-ostensive contexts. Cognitive D evelopm ent. 10:
201-224.
W im m er,H .& J.Perner (1983).Beliefs about beliefs:
representation and the containing function of w rong
beliefs in young children's understanding of
deception.Cognition 13:103-128.

