UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mental Models and the Meaning of Connectives: A Study in Children, Adolescents and
Adults

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0fn0m1ts

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Sacco, Katiuscia
Bucciarelli, Monica
Adenzato, Mauro

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mental Models and the Meaning of Connectives:
A Study on Children, Adolescents and Adults
Katiuscia Sacco (sacco@psych.unito.it)
Monica Bucciarelli (monica@psych.unito.it)
Mauro Adenzato (adenzato@psych.unito.it)
Centro di Scienza Cognitiva
Universita’ di Torino
via Lagrange, 310123 Torino, Italy

Abstract
We present a study on the ability to comprehend conjunction,
exclusive disjunction, bi-conditional and conditional. Mental
model theory predicts differences in difficulty in dealing with
such connectives, and it also predicts that it is easier to
envisage situations that comply with an assertion than
situations which do not comply. We carried out an experiment
on children, adolescents and adults to validate these
predictions within a developmental perspective. Participants
had to judge some states of affairs as complying or not
complying with sentences involving connectives. A further
aim of the experiment was to test the power of the theory to
account for connectives’ comprehension within a pragmatic
context. Thus, while half of the participants dealt with an
abstract version of the task, the other half coped with a
pragmatic version where the sentences were uttered by a
character known as sincere in the complying condition and as
a liar in the not complying condition. The results of the
experiment show that difficulty in comprehension of the
different connectives depends on the number of models they
require. Also, the results show that it is easier to envisage
situations complying with the meaning of a connective than
situations which do not comply. The results hold for all
groups of participants in both versions of the task. We
conclude that mental model theory offers a plausible account
of connectives' comprehension, which holds also within the
investigated pragmatic context.

1. Introduction
Experimental data show that connectives vary in difficulty
of comprehension. Conjunction and is handled by 2 years
old children (Bloom, Lahey, Hood, Lifter & Fiess, 1980);
disjunction or is understood after 4 years (Johansson &
Sjolin, 1975); bi-conditional only if then emerges from 8
years of age but it is not fully mastered until 11;6 years
(Staudenmayer & Bourne, 1977); conditional if then
remains difficult even for 14 year old children, although
around 5-6 years there is a clear improvement (Amidon,
1976; Staudenmayer & Bourne, 1977).
The connective interpretation varies from children to
adolescents to adults. Conjunction is early understood as
implying the co-occurrence of its constituents, even if

children sometimes treat it as a disjunction (Johnson-Laird
& Barres, 1994). Disjunction is commonly interpreted
exclusively, namely as if it would imply a choice between
the co-ordinated members and they should not be taken in
combination; this kind of interpretation seems the favourite
at every age (Staudenmayer & Bourne, 1977). To
comprehend conditional relations, individuals have to grasp
the possibility of relations between properties that are
absent, but implied. The first achievement of this kind is the
bi-conditional interpretation. Conditional interpretation is
hardly caught even by adolescents and adults, who often
interpret it as it would imply its converse, i.e. they usually
give a bi-conditional interpretation (Taplin, 1971).
The meaning of the connectives has been mainly a
concern of the theories on propositional reasoning, viz. the
ability to reason with propositions and connectives. Some of
these theories claim that the meaning of the connectives is
conveyed by the truth-values they receive in a truth table
system. For instance, Piaget and Inhelder (Inhelder &
Piaget, 1958; Piaget, 1953) claim that people can construct
true and false contingencies of propositions because they
posses a mental logic: in their view, some truth functions
and a set of transformations would develop by the early
teens, so that children would grasp the meaning of the
connectives.
Other theorists have proposed that the meaning of the
connectives is grasped through natural deduction systems,
where rules are claimed to have more psychological
plausibility than standard logic (Braine, 1978; 1990; 1998,
Braine & Rumain, 1983, Rips, 1990). In their view, the
evaluation of contingencies complying with propositions
would depend on the internal structure of the proposition
itself: each connective would define which inferential rules
can be applied and, therefore, how reasoners can envisage
the correct contingencies.
In a radically alternative view, Pollard (1981) and Griggs
and Cox (1982) claim that the understanding of the meaning
of connectives depends on the reasoners’ previous
experience. In particular, the specific experiences encoded
in memory would provide a set of domain dependent rules
that reasoners can use in the current situation by analogy.

Cheng, Holyoak and colleagues analyze just the
conditional connective and postulate the existence of
abstract knowledge structures such as causation, obligation
and permission (Cheng & Holyoak, 1985; Cheng, Holyoak,
Nisbett & Oliver, 1986). They argue that the meaning of a
conditional emerges from the concrete context within which
it is introduced. For instance, a permission context would
induce the reasoner to think about the possibility in which
an action is done provided the precondition is satisfied.
All of the mentioned theories offer an explanation of how
people represent the meaning of the connectives, but none
of them gives a systematical account of their difference in
terms of difficulty of comprehension.
Mental model theory offers such an account. Our
investigation into the mental representations of the meaning
of the connectives follows the tenets of this theory.

2. Mental Models for Connectives
Mental model theory (Johnson-Laird, 1983; Johnson-Laird
& Byrne, 1991) claims that the meaning of the connectives
is conveyed by mental models. A model is an analogical
representation: it does reproduce the structure of the states
of affairs perceived or described. For example, the theory
claims that the meaning of an indicative conditional such as:
If you eat too many cakes, then you put on weight

too many cakes
not- too many cakes
not- too many cakes

In essence, mental model theory (MMT hereafter)
assumes that human reasoners tend not to represent
information explicitly. In fact, the more information that has
to be represented explicitly, the greater the load on the
working memory, and so the initial models of a proposition
represent as much information implicit as possible. Implicit
information is not immediately available for processing, but
it becomes available when it is made explicit (see e.g. Bara,
Bucciarelli, Johnson-Laird & Lombardo, 1994).
The fully explicit models required by each connective and
the implicit models which people tend to construct are in
Table 1. In fact, constraints of working memory prevents
people to imagine all the possible models of a connective,
and because truth appears to be highly salient, people
represent first what is true.
Table1: Mental models representing the meaning of
connectives (fully explicit models).
Connectives

is represented by the model representation:
[too many cakes]

put on weight

True instances
Implicit Explicit
models models
p
q
p
q

p and q

...
Each row in the representation denotes a model of a
separate possibility. The first model is explicit and satisfies
the antecedent and the consequent, and the second model
(dots) is implicit: it allows for the case in which the
antecedent is not satisfied.
The construction of models is guided by the Principle of
truth and the attempt to maintain as much information
implicit as possible. According to the Principle of truth,
each model represents only what is true in a particular
possibility. Hence, the first model represents the possibility
in which the antecedent (and then the consequent) is true.
Reasoners do not represent the possibilities in which the
antecedent is false. The theory postulates that reasoners
make "mental footnotes" to keep track of this information,
but that these footnotes are soon likely to be forgotten. To
indicate these footnotes we use the square brackets and the
dots. The square brackets indicate that the antecedent (i.e.
too many cakes) has been exhaustively represented in
relation to the occurrence of the consequent (i.e. put on
weight), i.e. it can not occur in any other model of the
conditional (see Johnson-Laird, Byrne & Schaeken, 1992).
The dots denote the wholly implicit models, in which the
antecedent is false. Therefore, the fully explicit
representation of a conditional calls for three models. In our
example:

put on weight
put on weight
not- put on weight

p or else q
only if p
then q

p
q
q

p
…
p

if p then q

q
…

p ¬q
¬p
q
p
q
¬p ¬q
p
q
¬p
q
¬p ¬q

False instances
Explicit
models
p ¬q
¬p
q
¬p ¬q
p
q
¬p ¬q
p ¬q
¬p
q
p ¬q

The models representing the false instances of a
proposition (see Table 1) would be fleshed out afterwards,
only if they are needed to make the deduction. Thus, the
theory predicts that the mental representation of cases
complying with the meaning of a connective (i.e. the true
instances) is easier than that of not complying cases (i.e. the
false instances). The prediction is confirmed by Barres and
Johnson-Laird (1997). They carried out a study where the
participants were asked to list the true and the false
instances given an assertion, and they found that
representing the false instances is more difficult than
representing the true ones. Thus, they claim that there is no
a direct way to imagine what is false and errors are likely to
occur when listing the false instances. For example, given
the assertion "A or B, or both", most of their subjects
perform correctly, and list the following instances in which
the assertion is true:

A
A

B
B

Then, in order to infer the false instances, most subjects
negate the true ones and list what follows:
not A
not A

not B
not B

while we know the only false instance is:
not A

not B

The aim of our experiment is to validate the following
predictions within a developmental perspective. First, the
difficulty of comprehension of the different connectives
depends on the number of models they require. Second, in
line with the study by Barres and Johnson-Laird (1997), to
envisage the false instances of a connective is harder than to
envisage the true instances. Also, we derive a corollary
prediction from MMT and from the fact that working
memory abilities, such as encoding abilities and the time
information which can be maintained in memory (Cowan,
1997; Towse, Hitch & Hutton, 1998), are good predictors of
the performance of subjects belonging to different age
groups. Thus, the ability to deal with the not complying
conditions should increase with age; such ability requires
keeping in memory the true instances of a connective while
deriving the false ones.
We tested these predictions using two different protocols:
one in which the connectives are presented within an
abstract context and the other in which they occur in a
pragmatic context, where they are uttered by a character
describing a certain state of affairs. We expect the
evaluation of instances complying with the utterance
proffered by a sincere character to be easier than the
evaluation of instances not complying with the utterance
proffered by a liar. This prediction parallels the prediction
concerning complying versus not complying conditions in
the abstract version of the task. In particular, granted that 7
year olds do possess the ability to think in term of lies, the
requested abilities in the two contexts might be the same.
Thus, we should detect an analogy between evaluating true
instances of a sentence and understanding a person who is
telling the truth, and between evaluating false instances of a
sentence and understanding a person who is lying. In
previous studies, MMT has been proved to account for the
ability to comprehend connectives within different contexts,
calling for the same basic principles (see, e.g. Bara,
Bucciarelli & Lombardo, 2001). As people in everyday life
have to deal with utterances rather than with abstract
sentences, MMT for the meaning of connectives has to hold
within pragmatic contexts as well as in abstract contexts.
To sum up, our aim is a validation of the following
predictions:
i. The difficulty of comprehension of the meaning of the
connectives depends on the number of models they require.

Thus, we expect to observe the following trend of difficulty,
from the easiest to the most difficult connective:
conjunction (one model), exclusive disjunction and biconditional (two models), conditional (three models).
ii. The evaluation of cases not complying with a
connective is more difficult than the evaluation of
complying cases (from the Principle of truth). It requires
first to represent the states of affairs consistent with the
connective, then to negate them. Also, the ability to evaluate
instances not complying with a connective would improve
with age.
We expect these predictions to hold both in the abstract
and in the pragmatic version of the task.

3. Experiment
Method
Participants. We tested a sample of 180 subjects, 60 in
each of the following age groups: children from 7 to 7;9
years old, adolescents from 14 to 14;9 years old, adults from
21 to 24;9 years old. They were students from primary
schools, high-schools and university residences, who took
part in the experiment voluntarily. There was a balanced
proportion of males and females in each group of
participants.
Design. We devised two protocols: the Abstract Protocol
and the Pragmatic Protocol. In the Abstract Protocol
propositions were presented within an arbitrary context,
whereas in the Pragmatic Protocol the context was provided
by a character proffering the utterance. The participants
were randomly assigned to one of the two protocols. Thus,
half of the participants of each age group dealt with the
Abstract Protocol and half with the Pragmatic Protocol.
In either protocol, subjects had to deal with two
conditions: «complying» and «not complying». As for the
Abstract Protocol, propositions in the complying condition
were said to be true, while propositions in the not
complying condition were said to be false. As for the
Pragmatic Protocol, propositions in the complying condition
were uttered by a character said to be sincere, while
propositions in the not complying condition were uttered by
a character said to be a liar. Each subject dealt with 8
propositions, 4 in the complying condition and 4 in the not
complying condition. The order of presentation of
propositions within each condition was determined at
random.
In either protocol, after reading the proposition, the
experimenter showed the subjects a set of 4 cards, each
representing a possible state of affairs. For each card the
experimenter asked the subject if it satisfied the proposition
or not. The cards were presented in a random order.
Materials. In the Abstract Protocol we used the following
materials:

- 8 sheets of paper; on each of them it was written a
proposition containing one of the following connectives:
and, or, only if-then, if-then. Each connective occurred in
two propositions, but with different content;
- 8 series of cards: each series consisted of 4 cards. Given a
proposition «A connective B» (for example, «There are an
aeroplane and a car»), the four cards represented A and B
together (aeroplane and car), A alone (aeroplane), B alone
(car), and CD, two things different from the ones mentioned
in the proposition (for example, train and boat). Four series
of cards were used in the complying condition and four
series in the not complying condition.
In the Pragmatic Protocol we used the following
materials:
- the puppets Minnie and Lucy;
- 8 sheets of paper; on each of them it was written an
utterance proffered by a character. Each utterance contained
one of the following connectives: and, or, only if-then, ifthen. Each connective occurred in two utterances, but with
different content;
- 8 series of cards: each series consisted of 4 cards, as in
the Abstract Protocol. Four series of cards were used in the
complying condition and four series in the not complying
condition.

about some cards she owns. The experimenter began with
the first proposition. For example:
Minnie says «On each of my cards, only if there is a candle,
then there is a book». Remember that Minnie always says
the truth. I’ll show you some cards, and you have to tell me
which cards belong to Minnie.

Then, the experimenter showed one of the four cards (for
example, the card representing the book) and asked:
Can a book alone belong to Minnie?

and waited until the participant has judged the card as
belong or not to the sincere character. Then, the
experimenter showed another card of the set, questioned the
participant and so on with the other cards.
The same procedure was followed with the other three
propositions of the complying condition.
Pragmatic Protocol: not complying condition. Participant
was introduced to a character, Lucy, said to be a liar and
they are told that Lucia will have proffered utterances about
some cards she owns. The procedure was the same as that in
the Pragmatic Protocol, complying condition.

4. Results

«Either there is a parrot, or there is a fish, but not both». I’ll
show you some cards: you have to choose those satisfying
the proposition.

The score was computed assigning one mark for each
correct response (the choice of a card which would have to
be chosen and the non-choice of a card which would have
not to be chosen). So, the maximum score participants could
obtain in each trial was 4.
i. Trend of difficulty in comprehension of the different
connectives.
The trend in difficulty of comprehension of the different
connectives is confirmed in the Abstract Protocol (see Table
2).

Then, the experimenter showed one of the four cards (for
example, the card representing the fish) and asked:

Table 2: Mean scores obtained by participants
in the Abstract Protocol.

Procedure. The participants were tested individually in a
quiet room.
Abstract Protocol: complying condition. The participant
was told that he will be presented with some true
propositions. Then the experimenter showed the sheet of
paper with the first proposition and read it. For example:

Does a fish alone1 satisfy the proposition?

and waited until the participant has judged the card as
satisfying or not the proposition. Then, the experimenter
showed another card of the set, questioned the participant
and so on with the other cards.
The same procedure was followed with the other three
propositions of the complying condition.
Abstract Protocol: not complying condition. The
participant was told that he will be presented with some
false propositions. The procedure was the same as that in
the Abstract Protocol, complying condition.
Pragmatic Protocol: complying condition. Participant
was introduced to a character, Minnie, said to be sincere and
they are told that Minnie will have proffered utterances
1

The cards are intended to correspond to the instances pq, p not q,
not p q and not p not q. Thus, as the participant received pq, p, q
and rs, we wanted to clarify that an implicit negation is intended.

Age
groups
7-7;9
14-14;9
21-24;9
Overall

and
3.28
3.58
3.87
3.58

Connectives
or/only if-then
2.85
3.26
3.33
3.15

if-then
1.97
1.88
2.10
1.98

Mean
score
2.70
2.91
3.10
2.90

Participants find it easier to comprehend the meaning of
«and» than the meaning of «or/only if-then»: the difference
is statistically significant in each age group (paired T Test; t
value ranging from 2.607 to 9.406, p value ranging from
<.001 to p=.007). Also, participants find it easier to
comprehend the meaning of the connectives «or/only ifthen» than the meaning of «if-then»: again, the difference is
statistically significant in each age group (paired T test; t
value ranging from 6.520 to 19.746, p value is always
<.001).

Also, the results show that the knowledge of the meaning
of the different connectives does increase with age
(ANOVA one-way; F= 7.593, p<.001).
The same results hold in the Pragmatic Protocol (see
Table 3).
Table 3: Mean scores obtained by participants
in the Pragmatic Protocol.
Age
groups
7-7;9
14-14;9
21-24;9
Overall

and
3.12
3.55
3.37
3.35

Connectives
or/only if-then
2.63
3.18
3.22
3.01

if-then
2.02
2.12
2.20
2.11

Mean
score
2.59
2.95
2.93
2.82

Participants find it easier to deal with «and» than with
«or/only if-then», and the difference is statistically
significant in each age group (paired T Test; t value ranging
from 3.447 to 3.768, p value ranging from <.001 to p=.005).
An exception are adults: their performance with the
different connectives is in the predicted direction, however,
the difference is not statistically significant (paired T Test;
t= 1.260, p=.109). Further, the participants find it easier to
deal with the connectives «or/only if-then» than with «ifthen», and the difference is statistically significant in each
age group (paired T Test; t value ranging from 4.389 to
12.853, p value is always <.001).
The results show that also within the pragmatic context
the knowledge of the meaning of the different connectives
does increase with age (ANOVA one-way; F= 7.142,
p<.001).
ii. The evaluation of cases complying with a connective is
easier than the evaluation of cases not complying.
In the Abstract Protocol the prediction is confirmed (see
Table 4).
Table 4: Mean scores obtained by participants in the two
conditions of the Abstract Protocol.
Age
groups
7-7;9
14-14;9
21-24;9
Overall

Complying
2.75
3.07
3.24
3.02

Not complying
2.53
2.93
3.07
2.84

All groups of participants performed better in the
complying condition than in the not complying condition:
the difference is statistically significant in each age group
(paired T Test; t value ranging from 1.772 to 3.553, p value
ranging from <.002 to <.05).
Also, within the Abstract Protocol the ability to evaluate
instances not complying with a connective improve with
age, as we predicted (ANOVA one-way; F= 7.249, p<.001).

The same results hold in the Pragmatic Protocol (see
Table 5).
Table 5: Mean scores obtained by participants in the two
conditions of the Pragmatic Protocol.
Age
groups
7-7;9
14-14;9
21-24;9
Overall

Complying
2.79
3.21
3.08
3.03

Not complying
2.40
2.81
2.92
2.71

All groups of participants performed better in the
complying condition than in the not complying condition,
and the difference is statistically significant in each age
group (paired T Test; t value ranging from 1.746 to 3.972, p
value ranging from <.001 to <.05). Also within the
Pragmatic Protocol the ability to evaluate instances not
complying with a connective improve with age, as we
predicted (ANOVA one-way; F= 5.994, p<.004).
Thus, MMT predictions hold both within the Abstract and
the Pragmatic Protocol.

5. Conclusions
The aim of the experiment was to test the power of MMT in
explaining how people represent the meaning of connectives
in their mind. The results of the experiment confirm our
predictions.
First, the difficulty in comprehending the meaning of a
connective depends on the number of mental models it
requires. Our results show the following trend of difficulty
among connectives in both the Abstract and the Pragmatic
Protocol: conjunction is easier than disjunction and biconditional, and the latter are easier than conditional.
Second, MMT predicts that, according to the Principle of
truth, evaluating instances of compliance is easier than
evaluating instances of non-compliance. Our data confirm
such a prediction in both contexts. We have argued, in line
with MMT, that the evaluation of instances not consistent
with a connective leads subjects to err because they have to
imagine first the true instances and then to infer the false
ones. The corollary prediction that the ability to evaluate
instances of non-compliance does increase with the age is
also confirmed.
Our results are consistent with the results obtained by
Bucciarelli e Johnson-Laird (2001). They investigate
reasoning with conditionals within contexts where subjects
have to construct instances complying with an assertion (i.e.
instances of truth and obedience) and instances not
complying with an assertion (i.e. lie and disobedience).
Their results show that, while in a selection task the not
complying context improves the performance, in a
comprehension task participants are better at constructing
cases of compliance than cases of non-compliance.

Our results corroborate MMT’s predictions in three
different age groups (children, adolescents and adults).
These results strengthen the theory, which is powerful
enough to predict and explain the development of
connectives’ comprehension. In particular, MMT explains
the different difficulty of connectives, the difference in
difficulty of comprehension of the same connective (easier
in complying conditions, and more difficult in not
complying conditions) and, finally, how people represent
the meaning of the connectives both within an abstract
context and a pragmatic context.

Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by M.U.R.S.T. of Italy,
cofinanziamento 1999 (9911314534, Reasoning Processes
and Mental Models).

References
Amidon, A. (1976). Children's understanding of sentences
with contingent relations: Why are temporal and
conditional connectives so difficult? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 22, 423-437.
Bara, B.G., Bucciarelli, M., & Lombardo, V. (2001). Model
theory of deduction: A unified computational approach.
Cognitive Science, in press.
Bara, B.G., Bucciarelli, M., Johnson-Laird, P.N., &
Lombardo, V. (1994). Mental models in propositional
reasoning. Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 15-20).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Barres, P.E., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1997). Why is it hard
to imagine what is false? Proceeding of the Nineteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p.
859). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bloom, L., Lahey, M., Hood, L., Lifter, K., Fiess, K.
(1980). Complex sentences: Acquisition of syntactic
connectives and the semantic relations they encode.
Journal of Child Language, 7, 235-261.
Braine, M.D.S. (1978). On the relation between the natural
logic of reasoning and standard logic. Psychological
Review, 85, 1-21.
Braine, M.D.S. (1990). The «natural logic» approach to
reasoning. In W.F. Overton (Ed.), Reasoning, necessity,
and logic. Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Braine, M.D.S. (1998). Steps towards a mental predicate
logic. In M.D.S. Braine & D.P. O’Brien (Eds.), Mental
logic. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Braine, M.D.S., & Rumain, B. (1983). Logical reasoning. In
J.H. Flavell & E.M. Markman (Eds.), Carmichael’s
handbook of child psychology, Vol. 3. Cognitive
Development. Fourth Ed. New York: Wiley.
Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2001). Is there an
innate module for deontic reasoning? In J. GarciaMadruga, N. Carriedo & M.J. Gonzalez-Labra (Eds.),
Mental models in reasoning. Madrid: UNED.

Cheng, P.W., & Holyoak, K.J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning
schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Cheng, P.W., Holyoak, K.J., Nisbett, R.E., & Oliver, L.M.
(1986). Pragmatic versus syntactic approaches to training
deductive reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 293-328.
Cowan, N. (1997). The development of working memory.
In N. Cowan (Ed.), The development of memory in
childhood. Studies in developmental psychology. Hove,
UK: Psychology Press.
Griggs, R.A., & Cox, J.R. (1982). The elusive thematic
materials effect in the Wason selection task. British
Journal of Psychology, 73, 407-420.
Inhelder, B. & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical
thinking from childhood to adolescence. London:
Routledge, Chapman & Hall.
Johansson, B. S., & Sjolin, B. (1975). Preschool children’s
understanding of the coordinators "and" and "or". Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 19, 233-240.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. & Barres, P. (1994). When ’or’ means
’and’: A study in mental models. Proceedings of the
Sixteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 475-478). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. & Byrne, R.M.J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, and consciousness.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Byrne, R.M.J., & Schaeken, W.
(1992). Propositional reasoning by model. Psychological
Review, 99, 418-439.
Piaget, J. (1953). Logic and psychology. Manchester, UK:
Manchester University Press.
Pollard, P. (1981). The effect of thematic content on the
Wason selection task. Current Psychological Research, 1,
21-30.
Rips, L.J. (1990). Reasoning. Annual Review of Psychology,
41, 85-116.
Staudenmayer, H., & Bourne, J.R.L.E. (1977). Learning to
interpret conditional sentences: A developmental study.
Developmental Psychology, 13, 6, 616-623.
Taplin, J.E. (1971). Reasoning with conditional sentences.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 10,
219-225.
Towse, J. N., Hitch, G. J. & Hutton, U. (1998). A
reevaluation of working memory capacity in children.
Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 195-217.

