UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Metarepresentation in Philososphy and Psychology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1kr8079g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Scott, Sam

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Metarepresentation in Philosophy and Psychology
Sam Scott (sscott@ccs.carleton.ca)
Department of Cognitive Science
Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6

Abstract
This paper brings together two definitions of
metarepresentation:
Dennett's
notion
of
metarepresentation as second-order representation, and
an alternative definition of metarepresentation found in
the work of Leslie, Frith, and Baron-Cohen on autistic
children. I show that the two definitions are not in any
way compatible with one another, and that the
assumption that they are compatible can lead to
confusion about the nature of higher cognition. I
illustrate this potential for confusion through the analysis
of some claims made in a paper by Whiten and Byrne on
primate cognition.

Representation
I will use the term “representation” to mean mental
representation as defined in Von Eckardt's (1999)
MITECS entry. Her definition of mental representation
is (I hope) sufficiently broad and uncontroversial to be
acceptable to most of the various competing currents in
cognitive science. According to Von Eckardt, a
(mental) representation has four important aspects: “(1)
it is realized by a representation bearer; (2) it has
content or represents one or more objects; (3) its
representation relations are somehow ‘grounded’; (4) it
can be interpreted by (will serve as a representation for)
some interpreter.” (p. 527) Points (1) and (4) in the
above establish that a (mental) representation requires a
subject that both bears and can interpret the
representation.
Point (2) establishes what the representation can be
about. The point about representing one or more objects
is fairly clear, but the point about “having content”
needs some unpacking. Fortunately, Von Eckardt does
that unpacking for us. A (mental) representation is
something that can stand for “concrete objects, sets,
properties, events, and states of affairs in this world, in
possible worlds, and in fictional worlds as well as
abstract objects such as universals and numbers; that
can represent both an object (in and of itself) and an
aspect of that object (or both extension and intension);
and that can represent both correctly and incorrectly.”
(p. 527) Von Eckardt's list is probably not exhaustive,
but it does cover the ability of cognitive systems to
“think about” objects in the world, counterfactual
situations, and propositions and predicates, all under the
umbrella term representation.

The only point that remains undeveloped in Von
Eckardt is point (3), which states that relations must be
“grounded”. I take that to mean simply that there must
be an external referent of some kind for any
representation, although this “external” referent may
only exist in a possible or fictional world.

Metarepresentation
The prefix “meta” can mean a number of different
things in different contexts (e.g. “metaphysics”,
“metaphilosophy”, “metamorphosis” to name but a
few) but the usual sense attributed by philosophers is
that a metarepresentation is a higher-order
representation of some kind. That is, a
metarepresentation is a representation of a
representation. Following Dennett (1998), it stands to
reason that if a representation exists as an object in the
world, then it too can be represented. Dennett's
examples of metarepresentation tend to be of a hybrid
nature. For instance a drawing on a piece of paper is a
type of non-mental representation, which is represented
in the mind of the person viewing it. The mental
representation is of the drawing, but since the drawing
is itself a representation, the viewer has a (mental)
metarepresentation of whatever it is that the drawing
represents.
Despite the drawing being an “external” rather than a
mental representation it does share many of the
properties of the latter. Following Von Eckardt as
quoted above, the drawing: (1) has a representation
bearer (the paper); (2) has content (whatever the
drawing represents); (3) has a referent; and (4) can be
interpreted by some interpreter. Most of Dennett's
examples are to do with hybrid metarepresentation –
mental representations of external representations. An
interesting
question
is
whether
hybrid
metarepresentation is the same sort of thing as purely
mental metarepresentation. Some would say no, arguing
that in the hybrid case, there is a difference of content –
the external and the mental represent in different ways,
therefore a representation of an external representation
has a different type of content from a representation of
a mental representation. Dennett would not want to take
this approach, opting for an intentional stance in which
he could avoid discussing matters such as internal
content – things represent if we can sensibly treat them
as representing, regardless of whether the
representation has any further degree of reality. For the

current discussion, I would like to leave aside issues of
content and the differences between hybrid and purely
mental metarepresentation. In any case, this paper
discusses purely mental metarepresentation almost
exclusively. I hope I can safely take from Dennett the
intuitively satisfying notion that the definition of
“metarepresentation” corresponds roughly to the
definition of “higher-order representation”.
In addition to being intuitive, the “higher-order”
definition of metarepresentation is also the one that has
seen most use in philosophical circles. Unfortunately, in
a large part of the psychological literature, it is not clear
that this is the definition that is in use. In what follows,
I will show that the so-called “metarepresentational
conjecture” that is postulated to explain certain aspects
of autistic behavior is making use of a very specific and
technical definition of the word “metarepresentation”.
Of course this fact on its own should be neither
surprising nor cause for alarm – any group of scientists
should always feel free to redefine terms in technical
ways that suit their needs. But unfortunately, the
different definitions have lead to confusion even within
the psychological literature. Before moving on to this
literature, however, it is worth spending some time
sorting out potential confusions lurking within the
definitions articulated above.

What Metarepresentation is NOT
First of all, a representation can contain other
representations without being a metarepresentation. For
instance, consider the representations that might be
necessary to entertain the thought corresponding to the
following proposition:
(1)

Mélissa's dog is dead

At the very least, we need a representation of Mélissa's
dog. We will also need a representation of some oneplace predicate DEAD. Finally, it is possible that we
would also need a representation of the saturated
predicate DEAD(Mélissa's dog). Depending on your
personal biases (i.e. connectionist or classical), you may
therefore want to assert that understanding sentence (1)
requires a representation of Mélissa's dog which is
contained within a representation of the predicate
DEAD(Mélissa's dog). If so, this is not the same thing
as the representation of DEAD(Mélissa's dog) being
(even partially) a metarepresentation of Mélissa's dog.
That
is,
there
is
nothing
necessarily
metarepresentational going on in this situation.
So far so good, but the next assertion may be more
controversial. Second-order beliefs and desires do not
necessarily require metarepresentations either. To see
why, consider the following first-order belief:
(2)

Mélissa BELIEVES that her dog is dead

This first-order belief requires Mélissa to have a mental
representation of the proposition “my dog is dead” and
believe that the proposition is true (perhaps it is marked
as “true” in her mental database, or perhaps she has it in
her “belief box”, or whatever). The important
observation here is that Mélissa need not be aware of
her belief. If she were, she would require a
representation of it, but to simply hold the belief, no
such special mental machinery is required. She need not
think to herself “I believe my dog is dead” in order to
believe her dog is dead. She just needs to believe that
her dog is dead. Thus “believe” is a definitional label
we apply to any state of affairs in which someone holds
a proposition to be true. This is why we can speak of
animals having beliefs, even if we are not comfortable
with the notion that they may be aware of them.
Now consider the following second order belief:
(3)

Anne BELIEVES that Mélissa BELIEVES
that her dog is dead

What kinds of representations do we need to ascribe to
Anne in this case? First, she needs the representation of
Mélissa's dog, the predicate DEAD, and so on. What
she doesn't need is a representation of Mélissa's
representation of her dog, the predicate DEAD, and so
on. That is, she doesn't need a second-order
representation of any of these things. She can get by
with her own first-order representations. But it would
appear that Anne also needs to have a representation of
Mélissa's BELIEF. That is to say, she needs a
representation of Mélissa's mental state of believing in
a way that Mélissa does not. She must be aware of
Mélissa's BELIEF, while Mélissa need not be. If we
consider Mélissa's mental state of believing to be an
object in the world, then this mental state must be
represented somehow in Anne's belief. The question of
whether we need a metarepresentation here hinges on
whether Mélissa's belief state counts as a
representation. But as I pointed out above, for Mélissa
to simply have the first order belief, no first order
representation of belief is required. Since neither
Mélissa nor Anne has any particular need of belief
representation in order to be a believer, Anne's
representation of Mélissa's belief need not be secondorder.
So what does Anne require in order to hold belief (3)
above? It would seem that certain processing
requirements are necessary to be able to form such
complex thoughts. (Recall that what she actually
believes corresponds to sentence (2) above, and not to
sentence (3).) First of all, Anne must be able to perform
some kind of propositional embedding. She needs to be
able to represent Mélissa's belief as a proposition with
two arguments: a representation of Mélissa, and a
representation of the proposition that she believes.

Furthermore, Anne needs to be capable of dealing with
referential opacity. She must be able to remain agnostic
about the truth-value of the embedded proposition
(“Mélissa's dog is dead”) and recognize that it has no
effect on the truth-value of the belief proposition.

“Metarepresentation” in Autism Research
A particular definition of “metarepresentation” has
played a very important role in research on Autism,
where researchers have proposed the existence of a
metarepresentational module to explain some of the
deficits that autistic people exhibit. Alan Leslie, along
with Simon Baron-Cohen and Uta Frith, are the
principal proponents of metarepresentational modules
in the psychological literature (Leslie, 1991; BaronCohen, 1991). Leslie in particular has put forward the
metarepresentational conjecture: “Autistic children are
impaired and/or delayed in their capacity to form and/or
process metarepresentations. This impairs (/delays)
their capacity to acquire a theory of mind.” (Leslie,
1991, p. 73) Before dissecting what Leslie means by
“metarepresentation”, let's take a quick look at the
evidence on which this statement is founded.
The three most classic experiments on autistic
children are the picture sequencing task, the Sally/Anne
task and the Smarties task, all of which reveal a
selective deficit in autistic children in understanding
false beliefs. For space reasons, I discuss only the
Sally/Anne task (see Leslie, 1991 for the others). In this
experiment dolls are used to act out a scenario in which
Sally hides a marble in a basket and leaves the room.
While she is gone, Anne enters and transfers the marble
to a box. Sally returns, and the children are asked,
“Where will Sally look for her marble?” Autistic
children consistently make the incorrect prediction that
Sally will look in the box. They fail to realize that in
the absence of new information, Sally will retain her
(now false) belief that the marble is still in the basket –
to use the common term, autistic children lack an
adequate Theory of Mind.
In the first act of the puppet show, the child
presumably believes the following:
(4)
(5)

The marble is in the basket, and
Sally BELIEVES that the marble is in the
basket.

Then in act 2, the child learns that:
(6)

The marble is in the box

and presumably updates her beliefs incorrectly to infer
that:
(7)

Sally BELIEVES that the marble is in the
box

Recall the conclusions of the previous discussion: 1)
second-order beliefs do not necessarily require
metarepresentations (it is only necessary to have the
ability to represent first order beliefs in order to have
second-order beliefs), and 2) propositional embedding
and referential opacity are required for second-order
beliefs. Following from these conclusions, it seems
clear that the Sally/Anne test does not imply an autistic
deficit to do with second-order representations. Rather,
it implies that either: 1) the autistic child does not have
a concept of belief, or 2) the autistic child has a concept
of belief but cannot handle the processing requirements
of referential opacity and/or propositional embedding.
In fact, the evidence quoted in (Leslie, 1991) is
insufficient to distinguish between these two
possibilities. Children are never directly asked about the
beliefs of others (“Where does Sally think her marble
is?”) Rather, they are asked something like, “Where
will Sally look for her marble?”
The second area of evidence quoted by Leslie is the
apparent lack of pretend play in autistic children, and it
is on this basis that he develops the
metarepresentational conjecture and defines what he
means by “metarepresentation”. “I have used the term
'metarepresentation' in a specific sense: to mean (e.g., in
the case of understanding pretence-in-others) an
internal representation of an epistemic relation
(PRETEND) between a person, a real situation and an
imaginary situation (represented opaquely)…” (Leslie,
1991, p. 73) This definition doesn't sound at all like the
definition of metarepresentation as higher-order
representation pursued above. It seems like a highly
technical redefinition of the word. This is a fact that
Leslie seems to be quite aware of, as he says in a
footnote that “'metarepresentation' can mean something
like 'a kind of proprietary (internal) representation in
ToM mechanisms' and something like 'a particular
concept of representation which someone grasps'.” (p.
77) It is not clear what Leslie's second possibility in the
above refers to, but what he probably has in mind is
Perner’s (1991) account, which differs from both Leslie
and Dennett. Unfortunately, he does not elaborate any
further. From now on, I will call the definition of
“metarepresentation” as higher-order representation
“metarepresentation1”, while Leslie's version will be
“metarepresentation2” (and I’ll forget about Perner’s
definition for the purposes of this discussion).
With that in mind, let's take a look at Leslie's
formalism of the PRETEND example. In his view, the
predicate PRETEND (which is supposed to behave
similarly to BELIEVE and DESIRE) works something
like this:
(8)

Mother PRETEND the empty cup “it
contains tea” (p. 73)

In
addition
to
the
new
definition
for
metarepresentation2, Leslie is also using a very different
formalism for his psychological predicates – three
arguments instead of two. Two questions immediately
arise: 1) is Leslie's formalism plausible and/or
compatible with the BELIEF/DESIRE formalism
pursued above? and 2) putting aside Leslie's
metarepresentation2,
is
there
anything
metarepresentational1 in his alternative formalism?

The Plausibility of Leslie's Formalism
Much of what I have to say in this section and the next
parallels critiques from Pernerwith which I am in broad
agreement (for example, Perner, 1991) . Rather than
give a full analysis of Leslie’s ideas, I will concentrate
on the points I need to make for the discussion to
follow.
The first observation is that there appears to be an
important difference between pretending and believing,
so we need to be cautious about generalizing from one
to the other. Although it is possible to have beliefs
without any representation of belief, it is not at all clear
that this also holds for pretence. The possibility of
pretending that something is true without being aware
that one is doing so seems unlikely. So whereas to
believe that the cup is empty does not require the selfconscious reflection that
(9)

situation (it contains tea). But why is it that in order to
understand pretence, you must be aware of exactly how
the real situation differs from the imagined one? In
reality, you can simply say “Mother pretends that the
cup contains tea” and remain unsure of whether the cup
is empty, contains orange juice, or whatever. That is,
you do not need to know the “real” situation to
understand the pretence. All you need to know is the
fact, contained in the semantics of PRETEND with it's
implied referential opacity, that the real situation must
differ in some way from the imaginary one. If this is
clear in the case of PRETEND, it is even more so in the
case of BELIEVE. It would be much too restrictive to
suppose that BELIEVE requires knowledge of the
actual situation as in:
(13) Mélissa BELIEVES (her dog is dead) (“her
dog is dead”), or
(14) Mélissa BELIEVES (her dog is not dead)
(“her dog is dead”)
Again, the information one needs is bound up in the
semantics and referential opacity of BELIEVE. When
you believe that p, p may or may not be true. Further
problems arise when we try to embed Leslie's
formalizations of psychological predicates to form
second order beliefs. For instance, to believe (12) above
would require:

I BELIEVE that the cup is empty,

there is no way to pretend that the cup contains tea
without self-conscious reflection by the subject on her
own mental state. That is, the subject would have to
BELIEVE:
(10) I PRETEND that (the cup contains tea).
Therefore, unlike beliefs and desires, being able to
pretend seems to imply the ability to understand
pretence in oneself, and thus in others, since the forms
are the same. For instance believing that:
(11) Mother PRETENDS that (the cup contains
tea)
requires exactly the same representational capacities as
believing that one is pretending oneself.
Getting back to the substance of the issue, Leslie's
formalism is actually quite different from the above. In
his system, pretence is represented more like this:
(12) Mother PRETENDS (the empty cup) (“it
contains tea”)
That is, he has three elements: the subject (Mother),
the real situation (the empty cup), and the pretend

(15) I BELIEVE [Mother may or may not
PRETEND (the empty cup) (“it contains
tea”)]a [“Mother PRETENDS (the empty
cup) (“it contains tea”)”]o
where the subscript “a” above marks the actual situation
and “o” marks the referentially opaque proposition.
This situation just seems unnecessarily complicated.
You simply don't need to know the real situation in
order to evaluate the truth of psychological predicates.
The principle of referential opacity gives you
everything you need to know – that the embedded
proposition may or may not be true regardless of the
truth-value of the psychological predicate.

Metarepresentation1 in Leslie's Formalism
Is there anything metarepresentational1 in Leslie's
formulation of the semantics of psychological
predicates? Leslie has made the unusual move of
including the actual situation alongside the imagined
situation in his formulation of at least one of the
psychological predicates. Does this move change
anything in the analysis of metarepresentations1 in
psychological predicates? The only real complication
here is the introduction of dual representations for the
same object – for example, the cup as an empty cup and
the cup as a cup with tea in it. This dual representation

is well accounted for in Von Eckardt's (1999) definition
of mental representation. The first refers to a concrete
object and/or a property of a concrete object, while the
second refers to an object/property in a possible or
fictional world, or in the case of BELIEVE may simply
represent an object/property incorrectly. So the dual
representation does not imply metarepresentation1.
One other aspect of Leslie's formulation deserves
consideration. In the “Mother PRETENDS” example
above, the first situation (the empty cup) is referred to
again in the imaginary situation (it contains tea). The
anaphoric reference in the imaginary situation (“it”)
could perhaps be taken to imply that the representation
of the empty cup, rather than the empty cup itself, is the
subject of the imaginary representation, thus making the
latter a metarepresentation1, but this is probably not the
interpretation Leslie had in mind.1 In fact it is hard to
imagine how such an interpretation could be made
coherent, since unpacking the imaginary situation
would lead to “(the representation of the empty cup)
contains tea” – and that can't be right.

Metaconfusion
Leslie is self-consciously using a technical definition
for metarepresentation2 that does not intersect in any
way with Dennett's metarepresentation1. Nevertheless,
for other authors, the distinction may not be so clear.
The potential for confusion is quite neatly demonstrated
in a paper by Whiten and Byrne (1991). In an otherwise
excellent article about the implications of Leslie's ideas
for studies of pretend play in primates, they explicitly
state that Leslie's metarepresentation2 is second-order
representation (i.e. metarepresentation1). But the
confusion doesn't stop there. They go on to offer a
summary of Leslie's theory of metarepresentation2 that
is worth quoting at length.
“Leslie argues convincingly that the isomorphism
between the properties of mental state terms and those
of pretend play is not coincidental, but signifies a
fundamental psychological achievement which can
generate both pretence and an ability to represent the
mental states of others. What these two share is that
they are representations of representations – labeled
variously as second-order representations (Dennett) or
metarepresentations (Pylyshyn, Leslie).
“In the case of mental state terms, what ‘secondorder’ means is fairly obvious: the child’s mind
represents a mental state in another's mind, believing
(for example) that her father thinks there is a mouse
behind the chair.
“In the case of pretence, the implication is less
obvious. The key point is that in pretence, as strictly
defined by Leslie, two simultaneous representations of
1

Recall Leslie's definition above:
representation of an epistemic relation…”

“…an

internal

the world must coexist in a precise relationship. When a
child talks into a banana as if it were a telephone …the
child has a primary representation of the object as a
banana and, simultaneously, a representation of it as a
telephone … The pretend representation is coded or
marked off in some way as metarepresentational…”
(Whiten and Byrne, 1991, p. 269, their italics.)
The first two paragraphs above demonstrate the
confusion nicely. The authors are explicitly running
together Dennett's metarepresentation1 with Leslie's
metarepresentation2. Furthermore, they are committing
the error of assuming that second order beliefs require
second order representations. To see this, consider their
example in the final paragraph, which makes use of the
psychological predicate THINK. They make it seem
like the child must have a representation of her father's
thoughts, which of course consist of representations.
Therefore the child must be engaging in second-order
representation, or metarepresentation1. But “thinks” in
this context means the same thing as “believes”, and so
the appropriate formulation is actually:
(16) The child BELIEVES that her father
BELIEVES that there is a mouse behind the
chair.
This is straight-up second-order belief, which I have
shown to not necessarily involve second-order
representation, or metarepresentation1.
The final paragraph picks up on the “real situation”
vs. “imaginary situation” component of Leslie's
formulation and reads into it another sense of
“metarepresentation”,
which
I'll
call
“metarepresentation3” – definition: a representation of a
counterfactual state of affairs. But counterfactual
representations are fully compatible with the fairly noncontroversial
theory
of
first-order
mental
representations put forth by Von Eckardt (1999).
The confusion in Whiten and Byrne really comes to
the fore in their concluding sections, where they talk
about a “cluster of metarepresentational capacities.”
The first capacity they discuss is indirect sensorimotor
coordination – the ability that humans and some other
primates have to direct the actions of parts of their
bodies by looking in a mirror or at a video image of the
body parts they are trying to control. This, according to
Whiten and Byrne, requires “a capacity to represent the
remote representation of parts of self available in the
mirror or video image: second-order representation” (p.
279).
This
ability
is
straightforwardly
metarepresentational1 in the Dennettian sense. In fact, it
is a case of hybrid metarepresentation1, requiring a
mental representation of an external representation.
The other two “metarepresentational” abilities are
tool use and insight. Tool use (in this case, a
chimpanzee using a branch to probe for termites)

apparently requires “a capacity to generate,
simultaneously with the primary perception of the
branch as branch, a metarepresentation of it as probe”
(p. 280). Insight is a leap from pretence to redescription as in, “'I pretend this rock is a hammer' …
'Aha, I could use this rock as a hammer'....” (p. 280,
Whiten and Byrne's italics). This is much closer to
Leslie's technical definition of metarepresentation2 in
which the representation of the world as it really is
coexists with a pretend representation of the world. But
as I argued above, Whiten and Byrne appear to have
drawn on the occurrence of a counterfactual in Leslie's
formalism to build a third sense (metarepresentation3),
which is at work in the above.
In conflating metarepresentation1 with their own
interpretation
of
metarepresentation2
(metarepresentation3), Whiten and Byrne have made
two mistakes, one of which comes directly from Leslie,
and one that is not explicitly present in (Leslie 1991). In
the former case, they have imported Leslie's notion that
psychological
predicates
require
an
explicit
representation of how the world actually is in addition
to the representation of how the world is believed,
pretended, or desired to be, and used it to unwittingly
arrive at a new definition of metarepresentation3. But
they have also made another mistake in equating
Leslie's
metarepresentation2
with
Dennett's
metarepresentation1, even to the point of citing Dennett
and Leslie in the same sentence.
To be fair to Whiten and Byrne, their dissection of
Leslie is itself an attempt to criticize and make some
new distinctions. For instance, they point out that not
all pretend play involves a real object. Humans and
other apes appear quite capable of having imaginary
friends, and interacting with imaginary objects. In this
case, it is difficult to see what the “real situation”
component of Leslie's formulation would amount to,
and is evidence for at least sometimes abandoning it in
favor of two-place intentional predicates. But confusion
over the two original senses of metarepresentation, and
the unwitting introduction of yet a third sense really
manages to confuse the issue. For instance, in summing
up, they speculate that perhaps, “what convinces those
who interact intensively with them that chimpanzees
are ‘intelligent’ is a facility in second-order
representation.” (p. 280) This is a nice parsimonious
account, but it is built by equating three different
definitions of metarepresentation based on a number of
confusions about the nature of psychological predicates.
As I have attempted to show, second-order beliefs and
desires as well as the pretend play studied in Whiten
and Byrne's work require propositional embedding and
referential opacity, but do not necessarily require
second-order representations (metarepresentation1).

Conclusions and Prospects
In Dennett's Making Tools for Thinking (Dennett,
1998), he invites us to speculate along with him on the
difference between what he terms “florid” and “pastel”
representations. Florid representations are those that
become explicit as objects in the world, by being
encoded in language or some other physical medium
(drawings on paper, for instance.) He notes that the
capacity to form florid representations seems to imply
the ability to manipulate the representations themselves,
which leads him to raise the slogan “no florid
representation without metarepresentation.” He further
speculates that “belief about belief” may not be the
same thing at all as “thinking about thinking” – that is,
having the ability to self-consciously reflect, compare
notes with other thinkers, and so on. The considerations
in this paper may help to shed a little light on all of
these questions.
If I am right that second-order belief does not require
metarepresentation1, and Dennett is right that thinking
about thinking requires florid representations and
therefore metarepresentations1, then maybe we do have
the basis for a nice account of one possible difference
between humans and other apes – a capacity to form
and manipulate higher-order representations (that is,
metarepresentations1).

References
Baron-Cohen, Simon (1991). Precursors to a theory of
mind. Andrew Whiten (Ed.), Natural Theories of
Mind: Evolution, Development, and Simulation of
Everyday Mindreading. (pp. 233-252). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Dennett, Daniel (1998). Making tools for thinking. Dan
Sperber (Ed.) (2000). Metarepresentation. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Leslie, Alan (1991). The theory of mind impairment in
autism. Andrew Whiten (Ed.) op cit. (pp. 63-78)
Perner,
Josef
(1991).
Understanding
the
Representational Mind. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Von Eckardt, Barbara (1999). Mental representation.
Robert A. Wilson and Frank C. Keil. The MIT
Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences. (pp. 527529). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Whiten, Andrew, and Byrne, Richard W. (1991). The
emergence of metarepresentation in human ontogeny
and primate phylogeny. Andrew Whiten (Ed.) op cit.
(pp. 267-282.)

