UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mice Trap: A New Explanation for Irregular Plurals in Noun-Noun Compunds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45r0f75m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Buck-Gengler, Carolyn J.
Menn, Lise
Healy, Alice F.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mice Trap: A New Explanation for Irregular Plurals in Noun-Noun Compounds
Carolyn J. Buck-Gengler (Carolyn.Buck-Gengler@Colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Institute of Cognitive Science
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, Colorado 80309-0345 USA

Lise Menn (Lise.Menn@Colorado.edu)
Department of Linguistics and Institute of Cognitive Science
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, Colorado 80309-0295 USA

Alice F. Healy (Alice.Healy@Colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Institute of Cognitive Science
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, Colorado 80309-0345 USA

Abstract
In an experiment eliciting noun-noun compounds, participants
were more likely to produce plural nouns in the first position
(e.g., mice trap) when presented with an irregular plural in the
stimulus (e.g., a trap for catching mice is a _____) than when
presented with stimuli containing regular plurals (e.g., a trap
for catching rats is a _____). When they did produce a
normatively correct singular (e.g., mouse trap) in response to
a stimulus with an irregular plural, response time was longer
than it was for producing a singular response to stimuli
containing singulars or regular plurals. This finding suggests
a priming-based processing problem in producing the
singulars of irregular plurals in this paradigm. Such a problem
is likely also to be present in young children, which would
explain their production of forms like mice trap (Gordon,
1985; Pinker, 1994) without requiring recourse to the
hypothesis that they have innate grammatical knowledge.

Introduction
It has been observed that irregular nouns and verbs often
behave quite differently than their regular counterparts. A
case in point is noun-noun compound formation in English.
Pinker (e.g., 1994, pp. 146-147) and others have pointed out
that in general, the first noun of a noun-noun compound
must be singular, but that plurals of irregular nouns seem to
be more acceptable in that position. For instance, one would
not say *rats catcher or *toys box, even when talking about
more than one rat or toy. However, mice catcher is far more
acceptable. The typical explanation given is that this follows
from the theory of Level Ordering of morphology (Kaisse &
Shaw, 1985; Kiparsky, 1982, 1983).
In this theory, production of compounds (or at least, novel
compounds) proceeds at several “levels.” At Level 1, a base
form (for almost all English nouns, the singular) or another
memorized form (such as the irregular plural) is retrieved
from the mental lexicon; at Level 2, compounds are formed;

at Level 3, after compound formation, regular affixes such
as the regular plural are added. If this production schema is
taken to represent a sequence of real-time processes or a
fixed mode operation of a mental grammar, the normative
English pattern dispreferring *rats trap is explained by
saying that the regular plural rats is created too late (at
Level 3) to be placed inside a compound (at Level 2).
However, irregular plurals, being retrieved from memory at
Level 1, are easily incorporated during compound
formation. This theory, in its general form, successfully
schematized a wide variety of data in English and other
languages, although by now it has been shown to have
serious limitations (Bauer, 1990; Fabb, 1988).
Gordon (1985) explored compound formation with
children aged 3-5, and induced them to produce compounds
containing plurals when presented with irregular nouns, but
only singulars when primed with regular nouns. He took this
result as support for the idea that level ordering in grammar
must be innate, because, as he demonstrated, children are
rarely exposed to irregular plurals inside compounds, so
they cannot induce the rule permitting irregular plurals
inside compounds from their input.
However, there is another way to formulate the English
pattern: English compounds obey the (soft) constraint that
the first element is singular, regardless of whether the
semantics has stimulated the retrieval of a plural referent
(e.g., toys, cookies). Thus, if a compound such as cookie jar
is called for, the retrieved cookies must be made singular
before proceeding. Young children have plenty of examples
of this pattern in their early years (e.g., toy box, raisin box,
jelly bean jar) and could well have adduced such a rule by
age 3.
Using this second way of constructing compounds, we
suggest a processing difficulty explanation for the
experimentally observed behavior: It is harder to produce a
singular when primed by an irregular plural (e.g., to produce
mouse after just having heard or read mice) than it is to

produce a singular when primed by a regular plural (e.g., to
produce rat just having heard or read rats), for reasons that
will be discussed later. This difficulty should show up in
two ways: first, the already observed predilection of both
adults and children to produce the irregular plural noun in
compounds more often than the regular plural (predicted by
both explanations), and second, a longer time to produce
such a compound when given an irregular plural as input
(predicted by our explanation).
To examine these predictions, we constructed an
experiment to elicit noun-noun compounds and obtain
response times. The experiment was similar in some ways to
that of Gordon (1985), but differed in several important
features. As in Gordon’s experiment, the compound was
elicited by prompting with some form of the words that
were intended to be used in the compound. The differences
were as follows: First, adult speakers rather than children
were used. Second, response times were recorded by a
computer, and therefore the materials were also presented
by the computer. Third, we included the set of regular and
irregular nouns that Gordon used, but augmented it in three
ways: (a) Both the singular and the plural forms of each
noun were used as stimuli; (b) three additional sets of
regular and irregular words were added to provide for more
stimuli; and (c) in addition to semantically matched regular
nouns, a set of regular nouns matched for form (length,
frequency, and initial phoneme class) was included.
Participants were trained on the individual words, then
responded to fill-in-the-blank sentences as quickly as
possible with compounds that included one of the target
words as the first word and a container as the second word.

Method
Participants
16 University of Colorado psychology students participated
in the experiment. All were native speakers of English.
Participants were assigned to counterbalancing groups
according to a fixed rotation on the basis of their time of
arrival at the experiment.

Apparatus
Stimuli were presented on an Apple iMac computer using
the PsyScope software (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, &
Provost, 1993) and a button box/voice key. Responses were
recorded on a cassette tape recorder via a head-mounted
microphone through a y-jack.

Procedure
There were two parts to the experiment, training and test.
The entire experiment took approximately 35-45 minutes.
Training The training part of the experiment familiarized
participants with the task and the set of words used in the
experiment. During training, participants were shown words
one at a time. Each word that was to be used in the test
portion of the experiment was shown twice, in two different
pseudorandom orders, for a total of 152 trials. Participants

were instructed to name the word as quickly and clearly as
possible.
For each trial, first a black dot was displayed. When
participants were ready for the trial, they pressed the space
bar, causing the dot to disappear and the word to be
displayed. When the participant responded, the computer
registered the response via the voice key; the time was
recorded; the word was erased; a red asterisk was briefly
displayed as feedback that recording had taken place; and
then the black dot signaling the next trial was displayed.
Response time was measured from the time the word was
displayed to the time the response triggered the voice key.
Self-pacing of trials gave participants control over the
pacing of the experiment, and also allowed a participant to
postpone a trial momentarily if he or she felt a need to
cough or make other noise that could disrupt the voice key.
The feedback asterisks also trained participants to speak
loud enough to trigger the voice key.
Test The second part of the experiment was similar to the
first, except that in addition to single-word trials, there were
also complex trials involving reading a sentence of the form
“a JAR containing COOKIES is a _________” and filling in
the blank. This part began with examples to show the
participants what the complex fill-in-the-blank stimulus
sentences would be like, and instructing them to fill in the
blank based on the sentence they saw. The first example
showed the participant what a “typical” answer would be;
the participant then practiced on seven more examples by
answering what they thought the answer should be and then
repeating what the computer printed in red as the “typical”
answer. (The example sentences are described in the
Materials section.)
In this part of the experiment, the self-pacing was done as
in the training phase. There were 4 blocks in this part of the
experiment. Each block had 60 complex trials mixed with
90 single-word trials; together with 10 practice trials
(different from the 8 example trials) before the first block,
there was a total of 610 trials in the second part of the
experiment. The order of the four blocks was
counterbalanced using a balanced Latin Square design,
resulting in four different groups of participants.

Materials
Target Nouns There were three types of target nouns:
irregular nouns, semantically matched regular nouns
(“semantic match”), and form matched regular nouns (“form
match”). Five of the irregular nouns and their semantic
matches were taken from Gordon (1985). These lists were
augmented with three more nouns for greater
generalizability across items. To draw attention away from
the irregular nouns and their semantic matches, a nonsemantically related noun was matched with each irregular
noun. This set of nouns was chosen such that each matched
regular noun was similar in length and frequency to the
irregular noun, and also started with a phoneme that had
acoustic onset characteristics similar to the first phoneme of
the irregular noun. In addition, six more nouns and their
plurals (two irregular nouns and four regular nouns) were

Table 1: Target nouns by type.
Regular noun
Irregular noun Semantic match
Form match
mouse*
rat*
nail
tooth*
bead*
tape
foot*
hand*
cent
goose*
duck*
bell
man*
baby*
letter
louse
fly
knight
child
doll
chain
ox
horse
ax
*From Gordon (1985)
used for filler trials. The complete set of target nouns
(singular form) is presented in Table 1. Targets in the
experiment included both singular and plural forms.
The three new irregular nouns were chosen to be
imageable and concrete. Semantic match nouns were chosen
with criteria similar to those of Gordon (1985). Form match
nouns, in addition to fitting frequency and length
constraints, also fit the acoustic onset match criterion.
Frequency and word length were equated across irregular,
semantic match, and form match lists.
Individual Stimuli Individual stimuli were either singleword or complex. Single-word stimuli consisted of a single
word chosen from the target nouns, containers, fillers, and
words from the practice trials of the second part of the
experiment. Complex stimuli consisted of fill-in-the-blank
sentences of the following format: “a CONTAINER filled
with (a/an) TARGET NOUN is a/an _________”. Table 2
lists the containers and the verb associated with each
container; TARGET NOUN was replaced with the target
noun for that trial. The goal was to elicit a noun-noun
compound using some form of the target as the first noun
and the container as the second noun. The container and
target noun were in upper case and the rest of the sentence
was in lower case.
Each of the 48 target nouns and 12 filler nouns was
combined with each of the 4 containers for a total of 192
target and 48 filler complex stimuli. Each target and filler
noun occurred once in each block; the containers were
distributed over the 4 blocks using a modified balanced
Latin Square pattern.
In addition, there were eight example stimuli (all
complex) and 10 practice stimuli (six single-word and four
complex) at the beginning of Part 2 of the experiment,
which were included (a) to ensure that the participants were
not merely reversing the words, and (b) to give participants
experience with the second part of the experiment before
beginning the experimental trials. The eight example trials
alternated between using mass nouns as the target nouns
(because mass nouns do not have a plural/singular
distinction, and thus would not have a distinct plural form;
i.e., rice jar, dough pan, fish glass, soup pot) and extremely
common noun-noun collocations. These examples were
intended to induce the participants to realize that changing
the form of the target noun was allowable (i.e., bird cage,
tool chest, coin purse, egg carton). In these example trials

Table 2: Containers and associated verbs.
CONTAINER
bowl
box
crate
tub

Verb (replaces “filled with”)
containing
for transporting
for carrying
holding

the plural form of the target noun was presented, but the
expected or typical answer was the singular form. Common
noun-noun compounds were also chosen for the four
complex practice stimuli (i.e., flower vase, pencil case,
chicken coop, cookie jar). As with the example stimuli, the
plural form of the target noun was presented in the complex
practice stimuli. The target nouns and containers from these
complex examples were included as single-word trials in
Part 1. The single-word trials in the practice stimulus set
were taken from the eight example stimuli used at the
beginning of the test part of the experiment.
Stimulus lists As noted earlier, in Part 1 all 48 experimental
target words, 12 filler words, 4 container words, 4
compound practice containers, and 8 compound practice
target words (both singular and plural forms) were presented
twice, in two different pseudorandom orders. All
participants saw the same order of stimuli.
In Part 2 (test), single-word trials and complex trials were
intermixed. First, the complex trials for each block were
pseudorandomly ordered. Within each subblock of 12
complex trials there were two words of each combined type
(noun type x grammatical number). Preceding each complex
trial was either 0 or 1 container single-word trial, and either
0 or 2 target word single-word trials. There were no more
than 2 complex trials (i.e., with 0 intervening single-word
trials) in a row.

Design
The dependent variables measured were the response time
(RT) for each compound response in ms and the proportion
of complex trials with a singular first noun response (out of
all usable trials as defined in the section on scoring). Each
measure was analyzed with a mixed 4 x 3 x 2 analysis of
variance. The first factor (between-subjects) was
counterbalancing group. The second factor (within-subjects)
was the noun type (irregular, semantic-match regular, formmatch regular) of the target noun. The third factor (withinsubjects) was the grammatical number (singular, plural) of
the target noun.
A number of participants gave no plural responses to one
or both of semantic match plural and form match plural
stimuli. To reduce the number of participants whose data
therefore would have to be eliminated from the RT analyses,
the third analysis was conducted over the combined results
of the regular nouns. Collapsing these categories was further
justified by post-hoc tests that determined that there was no
significant difference between the results of the two sets of
regular nouns. In this analysis, the dependent variable was
RT, which was analyzed with a mixed 4 x 2 x 2 analysis of
variance. The first factor (between-subjects) was
counterbalancing group. The second factor (within-subjects)

was the noun type (irregular, regular) of the target noun.
The third factor, although not properly an independent
variable, was response type (singular, plural) and was also
within subjects.

Two independent scorers listened to each tape. Each trial,
single-word or complex, was scored as singular, plural, or
other. Problems that would affect the RT as recorded by the
voice key, such as repeating a word more than once, coughs
or other noises, giving the complex answers in the wrong
order, and so forth, were noted. Discrepancies between the
two scorers were resolved by a third listener. RTs for
problem trials and trials with responses categorized as
“other” were discarded, and those trials were not used in RT
analyses. When a participant responded to a complex
stimulus first with one complete answer and then with
another, it was scored with the first response.

Proportion of Singular Response

Scoring

Stimulus Number

Singular
Plural

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00
Irregular SemanticMatch FormMatch

Results
All results are based only on complex trials that were not
excluded due to problems, as discussed above.
Proportion of Trials with Singular First Noun Responses
The first analysis examined how many responses used a
singular first noun, no matter what the grammatical number
of the stimulus. As expected, there was no effect of
counterbalancing group, nor did this factor interact
significantly with any other factor. Whereas approximately
93.8% of all semantic match trials and 94.6% of all form
match trials were responded to with the singular form of that
noun, only 64.1% of all trials with an irregular target noun
were responded to with the singular form (thus, 35.9% were
responded to with the plural form). This difference was
significant, F(2,24) = 75.31, MSE = .013, p < .001. Of trials
with a singular target noun, 99.1% of the responses were
also singular, whereas only 69.2% of the trials with a plural
target noun were responded to with the singular form. This
difference was also significant, F(1,12) = 46.94,
MSE = .046, p < .001.
What is interesting is the interaction between these two
factors. As can be seen in Figure 1, when the trial contained
an irregular plural target noun, the response was the singular
form only 30.0% of the time. For all five of the other
combinations, the singular form was used between 88.8% of
the time (for the regular plural target nouns, including both
semantic and form match) and 99.1% of the time (for the
singular nouns of any type). This interaction was significant,
F(2,24) = 70.534, MSE = .012, p < .001. This result confirms
earlier findings, notably those of Gordon (1985), that
irregular plurals are readily produced as the first noun of
noun-noun compounds in response to this type of elicitation
frame.
RTs to Singular First Noun Responses This analysis looks
at the time to respond with singular mouse box when shown
either “a BOX for transporting a MOUSE is a _________”
or “a BOX for transporting MICE is a _________”,
compared to the time to respond when regular forms were

Stimulus Noun Type
Figure 1: Proportion of singular response by noun type
and grammatical number of the stimulus target word.
shown. This analysis includes only those trials in which the
response was singular; thus fewer trials contributed to the
irregular plural cell than to the other cells (as seen in Figure
1). Four participants responded with a plural 100% of the
time when given an irregular plural stimulus. Thus, they had
zero singular responses, and no mean RT could be
computed for that cell. As a result, the data from those four
participants were excluded from this analysis.
As expected, there was no effect of counterbalancing
group, nor did this factor interact significantly with any
other factor. RTs for the semantic match trials (796 ms) and
the form match trials (799 ms) were significantly faster than
for the irregular trials (894 ms), F(2,16) = 6.18,
MSE = 13179, p = .010. RTs for singular-stimulus trials
(787 ms) were significantly faster than for plural-stimulus
trials (872 ms), F(1,8) = 13.61, MSE = 10430, p = .006.
Most interestingly, the interaction between these factors,
seen in Figure 2, was also significant, F(2,16) = 6.90,
MSE = 8075, p = .007. As can be seen in the figure, it is the
irregular plural stimuli that have the slowest RT; all other
forms were responded to much more quickly.
An additional finding is that there was no significant
difference between the semantic match and form match
regular nouns, as can be seen in both Figure 1 and Figure 2,
and confirmed by post-hoc tests. This result means the
differences between regular and irregular nouns do not
depend either on semantic or form similarity.
RTs to Trials with Plural Stimuli This analysis looks at
the time to say mouse box or mice box when shown “a BOX
for transporting MICE is a _________”, compared to the
time to say rat box or rats box when shown “a BOX for
transporting RATS is a _________”. In this analysis, both
singular and plural responses were examined for all trials
with a plural stimulus noun. As noted previously (and as can
be inferred from Figure 1), the rate of plural response to

Stimulus Number
1000

Response type

Singular
Plural
1000

38.9%
61.1%

94.1% 5.9%

750
500

RT (ms)

RT (ms)

750

Singular
Plural

250

500

250
0
Irregular SemanticMatch FormMatch

Stimulus Noun Type
Figure 2: Response times in ms for singular responses.
regular plural stimuli was extremely low; so to increase the
chance of a plural response, the two types of regular nouns
were combined for this analysis. In addition to the four
participants with no singular responses to irregular plural
stimuli, one participant never responded to regular plural
stimuli with a plural, and no mean RT could be computed
for that cell. Thus, the data from these five participants were
excluded from this analysis.
As expected, there was no effect of counterbalancing
group, nor did this factor interact significantly with any
other factor. In this analysis, neither the main effect of noun
type nor the main effect of response type were significant.
However, the interaction between these factors was
significant, F(1,7) = 6.36, MSE = 14120, p = .040. As can
be seen in Figure 3, there was no RT difference in
producing a singular or a plural response to a regular plural
stimulus or a plural response to an irregular plural stimulus.
This can be thought of as the baseline time for responding.
However, when participants were presented with an
irregular plural stimulus to which the singular response was
eventually made, the time was much longer.

Discussion
The proportion of singular response in this experiment
showed a pattern similar to that found by Gordon (1985);
that is, that when the participant is given an irregular plural
noun in the stimulus, the response could be either singular
or plural, but with all the other combinations of number and
noun type, the response was almost invariably singular.
Thus, this experiment, with added controls and stimuli,
serves to verify that a typical college undergraduate
population gives similar results to the children tested by
Gordon. (Some of our participants, like some of Gordon’s
children, also provided self-corrections after their plural
responses: “men bowl, oops, man bowl.”)
What is new here are the response time findings.
Specifically, when the response actually produced was
singular, it took longer to produce when the stimulus was an

0
Irregular

Regular

Stimulus Noun Type (all plural)
Figure 3: Response times in ms for both singular and
plural responses to plural target noun stimuli.
Numbers over the bars indicate the proportion of trials
contributing to that cell.
irregular plural noun than when it was any other
combination of number and noun type. Moreover, although
it does not take longer to produce rat than rats when rats is
seen, it DOES take longer to produce mouse than mice when
mice is seen. We suggest that the times for the plural
responses in Figure 3 show the times to inhibit the justprimed plural and produce the singular form instead. A
model congruent with our findings would have the
following properties: Given a form like rats, the plural affix
-s is automatically segmented by the hearer/reader, allowing
the regular singular rat to be strongly primed. On the other
hand, given a form like mice, the singular is aroused only by
re-accessing the lexicon where a mouse-mice link is stored,
which presumably is a more time-consuming process.
To be more explicit, we think something like the
following is going on. When the task is to respond to “a
BOWL containing MICE is a _____”, mice is strongly
activated; mouse is likely activated as well but somewhat
later and not as strongly, allowing both mice bowl and
mouse bowl to be formed and compete with/inhibit each
other. The constraint preferring singulars within compounds
would also add inhibition to mice bowl, but because mice
bowl starts out with higher activation, it wins more often.
However, sometimes mouse bowl does win, when it and the
constraint succeed in inhibiting mice bowl. In the regular
case, when the task is to respond to “a BOWL containing
RATS is a _____”, rats is aroused, but rat is aroused as
well. The constraint preferring singulars in compounds
inhibits rats bowl even more strongly than it did mice bowl;
that inhibition, along with the competition from rat bowl,
serve to eliminate rats bowl in almost all cases, resulting in
an output of rat bowl most of the time.

A number of theories of morphological structure,
including Level Ordering, would be compatible with such a
processing model. Our proposal does, however, postulate
that speakers recognize and segment grammatical
morphemes when the language structure supports it.
To be sure, our elicitation task, designed to parallel
Gordon’s (1985) task, and also to permit collecting reaction
time data, is distinctly non-natural. The data we have
collected do not speak directly to the problem of creating a
real-time model of how plurals and compounds are created
in natural speech. However, in the real world the situation is
also not as neatly divided into regular and irregular nouns
with different behavior. In the real world we find violations
of the no-plurals-inside-compounds constraint (e.g., civil
rights legislation, fireworks display, parks commissioner).
Children also hear at least four nouns of English that have
no singular form (e.g., clothes, pants, scissors, glasses).
They hear these nouns both alone and in compounds (e.g.,
clothes basket, pants leg); such compounds are well-attested
in input to children in CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000).
Eventually children will discover that these nouns are
special in not having corresponding singulars, but initially
the nouns may be apprehended as evidence that at least
some plurals may be allowed within compounds.
The cornerstone of Gordon’s (1985) and Pinker’s (1994)
argument for innateness of level ordering in grammar was
that children who had no exposure to irregular plurals inside
compounds nevertheless permitted them, as did adults. What
we have shown is that adult production of plurals inside
compounds in this type of elicitation task is probably a
consequence of the difficulty in overcoming the strongly
primed irregular plural form. Presumably children in
Gordon’s task faced the same problem. The fact that they
behave like adults need not be due to their having an adultlike rule permitting irregular plurals in compounds, but
rather to their having a similar human system for processing
language stimuli.
To conclude, our finding points to a processing difficulty
explanation for violations of the constraint against plurals
within compounds in this elicitation situation: It is more
difficult and time-consuming to produce the singular form
of an irregular noun when primed with a stimulus of the
plural form than it is to segment the regular plural marker, at
least when it is an easily removable affix like the –s in
English, and thereby retrieve the singular form. It is likely
that the same explanation also works for the children
examined by Gordon (1985). Given these results, we argue
that Gordon’s findings do not provide support for the notion
of innate grammar.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Erica Wohldmann and James Kole for
their assistance in scoring the tape recordings, to William
Bright for editorial suggestions, to George Figgs for his
CHILDES searches, and to Dan Jurafsky, Todd Haskell, and
K. P. Mohanan for their comments and suggestions at
various stages of this project. Lise Menn presented
preliminary explorations of this topic on several occasions;

we are grateful to audiences at the 11th World Congress of
Applied Linguistics, the Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics at Nijmegen, the Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Anthropology at Leipzig, Swarthmore
College, and the UCLA Linguistics Department for their
helpful comments. This research was supported in part by
Army Research Institute Contract DASW01-99-K-0022 and
Army Research Office Grant DAAG55-98-1-0214 to the
University of Colorado (Alice Healy, Principal
Investigator).

References
Bauer, L. (1990). Level disorder: The case of -er and -or.
Transactions of the Philological Society, 88, 97-110.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: An interactive graphics system for
designing and controlling experiments in the psychology
laboratory using Macintosh computers. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments & Computers, 25(2), 257271.
Fabb, N. (1988). English suffixation is constrained only by
selectional restrictions. Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory, 6, 527-539.
Gordon, P. (1985). Level-ordering in lexical development.
Cognition, 21(2), 73-93.
Kaisse, E. M., & Shaw, P. A. (1985). On the Theory of
Lexical Phonology. Phonology Yearbook, 2, 1-30.
Kiparsky, P. (1982). From cyclic phonology to lexical
phonology. In H. v. d. Hulst & N. Smith (Eds.), The
Structure of Phonological Representations (pp. 131-175).
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Foris Publications.
Kiparsky, P. (1983). Word-formation and the lexicon. In F.
Ingeman (Ed.), Proceedings of the 1982 Mid-America
Linguistics Conference (pp. 3-29). Lawrence, KS:
University of Kansas.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. New York: W.
Morrow and Co.

