UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On Choosing the Parse with the Scene: The Role of Visual Context and Verb bias in
Ambiguity Resolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1763p4pp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Snedeker, Jesse
Thorpe, Kirsten
Trueswell, John

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On choosing the parse with the scene:
The role of visual context and verb bias in ambiguity resolution
Jesse Snedeker (jessned@psych.upenn.edu)
Kirsten Thorpe (thorpe@psych.upenn.edu)
John Trueswell (trueswel@ psych.upenn.edu)
The Department of Psychology and the Institute for Research in Cognitive Science
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Abstract
Two striking contrasts currently exist in the sentence processing literature. First, whereas adult reading studies indicate
an important role for verb biases in the initial consideration of
syntactic alternatives (Britt, 1994), studies of adult listeners in
world-situated eye-gaze studies suggest an almost exclusive
role for referential cues in determining initial syntactic
choices (Tanenhaus et al., 1995). Second, in contrast to
adults, children in similar listening studies fail to take into account this referential information and instead appear to rely
exclusively on verb biases or perhaps syntactically-based
parsing principles (Trueswell et al., 1999). The current paper
seeks to understand better these surprising contrasts by fully
crossing verb bias and referential manipulations within a single experimental design, while using the eye-gaze listening
technique. The full pattern is examined in adults (Exp. 1) and
children (Exp. 2). Results indicate that adults combine both
verb bias and referential information to determine syntactic
choice, but children rely exclusively on verb bias. We discuss
the implications for current theories of sentence processing as
well as prior interpretations of world-situated listening studies.

Introduction
A central interest in the study of human language comprehension has been to understand the role that context plays in
resolving linguistic ambiguities. In particular, can readers
and listeners take into account extra-sentential information
(i.e., information about the current situation or discourse)
when making initial decisions about how to structure an incoming utterance? Or, do constraints on the organization of
the comprehension system force it to exclude these nonlinguistic factors during the early stages of processing?
These questions have played themselves out in the sentence processing literature in a series of studies examining
how the referential context of a sentence affects the way
readers initially interpret syntactically ambiguous phrases.
To illustrate these findings, consider sentence fragment 1.
The prepositional phrase (PP) beginning with with is temporarily ambiguous because it could be linked to the verb hit
(verb phrase (VP)-attachment), indicating an Instrument
(e.g., with the stick); or it could be linked to the definite
noun phrase the thief (noun phrase (NP)-attachment) indicating a Modifier (e.g., with the wart).
1. The store owner hit the thief with the…

Crain and Steedman (1985) hypothesized that ambiguities
involving this structure, and others, are initially resolved by
taking into account the referential presuppositions of the
syntactic analyses, with readers pursuing the analysis that
has the fewest presuppositions. In short, if one assumes that
a definite NP like the thief requires a unique referent, a restrictive modifier analysis of with the wart would presuppose the presence of two or more thieves, one of which has a
wart. An Instrument analysis makes no such presupposition.
Hence, it is predicted that in a context containing two possible referents (two-referent contexts) readers should pursue a
modifier (NP-attachment) analysis, but in a one-referent
context, or even a null context, readers should erroneously
pursue an Instrument (VP-attachment) analysis.
Indeed several studies have found that readers in a tworeferent context pursue a modifier analysis for ambiguous
phrases of this sort (e.g., Altmann & Steedman, 1988; van
Berkum, Brown & Hagoort, 1999, among many). However,
several studies have failed to find such affects (e.g., Ferreira
& Clifton, 1986; Rayner, Garrod & Perfetti, 1992).
An account of these conflicting findings comes from constraint-satisfaction theories of parsing that propose a role for
verb biases in parsing preferences (e.g., MacDonald et al.,
1994; Trueswell & Tanenhaus, 1994). These theories predict
that referential effects should be weakened or eliminated
when lexically specific constraints are strong. Thus, differences in the materials that were used in these prior studies
may account for the conflicting findings.
Indeed, studies that have manipulated both referential
context and verb bias have found that effects of referential
factors disappear when a verb strongly prefers a single
analysis (e.g., Britt, 1994; Spivey-Knowlton & Sedivy,
1995). Using materials like “Susan put/dropped the book on
the civil war onto the table” Britt (1994) found that 2-book
vs. 1-book contexts failed to guide parsing preferences when
the verb required a PP argument. That is, for verbs like put,
readers initially pursued VP-attachment regardless of context but for verbs like dropped, context guided parsing.
These reading studies suggest that context only has an influence in the absence of strong lexical constraints, leading
some researchers to contend that verb information plays the
privileged role of proposing syntactic structures, which are
only compared against context at a later stage (Boland &
Cutler, 1996; Britt, 1994).
Recent work on syntactic ambiguity resolution in spoken
language comprehension however has raised questions about
the relative contributions of context and verb information.
Tanenhaus, Spivey and colleagues (Tanenhaus et al., 1995;

Spivey et al., 2001) have found that under the right conditions situation-specific contextual information can completely override strong verb biases that support a competing
syntactic alternative. In their studies, participants were given
spoken instructions to move objects about on a table while
their eye movements were recorded. Target instructions,
like 2 below, contained a temporary PP-attachment ambiguity, in which the verb’s argument preferences strongly supported an initial VP-attachment analysis of on the napkin.
2. Put the apple on the napkin into the box.
Even though the verb put requires a destination role, usually a PP, the two-referent context was sufficient to allow
listeners to override the strong bias for VP-attachment. In
particular, scenes containing two apples, one of which was
on a napkin, eliminated early and late looks to an incorrect
destination object (e.g., an empty napkin). Similar scenes
with one apple resulted in large numbers of early and late
looks to the incorrect destination. The authors concluded
that when referential cues to attachment are salient, copresent with the linguistic utterance, and hence easy to
maintain in memory, they can prevail over even the strongest of verb biases. However, they also noted that such strong
effects of context are unexpected under most views of constraint-satisfaction, given the overwhelming structural bias
of put.
Trueswell, Sekerina, Hill & Logrip (1999) replicated the
findings of Tanenhaus et al. (1995) using essentially the
same auditory eye-gaze task. In addition, they tested children, ages 4 and 5 , with the same materials. The children
pursued the VP-attachment analysis, ignoring referential
constraints even for the purpose of reanalysis. In particular,
both two-referent and one-referent scenes showed early and
late eye movements to the incorrect destination. Moreover,
children’s actions frequently involved the incorrect destination (e.g., moving an object to the empty napkin). By age
eight, children acted like adults in this task, using referential
context to guide parsing commitments. The authors concluded that the child parsing system relies heavily on verbargument preferences to assign structure, and that processing
1
demands prevented any use of the referential facts. This
developmental shift is surprising and a bit mysterious. How
and why would lexicalist children become referentiallydriven adults?
The current paper explores the striking and somewhat
puzzling contrasts that we have outlined above. First, we
wish to better understand the differences between adult
reading and auditory studies, which paradoxically suggest
that verb-specific preferences play little or no role in worldsituated syntactic ambiguity resolution. Second, we wish to
better understand the developmental change that occurs in
sentence processing, to discover whether the parsing strategies of children and adults are as incommensurable as they
appear.

1

The children’s parsing pattern might instead be attributable to
the use of a syntactically-based parsing strategy (e.g., Minimal
Attachment, Frazier & Fodor, 1978). This will be addressed in
Experiment 2.

To achieve these goals, we follow the lead of the prior
reading studies that have, in a single experiment, fully
crossed verb bias preferences with manipulations of referential context, except we now perform these manipulations in
the world-situated eye-gaze task of Tanenhaus and colleagues. Such manipulations should reveal the relative contributions of these factors under all possible combinations.
Second, we collected similar observations in five year olds,
to observe the full pattern of information combination in this
age group.

Experiment 1
In this experiment adults heard instruction containing a PPattachment ambiguity (e.g., “Feel the frog with the feather”)
in both two-referent and one-referent contexts. For some
subjects the target sentence contained a verb that typically
uses an instrument phrase. Others heard instructions containing verbs that rarely use instruments. A third group was
given instructions with equi-biased verbs.
The target instructions were globally ambiguous sentences
rather than the temporarily ambiguous sentences typically
used in comprehension studies. This was done for two reasons. First, we wanted to use the simplest sentences possible
(i.e., ones without a second preposition) to avoid confusing
children with uncommon sentence types (Exp. 2). Second,
we were concerned that the previous listening studies (Tanenhaus et al., 1995; Trueswell et al., 1999) may have failed
to find evidence that a VP-analysis was being considered in
two-referent contexts because the disambiguating preposition occurred so soon after the introduction of the ambiguous
phrase (see MacDonald, 1994, for the effects for postambiguity cues on parallel processing).
Because the sentences used in this study are never definitively disambiguated, we should expect continuity between
the listeners’ online attachment preferences and their ultimate interpretations. If listeners rely entirely on the visual
context, then in two referent contexts they should interpret
the ambiguous phrase as a modifier, regardless of verb bias.
This preference should be reflected in both their eye movements and their actions. In contrast, if listeners simultaneously consider both lexical and contextual information then
we would expect to find: 1) an effect of verb bias in both the
one- and two-referent contexts and 2) an effect of referential
context in some or all of the verb classes.

Methods
Participants Thirty-six students at the University of Pennsylvania volunteered for the experiment (twelve in each of
the verb bias conditions). They received extra course credit
or were paid for their participation. Twelve of the participants were males and all were native speakers of English.
Procedure The adult subjects were told that they were going
to listen to and follow prerecorded instructions and that their
responses would serve as a point of comparison for a study
of how children follow directions. The subject sat in front of
an inclined podium. At the center of the podium was a hole
for a camera that focused on the subject’s face. In each
quadrant of the podium was a shelf where one of the props

could be placed. At the beginning of each trial one experimenter laid out the props and introduced each one using indefinite noun phrases (e.g., This bag contains a dog, a
fan…).
A second experimenter then played three prerecorded
sound files from a laptop computer connected to external
speakers. The first sound file was the same on every trial
and simply told the subject to look at a fixation point at the
center of the display. The second and third sound files were
single sentence commands involving the props. The subject
heard the first command, performed that action, and then
heard the second command. Subjects signaled that an action
was completed by saying “done”. A second camera, placed
behind the subject, recorded their actions and the locations
of the props.
Stimuli On the critical trials, the first command contained
an ambiguous Prepositional Phrase attachment, as in (3 a-c)
below. The scene that accompanied these sentences contained the following objects: 1) a Target Instrument, a full
scale object that could be used to carry out the action (e.g.,
for 3b a large feather); 2) a Target Animal, a stuffed animal
carrying a small replica of the Target Instrument (e.g., a frog
holding a little feather); 3) a Distractor Instrument; a second
full scale object (e.g., a candle); and 4) A Distractor Animal,
a stuffed animal carrying a replica of the Distractor Instrument. For Two Referent Trials the Distractor Animal and
Target Animal were of the same kind (e.g., both frogs) for
the One Referent Trials the Distractor Animal was of a different kind (e.g., a leopard carrying a candle).

lated between subjects. This was done to minimize the number of trials per participant to ensure that children could
complete the same study. Referential Context was manipulated within subjects but blocked. The first half of one list
contained all One Referent Contexts while the first half of
the other list contained just Two Referent Contexts. The
critical trials were interspersed with twenty-four filler trials.
The prop sets for the filler trials were similar to those used
in the target trials: the attributes of the animals were
matched to the large objects and animals of the same kind
were used in half of the filler prop sets. Each list was presented in two orders (forward and reverse).
Coding Trained coders watched the videotape of the subject’s actions and judged whether they made an Instrument
response (performed the target action using the Target Instrument or the miniature instrument). A different coder
viewed the videotape of the subject’s face and recorded the
onset of the target sentence and the onset and location of
each fixation that occurred from the beginning of the instruction up until the subject began the action.

Results
Eye Movements For each trial we determined whether the
subject looked at the Target Instrument during the time between the onset of the direct-object noun and the beginning
2
of the action. Figure 1 shows the proportion of trials with
Instrument Fixations in each of the six conditions.

Examples of the three different types of verbs were used
in this study are given in (3a-c). The verbs were identified
in an earlier sentence completion study (see Snedeker, Dardick & Trueswell, 1999). In that experiment, adult subjects
were asked to complete sentence fragments that ended with
the ambiguously attached preposition (e.g., “Touch the teddy
bear with…”). The verbs in the Modifier Bias condition
were ones for which modifier completions (e.g., “the big
brown eyes”) were at least three times as frequent as Instrument completions (e.g., “your toes”). For the Instrument
Bias verbs the opposite rule applied. Equi Bias verbs were
those that fell somewhere in between.
The Target Instruments for each sentence were also chosen on the basis of a prior norming study (Snedeker et al.,
1999). Subjects were shown several objects for each verb
and asked to rate them as instruments for performing that
action on a seven-point scale. We selected objects with
mean ratings between 2 and 5 and balanced the ratings
across the three Verb Bias conditions (M = 3.60, 3.65, and
3.64 for Modifier, Equi, and Instrument Biased respectively,
p > .9).
Two presentation lists were constructed for each Verb
Bias condition, so that each of the 8 target trials appeared in
only one of the conditions on a given list but appeared in
both conditions across lists (resulting in four target trials in
each condition per subject). Thus Verb Bias was manipu-

Proportion of Trials with Instrument Fixations

3a. Choose the cow with the stick. (Modifier Bias)
3b. Feel the frog with the feather (Equi Bias)
3c. Tickle the pig with the fan. (Instrument Bias)

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
InstrumentBias

Equi-Bias

1 Referent

Modifier-Bias

2 Referent

Figure 1: Proportion of Instrument Fixations for Adults (Experiment 1)

2

This is essentially the same measure used by Tanenhaus et al.,
1995. More fine-grained analyses of the pattern of fixations over
time, indicate an early use of verb information even in Two Referent contexts.

Subjects’ fixations during the ambiguous instructions were
strongly affected by the type of verb in the sentence
(F1(2,24) = 27.71, p < .001; F2(2,18) = 35.01, p < .001).
Subjects who heard Instrument Biased verbs looked at the
Target Instrument on 73% of the trials, indicating that they
were considering the VP-attachment. Those who were given
Modifier Biased verbs looked at the Target Instrument on
only 18% of the trials.
Referential Context also had a strong and reliable effect
on performance (F1(1,24) = 10.52, p < .005; F2(1,18) =
11.90, p < .005). When the ambiguous sentence occurred in
a Two Referent Context only 34% of the trials included an
Instrument Fixation, while in One Referent Contexts 49% of
the trials did so. There was no significant interaction between Verb Type and Referential Context (F1(2,24) > 1, p >
.5; F2(2,18) > 1, p > .5).
Actions The analysis of the Actions closely paralleled the
analysis of the Instrument Fixations. Subjects tended to look
at the Target Instrument when they were going to use it to
perform the action but seldom fixated on it otherwise. The
proportion of Instrument responses in each of the six conditions is presented in Figure 2.
Again there was a large and reliable effect of Verb Type
(F1(2,24) = 36.54, p < .001; F2(2,18) = 69.99, p < .001).
When the subjects heard an Instrument Biased verb, they
produced Instrument actions 77% of the time. When they
heard a Modifier Biased verb, they produced Instrument
actions only 7% of the time.

Experiment 2
A very similar experiment was conducted with five-year old
children. Recall that Trueswell et al (1999) found an overwhelming VP-attachment bias in children of this age. As
mentioned above this finding could be the result of the
strong attachment bias of put or it could be evidence that
children use a general structural parsing principle (e.g.,
minimal attachment). This experiment gives us the opportunity to distinguish between these explanations. A lexically
based theory would predict that attachment preferences
would be guided by verb information. A minimal attachment explanation would predict that children would show a
VP-attachment preference independent of verb type. In addition, manipulating verb type allows us to see whether children’s failure to use referential context is limited to strongly
biased verbs (ala, Britt, 1994). We reasoned that children
might prove to be sensitive to context for the Equi Biased
verbs.

Methods
Participants Thirty-six children between 4;6 and 5;10 participated in the study (M = 5;1). Parents were contacted from
Philadelphia area preschools and a commercial mailing list.
Four additional children participated but were not included
in the analyses because they refused to cooperate (1) were
bilingual (1), or had been identified as developmentally delayed (2). Half of the children were male. Sex and age were
balanced across the Verb Bias conditions and Lists.

1
Proportion of Instrument Responses

and Referential Context was not reliable (F1(2,24) = 2.20, p
< .2; F2(2,18) = 3.28, p = .06), the effect of context appeared to be isolated to the Equi Biased Verbs (F1(1,8) =
5.33, p < .05; F2(1,6) = 11.39, p < .05) and Instrument Biased Verbs (F1(1,8) = 5.59, p < .05; F2(1,6) = 4.74, p =
.07). There was no significant effect of Referential Context
for the Modifier Biased Verbs (F1(1,8) < 1, p > .5; F2(1,6)
= 1.00, p > .3).

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
InstrumentBias

Equi-Bias

Modifier-Bias

Procedure and Stimuli The procedure was identical to Experiment 1 with the following exceptions. First, the children
were told the names of each object twice. Second, the children were not asked to tell us when they had finished performing each action. Instead the experimenter who introduced the toys waited until the child finished moving the
toys or looked at her and then praised the child for her response regardless of his or her action. Third, the number of
filler trials was reduced from 24 to 10.

Results
1 Referent

2 Referent

Figure 2: Proportion of Instrument Actions for Adults
(Experiment 1).
Referential Context also had a strong effect on performance (F1(1,24) = 10.81, p < .005; F2(1,18) = 15.99, p <
.001). In One Referent Contexts 42% of the responses involved the Target Instrument, in Two Referent Contexts
only 27% did. Although the interaction between Verb Type

Eye Movements Figure 3 shows the proportion of trials
with Instrument Fixations in each of the six conditions. An
Instrument Fixation was defined as any fixation to the Target Instrument that occurred between the onset of the direct
object noun and the initiation of the action.
Like the adults, the children’s fixations were strongly affected by the type of verb in the sentence (F1(2,24) = 43.49,
p < .001; F2(2,18) = 18.60, p < .001). Subjects who heard
Instrument Biased verbs looked to the Target Instrument on

1
0.9
0.8
0.7

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.6

0.1

0.5

0
InstrumentBias

0.4

Equi-Bias

Modifier-Bias

0.3
1 Referent

0.2
0.1
0
InstrumentBias

Equi-Bias

1 Referent

Modifier-Bias

2 Referent

Figure 3: Proportion of Instrument Fixations for
Five-Year Olds (Experiment 2)
Actions The proportion of Instrument responses in each
condition is presented in Figure 4. Here again the offline
actions and the online eye movements provide convergent
evidence of the children’s interpretation of the with-phrase.
Verb Bias had a striking effect on the children’s actions
(F1(2,24) = 58.21, p < .001; F2(2,18) = 309.47, p < .001).
When the Subjects heard an Instrument Biased verb, they
produced Instrument Actions 96% of the time. When they
heard a Modifier Biased verb, they produced Instrument
actions only 9% of the time. In contrast Referential Context
appeared to have no effect on the children’s actions
(F1(1,24) = 1.15, p > .2; F2(1,18) = 1.46, p > .2). In One
Referent Contexts instruments were used on 47% of the trials, in Two Referent Contexts they were used on 51% of the
trials. There was no significant interaction between Referential Context and Verb Bias (F1(2,24) < 1, p > .5; F2(2,18)
< 1, p > .4).
A direct comparison of the data from the two experiments
revealed a main effect of Age Group (F1(1,66) = 9.57, p <
.005; F2(1,21) = 17.32, p < .001) and an Age Group by Ref3

erential Context interaction (F1(1,66) = 7.66, p < .01;
F2(1,21) = 9.79, p < .005). Five-year-old children produce

Proportion of Instrument Responses

Proportion of Trials with Instrument Fixations

82% of the trials, while those who heard the Modifier Biased
verbs looked at the Target Instrument on only 21% of the
trials. In contrast, Referential Context had no significant
effect on the children’s Instrument Fixations (F1(1,24) < 1,
p > .5; F2(1,18) = 1.41, p > .25). There was no significant
interaction between Verb Type and Referential Context
(F1(2,24) > 1, p > .5; F2(2,18) > 1, p > .5). The children’s
fixations suggest that in all three Verb Bias Conditions, Referential Context played no role in determining the attachment of the ambiguous phrase.3

More detailed analyses of the time course of the eye movements
support these claims. Verb Bias has an early effect on fixations but
Referential Context does not.

2 Referent

more Instrument responses than adults but this difference is
limited to the Two Referent Condition.
Figure 4: Proportion of Instrument Actions for Five-Year
Olds (Experiment 2)
In the One Referent Context, there was no effect of Age
Group nor an Age Group by Verb Bias interaction (all Fs <
1, all p’s > .3), indicating that the children and adults were
equally responsive to the combinatorial properties of the
verbs. In the Two Referent Contexts, there was both an effect of Age Group (F1(1,66) = 16.54, p < .001; F2(1,21) =
26.93, p < .001) and a marginal Age Group by Verb Bias
interaction (F1(2,66) = 3.00, p = .06; F2(2,21) = 4.90, p <
.05). Children gave more Instrument Responses, especially
in the Instrument Biased and Equi Biased Conditions.

General Discussion
Two important findings emerge from this work. First, we
observe that lexical biases do play an important role in adult
parsing preferences in a world-situated task. Even when
there is a rich and potentially constraining context that is copresent with the utterance, verb bias and referential cues
combine to determine adult listeners’ parsing preferences.
Second, children show a complete inability to use referential
information to inform parsing decisions, and instead reveal
detailed sensitivity to verb biases. The implications of the
adult and child data are considered separately below.
The data from our adult study indicate a greater continuity
between the reading and listening than previous studies
would suggest. Like Britt (1994), we observe contributions
of both factors in on-line parsing commitments. This pattern
is consistent either with a constraint-satisfaction approach
that weighs both sources of evidence (e.g., Trueswell & Tanenhaus, 1994) or a ‘propose-and-select’ model which gives

a privileged status to lexical items in computing syntactic
alternatives (e.g., Boland & Cutler, 1996).
Why then did the previous put studies show no consideration of the VP-attachment analysis? We speculate that two
additional sources of information present in those studies
may have further reduced consideration of VP-attachment.
First, the appearance of a second prepositional phrase (into
the box) right at the very moment that eye movements
should show consideration of VP-attachment may have
served as a post-ambiguity cue that squelched consideration
of this parse. Second, prosodic cues may have provided
evidence during the first PP that a second potential argument
was forthcoming. Prosody was held constant across conditions in these studies, but the neutral prosody that the experimenters aimed for may have revealed that the utterance
would continue. Indeed, our own studies of prosody, which
used a similar task and measure, suggest that differences of
this kind can influence parsing as rapidly as lexical information (Snedeker et al, 2001). These additional cues may not
have been enough to completely eliminate the VPattachment analysis in the one referent condition but may
have been adequate to eliminate it in the two referent condition where context also supports a modifier analysis.
Implications from the child data are clear. First, children
are not ‘miniature minimal attachers’. The lack of a general
VP-attachment bias, and a clear sensitivity to verb information speaks to this issue. Second, children seem instead to
have formed parsing strategies that derive from their syntactic/semantic knowledge of individual verbs, lending further
support to constraint-based lexicalist models of parsing.
An issue that remains less understood is why children fail
to use referential specificity to guide their parsing commitments (i.e., the Referential Principle). This failure occurs
even verbs that have no strong attachment preferences,
which might override the effects of context. We strongly
suspect that the failure to employ the referential principle is
not due to a general lack of knowledge about specificity or
the proper use of modification—our own studies show a
clear talent in children’s utterances for specifying a referent
via locative modification (e.g., Hurewitz et al., 2001).
A controversial position, which our current data cannot
rule out, is that children show a degree of bottom-up priority
for lexically-based cues to syntax, perhaps because of the
architectural configuration of the system. If children have
memory limitations that prevent them from considering improbable syntactic alternatives, and probability is determined
solely by distributional facts gleaned from utterances, then
such a pattern might emerge. Only after the processing system gains the ability to maintain parallel parses over numerous words may the contextual facts further drive processing
decisions. Indeed, this may also explain the inability of
children in the Trueswell et al. study to revise initial commitments. It remains to be seen however, whether other
contextual factors (e.g., related to conversational goals of a
discourse) might better guide parsing preferences in children.

Acknowledgments
We thank Amy Nichols, Jessica Lilleston, John Paul Moorehead, Stefanie Poulos, Kate Ruane, Sandy Yim, and Lauren

Cornew for their assistance with testing, coding and subject
recruitment. We also gratefully acknowledge Tracy Dardick
who carried out the norming studies. This work was supported by NIH Grant 1-R01-HD3750707-01 and a NSF
Center Grant to the University of Pennsylvania Institute for
Research in Cognitive Science.

References
Altmann, G. & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction with context during human sentence processing. Cognition, 30,
191-238.
Boland, J. & Cutler, A. (1996). Interaction with autonomy:
Multiple output models and the inadequacy of the Great
Divide. Cognition, 58, 309-320.
Britt, M. A. (1994). The interaction of referential ambiguity
and argument structure in the parsing of prepositional
phrases. JML, 33, 251-283.
Crain, S. & Steedman, M. (1985). On not being led up the
garden path: The use of context by the psychological
parser. In Dowty, Karrattunen & Zwicky. Natural Language Parsing, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ferreira, F. & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of syntactic processing. JML, 25, 348-368.
Frazier, L. & Fodor, J. D. (1978). The sausage machine: A
new two-stage parsing model. Cognition, 6, 291-325.
Hurewitz, F., Brown-Schmidt, S., Thorpe, K., Gleitman, L.,
& Trueswell, J. (2000). One frog, two frog, red frog, blue
frog: Factors affecting children's syntactic choices in production and comprehension. JPR, 29, 597-626.
MacDonald, M.C. (1994). Probabilistic constraints and syntactic ambiguity resolution. LCP, 9, 157-201.
MacDonald, M.C., Pearlmutter, N.J., Seidenberg, M.S.
(1994). The lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution. Psychological Review, 101, 676-703.
Rayner, K, Garrod, S & Perfetti, C. (1992). Discourse influences during parsing are delayed. Cognition. 45, 109-139.
Snedeker, J., Dardick, T., & Trueswell, J. (1999). Identifying Verb Biases. Unpublished manuscript.
Spivey-Knowlton, M.J. & Sedivy, J. (1995) Resolving attachment ambiguities with multiple constraints. Cognition,
55, 227-267.
Spivey, M.J., Tanenhaus, M.K., Eberhard, K.M. & Sedivy,
J.C. (2001). Eye movements and spoken language comprehension: Effects of visual context on syntactic ambiguity resolution. In press, Cognitive Psychology.
Tanenhaus, M., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., & Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken language comprehension. Science, 268,
1632-1634.
Trueswell, J., Sekerina, I., Hill, N., & Logrip, M. (1999).
The kindergarten-path effect: Studying on-line sentence
processing in young children. Cognition, 73, 89-134.
Trueswell, J.C. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1994). Toward a lexicalist framework of constraint-based syntactic ambiguity
resolution. In Clifton, and Frazier (Eds), Perspectives on
sentence processing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
van Berkum, J, Brown, C, & Hagoort, P. (1999) Early referential context effects in sentence processing: Evidence
from event-related brain potentials. JML, 41, 147-182.

