UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pragmatics at Work: Formulation and Interpretation of Conditional Instructions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1609g73m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Hilton, Denis J.
Bonnefon, Jena-Francois
Kemmelmeier, Markus

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pragm atics atW ork:Form ulation and Interpretation ofC onditional
Instructions
D enis J.H ilton (hilton@ univ-tlse2.fr)
Laboratoire D .S.V .P.,U niversité Toulouse 2
5 allées A .M achado,31058 Toulouse cedex,France

Jean-François Bonnefon (bonnefon@ univ-tlse2.fr)
Laboratoire D .S.V .P.,U niversité Toulouse 2
5 allées A .M achado,31058 Toulouse cedex,France

M arkusK em m elm eier (m arkusk@ um ich.edu)
D epartm entofPsychology,U niversity ofM ichigan
525 E.U niversity A ve.,A nn A rbor,M ichigan,48109-1109,U SA

A bstract
Form ulation and interpretation ofconditionalinstructions
(conditionals relating the occurrence of an event to the
taking of an action) are studied from a pragm atic
standpoint: It is argued that form ulations of the
instructions differ in perceived naturalness as a function
of the adequacy betw een the necessity and sufficiency
relations they em bed and the goal-structure of the
situation. Tw o experim ents are reported to support this
claim .

C onditionalInstructions as a Peculiar
Subclass ofC onditionalStatem ents
A s A ustin (1962) has observed, w e use w ords to get
things done – and there are indeed lots ofthings w e can
getdone by using the w ord “if”,thatis,by asserting a
conditionalstatem ent.W ith a conditionalstatem ent,w e
can tellothers w hatconclusion they should draw (e.g.,
“if it is a three-star restaurant, then the food there is
certainly divine”),orw hataction they should take (e.g.,
“if you w ear this suit, you w ill m ake a very good
im pression on her”) – and in particular, especially in
w orking situations, w e can give others instructions to
follow w ould a specific situation occur (e.g., “if a
custom er buys tw o m ake-up products, offer her a
sam ple ofthis perfum e”).
It is com m on know ledge am ong psychologists that
people do not do very w ell in conditional reasoning
tasks.For exam ple,they have a disturbing tendency to
derive the w rong conclusions from a conditional
argum ent (e.g., they com m it the fallacies of A sserting
the Consequent: “If P then Q ; Q ; therefore P,” and of
D enying the A ntecedent:“If P then Q ;not-P;therefore
not-Q ”) and not to derive the right ones (e.g.,they do
notapply M odus Tollens:“IfP then Q ;not-Q ;therefore
not-P”). (See Evans, N ew stead, & Byrne, 1993, for a
review .) D oes this poor perform ance extend to this
subclass of conditional statem ents w e just dubbed

conditional instructions? Since conditional instructions
are so very com m on in w orking situations,thatcould be
bad new s.
Fortunately, people seem to be better at handling
conditional instructions than at solving conditional
reasoning problem s.In this paper,w e w antto show that
w hen dealing w ith conditional instructions, people are
able to (a)selectthe betterw ay to express a conditional
relation betw een tw o events according to the goalstructure of the context,and (b) interpret a conditional
relation in a norm atively (logically)valid w ay.

G oal-Structure ofthe C ontextand
Form ulation ofa C onditionalInstruction
From our pragm atic point of view , the context w ill
determ ine w hat a speaker w ill aim to achieve by
uttering a conditional instruction: Thus, conditional
instructions m ake points, and do so w ell or badly
depending on their perceived relevance to contextually
specified goals. Context w ill be considered here
through an analogy betw een com plying w ith a
conditional instruction and being engaged in a signal
detection task. (See K irby, 1994, for another view on
the analogy betw een conditional reasoning tasks and
signaldetection tasks.)
In a signal detection task, the observer has to judge
w hether a signal actually indicates its putative referent
or not. D oes a certain kind of blip on a sonar screen
indicate the presence of an enem y subm arine (that has
to be sunk) or not? Tw o types of error are conceivable
here: (a) other kinds of objects m ay have caused the
blip, for exam ple w hales or friendly subm arines,
leading to a “false alarm ” (FA ); and (b) an enem y
subm arine m ay really be outthere,his sonar“signature”
being distorted by underground w ave patterns or rock
form ations in such a w ay that the operator fails to
recognize it,leading to a “m iss” (M S).

N ow ,w hethera M S ora FA has the highestexpected
costm ay depend on the situation.In a state of w ar,M S
are likely to prove costly:If you do notsink the enem y
subm arine first then it w ill sink you. H ow ever, a FA
m ay also prove costly:If you m istakenly sink a neutral
country’s subm arine or ship, you m ay provoke that
country to declare w ar on you, w hich could prove
especially costly if the neutral country happens to be,
say,the U nited States.(Think ofthe Lusitania… )
N ow ,im agine a w arship com m ander w ishing to give
his operators a conditional instruction linking the
observing of an enem y subm arine “blip” and the
launching of depth charges. In context A , the
com m ander know s thatenem y subm arines are lethalif
allow ed w ithin range and m ust be destroyed at first
sighting.Clearly,w hat he should fear are M S,that is,
enem y subm arines w hich are notattacked.In contextB,
the com m ander know s that enem y subm arines are
outside range at first sighting, and that there is a
considerable risk of destroying his ow n subm arines,or
those of a neutral superpow er that are also lurking in
the area.W hathe should fear here are FA ,thatis,nonenem y subm arines w hich are attacked.
W hat w ould be the best w ay for the com m ander to
fram e his conditionalinstruction in contextA ? “If you
see an enem y blip,then launch the depth charges?” “If
and only if you see an enem y blip, then launch the
depth charges?” “If you do notsee an enem y blip,then
do not launch the depth charges?” “Launch he depth
charges only if you see an enem y blip?” A nd w hat
w ould be the bestchoice in contextB?
O ur prediction is that people can and do perceive
differences in the naturalness ofthese form ulations as a
function of w hat they perceive to be the goal-structure
of the context,that is,“avoid m isses” vs.“avoid false
alarm s”. Experim ent 1 below offers an experim ental
investigation ofthis claim .

lim itin France being low erthan in G erm any),know ing
that (avoid-M S context) officials insisted on strictly
im plem enting the French regulation, or (avoid-FA
context) the officials insisted on the im portance of
fluent circulation prior to the strict im plem entation of
the French regulation.In the M ailscenario,w hich w as
adapted from G igerenzer and H ug (1992) in order to
vary costs and benefits from a single perspective, an
office w orkerw as told to stam p letters over20 gram s in
w eight at 2 m arks, know ing that (avoid-M S context)
understam ping (i.e., putting 1 m ark stam ps on letters
over 20 gram s) w ould dam age the firm ’s public im age,
or (avoid-FA context) overstam ping (i.e., putting 2
m arks stam ps on letters under 20 gram s) w ould be
costly to the firm ’s finances.
Each questionnaire featured the four scenarios,allof
them in their avoid-M S or avoid-FA version (context
w as thus a 2-levelbetw een-subjectfactor),rotated over
tw o experim ental blocks, w ith tw o orders w ithin each
experim ental block, such that each subject saw tw o
avoid-M S and tw o avoid-FA contexts paired w ith
different content scenarios. Follow ing each scenario,
four conditionalinstructions w ere introduced (if P then
Q ,ifand only ifP then Q ,Q only ifP,ifnot-P then not
Q ); participants had to rate on a 7-point scale the
naturalness of each instruction in the situation thathad
just been described to them (form ulation of the
conditionalinstruction w as thus a 4-levelw ithin-subject
factor).The experim entw as conducted in G erm an.
R esults & D iscussion Table 1 displays the m ean
naturalness ratings (across the four scenarios) assigned
to the four form ulations as a function of the goalstructure ofthe context.(The observed pattern ofresults
w as rem arkably stable across scenarios.)
Table 1: N aturalness ratings (7-pointscale)of
conditionalform ulations as a function ofcontext.

Experim ent1
ParticipantsA totalof 46 students atthe U niversity of
H eidelberg took partin this study.
M aterial & M ethod Three additional scenarios w ere
created on the m odel of the Subm arine scenario: each
scenario cam e either in an avoid-FA context or in an
avoid-M S context. In the A irport scenario, a security
officer w as to decide w hether he w ould search
suspicious-looking luggage, know ing that (avoid-M S
context) the airport w as situated w ithin a “hot” area
w here terrorists w ere liable to sm uggle w eapons, or
(avoid-FA context) the airport w as m ostly frequented
by high-ranking executives that w ould not appreciate
losing their tim e w ith a luggage search. In the Border
scenario, a policem an equipped w ith a speed radar of
som e poor quality had to decide w hether he w ould
arrest drivers slightly exceeding the speed lim it w hen
entering France from G erm any via a subw ay (the speed

IfP then Q
Ifand only ifP then Q
Q only ifP
Ifnot-P then not-Q

Context:
avoid-M S
5.74 a
4.03 b
3.19 c
2.42 d

Context:
avoid-FA
3.10 c
4.47 b
4.33 b
4.91 b

N = 22 for avoid-M S context, N = 24 for avoid-FA
context. V alues that do not share the sam e subscript
differatp < .05.
In the avoid-FA context,allform ulations appearto be
of acceptable naturalness (4 to 5 on a 7-point scale),
except the “if P then Q ” form ulation w hich is judged
significantly less felicitous. O n the contrary, this
form ulation is by far the m ost felicitous in the avoidM S context,the form ulations “Q only ifP” and “ifnotP then not-Q ” being this tim e judged unnatural.

N ow w hy these differences in naturalness as a
function of context? O ne possible answ er is related to
the notions of necessity and sufficiency. In the avoidM S context,one w ould like to stress the sufficiency ofP
(observing an enem y blip)in regard to Q (launching the
depth charges),w hereas in the avoid-FA context,stress
should be on the necessity of P in regard to Q .H ence,
the idealform ulation in the avoid-M S contextw ould be
“if P then Q ”,w hereas this sam e form ulation w ould be
inappropriate in the avoid-FA context. In a given
context,a naturalform ulation w illbe one thatdirectthe
attention of the hearer to the relevant aspects of the
situation: is P necessary rather than sufficient for Q ?
This explanation assum es thatpeople’s interpretation of
the necessary and/or sufficientcharacter of P in regard
to Q in the four considered form ulations coincide w ith
w hatitshould be according to form allogic.In the light
of previous research (see again Evans, N ew stead, &
Byrne, 1993), this could be seen as a rather bold
assum ption.The nextsection w illfocus on the reasons
w hy this assum ption m ay hold in the specific case of
conditionalinstructions.

Interpretation ofC onditionalInstructions
as C onstraintPerception
D oes each of our four conditional form ulations (if P
then Q , if and only if P then Q , Q only if P, if not-P
then not Q ) have its ow n stable interpretation in term s
of necessity and sufficiency relations? That is, do
people consider these form ulations to em bed different
basic patterns of necessity and sufficiency,even if they
have no idea of the goal-structure of the instruction?
M oreover,do these patterns coincide w ith the patterns
predicted by traditionallogic?

The standard approach to this issue w ould have been
to give participants a scenario (e.g.,selling clothes in a
clothing store),an instruction (e.g.,“ifa custom eris not
touching any clothes, do not offer him your help”), a
situation (e.g.,“a custom er is touching som e clothes”),
and ask them w hat they w ould do in this situation if
they had to follow the rule (e.g., “I w ould offer m y
help”,“I w ould not offer m y help”,“I do not know ”).
But this approach w ould actually m iss the point,for it
w ould notassess the interpretation subjects m ade ofthe
rule,buttheir finaldecision on w hatthey should do,a
decision that does not solely depend on the
interpretation they m ade of the rule. (In the above
exam ple,a participantm ay w ellansw er thatshe w ould
offer her help to a custom er that is touching som e
clothes, after being told that “if a custom er is not
touching any clothes, do not offer him your help”. Is
this participant interpreting the rule as m eaning that a
custom ertouching som e clothes is a sufficientcondition
to offer him som e help? O r is she just taking her best
beton w hatto do w hen the rule does notstrictly apply?)
Therefore, in order to assess the interpretation
participants m ake of a conditionalinstruction,w hathas
to be checked is not what they would do in the
situations P and not-P,but how they perceive the way
the instruction is constraining their behavioraloptions
in these situations.Thus,given the rule “ifa custom eris
nottouching any clothes,do notoffer him your help”,
and the situation “a custom eris touching som e clothes”,
the relevantsetofansw ers to choose from w ould be:“I
m ustofferm y help”,“Im ustnotofferm y help”,and “I
am free to decide w hatto do.”
W e proposed that the function of the different
form ulations of the instruction w as to direct attention

Table 2: M ostfrequentpatterns associated to each form ulation ofthe conditionalinstruction (N = 39).
Form ulation

M ostfrequentpattern

Frequency:Shop scenario

Frequency:Restaurantscenario

IfP then Q

Situation P:M ustdo Q
Situation not-P:Free to decide

82%

82%

If and only if P Situation P:M ustdo Q
then Q
Situation not-P:M ustnotdo Q

85%

82%

If not-P then Situation P:Free to decide
not-Q
Situation not-P:M ustnotdo Q

85%

90%

Situation P:Free to decide
Situation not-P:M ustnotdo Q

56%

46%

Situation P:M ustdo Q
Situation not-P:M ustnotdo Q

31%

46%

Q only ifP

on different aspects of the context. Efficient
illocutionary uptake w ould then depend on the
possibility for the hearers to rely on som e basic,
conventional m eaning of the four form ulations
regarding the necessity and sufficiency relations they
em bed. W ere these basic m eanings to coincide w ith
w hat they are in traditional logic, then given a
conditional instruction “if P then Q ”,“if and only if P
then Q ”,“Q only ifP”,or“ifnot-P then notQ ”,and the
setof choices “I m ustdo Q ”,‘I m ustnotdo Q ”,“I am
free to decide w hatto do”,participants’ answ ers in the
situations P and not-P w ould exhibitnorm ative (logical)
validity in term s of the necessary and/or sufficient
relationships betw een P and Q . Experim ent 2 below
w as designed to provide an em pirical investigation of
thishypothesis.

Experim ent2
Participants A total of 39 students of the Ecole
Supérieure des Sciences Econom iques etCom m erciales
(ESSEC)atCergy-Pontoise took partin this study.
M aterial & M ethod Tw o scenarios w ere constructed,
the Shop scenario and the Restaurant scenario. In the
Shop scenario participants w ere told that they w ere
selling clothes in a shop; they had to decide w hether
they w ould offer a custom er som e help, know ing that
there w as an instruction to be strictly follow ed (e.g.,“if
a custom er is touching som e clothes, offer him som e
help”).In the restaurantscenario,participants w ere told
they w ere establishing a list of providers for the chef;
they had to decide w hether a provider should be puton
the list,again know ing thatthere w as an instruction to
be strictly follow ed (e.g.,“if a provider does not offer
you a reduced price,do notputhim on the list”).
Each questionnaire featured the Shop scenario and
the Restaurantscenario.W ithin each scenario,the four
form ulations of the conditional instruction w ere
introduced in turn. (For the Shop scenario, the four
form ulations w ent:
“Ifa custom eris touching som e clothes,offerhim your
help”, “If and only if a custom er is touching som e
clothes, offer him our help”, “O ffer a custom er your
help only if he is touching som e clothes”, and “If a
custom er is nottouching any clothes,do notoffer him
yourhelp.”)The form ulation ofthe instruction w as thus
a 4-level w ithin-subject factor. For each rule,
participants w ere asked to choose from the three
follow ing answ ers, first in the situation P, then in the
situation
not-P: “I
m ust do
Q ”, “I
m ustnotdo Q ”,“I am free to decide w hatto do.” The
experim entw as conducted in French.
R esults & D iscussion A firstw ay to look atthe results
is to consider the m ost frequent pattern of answ er
elicited by the participants for each form ulation (see
Table 2).Regarding the form ulations “if P then Q ”,“if
and only if P then Q ”,and “if not-P then not-Q ”,there

is a clear dom inance of a single pattern for each rule
(eliciting 82 to 90% of answ ers), w hereas the
form ulation “Q only if P” elicits tw o m ain patterns.
(W hatever the form ulation, no other pattern elicited
m ore than 13% of answ ers.) The dom inant patterns
elicited by the form ulations “ ifP then Q ”,“ifand only
if P then Q ”, and “if not-P then not-Q ” are precisely
those thatw ould be predicted by classicallogic.O f the
tw o m ain patterns elicited by the form ulation “Q only if
P”,one is predicted by classicallogic,the other one is
the biconditionalpattern.
A nother w ay to look atthe results is to consider,for
each form ulation of the instruction,the frequency w ith
w hich participants answ ered as if P w as necessary (see
Table 3) or sufficient (see Table 4) for Q . In order to
com pute the percentages in Tables 3 and 4,participants
have been considered as (a) answ ering as if P w as
necessary for Q if they answ ered thatthey w ould have
to avoid doing Q in the situation not-P, and (b)
answ ering as if P w as sufficientfor Q if they answ ered
thatthey w ould have to do Q in the situation P.
W hatever the scenario, P w as overw helm ingly
considered to be necessary for Q w ith all form ulations
except “if P then Q ”,w hich is w hat one w ould expect
according to classical conditional logic. In particular,
the fallacy of D enying the A ntecedent (“if P then Q ,
not-P,therefore not-Q ”)w as endorsed by only 8 to 13%
of the participants, w hich is w ell below the usual rate
observed in conditionalreasoning experim ents.
Table 3: N ecessity ofP in regard to Q (in percentage of
answ ers),as a function ofinstruction form ulation.

IfP then Q
Ifand only ifP then Q
Q only ifP
Ifnot-P then not-Q

Shop
scenario
08 % a
95 % b
87 % b
92 % b

Restaurant
scenario
13 % a
95 % b
92 % b
97 % b

N = 39. V alues that do not share the sam e subscript
differatp < .05.
Turning to the sufficiency ofP in regard to Q ,results
are unam biguous forthe form ulations “ifP then Q ”,“if
and only if P then Q ”,and “if not-P then not-Q ”:This
tim e,P is overw helm ingly deem ed as sufficient for Q ,
as classicallogic w ould predict.The unexpected result
(from a logicalstandpoint) com es from the form ulation
“Q only if P”,w ith P being deem ed sufficientfor Q by
36 to 51% of participants.This lastresultm ay be used
to rule outthe idea thatlogicalcom petence only could
be responsible of participants’ answ ers: If participants
recovered logical com petence w hen dealing the
instructional subclass of conditional statem ents, then

w hy w ould the specific form ulation “Q only if P” elicit
logicalerrors?
Table 4: Sufficiency ofP in regard to Q (in percentage
ofansw ers),as a function ofinstruction form ulation.

IfP then Q
Ifand only ifP then Q
Q only ifP
Ifnot-P then not-Q

Shop
scenario
87 % a
87 % a
36 % b
08 % c

Restaurant
scenario
92 % a
85 % a
51 % b
08 % c

N = 39. V alues that do not share the sam e subscript
differatp < .05.
W ithout resorting to an explanation in term s of
logicalcom petence,itcould be argued thatthe deontic
nature of conditionalinstructions is responsible for the
norm atively correct perform ance of participants, since
deontic contents are know n to be a pow erfulfacilitator
ofconditionalreasoning.First,itshould be noted thata
conditional instruction is not a social contract the w ay
Cosm ides (1989) has defined it: A conditional
instruction does not relate perceived benefits to
perceived costs,itdoes notexpress a socialexchange in
w hich an individualis required to pay a cost(orm eeta
requirem ent) to another individual in order to be
eligible to receive a benefit from that individual.
H aving no cost-benefit structure, conditional
instructions do not leave room for cheating, that is,
obtaining the benefit w ithout paying the cost.
Therefore, if participants' perform ance has benefited
from som e deontic facilitation,this facilitation does not
fall w ithin the scope of Cosm ides' (1989) social
contracttheory orG igerenzerand H ug's (1992)cheaterdetection algorithm .
W ould this deontic facilitation be explainable by
Cheng and H olyoak's (1985) pragm atic reasoning
schem as theory? In Cheng and H olyoak's term s,
im proved perform ance w ould be due to som e contentor
context-based prom pting of either a perm ission or an
obligation schem a. Y et, since context and sem antic
content of the instruction stay the sam e across our
conditions, w hy should syntax alone determ ine the
nature of the prom pted schem a? W e fail to see w hy,
content and context rem aining stable, "if P then Q "
w ould lead to the activation of an obligation schem a,
w hereas "if not-P then not-Q " or "Q only if P" w ould
lead to the activation ofa perm ission schem a.
A s dem onstrated by Thom pson (2000)in herstudy of
interpretative processes in various types of conditional
reasoning tasks,perform ance in a conditionalargum ent
task (contrary to perform ance in W ason's selection task)
is predicted by necessity and sufficiency conditions,
and not by the deontic or factual nature of the

conditional.Is itpossible to explain ourresults in term s
ofperceived necessity and sufficiency relations?
Indeed, conditional instructions are m eant to em bed
very strong necessity and sufficiency relations: In the
instruction "put a provider on the list only if he offers
you a reduced price",the necessity ofthe offeris clearly
not a m atter of degree. D ue to the intrinsic nature of
conditional instructions, any necessity or sufficiency
relation betw een the tw o propositions involved w ill be
of m axim al perceived strength, w hich w ould explain
the extrem e frequencies observed in Tables 3 and 4.
The fact that participants did so w ell in perceiving the
valid necessity and sufficiency relations and dism issing
the invalid ones in the instructions they w ere given can
conceivably be explained by one distinctive aspect of
conditional instructions: Contrary to m ost conditionals
(e.g., causal conditionals, conditional w arnings, etc.)
instructions are notm eantto change the epistem ic state
of their recipient,butto constrain his or her behavior.
A s one's natural preference w ill usually be to exert
one's free w ill,itis notm uch surprising thatone w illbe
accurate in recognizing in w hich situation one's
behavior w illbe dictated or notby the instruction,that
is, recognizing the necessity and sufficiency relations
em bedded in the instruction.

C onclusion
The focus of this paper has been the form ulation and
interpretation of conditional instructions, that is,
conditionals thatrelate the occurrence of som e eventto
the undertaking of som e action. D raw ing an analogy
from signal detection theory, w e labeled a "M iss" the
situation in w hich the eventis occurring butthe action
is nottaken,and a "False A larm " the situation in w hich
the action is taken w ithoutthe eventoccurring.
W e proposed that context allow s to determ ine the
relative expected costs of M isses and False A larm s,
w hich in turn allow s to determ ine the goal-structure of
the situation and the aim of the speaker asserting the
instruction: W hat is to be avoided in the situation?
M isses? False A larm s? Both?
D epending of the goal-structure of the situation (and
consequently of the aim of the speaker), syntactic
form ulations of the instruction differ in perceived
naturalness (Experim ent 1). For exam ple, the usual
conditionalform ulation “if P then Q ” w illbe perfectly
appropriate for situations w here M isses m ust be
avoided,butw illbe of poor felicitousness in situations
w here False A larm s m ustbe avoided.
W e proposed that judgem ents of naturalness are
based on the understanding people have ofthe necessity
and sufficiency relations em bedded in the various
possible form ulations of the instruction.A form ulation
in w hich P is sufficient for Q is appropriate for
situations w here M isses m ustbe avoided,a form ulation
in w hich P is necessary for Q is appropriate for

situations w here False A larm s m ust be avoided.
Experim ent 2 show ed that w hen dealing w ith
conditional instructions, people have a m uch clearer
understanding of those relations than w hat could have
been expected from their usual perform ance in
conditionalreasoning tasks.
Taken together, these tw o studies suggest that
speakers’ perception of the felicity of differentkinds of
conditionalexpressions is strongly determ ined by goalstructure (avoid m iss vs. avoid false alarm ), and that
hearer’s reactions to these conditionals is w ell aligned
w ith this goal-structure,even ifhearers have no explicit
know ledge of these goals.The results therefore suggest
that the function of these different form ulations of
conditional instructions is to direct the hearer’s
attention to aspects ofhis decision-m aking situation that
the speaker considers im portant. That hearers so
successfully detect the speaker’s intentions not only
suggests – in the language of A ustin – high
illocutionary uptake,butalso successfulcoordination of
action by the speakerand the hearer.
For the rational speaker to get w hat he w ants done
w ith w ords, he should therefore choose a form of the
conditional that encodes the goal-structure im plicit in
the context, in the know ledge that the hearer should
reactin a w ay thatw illfulfillhis intention.Rationality
here is thus social and pragm atic, determ ined by the
successfulcoordination ofthe speakerand the hearerto
achieve shared organizationalgoals.

A cknow ledgm ents
The authors w ould like to thank Fouad El-O uardighi
forhis help in data collection.

R eferences
A ustin, J. L. (1962). H ow to do things with words.
O xford:Clarendon Press.
Cheng, P. W ., & H olyoak, K . J. (1985). Pragm atic
reasoning schem as. Cognitive psychology, 17, 391416.
Cosm ides,L.(1989).The logic of socialexchange:has
naturalselection shaped how w e reason? Studies w ith
the W ason selection task.Cognition,31,187-276.
Evans,J.St.B.T.,N ew stead,S.E.,& Byrne,R.M .J.
(1993). H um an reasoning: The psychology of
deduction.H ove:Law rence Erlbaum A ssociates.
G igerenzer, G ., & H ug, K . (1992). D om ain specific
reasoning, social contracts, and perspective change.
Cognition,43,127-171.
K irby, K . N . (1994). Probabilities and utilities of
fictional outcom es in W ason's four-card selection
task.Cognition,51,1-28.
Thom pson, V . A . (2000). The task-specific nature of
dom ain-generalreasoning.Cognition,76,209-268.

