UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reference-point Reasoning and Comparison Asymmetries

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8dm5v7np

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Bowdle, Brian F.
Medin, Douglas L.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

R eference-pointR easoning and C om parison A sym m etries
Brian F.Bow dle (bbow dle@ indiana.edu)
D epartm entofPsychology,Indiana U niversity
1101 EastTenth Street
Bloom ington,IN 47405 U SA

D ouglas L.M edin (m edin@ nw u.edu)
D epartm entofPsychology,N orthw estern U niversity
2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston,IL 60208 U SA

A bstract
Com parison asym m etries are m ost often explained in
term s of underlying asym m etries in the perceived sim ilarity ofthe com parison item s,w hich in turn are seen as
arising from the differentialw eighting ofdistinctive features of the targetand base representations. In tw o experim ents,w e failto confirm the predictions ofthe standard account. Rather,com parison asym m etries seem to
follow from tw o generalprinciples. First,certain item s
actas cognitive reference points thatother,less prom inentcategory m em bers are located in term s oforassim ilated to. A nd second, the target and base term s of a
com parison play differentsem antic roles,w ith the target
acting as the figure and the base acting as the ground.

Introduction
The notion that sim ilarity is a sym m etric relation is
highly intuitive. A fter all,if one claim s thatlim es are
sim ilarto lem ons,this w ould seem to entailthatlem ons
are also sim ilar to lim es. This notion is further supported by the observation that m any com parisons can
be stated eitherdirectionally,as in Lim es are sim ilar to
lem ons, or non-directionally and reciprocally, as in
Lem ons and lim es are sim ilar to each other. N evertheless, com parisons often behave asym m etrically. For
exam ple,Tversky (1977)show ed thatpeople frequently
preferone direction ofcom parison (e.g.,North Korea is
sim ilar to China) over the other (e.g.,China is sim ilar
to North Korea). Such asym m etries are even m ore pronounced in m etaphors and sim iles,for w hich only one
direction of com parison m ay be m eaningful. For exam ple, w hereas Tim e is like a river is an inform ative
statem ent,A river is like tim e is nonsensical. The general observation is that, w henever tw o item s differ in
prom inence due to such factors as fam iliarity,salience,
orconcreteness,the less prom inentitem is com pared to
the m ore prom inentitem .
W hatis the source ofthese com parison asym m etries?
That is, given that tw o item s are recognized as being
sim ilar, w hy should one direction of com parison be
m ore naturaland m eaningfulthan the other? Clearly,
the answ er to this question is im portantto any psychologically plausible m odel of com parison. Indeed, the

existence of com parison asym m etries has been used to
argue for and against different theories of sim ilarity
(e.g., Tversky, 1977) and m etaphor com prehension
(e.g.,G lucksberg & K eysar,1990; O rtony,1979). In
this paper w e evaluate tw o different accounts of the
cognitive factors underlying com parison asym m etries.

The Standard A ccount
Com parison asym m etries are m ost com m only explained in term s of Tversky’s (1977) contrastm odelof
sim ilarity w hich predicts that, under certain circum stances,the sim ilarity of item a to item b w illactually
seem greaterthan thatofitem b to item a. A ccording to
the contrastm odel,the perceived sim ilarity ofitem a to
item b,s(a,b),is given by
s(a,b)= qf(A ˙ B)-a f(A -B)-bf(B -A)
w hereA and B are the featuresofa and b,fisa m easure
ofsalience,and q,a ,and b are w eights assigned to the
feature sets. The basic idea is thatthe sim ilarity oftw o
item s increases as a function of their com m on features
and decreases as a function oftheirdistinctive features.
A sym m etries in the sim ilarity of tw o item s are predicted in term s ofthe focusing hypothesis: Because the
target (first term ) of a directional com parison is the
subject of the statem ent,it w ill receive m ore attention
than the base (second term ). This m eans thatthe distinctive features ofthe targetare w eighted m ore heavily
than those of the base – thatis,a > b. Thus,the sim ilarity of a to b w ill seem greater than that of b to a
w heneverb possesses the larger or m ore salientsetof
distinctive features.
Consistentw ith the contrastm odel,asym m etric sim ilarity ratings have been obtained in a w ide range of
stim ulus dom ains, such that less prom inent item s are
seen as being m ore sim ilar to m ore prom inent item s
(e.g., Bartlett & D ow ling, 1988; H olyoak & G ordon,
1983; O rtony,V ondruska,Foss,& Jones,1985; Tversky, 1977). But how does this explain the fact that
people typically prefer one direction of com parison
betw een tw o item s over the other? The standard answ eris that,w hen interpreting a sim ilarity com parison,
the hearerseeksto m axim ize the sim ilarity ofthe item s.
In otherw ords,people preferNorth Korea is sim ilar to

China over the reverse direction of com parison precisely because N orth K orea is judged as being m ore
sim ilar to China than the reverse – presum ably reflecting differences in the featural com plexity of the tw o
item s. In supportofthis position,both Tversky (1977)
and O rtony et al. (1985) found that item s in the preferred com parison ordertypically received highersim ilarity ratings than the sam e item s in the non-preferred
order.
To sum m arize, the standard account of com parison
asym m etries m akes tw o claim s. First, com parison
asym m etries reflectunderlying asym m etries in the perceived sim ilarity of the item s. A nd second,these underlying asym m etries are due to attentional factors,
such that the distinctive features of the target are
w eighted m ore heavily than the distinctive features or
spatialdensity ofthe base.

C ognitive R eference Points
A lthough the contrastm odelhas been w idely adopted,
there is an alternative explanation of com parison
asym m etries – nam ely, that such asym m etries follow
from principles of reference point reasoning (e.g.,
G leitm an, G leitm an, M iller, & O strin, 1997; Roese,
Sherm an, & H ur, 1998; Rosch, 1975; Shen, 1989).
O ne ofthe centralclaim s ofthis position is thatcertain
highly prom inentitem sactascognitive reference points
that other item s are seen in relation to. Som e w ellknow n exam ples of cognitive reference points are prototypes and ideals, w hich m ay be used to understand
less prom inent category m em bers (Rosch, 1975), and
the selfconcept,w hich serves as a habituallandm ark in
socialjudgm ents (e.g.,H olyoak & G ordon,1983; Srull
& G aelick,1983). The basic idea is thatm any dom ains
ofknow ledge are atleastpartially structured in term sof
a sm allnum berofreference item s.
O f course, the claim that non-reference (or deviant)
item s are seen in relation to reference item s raises the
question ofw hatis m eantby “seen in relation to.” O ne
w ay in w hich this relationship m ay m anifest itself is
conceptual location: Cognitive reference points provide landm arks that can be used to better specify the
location of deviant item s in a sem antic or perceptual
space. By doing so,reference item s lend stability to the
representations of deviant item s. For exam ple,itm ay
be easierto conceptualize and reason w ith non-standard
quantities (e.g.,a length oftw o feetand nine inches)in
term s of certain standards of m easurem ent (e.g., a
length of one yard). The beneficial use of reference
item s as landm arks forlocating deviantitem s has been
dem onstrated in severalstudies of m agnitude com parisons,w here pairs of deviant item s w ere discrim inated
w ith greaterspeed and accuracy w hen they w ere in the
vicinity of a cognitive reference point(e.g.,H olyoak &
M ah,1982; H utchinson & Lockhead,1977; te Linde
& Paivio,1979).
In addition to conceptuallocation,there is a second
and m ore com plex w ay in w hich deviantitem s m ay be

seen in relation to cognitive reference points – nam ely,
conceptualassim ilation. The idea here is thatdeviant
item s are m ore easily assim ilated to reference item s
than the reverse (e.g.,Bow dle & G entner,1997; Rosch,
1975; Shen, 1989). Such assim ilation effects have
been obtained in num erous studies. For exam ple,people are m ore likely to projectnew properties from prototypicalcategory m em bers to less prom inentm em bers
than vice versa (Rips, 1975), and are m ore w illing to
m ake inferences and predictions aboutothers based on
the self than vice versa (e.g.,K unda & N isbett,1988;
M cFarland & M iller,1990). W henever such assim ilation occurs, the representation of the deviant item is
changed to m ake it m ore concordant w ith that of the
reference item .
The above discussion of the functions of cognitive
reference points suggests that, even prior to being
placed in a com parison,there is a directionalor asym m etric relationship betw een tw o item s w henever one
m akes a bettercognitive reference pointthan the other.
But how does this translate into preferred com parison
orders? A n answ ercom m only given by reference point
m odelsisthatthe targetand base term sofa com parison
play different sem antic roles,w hich specify the placem entof deviantand reference item s in the com parison
fram e.
Ithas been claim ed thatitem s in the subjectand com plem entpositions of m any sentence types are assigned
the roles of figure and ground,respectively (G leitm an
et al., 1997; Langacker, 1990; Talm y, 1978). The
figure is characterized as a m oving or conceptually
m ovable objectw hose site or path is the issue of interest. In contrast, the ground is characterized as a stationary landm ark w ith respectto w hich the figure’s site
orpath is defined. Thus,w hicheveritem m akes a m ore
natural cognitive reference point w ill be the preferred
ground ofthe sentence. In directionalcom parisons,this
predicts thatdeviantitem s should be placed in the targetposition and reference item s in the base position.
Perhaps the m ost notable distinction betw een the
standard account of com parison asym m etries and the
reference pointaccountisthatthe latterdoesnotrely on
the notion of underlying asym m etries in the perceived
sim ilarity of the com parison item s. That is,one does
nothave to judge w hetheritem a seem s m ore sim ilarto
item b or item b seem s m ore sim ilar to item a in order
to determ ine theirpreferred ordering. Rather,com parison asym m etries reflectthe factthatdeviantitem s are
m ore concordant w ith the sem antic constrains of the
target position,and reference item s w ith the sem antic
constraints of the base position. Sim ply put, using a
cognitive reference point as the base of a directional
com parison results in a m ore natural and inform ative
statem ent.

C om paring the Positions
Both the standard account and the reference point account are able to explain m any of the com parison

asym m etries that have been observed in the literature,
albeitusing differentm echanism s. In the presentstudy,
w e soughtto address an im portantlim itation ofexisting
research in this area. Specifically, the available evidence alm ostexclusively involves asym m etries in sim ilarity com parisons, for w hich the tw o accounts m ake
essentially the sam e predictions concerning w hich direction ofcom parison should be preferred. Ifone turns
to consider the relationship betw een sim ilarity and difference com parisons, how ever, then the tw o accounts
can be show n to m ake distinctpredictions.
A ccording to the standard account,people prefer the
direction ofa sim ilarity com parison thatm axim izes the
perceived sim ilarity of the targetto the base. By analogy,then,people should also prefer the direction of a
difference com parison that m axim izes the perceived
difference of the target from the base. This suggests
that com parison asym m etries should go in opposite
directions for sim ilarity and difference statem ents, as
asym m etries in sim ilarity and difference ratings tend to
be inversely related (Tversky,1977). For exam ple,if
N orth K orea seem s m ore sim ilar to China than the reverse,then China w illseem m ore differentfrom N orth
K orea than the reverse. Therefore,people should not
only preferNorth Korea is sim ilar to China overChina
is sim ilar to North Korea,they should also preferChina
is differentfrom North Korea over North Korea is different from China. In both cases,the preferred direction of com parison m axim izes the value of the dim ension specified by the com parison predicate.
In contrastto the standard account,the reference point
accountstates thatpeople sim ply preferthe direction of
com parison that uses the better cognitive reference
point as the ground, because this ordering m axim izes
the inform ativity ofthe statem ent. G iven thatthe position of figure and ground in a statem entshould notbe
affected by the particular com parison predicate, the
preferred direction of com parison betw een tw o item s
should place reference item s in the base position for
both sim ilarity and difference statem ents. Thus,ifpeople prefer North Korea is sim ilar to China over the reverse,then they should also prefer North Korea is differentfrom China overthe reverse.
In addition to m aking differentpredictions aboutthe
direction ofcom parison asym m etries forsim ilarity and
difference statem ents,the standard and reference point
accounts also m ake differentpredictions aboutthe relative m agnitude of such asym m etries. A ccording to
Tversky (1977), difference com parisons w ill tend to
place m ore w eight on the distinctive feature sets than
w ill sim ilarity com parisons. Because the standard account derives asym m etries from distinctive features,
this m eans thatdifference com parisons should be m ore
asym m etric than sim ilarity com parisons. In contrast,
the reference pointaccountsuggests precisely the opposite – sim ilarity com parisons should be m ore asym m etric than difference com parisons. A lthough the use of
reference item s to specify the location of deviantitem s

is presum ably equally im portant in sim ilarity and difference statem ents, conceptual assim ilation of deviant
item s to reference item s should be m ore likely to occur
in sim ilarity statem ents. A s noted by a num beroftheorists,inform ative sim ilarity com parisons do notm erely
pointoutobvious com m onalities; rather,they highlight
nonobvious com m onalities,and prom ote the creation of
new ones through processes such as inference projection (e.g., Bow dle & G entner, 1997; M edin et al.,
1993). W hile less w ork has been done concerning the
com m unicative functions of difference com parisons,it
is reasonable to assum e thatdifference com parisons are
less likely to invite such m odes of conceptualassim ilation. This is because difference com parisons serve
m ore to suggestdifferences betw een item s than to suggest com m onalities. Thus,although there should be a
generalpreference for com paring deviantitem s to reference item s,the utility of doing so should be greater
forsim ilarity statem ents than fordifference statem ents.

Experim ent1
In Experim ent1,w e tested the centralpredictionsofthe
standard and reference pointaccounts concerning com parison asym m etries. Subjects w ere given directional
sim ilarity or difference com parisons, each of w hich
contained a less prom inent (deviant) item and a m ore
prom inent(reference)item . A llcom parisons w ere presented in both possible orders – w ith the reference item
in the base position (e.g.,A zebra is sim ilar to/different
from a horse) or in the targetposition (e.g.,A horse is
sim ilar to/differentfrom a zebra). Forconvenience,w e
w illrefer to statem ents w ith the firstordering of item s
as forward com parisons, and statem ents w ith the second ordering ofitem sasreverse com parisons. Foreach
com parison,subjectsw ere asked to indicate the strength
oftheirpreference forone direction ofcom parison over
the other. A gain, the standard account predicts that
com parison asym m etries should go in opposite directions for sim ilarity and difference statem ents, and
should be stronger for difference statem ents. In contrast,the reference pointaccountpredicts thatcom parison asym m etries should go in the sam e direction for
sim ilarity and difference statem ents, and should be
strongerforsim ilarity statem ents.

M ethod
Subjects. Forty N orthw estern U niversity undergraduates
participated in partialfulfillm entofa course requirem ent.
M aterials and D esign. Each subjectreceived 32 directional
com parisons betw een a less prom inent(deviant) item and a
m ore prom inent(reference) item . (The relative prom inence
ofeach item w as initially determ ined by the authors and then
confirm ed by tw o judges.) To ensure generality,the 32 com parisons involved eight categories of item s: anim als (e.g.,
zebra – horse),artifacts (e.g.,m otel– hotel),colors (e.g.,tan
– brow n), countries (e.g., N orth K orea – China), em otions

(e.g., adm iration – love), fam ous individuals (e.g., Saddam
H ussein – A dolf H itler), m easurem ents (e.g., $105.00 –
$100.00),and occupations (e.g.,dentist– surgeon).
H alfofthe subjects received all32 com parisons as sim ilarity statem ents (e.g.,A zebra is sim ilar to a horse),and halfas
difference statem ents (e.g.,A zebra is differentfrom a horse).
Subjects saw each statem entin both forw ard and reverse directions,w ith the tw o directions separated by a six-pointnum ericalscale. The orderofpresentation ofthe tw o directions
(forw ard firstversusreverse first)w ascounterbalanced w ithin
and betw een subjects.
Procedure. Each subjectw as given a bookletcontaining the
32 pairs of com parison statem ents in a random order. Subjects indicated w hich direction of com parison they felt w as
“stronger, m ore sensible, or m ore natural” for each pair by
circling a num beron the six-pointscale. They w ere told that
the m ore strongly they preferred the direction on the left,the
closertheiransw ershould be to 1,and the m ore strongly they
preferred the direction on the right, the closer their answ er
should be to 6.

R esults and D iscussion
A lldirectionalpreference ratings w ere transform ed so
thathighernum bers indicated a preference forforw ard
com parisons over reverse com parisons. For sim ilarity
statem ents,the directionalpreference (M = 4.77,SD =
0.39) w as significantly above the scale m idpoint (3.5)
by both subjects and item s,tS(19)= 14.66,p < .001 and
tI(31)= 19.44,p < .001. Fordifference statem ents,the
directional preference (M = 4.03,SD = 0.57) w as also
significantly above the scale m idpoint,tS(19) = 4.14,p
< .001 and tI(31)= 6.41,p < .001. Thus,subjects consistently preferred com paring deviantitem s to reference
item s in both sim ilarity and difference statem ents. This
is consistent w ith the reference point account of com parison asym m etries: People prefer the direction of
com parison that places the better cognitive reference
point in the base position,regardless of the particular
com parison predicate used.
Turning to the relative m agnitudes ofthe com parison
asym m etries,the preference forthe forw ard direction of
com parison w as higher for sim ilarity statem ents than
for difference statem ents, tS(38) = 4.83, p < .001 and
tI(31) = 10.31,p < .001. A gain,this is as predicted by
the reference point account: Because sim ilarity statem ents are likely to elicita greaterdegree ofconceptual
assim ilation than difference statem ents,reference point
effects should be strongerin sim ilarity statem ents.

A sym m etries in Sim ilarity and D ifference
R atings
Contrary to the claim s of the standard account,the results ofExperim ent1 suggestthatcom parison asym m etries are notdue to underlying asym m etries in the perceived sim ilarity ordifference ofthe com parison item s.
Ifthis w ere the case,then – assum ing thathearers seek
to m axim ize the value ofthe dim ension specified by the
com parison predicate – com parison asym m etriesshould

have gone in opposite directions for sim ilarity and difference statem ents. Buthow ,then,doesone explain the
fact that com parison asym m etries are typically associated w ith asym m etries in sim ilarity and difference ratings (e.g., O rtony et al., 1985; Tversky,1977)? W e
suggestthatsuch ratingsasym m etriesm ightalso be due
to reference pointreasoning.
A ccording to the reference point account, the target
and base term s of a directionalcom parison play differentsem antic roles,w ith the targetacting as the figure
and the base acting as the ground. Thus,inform ation
flow s directionally from the base to the target,as w hen
the base is used to generate new inferences about the
target. A ssum ing that deviant item s are m ore easily
assim ilated to reference item s than the reverse, this
m eans thatassigning the reference item to the base position (forw ard com parisons) should resultin a greater
degree of conceptual assim ilation than assigning it to
the target position (reverse com parisons). Therefore,
forw ard com parisons should elicit higher sim ilarity
ratings – and low er difference ratings – than reverse
com parisons.
This explanation of ratings asym m etries is radically
differentfrom thatoffered by Tversky’s (1977)contrast
m odel. In this m odel,the representations of the com parison item s are assum ed to rem ain static,and asym m etries are sim ply due to attentional factors. O n the
reference point view , how ever, the representations of
deviant item s m ay shift tow ards those of reference
item s, thereby m aking the item s m ore sim ilar. This
view is, in fact, consistent w ith a fair am ount of evidence. Indeed,asym m etries in conceptualassim ilation
are often associated w ith asym m etries in sim ilarity ratings. For exam ple,people not only m ake m ore inferences and predictions about others based on the self
than vice versa (e.g.,K unda & N isbett,1988; M cFarland & M iller, 1990), they also rate others as being
m ore sim ilar to the self than vice versa (e.g.,Catram bone,Beike,& N iedenthal,1996; H olyoak & G ordon,
1983; Srull & G aelick, 1983). W e propose that the
lattereffectm ay be largely due to the form er– projecting novelinform ation from the selfto others w illm ake
others seem m ore sim ilarto the self.
In sum , the reference point account can explain
asym m etries in sim ilarity and difference judgm ents,
and in fact predicts the sam e directionalities as the
standard account. A s w as the case for com parison
asym m etries,how ever,these approaches m ake different
predictionsaboutthe relative m agnitude ofasym m etries
in sim ilarity and difference ratings. A ccording to the
standard account, difference com parisons w ill tend to
place m ore w eighton the com parison item s’distinctive
feature sets than w illsim ilarity com parisons. Because
the standard account derives asym m etries from precisely these stim ulus properties,this predicts thatdirectional difference ratings should be m ore asym m etric
than directional sim ilarity ratings. A ccording to the
reference pointaccount,how ever,this pattern ofresults

should nothold. This is because conceptualassim ilation is m ore likely to occur in sim ilarity com parisons.
A ssum ing thatconceptualassim ilation is in facta prim ary source of ratings asym m etries, then, directional
sim ilarity ratings should be m ore asym m etric than directionaldifference ratings.

Experim ent2
In Experim ent 2, subjects w ere given the sam e directional com parisons used in Experim ent 1, and rated
eitherthe sim ilarity orthe difference ofboth the deviant
item to the reference item (e.g.,H ow sim ilar is a zebra
to a horse?) and the reference item to the deviantitem
(e.g.,H ow sim ilar is a horse to a zebra?). A gain,the
standard account predicts that difference judgm ents
should be m ore asym m etric, w hereas the reference
pointaccountpredicts thatsim ilarity judgm ents should
be m ore asym m etric. W e also gave a second group of
subjects nondirectional versions these com parison
questions (e.g.,H ow sim ilar are a zebra and a horse?
or H ow sim ilar are a horse and a zebra?). That is,
these subjects w ere asked to rate eitherthe sim ilarity of
or the difference betw een the tw o item s w ithout any
specification of w hich item w as the target and w hich
w as the base.
The inclusion of the nondirectionalratings condition
w as inspired by Catram bone etal.(1996),w ho argued
that if the m ore prom inent of tw o com parison item s
serves as a cognitive reference pointfor understanding
the otheritem ,then itshould actas the im plicitbase of
a nondirectional com parison. That is, nondirectional
com parisons should be m entally translated into forw ard
com parisons,in w hich the deviantitem is directionally
com pared to the reference item . Supporting this claim ,
Catram bone et al.found that nondirectional sim ilarity
com parisons w ere rated as expressing the sam e degree
of sim ilarity as forw ard sim ilarity com parisons,and a
higherdegree ofsim ilarity than reverse sim ilarity com parisons. In the presentexperim ent,w e soughtto replicate this finding forsim ilarity com parisons,and extend
it to difference com parisons. If both nondirectional
sim ilarity and difference ratings are closer to forw ard
than reverse ratings,then this w ould furthersupportthe
claim thatasym m etries are due to reference pointreasoning.

M ethod
Subjects. Eighty N orthw estern U niversity undergraduates
served as paid subjects.
M aterials and D esign.H alfofthe subjects w ere assigned to
the directional ratings condition, and half to the nondirectionalratings condition. In the directionalcondition,subjects
received all32 directionalcom parisons used in Experim ent1.
H alf of the subjects in this condition w ere asked to rate the
sim ilarity of the com parison item s, and half the difference
betw een the com parison item s. Foreach com parison,subjects

gave ratings for both the forw ard direction and the reverse
direction. The orderofpresentation ofthe tw o directions w as
counterbalanced w ithin and betw een subjects.
In the nondirectional ratings condition, subjects received
nondirectionalversions ofthe 32 com parison statem ents. A s
in the directionalcondition,halfofthe subjects w ere asked to
rate the sim ilarity of the com parison item s,and half the difference betw een the com parison item s. Because nondirectionalcom parisons lack targetand base term s,how ever,subjects gave only one rating per com parison in this condition.
The orderofpresentation ofthe deviantand reference item sin
a com parison (e.g., H ow sim ilar are a zebra and a horse?
versus H ow sim ilar are a horse and a zebra?) w as counterbalanced w ithin and betw een subjects.
Procedure.Each subjectw as given a bookletcontaining the
32 com parison statem ents in a random order. Subjects gave
sim ilarity or difference ratings by circling a num beron a 20pointscale below each com parison. Forsim ilarity ratings,the
low end of the scale w as labeled “notatallsim ilar” and the
high end “very sim ilar”. For difference ratings,the low end
w as labeled “notatalldifferent” and the high end “very different”.

R esults and D iscussion
Focusing firston the directionalratings,subjects gave
higher sim ilarity ratings to forw ard com parisons (M =
11.02,SD = 2.44) than to reverse com parisons (M =
9.84,SD = 2.69),tS(19) = 3.93,p < .001 and tI(31) =
6.57,p < .001. Likew ise,subjects gave higher difference ratings to reverse com parisons (M = 13.12,SD =
2.26) than to forw ard com parisons (M = 12.44, SD =
2.35),tS(19)= 3.29,p < .005 and tI(31)= 3.42,p < .005.
These results are consistentw ith both the standard accountand the reference pointaccount. M ore critically,
how ever, the directional sim ilarity ratings w ere m ore
asym m etric than the directionaldifference ratings: The
absolute m ean difference in ratings betw een the forw ard and reverse com parisons w as nearly tw ice as large
for sim ilarity com parisons (M = 1.18,SD = 1.34) as it
w as for difference com parisons (M = 0.68,SD = 0.92).
This is only consistentw ith the reference pointaccount,
according to w hich conceptualassim ilation w illresult
in asym m etric sim ilarity and difference ratings but is
m ore likely to occur in sim ilarity com parisons. H ow ever, this difference in the m agnitude of the ratings
asym m etries w as only m arginally significantby item s,
tI(31)= 1.91,p < .10,and notby subjects,tS(38)= 1.38,
p <.20.
Turning now to considerthe entire pattern ofratings,
the nondirectionalsim ilarity ratings (M = 11.42,SD =
2.71)did notdifferfrom forw ard sim ilarity ratings,but
w ere significantly largerthan reverse sim ilarity ratings,
tS(38)= 2.23,p < .05 and tI(31)= 6.41,p < .001. This
replicates the findings of Catram bone et al. (1996).
Likew ise, the nondirectional difference ratings (M =
12.10,SD = 3.12) did not differ from forw ard difference ratings,butw ere significantly sm allerthan reverse
difference ratings by item s,tI(31) = 4.25,p < .001,but

notby subjects,tS(38) = 1.58,p < .20. Thus,subjects
seem ed to interpretnondirectionalsim ilarity and difference com parisons as forw ard com parisons,in w hich the
reference item played the im plicitrole ofground. This
resultcannotbe explained by Tversky’s (1977)contrast
m odel,and furtherillustrates the centrality ofreference
pointreasoning in com parisons.

C onclusions
O urfindings suggestthatasym m etries in sim ilarity and
difference com parisons cannotbe explained in term s of
the differential w eighting of static representations.
Rather, they seem to follow from tw o general principles. First, certain item s act as cognitive reference
points that other item s are understood in term s of via
conceptual location or conceptual assim ilation. A nd
second,the targetand base term s of a com parison play
differentsem antic roles – the base,acts as the ground,
is used to understand the target,w hich acts as the figure. Thus,com parison asym m etries reflectthe factthat
deviant item s are m ore concordant w ith the linguistic
constrains of the target position, and reference item s
w ith the linguistic constraints ofthe base position. D irectionalcom parisons are m axim ally inform ative w hen
a cognitive reference pointis used as the base. Further,
this direction of com parison is m ostlikely to resultin
higher sim ilarity ratings – and low erdifference ratings
– due to the increased potentialforconceptualassim ilation. In sum ,the com parison process w ould appear to
be far m ore dynam ic than is com m only assum ed,w ith
reference-point reasoning playing a prom inent role in
both sim ilarity and difference.

A cknow ledgm ents
W e thank D edre G entner, Robert G oldstone, Steven
Sherm an, and Phillip W olff for their com m ents and
suggestions. W e also thank G ina D avis, Elizabeth
Fram e,Jason G riffith,and M atthew K inm an for their
help w ith data collection and coding.

R eferences
Bartlett,J.C.,& D ow ling,W .J.(1988). Scale structure and
sim ilarity ofm elodies. M usic Perception,5,285-315.
Bow dle, B. F., & G entner, D . (1997). Inform ativity and
asym m etry in com parisons. Cognitive Psychology, 34,
244-286.
Catram bone,R.,Beike,D .,& N iedenthal,P.(1996). Is the
self-concepta habitualreferentin judgm ents ofsim ilarity?
PsychologicalScience,7,158-163.
G leitm an,L.,G leitm an,H .,M iller,C.,& O strin,R.(1997).
Sim ilar,and sim ilarconcepts. Cognition,58,321-376.
G lucksberg,S.,& K eysar,B.(1990). U nderstanding m etaphorical com parisons: Beyond sim ilarity. Psychological
Review,97,3-18.
H olyoak, K . J., & G ordon, P. C. (1983). Social reference
points. JournalofPersonality and SocialPsychology,44,
881-887.

H olyoak,K .J.,& M ah,W .A .(1982). Cognitive reference
points in judgm ents of sym bolic m agnitude. Cognitive
Psychology,14,328-352.
H utchinson,J.W .,& Lockhead,G .R.(1977). Sim ilarity as
distance: A structural principle for sem antic m em ory.
Journal of Experim ental Psychology: H um an Learning
and M em ory,3,660-678.
K unda, Z., & N isbett, R. E. (1988). Predicting individual
evaluations from group evaluations and vice versa: D ifferentpatternsforselfand other? Personality and SocialPsychology Bulletin,14,326-334.
Langacker, R. W . (1990). Subjectification. Cognitive Linguistics,1,5-38.
M cFarland,C.,& M iller,D .T.(1990). Judgm ents of selfothersim ilarity: Justlike otherpeople,only m ore so. Personality and SocialPsychology Bulletin,16,475-484.
M edin,D .L.,G oldstone,R.L.,& G entner,D .(1993). Respects forsim ilarity. PsychologicalReview,100,254-278.
O rtony,A .(1979). Beyond literalsim ilarity. Psychological
Review,86,161-180.
O rtony, A ., V ondruska, R. J., Foss, M . A ., & Jones, L. E.
(1985). Salience,sim iles,and the asym m etry ofsim ilarity.
JournalofM em ory and Language,24,569-594.
Rips,L.J.(1975). Inductive judgm ents aboutnaturalcategories. JournalofVerbalLearning and VerbalBehavior,14,
665-681.
Roese,N .J.,Sherm an,J.W .,& H ur,T.(1998). D irection of
com parison asym m etries in relationaljudgm ent: The role
oflinguistics norm s. SocialCognition,16,353-362.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive reference points. Cognitive
Psychology,7,532-547.
Shen, Y . (1989). Sym m etric and asym m etric com parisons.
Poetics,18,517-536.
Srull, T. K ., & G aelick, L. (1983). G eneralprinciples and
individual differences in the self as a habitual reference
point: A n exam ination of self-other judgm ents of sim ilarity. SocialCognition,2,108-121.
Talm y,L.(1978). Figure and ground in com plex sentences.
In J.G reenburg,C.Ferguson,& M .M oravcsik (Eds.),U niversals of hum an language, vol. 4. Stanford: Stanford
U niversity.
Te Linde,J.,& Paivio,A .(1979). A sym bolic com parison of
colorsim ilarity. M em ory and Cognition,7,141-148.
Tversky, A . (1977). Features of sim ilarity. Psychological
Review,84,327-352.

