UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Regularity and Irregularity in an Inflectionally Complex Language: Evidence form Polish

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/05n2p65v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Reid, Agnieszka
Marslen-Wilson, William

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Regularity and Irregularity in an Inflectionally Complex Language: Evidence from
Polish
Agnieszka Reid (agnieszka.reid@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
William Marslen-Wilson (william.marslen-wilson@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge CB2 2EF, UK.

Abstract
We report two experiments which address the question of
whether there is support for single or dual mechanisms in the
processing of Polish regular and irregular nouns and verbs.
The data from an immediate cross-modal priming experiment
(verbs and nouns) revealed that there was significant priming,
irrespective of regularity, for both verbs and nouns. The results for verbs were replicated in a second experiment using
delayed repetition auditory-auditory priming. The outcome
from both experiments is in line with the results reported
from research on Italian and French but not with English and
German, and suggest that Polish regulars and irregulars are
processed by a single underlying cognitive system.

Introduction
There has been a long lasting debate as to the implications
of English regular and irregular verbs for the universal
properties of human cognitive mechanisms (Marslen-Wilson
& Tyler, 1998; Pinker, 1999). The protagonists of a dual
mechanism approach (Pinker & Prince, 1991) have claimed
that English regular past tense forms are processed by a
symbolic rule, which concatenates allomorphic suffixes (-ed
or -d or -t) to the verb stem, while the irregular past tense
forms are processed as whole forms in an associative memory. In contrast, the proponents of the single mechanism
(Plunkett & Marchman, 1993; Rumelhart & McClelland,
1986) claim that regular and irregular English verbs are
processed and represented in the same way, by a distributed
connectionist system, operating without symbols and syntax.
We focus here on the experimental work probing the online processing and representation of regular and irregular
forms in the adult mental lexicon. Much of this work has of
course focused on English, chiefly using a variety of priming paradigms. In early work, for example, Stanners, Neiser,
Hernon and Hallet (1979) tested the representation of regular and irregular verbs using visual priming with a delay.
The authors found that regular inflected verbs primed their
bases as effectively as identity primes. In contrast the irregular past tenses primed their bases significantly less than
identity primes. Marslen-Wilson, Hare and Older (1995)
investigated the representation of English regular and irregular verbs using a cross-modal lexical decision paradigm.
The authors contrasted regular verbs (jumped/jump), with

irregular verbs which fell into two classes: semi-weak verbs
(burnt/burn) with irregular alveolar inflection, and vowel
change verbs (gave/give). The results showed that there was
significant priming for the regulars, but no priming for either sub-class of irregular verbs.
Evidence for behavioural differences of this type, suggesting asymmetries in the underlying systems supporting
the processing of regular and irregular forms, can be interpreted as support for a dual mechanism approach. It is important, however, to apply these techniques crosslinguistically, to develop a broader perspective on the processing consequences of regularity and irregularity, and to
evaluate the universality of the claims being made.

Cross-linguistic behavioural studies
Although cross-linguistic research is in its early stages it has
already suggested interesting contrasts between English and
German as opposed to Italian and French.
Sonnenstuhl, Eisenbeiss and Clahsen (1999) probed the
representation of regular and irregular German verbs as well
as regular and irregular noun plurals, using the cross-modal
paradigm. Significant priming for both regulars and irregulars was obtained. The regulars were as effective as identity
primes, whereas the irregulars were significantly less effective than identity primes. The authors argued that these data,
consistent with English, provide support for the dual
mechanism where the regulars are processed as a stem and
an affix, generated by a rule, whereas irregulars are processed as full lexical items.
Both English and German belong to the same West Germanic language family and share many similarities. In additional research we have begun to look at languages from
different sub-families which show different distributions of
regulars and irregulars as well as of inflectional suffixation.
Significant cross-modal priming has been found for Italian
regular and irregular verbs (Orsolini & Marslen-Wilson
1997). For regular verb pairs, the prime was typically a first
or third conjugation past definite form, paired with either an
infintive target (as in gioc-a-rono/gioc-are ‘they played/to
play’) or with a past participle target (as in am-a-rono/ama-to ‘they loved/loved’). These conditions were contrasted
with irregular verb pairs, such as sce-s-ero/scend-ere ‘they
got down, past definite’/to get down, infinitive’, with idiosyncratic alternations, comparable to English irregular alternations, but occurring in a much more constrained and predictable morphological environment. Significant priming

was found across the board, with no differences between
conditions in the magnitude of priming. There was no evidence here, or in an accompanying study using elicitation
techniques, to suggest underlying differences in the processing and representation mechanisms evoked by regular
and irregular forms.
Comparable results were obtained for French, where
Meunier and Marslen-Wilson (2000) investigated the processing of French verbs with regular and irregular alternations in both cross-modal priming and masked priming
experiments. They distinguished three levels of irregularity,
ranging from phonologically triggered alternations such as
sème/semer ‘I sow/to sow’, through sub-regularities such as
teignent/teindre ‘they dye/to dye’, to highly idiosyncratic
alternations such as iront/aller ‘they will go/to go. As in
Italian, these irregularities are linguistically embedded in
extensive, primarily regular inflectional paradigms. Again,
strong priming, without significant differences in the effects
for regulars and irregulars, was found across the board.
These results, similar to those from Italian, provide no support for the view that different mechanisms handle the processing of regulars and irregulars.
The aim of this paper is to extend these cross-linguistic
investigations to Polish, a representative of the Slavonic
language family, where very little behavioural research has
been conducted. A striking characteristic of Polish is the
great richness of its inflectional systems and the wide distribution of phonological and morphophonological alternations, varying considerably in regularity. In addition, note
that in Polish, as in French and Italian, but in contrast with
English, both regular and irregular verbs are inflected by
concatenation of an inflectional suffix with a stem. In English, this is true for regular past tenses, e.g. jump/jump-ed,
but not for irregular past tense forms, e.g. give/gave. The
distinction between Polish regular and irregular forms is
made on the basis of a vowel or consonant change (an alternation) in inflected forms. Regular inflected forms have
morphophonological alternations which are predictable from
Polish morphophonology. Irregular forms have morphophonological alternations which are idiosyncratic and are not
predictable from the rules of Polish morphophonology.
We report two preliminary studies which probe the processing of Polish regular and irregular verbs and nouns (Experiment 1) and verbs (Experiment 2). Before moving on to
the experiments, a description of the relevant characteristics
of Polish is necessary.
Polish inflectional morphology and alternations
Almost every word in Polish exists within a very extensive morphological paradigm: declensional for nouns, adjectives, numerals and pronouns and conjugational for
verbs. Every verb in Polish is inflected according to one of
the three conjugational paradigms (Laskowski, 1998). The
basis of the division of verbal themes into conjugations is
their ability to concatenate with the complex morpheme of
the present tense. The themes which are members of conjugation I take in the present tense the endings µ ¶ µHV]¶ µ
e’, ‘-e-my’, ‘-e-cie’ and µ¶ for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd person

SG1 and the 1st, 2nd and 3rd person PL, respectively. The
themes which are members of conjugation II take the endings: µ ¶ µLV]¶ µL¶ µLP\¶ µLFLH¶ µ¶. The verbs which
belong to conjugation III have the endings: ‘-m’, ‘-sz’, ‘-0’,
‘-my’, ‘-cie’ and ‘¶. Every conjugation is divided into
classes, depending on the ending of the verbal theme. For
instance, conjugation I consists of five classes and the fifth
class consists of verbs which exhibit unproductive, idiosyncratic alternations.
Every Polish noun is inflected according to an extensive
declensional paradigm. Each paradigm consists of seven
cases. There are three declensional groups for SG nouns:
masculine, feminine and neuter and two for PL nouns nonpersonal and personal (Zagórska-Brooks, 1975).
Fully two-thirds of words in Polish exhibit changes which
are consonantal and/or vocalic. Broadly speaking there are
two sources of alternations in Polish: phonological and
morphophonological (Zagórska-Brooks, 1975; Kowalik,
1998). Our focus here is on the second type, the morphophonological alternations. This type of alternation is caused
by an interaction between morphology and phonology during concatenation of morphemes with other morphemes
(e.g. in conjugation or declension). There are two kinds of
morphophonological alternations in Polish verbs and nouns:
regular and irregular. The regular alternation is predictable
and usually productive. For instance, the postalveolar consonants - [6] and [=] in prosz- [pro6-(] ‘I ask’ and wo*
[vo=-(] ‘I transport’ alternate with the palatal consonants - 
[Ý] and ( [Û] when the stem is concatenated with the vowel i-, as in prosiü [proÝi-teÝ] ‘to ask’ and wozi-ü [voÛi-teÝ] ‘to
transport’. The reason for this is that the alveolar place of
articulation in the inflected forms (1st person SG, present
tense) changes to the palatal place of articulation, because of
the following front vowel i. In contrast, the irregular alternations cannot be predicted and are usually unproductive.
For instance, the stem trzeü [t6(-teÝ] ‘to grate’ alternates
with the stem tr [tr-o] ‘they grate’. There are two kinds of
alternation here: the consonantal and the vocalic, where the
vocalic alternation e : 0 is an idiosyncratic one, which is
unpredictable from the morphophonology of contemporary
Polish.
The fact that the morphophonological alternations in Polish verbs have a different distribution to those found in
English is worth emphasising. In English, alternations in
verbs occur between the present and past tense forms, for
instance give/gave. In Polish, on the other hand, there can
be several different alternations in verbs in the same and
different tenses, depending on person, number and so forth.
For the verb ZLHü [ve#Ý-teÝ] ‘to lead’, there are two types of
alteration: consonantal and vocalic. There are three consonantal alternants: wie ü [v#(Ý-teÝ]: wiod [viod-o]: wiedziesz [viedeÛ(-6] ‘to lead: they lead: you lead’. And there are
also three vocalic alternants, two in the present tense: wie
ü wioG and the third in the past tense: wióGá [vºud-w] ‘he
led’.
1

The following abbreviations are used: SG - Singular number, PL - Plural number, NOM - Nominative, DAT - Dative, LOC - Locative, VOC Vocative;

The alternations in Polish have a more even distribution
than in English. All classes, despite regular or irregular
alternations, concatenate with the same conjugational endings, which are characteristic for a given conjugation. Polish
is very similar to French in this respect. This does not occur
in English, where the concatenative process applies to
regular past tense forms but not to irregular ones. Neither
does it happen in Italian, where the irregular forms conjugate using a different set of endings than the regular forms.

Experiment 1
The aim of Experiment 1 was to investigate processing of
Polish verbs and nouns with regular and irregular alternations. We chose cross-modal priming as a starting point
because most cross-linguistic and English data come from
this paradigm. The question that we asked was whether the
pattern of results for Polish items with no alternations,
regular alternations, and irregular alternations would be
comparable with the Italian and French or with the English
and German results. In contrast to all of these languages,
Polish also provides an opportunity to investigate the processing of regular and irregular nouns which are inflectionally suffixed; the suffix occurs in both singular and plural
and denotes case, gender and number. Taking advantage of
this characteristic of Polish nouns, we contrasted verbs and
nouns. This served firstly, to test whether the representation
of verb and noun alternants in Polish correspond to each
other, and secondly, to obtain a broader picture of the representation of alternants cross-linguistically.
Irregularity in Polish verbs is defined on the basis of the
alternation which occurs in the stem and not on the basis of
which conjugational morphemes are selected for a given
verb. The difference between regular and irregular verbs lies
in that regular verbs exhibit an alternation in the stem which
can be derived by the phonological rules of contemporary
Polish or is conditioned by a specific morphophonological
context. For irregular verbs, the alternations in the stems
cannot be predicted. All Polish nouns belong to one of the
declensional paradigms and their membership depends on
the gender of a noun and on the last consonant of the theme.
Irregularity and regularity in Polish nouns is defined in the
same way as for Polish verbs2.
To test the processing of words with alternation we covaried regular and irregular alternations in verbs and nouns
and contrasted them with verbs and nouns without alternations. Conditions 1 to 3 were concerned with verbs, while
conditions 4 to 6 were concerned with nouns. Condition 1
consisted of verbs with no alternations, such as czyt-asz/F]\WDü ‘you read/to read’. The aim here was to select as
homogenous a group of items as possible, to serve as a
baseline for verbs. Condition 2 consisted of verbs with
regular alternations, which can be predicted from the morphophonological rules of contemporary Polish, as in nosz/nosLü ‘I carry/to carry’. The alternation involved dental
consonants, such as c, dz; postalveolar consonants, such as
2

There is also a second type of irregularity in Polish nouns which originates from the fact that nouns which are for instance masculine, e.g. P *czyzn-a ‘a man’ are inflected in SG according to one of the feminine declensional paradigms. This type of irregularity was not the focus here.

V] * and palatal consonants - ü G(  (. The reason for
selecting this particular type of alternation is that it is regular and occurs in verbal stems which belong to a productive
conjugation. This contrasts with the verbs in Condition 3
with irregular alternations, as in WU]HüWU ‘to grate/they
grate’. Six types of irregular alternation were included in
this condition3: 1) a : e, 2)  : n’ and  : m’, 3) a : 0, 4) o : e,
5)   and 6) e : 0. The motivation for selecting these types
of alternation was that they could not be predicted from the
morphophonological rules of Polish. These alternations are
peculiar to a specific group of verbs, which belong to the
unproductive classes of conjugation I.
Conditions 4 to 6 concentrated on nouns. Condition 4
consisted of nouns with no alternation, e.g. plac-u/plac ‘a
square, GEN, LOC, VOC/a square, NOM, ACC’ and served
as a baseline for the other noun conditions. Condition 5
was designed to investigate the representation of nouns with
regular alternations. It consisted of nouns with three types of
alternation, all of which are predictable from the context.
These included the alternation of hard labials to soft labials,
as in FKáRSFKáRSL ‘peasant/peasants’, the alternation of
coronals, as in studenci-e/student ‘a student, LOC, VOC/a
student, NOM’, and the alternation of velars, as in nodz-e
/nog-a ‘a leg DAT, LOC/a leg, NOM’. Condition 6, in
contrast to Condition 5, concentrated on alternations which
are not fully predictable from the morphophonological rules
of Polish. Three types of irregular alternation were included:
1) a : e, 2)   DQG 3) o : ó. All three alternations exist
nowadays as fossilised historical remnants. The alternations


 DQG R  y DUH EDVHG RQ D YHU\ ROG SKRQHWLF FKDQJH

Finally Condition 7 consisted of words with phonological
overlap, without semantic or morphological relationship,
e.g. kotlet/kot ‘cutlet/cat’. This was designed to test whether
priming could be due just to pure phonological overlap
between the prime and the target.

Procedure
We used the cross-modal immediate lexical decision task.
The participants heard binaurally an auditory prime, at the
offset of which they immediately saw a visual target (for
500 ms) and had to decide, by pressing an appropriate button, whether a target word was a real word or a non-word.
The subjects were allowed 2500 ms from the onset of the
target for their response.
Targets were preceded either by a related prime or by an
unrelated control prime. The control prime was matched for
lemma frequency and number of syllables to the related
prime. The priming effect was measured as a difference in
the reaction time to the target word when preceded by the
control prime as opposed to the related prime. Each target
only occurred once in the experiment, and two experimental
versions were run, alternating control and related primes for
each target.

3
The vocalic alternations were in some cases accompanied by consonantal alternations. For instance an alternation of rz : r co-occurs with e : 0
in trz-HüWU ‘to grate/they grate’. Pairs of this type were included here,
because there are very few verbs with an irregular alternation which are not
accompanied by the consonantal alternation.

The experiment was run in Kraków using
DMASTR/VMASTR software4. A 486/33 NIMBUS PC was
used for running the experiment and collecting participants’
RTs and error rates. A Digital Audio Tape Corder TCD-D3,
Sony Walkman was used to present the auditory primes.

Results
Three subjects from version 1 and one subject from version
2 were discarded from the analyses because of a high error
rate in the lexical decision task. This gave 21 subjects per
version. All participants were Polish native speakers who
were studying in Kraków. The majority of them were in
their twenties and some were in their thirties. Out of the
total of 580 items per version, 5 experimental pairs had to
be discarded from the analyses; two because of high error
percentage, two because they were erroneously classified as
having a certain type of alternation, and one item because of
homophony. Every data point has been inversely transformed to reduce the influence of outliers. (see Table 1 for
details of the descriptive statistics).
Table 1. Priming effects and error rates in Experiment 1.
Condition

N

1 No Alternation
Verb
2 Regular Alternation
Verb
3 Irregular Alternation
Verb
4 No Alternation Noun
5 Regular Alternation
Noun
6 Irregular Alternation
Noun
7 Phonological Overlap

20

Prime
Control Priming
(Mean RT) (Mean
RT)
527 (1.0) 610 (5.5) 83***

26

534 (0.8)

622 (3.4)

88***

26

542 (1.1)

615 (4.2)

73***

20
30

512 (0.5)
518 (0.5)

573 (3.3)
580 (3.5)

61***
62***

30

503 (0.7)

549 (1.5)

46***

20

581 (6.5)

571 (3.5) -10

*** denotes p<0.01; Reaction Times are in ms; Error rates in percentages
(in parentheses).

An overall ANOVA with Prime (2 levels), Condition (7
levels) and Version (2 levels) was run, separately for subjects (F1) and items (F2), and revealed that there was a
facilitatory effect of Prime F1(1, 40)=160.22, p<0.001,
F2(1, 153)=200.94, p<0.001. There was a main effect of
Condition F1(6, 240)=35.52, p<0.001, F2(6, 153)=3.94,
p<0.01, and a two-way interaction of Condition and Prime
F1(6, 240)=160.22, p<0.001, F2(6, 153)=8.67, p<0.001.
Subsequently an analysis of the simple effects of Prime at
each level of the Condition was run. There was a consistent
facilitatory effect of Prime at all levels of Condition with the
exception of the Phonological Overlap Condition (p<0.001
throughout). To explore whether there were any differences
in the magnitude of priming between no alternation, regular
4

DMASTR/VMASTR software was developed by Ken and Jonathan
Forster at the University of Arizona, Tucson, U. S. A.

alternation and irregular alternation, planned comparisons
were run separately for verbs and nouns. Regarding verbs,
there was no significant difference in the magnitude of
priming between No Alternation and Regular Alternation
(F1<1, F2<1), No Alternation and Irregular Alternation,
(F1<1, F2<1), and Regular Alternation and Irregular Alternation, F1(1, 40)=2.866, p=0.098, F2(1, 46)=1.31, p=0.258.
The results for the nouns paralleled those of the verbs. There
was no significant difference between the magnitude of
priming for No Alternation and Regular Alternation, (F1<1,
F2<1), No Alternation and Irregular Alternation,
[F1(1,40)=1.281, p=0.264, F2<1] and Regular Alternation
and Irregular Alternation, F1(1, 40)=1.208, p=0.278, F2<1.

Discussion
Significant priming was found for regulars as well as for
irregulars, and no differences were found in the magnitude
of priming between all verb conditions compared together,
and all noun conditions compared together. Although there
was a slight numerical decline in the amount of priming for
the irregular alternations, this was not statistically significant in any analyses.
These results suggest, first, that the representation and
processing of verb and noun forms is comparable in Polish.
The only difference here is the significantly larger amount
of priming for verbs overall compared with nouns. A possible explanation for this is that nouns in the oblique cases (all
noun primes had this characteristic) are less effective primes
than conjugated verbs (all the verb primes were conjugated
forms). Nouns in the oblique case typically occur in a specific prepositional context, and they may be more difficult
to process out of context, in contrast to conjugated verb
forms, which can frequently occur without further context.
More generally, there is again no evidence here that the
processing of Polish regular and irregular verbs and nouns
invokes distinct underlying processing. This finding groups
Polish data together with the data on Italian and French, but
not with the English and German results. However, before
proceeding further, we need to put these results on firmer
ground.
The absence of priming for the pairs with pure
phonological overlap indicated that the effects cannot be
attributed just to phonological overlap. We cannot, however,
exclude an account purely in semantic terms, since all of the
verb and noun test pairs were strongly related not only morphologically but also semantically. It is possible, for example, that the preserved priming for the irregular alternants
reflects a strong semantic input, compensating for reduced
morphological priming. To address this concern, we ran a
subset of the items from Experiment 1 (the verb materials)
in a second experiment designed to separate morphological
and semantic effects.

Experiment 2
This experiment uses the delayed repetition auditoryauditory priming task. In this task, where several items
intervene between prime and target, we generally see no
effects of pure semantic relatedness but robust effects of
morphological relatedness (e.g., Marslen-Wilson & Tyler,

1998). If the priming effects for the alternation conditions
are primarily morphological in character, then these should
survive the change in task.

Materials
Because of the requirements of the task, the inclusion of all
the materials from Experiment 1 would have made the experiment infeasibly large. We therefore used only the verb
materials, which can be linked most directly to the research
in other languages.
108 prime-target pairs were selected for 5 experimental
conditions. Three of these were the Verb conditions from
Experiment 1, with 20 pairs in the No Alternation condition,
24 in the Regular Alternation condition, and 24 in the Irregular Alternation condition. A further 20 pairs were selected from the Phonological Overlap condition (kotlet/kot
‘cutlet/cat’). The fifth, new condition consisted of 20 pairs
of words that were Semantically but not Morphologically
Related [+Sem, -Morph] (banan/kokos, ‘banana/coconut’).
This was to check whether purely semantic priming could
be observed.

Procedure
Standard delayed auditory-auditory priming was used. The
subjects heard binaurally a string of words, one every 3
seconds, which were a mixture of primes, controls, targets
and fillers. Their task was to make a lexical decision by
pressing an appropriate button on a response box to every
heard item. The task was designed in such a way that primes
and targets were separated by 12 intervening items (approximately 35 seconds). The experiment was run in
Kraków using DMASTR/VMASTR software. The same
experimental equipment as in Experiment 1 was used.

Results
4 participants from version 1 and 3 from version 2 were
discarded from the analysis on the same criteria as in Experiment 1. Additionally 1 participant from version 1 and 1
from version 2 were excluded, because of technical problems. A total of 19 subjects per version was entered into the
analysis. Further details on participants were the same as in
Experiment 1. Two experimental items were removed from
the analysis, because of high error percentages. A total of
106 items were entered into the analysis. (See Table 2 for
the details of the descriptive statistics).
The analyses are based on the Target reaction times only.
The inversely transformed data were analysed in a repeated
measures ANOVA. The overall analysis for all 5 conditions
revealed that there was a main effect of Prime, F1(1, 36)=
40.14, p<0.001, F2(1, 96)=16.17, p<0.001. There was also a
main effect of Condition, F1(4, 144)=67.80, p<0.001, F2(4,
96)=4.24, p<0.01 and a two way interaction of Condition
and Prime F1(4, 144)=7.26, p<0.001, F2(4, 96)=3.50,
p<0.05.
Subsequently, the simple effects of Prime on each level of
the Condition were investigated. There was significant
priming in all the verb conditions as predicted: No Alternation Verb: F1(1, 36)=11.05, p<0.01, F2(1, 16)=5.69,
p<0.05; Regular Alternation Verb: F1(1, 36)=25.97,

p<0.001, F2(1, 22)=12.69, p<0.01; Irregular Alternation
Verb: F1(1, 36)=28.99, p<0.001, F2(1, 22)=9.56, p<0.01.
No significant priming was found either in the Phonological
Overlap condition [F1(1, 36)=1.41, p=0.242, F2<1], or in
the Semantically Related and Morphologically Unrelated
condition [F1(1, 36)=1.83, p=0.184, F2<1].
To explore whether there were differences in the magnitude of priming between the three verb conditions the appropriate planned comparisons were made. There were no
significant differences in the magnitude of priming in any of
the comparisons between the No Alternation, Regular Alternation, or Irregular Alternation conditions (F1<1, F2<1
throughout).
Table 2. Priming effects and error rates in Experiment 2.
Condition
N
Prime
Control
Prim(Mean RT) (Mean RT)
ing
1 No Alternation Verb
20
718 (0.6)
748 (0.9)
30*
2 Regular Alternation
24
743 (1.1)
781 (1.8)
39**
Verb
3 Irregular Alternation
24
753 (3.7)
785 (3.7)
32**
Verb
4 Phonological Over20
816 (8.9)
803 (7.4)
-14
lap
5 [+Sem, -Morph]
20
810 (2.6)
819 (1.8)
9
* denotes p<0.05; ** denotes p<0.01; Reaction Times are in ms; Error
rates in percentages (in parentheses).

Discussion
The results indicate that the priming effect observed in all
the verb conditions is morphological in nature and not semantic. As in Experiment 1, the effects are equally strong
across the alternation sets. There is no trace of a semantic
effect under these testing conditions, but there is robust
priming between all morphologically related pairs, indicating that both prime and target map onto the same underlying
morpheme at the level of the lexical entry. The absence of
significant priming for the Phonological Overlap condition
confirms that any facilitatory priming here cannot be attributed to the pure phonological overlap between primes and
targets.

General Discussion
The question asked at the beginning of this paper was
whether a dual or single mechanism can best account for the
results from Polish. The data we report, with no difference
in the magnitude of priming for regulars and irregulars,
seems to group with earlier findings on Italian and French
(Meunier & Marslen-Wilson, 2000; Orsolini & MarslenWilson, 1997), and indicates that a uniform set of processing procedures and representations are applied to Polish
regular and irregular verbs and nouns.
We suggest that the explanation for these properties of
Polish, and its similarities with French and Italian, lies in the
fact that every verb and noun in Polish functions within
similar inflectional paradigms which requires suffixation.
All verbs and nouns, despite having regular or irregular
vocalic or consonantal alternations, are inflected using con-

catenative processes which link verb roots to a series of
inflectional suffixes. This is in contrast to English, where
the regularity/irregularity distinction is confounded with a
contrast in type of morphological process. The regular past
tense inflection involves concatenative suffixing morphology, whereas the irregular forms have no overt inflectional
structure, and have to be both stored and processed as unanalysable full forms. The sequence jumped can be broken
down into the pair {jump} + {-ed}, but no such analysis can
be applied to forms like bought or gave.
The consequences of this, in English, is that regular and
irregular inflected forms do partially involve separable underlying cognitive and neural systems, with the regular
inflected forms requiring the involvement of specialised
systems supporting processes of morphophonological assembly and disassembly. These systems, that can be selectively damaged following stroke and other injuries to the
brain, are not required for the access and processing of the
irregular forms, which are not phonologically decomposable
(Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 1998). The same distinction does
not apply, of course, to Polish (or French and Italian) irregulars, all of which are morphophonologically complex,
and which invoke the same range of processing mechanisms
as the regular forms.
These considerations suggest that further progress in elucidating the properties of the mechanism underlying the
processing of regular and irregular forms will require more
attention to the neural underpinnings of these mechanisms.
A start has been made in this direction in the study of English and German inflection. For instance, Marslen-Wilson,
Csibra, Ford, Hatzakis, Gaskell and Johnson (2000) examined the processing of English regular and irregular past
tenses using an immediate cross-modal priming experiment
during which ERPs were recorded. The results revealed
differences in the pattern of scalp activity for regulars and
irregulars and provide support for the claim that partially
different mechanisms underly the processing of each type of
material. Two other ERP studies reported by Clahsen
(1999) on the representation and processing of German
regular and irregular plurals and participles, using a violation paradigm, claim that regularisations elicit signals which
are characteristic for violations of a morpho-syntactic rule,
whereas irregularisations elicited signals which are typical
of anomalous words and can be regarded as support for a
distinction between rule-based and lexically based inflectional processes (Pinker, 1999).
Thus, if Polish regular and irregular nouns and verbs are
indeed processed by a uniform underlying mechanism, as
suggested by the data presented in this paper, then one
would not predict significant differences in ERP recordings
for the regulars and irregulars, nor in neuro-imaging studies
using techniques such as fMRI, allowing a greater degree of
spatial localisation. But whatever the outcome, input from
studies of this sort are likely to be an essential component of
any future resolution of the kinds of questions raised here.

Acknowledgements
This research is supported in part by an ESRC research
studentship to A. Reid, and in part by the UK MRC.

References
Clahsen, H. (1999). Lexical entries and rules of language: A
multidisciplinary study of German inflection. Behavioral
& Brain Sciences, 22, 991-1060.
Kowalik, K. (1998). Morfonologia. In R. Grzegorczykowa,
R. Laskowski & H. Wróbel (Eds.), Gramatyka
ZVSyáF]HVQHJR M ]\ND SROVNLHJR 0RUIRORJLD Warszawa:
PWN.
Laskowski, R. (1998). Paradygmatyka. Czasownik. In R.
Grzegorczykowa, R. Laskowski & H. Wróbel. (Eds.),

*UDPDW\ND ZVSyáF]HVQHJR M ]\ND SROVNLHJR 0RUIRORJLD

Warszawa: PWN.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., Csibra, G., Ford M., Hatzakis, H.,
Gaskell G. & Johnson, M. (2000). Associations and dissociations in the processing of regular and irregular verbs:
ERP evidence. Poster presented at The conference of
Cognitive Neuroscience Society, San Francisco.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D. & Tyler, L. K. (1998). Rules, representations, and the English past tense. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 2 (11), 428-436.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D, Hare, M. & Older L. (1995). Priming and blocking in English inflectional morphology. Experimental Psychology Society, London, January 1995.
Meunier, F. & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (2000). Regularity &
irregularity in French inflectional morphology. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 346-351). The University of Pennsylvania in
Philadelphia, PA., Mahwah, N.J: LEA.
Orsolini, M. & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1997). Universals
in morphological representation: Evidence from Italian.
Language & Cognitive Processes, 12(1), 1-47.
Pinker, S. (1999). Words and Rules. London: Weidenfeld &
Nicolson.
Pinker, S. & Price, A. (1991). Regular and irregular morphology and the psychological status of rules of grammar. Proceedings of the 17th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistic Society (pp. 230-251).
Plunkett, K. & Marchman, V. (1993). From rote learning to
system building: acquiring verb morphology in children
and connectionist nets. Cognition, 48, 21-69.
Rumelhart, D. E. & McClelland, J. L. (1986). On learning
the past tenses of English verbs. In J.L. McClelland,
D.E. Rumelhart, & PDP Research Group, Parallel distributed processing: explorations in the microstructure
of cognition. Volume 1. Cambridge, MA: Bradford
Books/MIT Press.
Sonnenstuhl, I., Eisenbeiss, S. & Clahsen, H. (1999). Morphological priming in the German mental lexicon. Cognition, 72, 203-236.
Stanners, R. F., Neiser, J. J., Hernon, W. P. & Hall, R.
(1979). Memory representation for morphologically related words. Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behaviour, 18, 399-412.
Zagórska-Brooks, M. (1975). Reference grammar. The
Hague: Mouton & Co. N.V. Publishers.

