UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Remembering to forget: Modeling inhibitory and competetive mechanisms in human
memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1s79g94b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Oram, Mike W.
MacLeod, Malcolm D.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Remembering to forget: Modeling inhibitory and competitive mechanisms in
human memory.
Mike W Oram (mwo@st-andrews.ac.uk)
Malcolm D. MacLeod (mdm@st-andrews.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews
Fife, KY16 9JU, UK

Abstract
Given the importance attached to memory in everyday
life, the inability to recall items on demand can be
problematic. An apparently ironic phenomenon has been
identified, however, which suggests that in addition to
retrieving desired memories, the act of remembering
inhibits or suppresses related memories. We show here
that a competitive model, designed to investigate the
development of the cortical visual system, provides an
explanation for the suppression of some memories as a
consequence of remembering others. We confirm a
number of specific predictions based on our model as to
when retrieval-induced forgetting effects should or
should not occur. The model suggests that the
mechanisms by which memories are formed and adapted
may also underlie retrieval-induced forgetting effects. In
addition to having important practical implications, the
model provides a theoretical base for the transfer of
theories and ideas between two separate levels (cortical
processing and memory formation and adaptation) of
understanding brain function.

Introduction
Recent evidence suggests that far from being a
detrimental process, forgetting has an adaptive role
(Anderson & McCulloch 1999; Bjork 1989; Macrae &
MacLeod 1999). When trying to remember a specific
memory, available retrieval cues are often insufficiently
specified to the extent that related but unwanted
information is also accessed. This unwanted
information can interfere with our ability to retrieve the
information we wish to recall. A potential solution to
this problem is through the temporary suppression or
inhibition of related material (Anderson & McCulloch
1999; Anderson & Spellman 1995; Anderson et al
1994; Anderson, Bjork & Bjork 2000; Bjork et al 1998;
Ciranni & Shimamura 1999; MacLeod & Macrae 2001;
Macrae & MacLeod 1999). Importantly, this temporary
suppression of related memories – retrieval-induced
forgetting – occurs without the need for explicit cues to
forget and can therefore be considered an intrinsic part
of the act of remembering (Anderson & Spellman 1995;
Anderson et al 1994; Macrae & MacLeod 1999). Other
explanations, such as output interference (where items
recalled early in a list can interfere with the retrieval of
subsequent items) have been eliminated as potential
explanations for this phenomenon using a variety of

methods. Direct evaluation using statistical techniques
have shown that there is no tendency for the retrievalinduced forgetting effect to be larger for those
participants who recalled practised items first
(MacLeod in press; MacLeod & Macrae 2001; Macrae
& MacLeod 1999). More direct evidence that an
inhibitory process is involved comes from the
demonstration that temporary suppression is observed
in all items that are related (whether by initial set or
other semantic links) to the suppressed items (i.e.
second order inhibition, Anderson & Spellman 1995).

Retrieval-induced Forgetting
In an experiment showing retrieval-induced forgetting,
participants are typically given two sets of information
to remember regarding two separate categories (A_1,
A_2,…,A_10,
B_i,
B_ii,
B_iii,…,B_x,
e.g,
‘John_cheerful,
John_tolerant,…;
Bill_vigorous,
Bill_sensible,…) followed by a retrieval practice session
on a subset of items from one of the lists (the retrieval
practice or RP set, A_1, A_2,…A_5, e.g. complete the
following: ‘John_ch____’). Following a distracter task
(name as many capital cities as you can), participants
are asked to recall as many of the items as possible.
Figure 1 shows the pattern of results from such an
experiment (see Methods). A greater proportion of the
practised items (RP+, left bar) were recalled than
unpractised items in either the same set (RP-, middle
bar) or in the unpractised set (NRP, right bar). This
enhancement (RP+ versus NRP) shows the facilitatory
effect of practice on subsequent recall. Retrievalinduced forgetting is evidenced by the fact that recall
performance of the non-practised items in the practised
set (RP-) was worse than the recall of non-practised
items in the non-practised set (NRP). Thus, retrievalinduced forgetting is a selective suppression of related
items and not a general suppression of all memories
(Anderson & McCulloch 1999; Anderson & Spellman
1995; Anderson et al 1994, 2001; Bjork et al 1998;
Ciranni & Shimamura 1999; MacLeod & Macrae 2001;
Macrae & MacLeod 1999). An output interference
explanation would predict that retrieval-induced
forgetting effects would be higher where there was a
tendency to recall RP+ items early in the list. As noted
in the introduction, retrieval-induced forgetting is not
due to items from the practiced subset (RP+ items)

Methods

Figure 1: Retrieval-induced forgetting. Mean (±SEM,
n=20) of the proportion of items remembered in each
of each item type (RP+, RP- or NRP). The recall of
unpractised items in the practised set (RP-) was less (p
< 0.05) than the recall of the unpractised items in the
unpractised set (NRP). Overall effect of conditions
F[2,38]=28.3, p < 0.0005.
being recalled first during the free recall task.
(Anderson & Spellman 1995; MacLeod in press;
MacLeod & Macrae 2001; Macrae & MacLeod 1999).
As the act of remembering during practice can
selectively suppress memories for related but
unpractised items, retrieval-induced forgetting must be
influenced by the relationships between the items
established during memory formation (Anderson &
McCulloch 1999; Anderson & Spellman 1995). We
were therefore interested in whether or not the
mechanisms underlying retrieval-induced forgetting
were different from the mechanisms that established the
memories. We begin by considering, in broad terms, the
required properties of a model consistent with the
experimental data on retrieval-induced forgetting. As
retrieval-induced forgetting is undirected (Anderson &
McCulloch 1999; Anderson & Spellman 1995;
Anderson et al 1994; Macrae & MacLeod 1999),
learning should be unsupervised. Also, as retrievalinduced forgetting occurs with both semantic (Macrae
& MacLeod 1999) and episodic memories (Ciranni &
Shimamura 1999), the model should show unsupervised
learning of both semantic and episodic-like memories.
Finally, as inhibitory mechanisms are implicated, the
model should contain inhibitory or competitive
processes. We first show that a model consistent with
this broad outline shows retrieval-induced forgetting.
We then use the model to formulate three predictions of
when retrieval-induced forgetting will not be observed.
These predictions are verified experimentally.

We employed a computational approach to aid
understanding of the role of inhibitory mechanisms in
mental life. Computational testing of psychological
theories can provide a powerful conceptual framework
from which principled sets of research questions can be
derived. However, using computational models in this
way is not straightforward. The high number of degrees
of freedom can lead to over-fitting the data and hence
offer neither explanatory power nor generalisation to
other scenarios. Hence, the observation that a model
can fit experimental data is insufficient to validate the
underlying processes within the model. In addition,
results from a model developed around underlying
psychological processes will be restricted in
interpretation to the assumed underlying psychological
processes: such a model can determine whether the
assumed processes could underlie observed phenomena,
but is weak at determining whether the assumed
processes are actually in operation and important.
We address the caveats of using computational
models to investigate psychological processing in two
ways. First, selection of the category of model is made
in broad terms without specific implementation to
match observed psychological phenomena. If such a
model is observed to produce the phenomena of
interest, predictions from changing parameters in the
model can then be validated with experimental data.
The experimental validation of predictions overcomes,
at least partially, the difficulties associated with many
degrees of freedom that, in turn, gives rise to overfitting the experimental data. Second, we assume that if
the model reflects the psychological processes in a
meaningful way, the parameters of the model will relate
to psychological processes. This is not simply that the
output of the model relates to the phenomena of
interest, but that the parameters relate to underlying
psychological processes. If the parameters of a model
can be related to psychological processes, then the
model may provide insight into how these processes
interact.

Simulation methods
Damage to cortical tissue appears necessary for
retrograde amnesia, implying that the neural
representation in cortex correlates with the long-term
memory. As inhibitory mechanisms are implicated in
both the formation and functioning of neural
representation (Oram and Perrett, 1994; Desimone and
Duncan, 1995) and cognitive interactions between those
representations (Anderson et al., 1994; Anderson and
Spellman, 1995; Ciranni and Shimamura, 1999), we
chose to investigate whether inhibitory processes
involved in the formation of representations/memories
could also underlie the interactions between
representations/memories revealed by retrieval-induced
forgetting.

The model consisted of two sets of 10 input nodes
representing the individual items and two input nodes
representing the set identifiers. The 22 input nodes were
fully connected to the 10 output memory nodes, initially
with random weights (0..1). Each node had an
associated trace activity, Tr, which was dependent on
the node’s Tr at the previous time step and the node’s
current activity, Act: Tr(time+1) = (1-δ)Trtime+δAct. The
trace activity time constant δ was set at 0.5, with similar
results obtained for δ=0.2 to δ=0.8. Weights between
input i and memory node j were set randomly (0…1)
with updating (learning) based on the trace activity,
∆Wt[i,j] = α(Acti – Wt[i,j])Tracej. The weight change rate,
α, was 0.01 (similar results were obtained for α=0.001
to α=0.2). The (Acti – Wt[i,j]) ensures that the weights
are bounded (-1..1). Initial training consisted of setting
the activities of the input node corresponding to one of
the input items to 1, calculating the activity of the
memory nodes, updating the weights, then resetting the
activity of the input node to 0, then “presenting”
another input item. The activity of the set node
associated with each input item was set to 1 while items
within the set were presented. Retrieval practice was
run in an analogous way for one half of the items in set
1, except that activity of the item nodes was set at 0.5
representing the partial cueing in the experimental
paradigm. The representational strength was calculated
as the activity in the item nodes following activation of
1.0 of the set node. Weight change was calculated as
the change in the representational strength from after
training to after retrieval practice. The change was
normalised by dividing by the representational strength
after training.

Experimental methods
Following Anderson et al (1994), the study
comprised four phases: study, practice, distracter and
final test. Participants were presented with ten items of
information presented individually for 5s about two
witness statements (one concerning a personal theft and
the other a bank robbery). The practice phase followed
immediately after the study phase. Participants were
presented with five questions about a subset of items
concerning one of the witness statements (RP+ items).
Each question was presented three times.
Counterbalancing and randomisation of question order
ensured that each of the items appeared equally often in
the RP+, RP-, and NRP conditions. Participants were
then given a 5-min distracter task (write down as many
capital cities as you can). Finally, participants were
given a surprise free recall task in which they were
required to recall as much of the information contained
in the two statements. The number of correctly recalled
items was noted for each group (RP+, RP- and NRP)
and converted to proportion correct by dividing by the
number of items in each group (RP+=5, RP-=5,
NRP=10 and Figure 1).

Figure 2: Modelling retrieval-induced forgetting. The
weights between item nodes and memory nodes
(representing the strength of the memory) are depicted
by the thickness of the connecting line. The grey scale
of the memory nodes indicates the strength of
connection between the set node (not shown) and the
memory nodes. A: Before training, the weights
between input and memory nodes were random. B:
Weights after the training. C: Retrieval practice redistributed the weights linking the set 1 items with the
memory nodes while leaving the weights on set 2
unaltered. D: Change in the weights representing the
memories of the items and their set membership. As
practice increases from 10 to 100 iterations, the
strength of the memory inhibition also increases.

Results
We adapted a fully connected single layer unsupervised
competitive model that forms both semantic and
episodic like memories by learning from both past and
present activity (Foldiak 1990, 1991; Oram & Foldiak
1996). The model consists of two sets of input items,
each containing 10 items. Two additional inputs were
used to indicate the training set. Initial weights from the
input to output nodes were set randomly. Competitive
interactions were modelled using a winner-take-all
implementation (Foldiak 1991; Oram & Foldiak 1996)
between the 10 nodes in the output layer. The network
we adapted loads each output node with equal share of
the input variance (Foldiak 1990; Oram & Foldiak
1996). The trace activity (Tr) imparts a structure to the
inputs in the form of temporal co-variance between
items. This co-variance results in the equally distributed
input variance being parceled into equal variances
associated with the different input sets and, within each
set, an equal representation of the individual items.
Thus, each output node learns part of the co-variation
between a “set” node and the “item nodes”. The
resulting representation is best described as sparse,
being neither fully distributed nor local. Sparse

representations have the benefits of both distributed and
local representations and seem to describe accurately
cortical representations. The greater the number of
output nodes, the sparser the representation.
Qualitatively similar results are obtained when the
number of output nodes varies from 4-30 output nodes.
There were two phases to training: in the 1st phase,
the model was sequentially presented with each of the
items with the items set membership also activated.
This is analogous to the initial learning phase of
retrieval-induced forgetting paradigms. In the 2nd phase,
the model is sequentially presented with half the items
from one set partially activated (the retrieval practice
phase). The changes in the strength of the model’s
representations of items at different stages during

simulated retrieval-induced forgetting are shown
schematically in Figure 2a-d (thick lines indicate a
strong link, thin lines indicate a weak link). Before
training (Figure 2a) the weights are random and small.
Learning rules based on recent as well as current
activity, such as those employed here, learn temporal
relationships between inputs (episodic-like memories)
as well as relationships between nodes with concurrent
activity (semantic-like memories). This allows the
individual set-item relationships and the relationships
between the different items within the same set to be
learned. The inhibitory competition between nodes
keeps the set-item representations of different sets of
inputs separate (Foldiak 1991; Oram & Foldiak 1996).
After training (Figure 2b) the representation of the

Figure 3: Predicting the disruption of retrieval-induced forgetting. The three rows show different conditions under
which the model predicts that retrieval-induced forgetting will not occur and the results of experimental studies.
The change in the representational strengths of the RP+, RP- and NRP items in the model following retrieval
practice are shown in the middle column. The results of the experimental studies (mean proportion correct ±SEM
in free recall for the RP+, RP- and NRP item types) are shown in the right column. Upper Row: Lack of coherence
between items (random presentation of items). The model was run with trace activity time constant δ=1 (otherwise
experiment as in Figure 1) producing overlapping representations of set 1 and set 2 (left). Accuracy of predicted
recall was reduced compared with items which were temporally coherent. The absence of retrieval-induced
forgetting (compare top middle with Figure 2D)was confirmed experimentally (p > 0.5, right). Middle Row:
Effect of semantic links between items. Direct connections (strength = 0.5) between input items in set 1 and set 2
produces overlapping representations of set 1 and set 2 (left). Retrieval-induced forgetting was so attenuated that it
was predicted to be undetectable experimentally (middle). This was confirmed experimentally (p > 0.2). Lower
Row: Effect of confounding by category. When connections between memory nodes (25% chance) were included
(strength = 0.5), item-set memories showed overlap between sets (left), which again predicts greatly attenuated
effects of retrieval-induced forgetting (middle). This was also confirmed experimentally (p > 0.05).

items in the memory nodes is divided into two sets,
with little or no overlap. Following retrieval-practice
(Figure 2c), the strength of the representation of
practised items (RP+) is increased (without the
simulated retrieval practice, the representation of the
RP- and RP+ items is equivalent). The strength of the
representation of unpractised RP- items is reduced
because of repeated occurrences of high activity in the
memory nodes with no activity in the input nodes
representing the RP- items. As the retrieval-practice did
not activate the memory nodes associated with the NRP
items, the strength of representation items in the nonpractised set is not influenced by retrieval-practice.
Figure 2d shows that the network predicts the
phenomena
associated
with
retrieval-induced
forgetting: the expected recall of RP+ items is enhanced
compared to the recall of the NRP items and, as with
retrieval-induced forgetting, the recall of the RP- items
is lower than the recall of the NRP items. Thus, a
competitive model can show retrieval-induced
forgetting effects. The model does not provide a direct
prediction of any effect of the order in which items will
be recalled: we use the strength of representation as our
metric.
Note,
however,
that
although
the
representational strength would suggest free recall
beginning with RP+ items, the retrieval-induced
forgetting effect in the model is not due to any form of
output interference, only the strength of representation.
Given the variable success experimenters have had in
producing retrieval-induced forgetting effects, we were
particularly interested in examining the conditions
under which retrieval-induced forgetting would not
occur. We wished therefore to evaluate the model by
changing those model parameters which suggest a
strong influence on retrieval-induced forgetting and
experimentally testing the predicted effects. We chose
to manipulate those model parameters that have readily
identifiable psychological counterparts. If the model
parameter that represents the degree of continuity
between the items (trace activity) is reduced, the items
in each of the different sets to be remembered do not
form a coherent pattern after the initial training, and the
clarity of the relationships between items and their sets
is reduced (Figure 3, top left). The overlap between the
representations of items in different sets predicts
reduced levels of recall performance compared with the
situation where the continuity between items is easily
established. Following simulated retrieval-practice, the
strength of both the RP- and the NRP item
representations is reduced while the strength of the RP+
representations is increased, i.e., an absence of
retrieval-induced forgetting (Figure 3, top middle).
When items used in the initial experiment (Figure 1)
were presented in random order such that no coherence
between the items was evident, retrieval-induced
forgetting did not occur. In addition, absolute
performance levels were reduced compared to when the

same items were presented in a coherent fashion
(compare Figure 3, top right and Figure 1).
Links between individual input items of the different
sets can be thought of as exemplar-exemplar links
based on semantic relationships between item inputs.
Activation of one item will lead to (partial) activation of
those related items in the second set. The concurrent
activation leads to item representations that do not map
perfectly with the input set (Figure 3, center left), so
that retrieval practice reduces the strength of
representation of both the RP- and NRP items whilst
increasing the RP+ representation (Figure 3, center).
Semantic relationships between input items were
obtained experimentally by using appearance
descriptors concerning two individuals (e.g. Bill_Nike
trainers, Bill_Slim build…, John_Adidas trainers,
John_Medium build) as the input items (trainers, build
etc forming explicit links). As predicted, retrievalinduced forgetting did not occur (Figure 3, center right).
Finally, links between the representations of the item
groups (the memory nodes) models the existence of
pre-existing groupings involving the items. This can be
thought of as the existence of indirect or implicit
semantic links (exemplar-category-exemplar). The
overlap of pre-existing groupings of the items of the
different sets leads to the representation of single items
being associated with both sets (Figure 3, lower left).
The effect of confounding relationships between the
memory nodes was examined by asking participants to
learn representations of employees in different
companies that were confounded by gender. Again, the
prediction from the model was met: retrieval-induced
forgetting did not occur (Figure 3, lower right).

Discussion
The results of these studies highlight two important
aspects of memory formation and maintenance. First,
we have shown a mechanism by which practice and
revision (consolidation) of selected memories can lead
to suppression of related memories but leave unrelated
and unpractised memories unaffected (Figure 1). While
others have noted the restricted occurrence of retrievalinduced forgetting (Anderson & McCulloch 1999), our
model allows specific predictions to be made about
both performance levels and the strength of retrievalinduced forgetting effects. The four predictions about
performance in a cognitive memory task (Figure 3,
middle column) were all tested and verified
experimentally (Figure 3, right column). This suggests
competitive models with learning based on past as well
as present activity can help predict how, why and when
these types of memory interactions occur. Second, the
model suggests that the effects of practice and revision
of selected memories are due to the same processes by
which memories are first established and hence need
not be regarded as separate cognitive processes.
Support for retrieval-induced forgetting as an intrinsic

property of memory formation comes not simply from
the demonstration that a model can produce retrievalinduced forgetting effects without explicitly coding the
effect, but also that the same model predicts the absence
of retrieval-induced forgetting effects (Figure 3).
In day-to-day function, retrieval-induced forgetting is
important because it allows the updating or alteration of
memory without interference of or disruption to other
memories. For example, remembering where you
parked your car today rather than where you had parked
it yesterday should not interfere with your memory of
the shopping you need to do. This type of selective
adjustment of memories has practical implications:
police interview techniques could be adjusted to
minimise the potential loss of pertinent information
from witnesses; teaching the establishment of
conceptual links between aspects of the curriculum
should be emphasised with revision of all the related
material; students who revise only part of their course
may well be placing themselves at a disadvantage
because of the active suppression of related memories.
If, as our model suggests, retrieval-induced forgetting
effects are intrinsic to memory formation, then a simple
way of reducing susceptibility to this kind of forgetting
is to create many links during initial learning – perhaps
the reason why the development of complex schemata
provides resistance to such forgetting (Anderson &
McCulloch 1999).
We have shown that a competitive model reveals a
potential
mechanism
allowing
prediction
of
experimental data concerning the cognitive processes of
memory formation and adaptation. Our model shares
similarities with that of Bauml (1997). However, our
model suggest the suppression normally attributed to
retrieval processes could itself be part of the mechanism
by which memories interact and are updated. The
choice of model provides not only a potential
explanation of memory formation and adaptation but
also demonstrates that a mechanism proposed to
describe the selectivity of single cells within extrastriate visual cortex (Foldiak 1991; Oram & Foldiak
1996; Oram & Perrett 1996; Wallis & Rolls 1997) can
operate at the much coarser scale associated with
episodic and semantic memories and their interactions.
The existence of a single model that operates at both
fine (single cell) and coarse (episodic and semantic
memory) scales is appealing because it provides a
medium for the transfer of theories and ideas between
two different levels of approach to brain function and
their subsequent testing.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Dr. J. Gerry Quinn for helpful
discussion and reading of draft manuscripts.

References
Anderson, M.C., Bjork, R.A. & Bjork, E.L (1994)
Remembering can cause forgetting: Retrieval
dynamics in long-term-memory. J Expl PsycholLearn Mem Cogn 20, 1063-1087.
Anderson, M.C., Bjork, R.A. & Bjork, E.L. (2000)
Retrieval-induced forgetting: Evidence for a recallspecific mechanism. Psychon Bull Rev, 522-530.
Anderson, M.C. & Neely, J.H. (1996) in Memory:
Handbook of perception and cognition (eds Bjork,
E.L. & Bjork, R.A.) 237-313 ( Academic Press, New
York.
Anderson, M.C. & McCulloch, K.C. (1999) Integration
as a general boundary condition on retrieval- induced
forgetting. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 25, 608629.
Anderson, M.C. & Spellman, B.A. (1995) On the status
of inhibitory mechanisms in cognition: Memory
retrieval as a model case. Psychol Rev 102, 68-100.
Bauml, K.H. (1997) The list-strength effect: Strengthdependent competition or suppression? Psychonom
Bull Rev 4, 260-264
Bjork, R.A. (1989) in Varieties of memory and
consciousness: Essay in honor of Endel Tulving (eds
Roediger, H.L. & Craik, F.I.) (Erlbaum, Hillsdale,
NJ).
Bjork, E.L., Bjork, R.A. & Anderson, M.C. (1998)
Varieties of goal-directed forgetting. In (eds J.M.
Golding & C.M. MacLeod) Intentional forgetting.
Mahway: NJ Erlbaum.
Ciranni, M.A. & Shimamura, A.P. (1999) Retrievalinduced forgetting in episodic memory. J Exp
Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 25, 1403-1414.
Foldiak, P. (1990) Forming sparse representations by
local anti-Hebbian learning. Biol Cybern 64, 165170.
Foldiak, P. (1991) Learning invariance from
transformation sequences. Neural Comput 3, 194200.
MacLeod, M.D. (in press) Retrieval-induced forgetting
in eyewitness memory: Forgetting as a consequence
of remembering. Applied Cognitive Psychology In
press.
MacLeod, M.D. & Macrae, C.N. (2001) Gone but not
forgotten: The transient nature of retrieval-induced
forgetting. Psychol Sci 12, 148-152.
Macrae, C.N. & MacLeod, M.D. (1999) On
recollections lost: When practice makes imperfect. J
Pers Soc Psychol 77, 463-473.
Oram, M.W. & Foldiak, P. (1996) Learning
generalisation and localisation: Competition for
stimulus type and receptive field. Neurocomputing
11, 297-321.
Oram, M.W. & Perrett, D.I. (1994) Modeling visual
recognition from neurobiological contraints. Neural
Networks 7, 945-972.
Wallis, G. & Rolls, E.T. (1997) Invariant face and
object recognition in the visual system. Prog
Neurobiol 51, 167-194.

