UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Similarity Processing Depends on the Similarities Present: Effects of Relational Prominence
in Similarity and Analogical Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2t33p1dp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Keane, Mark T.
Hackett, Deirdre
Davenport, Jodi

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Similarity Processing Depends on the Similarities Present:
Effects of Relational Prominence in Similarity and Analogical Processing
Mark T. Keane (Mark.Keane@ucd.ie)
Department of Computer Science, Lukasiewicz Building,
University College Dublin, Belfield,, Dublin 4 IRELAND

Deirdre Hackett (Deirdre.Hackett@erc.ie)
Educational Research Center, Dromcondra, Dublin 9 IRELAND

Jodi Davenport (Jodi@mit.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139-4307 USA

Abstract
Several studies have shown that similarity judgements
involve a process of structural alignment akin to
analogical mapping. Some research has shown that
performing a similarity judgement task produces more
relational responding in a subsequent cross-mapping
task, suggesting that similarity necessarily uses
structural alignment. However, other research has
shown that this effect disappears when
procedural/material manipulations fail to emphasise the
relational aspects of similar scenes. The present study
confirms the latter findings showing that if relational
similarities are less prominent in a material set then
subjects respond in an object-based rather than a
relational way. Importantly, these results show that
similarity processing does not by necessity make use of
structural alignment but that the similarity processing
adopted is pluralistic and depends on properties of the
presented materials.

Introduction
A considerable body of recent research has shown that
similarity comparisons can involve a process of
structural alignment (see e.g., Goldstone, 1994;
Goldstone & Medin, 1994; Goldstone, Medin &
Gentner, 1991; Markman & Gentner 1993a, 1993b,
1997;
Medin, Goldstone & Gentner, 1993).
Representationally, this view characterises knowledge
as structured hierarchies encoding objects, object
attributes, relations between objects and relations
between relations. Given these representations it is
assumed that similarity comparisons involve the
alignment of relational structure to find the most
structurally consistent match between two systems of
concepts, that satisfies the constraints of parallel
connectivity (if two relations match, their arguments

must match) and one-to-one mapping (that each item
in one structure may only be mapped to one other
item).
Computationally, these ideas have been
realised by a family of models that simulate analogical
mapping (see e.g., Falkenhainer, Forbus & Gentner,
1989; Gentner, 1983, 1989; Holyoak & Thagard,
1989; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997; Keane, 1988, 1997;
Keane & Brayshaw, 1988; Keane, Ledgeway & Duff,
1994; Veale & Keane, 1994, 1997, 1998). Indeed,
structural alignment has been mooted as a unified
account of a diverse range of phenomena including
similarity, analogy, metaphor and concept
combination (see Costello & Keane, 2000; Gentner,
Holyoak & Kokinov, 2001; Keane & Costello, 2001).
Markman & Gentner (1993b) provided one of the
key pieces of evidence supporting the role of structural
alignment in similarity judgements. They used a oneshot mapping task in which subjects had to identify a
cross-mapped object between two drawn scenes (see
Appendix A).
A cross-mapped object was defined
as an object in one drawing that was perceptually
similar to an object in a different relational role in the
other drawing. So, for example, in the baseball scenes
shown in Appendix A, the cross-mapped object would
be the pitcher with the "C" on his uniform, because he
is pitching in the upper scene and being pitched to in
the other scene. Markman & Gentner have proposed
that structural alignment is reflected in this task when
subjects make relational responses (i.e., choosing the
object in the same role) as opposed to object responses
based on perceptual, feature similarity (i.e., choosing
the perceptually similar object in a different role).
The key manipulation asked participants to perform a
similarity judgement task on the picture-pairs either
before or after the mapping task. They found that

when participants made the similarity judgement
before the mapping task they made more relational
responses than when it was presented after the
mapping task. Thus, the result strongly suggested
that the similarity judgement task invoked a structural
alignment process which then carried over to the
mapping task increasing the proportion of relational
responses (significantly, when an aestheticappreciation task was given before the mapping task
no facilitation in relational responding was found).
Davenport & Keane (1999) queried these findings
by pointing out that the materials and presentational
procedure used may have contained unintended cues
to promote relational responding. First, some of
Markman & Gentner's materials had linguistic labels
indicating the key relational similarity between the
pictures (see e.g., the baseball pair in which "Pitch" is
written). Second, the presentational procedure may
have supported relational responding in that the all 8
stimuli presented were picture pairs with prominent
relational similarities. Davenport & Keane found that
when the linguistic cues were removed from the
materials and the materials were mixed with fillers
(involving simply object similarities) the similarityjudgement effect disappeared; that is, relational
responding did not increase reliably when the
similarity judgement task was made before, rather than
after the mapping task. Significantly, Davenport &
Keane also found that when the relational materials
were blocked as a group and presented before the
fillers there was increased relational responding
relative to a condition in which the relational materials
were randomly distributed among fillers in their order
of presentation. This blocked-condition mimicked the
presentational procedure used by Markman &
Gentner. No reliable interaction was found between
the ordering of the similarity judgement task (before
or after mapping task) and the materials-order variable
(blocked before or distributed among fillers). Hackett
(2000) has subsequently replicated this materials order
effect.
This pattern of results demands a very different
account of similarity and mapping to that proposed by
Markman & Gentner. First, it is no longer safe to
assume that structural alignment is used in similarity
judgements, as a matter of course, because relational
responding does not follow prior similarity
judgements. Second, it appears that relational
responding is mainly dependent on the materials used
and how they are presented. Specifically, the pattern
of responding in the mapping task suggests that the
prominence of relational similarities in the materials
is the key variable affecting relational responding.
This proposal best explains the evidence found:
• when linguistic cues are present that highlight key
relational similarities then relational responding is
seen (as in Markman & Gentner's original

materials)
when several materials are consecutively presented
with relational similarities then relational
responding results (as in Markman & Gentner's
study and Davenport & Keane's blocked condition)
• when materials with clear object similarities are
mixed up with these relational materials then
relational responding decreases (as in Davenport &
Keane's distributed condition)
So, structural alignment is really only used when the
prominence of relational similarities in the materials
appear to demand it, perhaps with the default style
being processing based on attribute similarities.
If this account is true then any manipulation that
reduces the prominence of relational similarities in the
materials should reduce relational responding. For
instance, if we take the materials that have previously
produced relational responding and add in additional
object similarities then, on balance, the relational
similarities should be less prominent. Hence, we
should see reduced relational responding for these
modified materials. For example, consider picturepair A in Appendix II; the top picture shows a woman
kicking a football with goal posts and a sun behind her
and the bottom picture shows her being kicked by a
child with some blocks and a clock in the background.
This picture pair is quite sparse, a sparseness that
lends a greater prominence to the kicking relation
shown. Compare picture-pair A with picture-pair B in
Appendix II; the latter also shows two kicking
episodes but the scenes are much richer with more
similar objects in the top and bottom pictures (houses,
the sun, goal posts, etc). Although, both picture pairs
have the same kicking incident, the greater frequency
of object similarities in the richer pair should, if our
hypothesis is correct, reduce the occurrence of
relational responding relative to the sparser pair.
The present study examines this sparse versus rich
manipulation, where the richer pairs were essentially
the same scenes with added matching objects. We
also attempted a further replication of the similarityjudgement effect by giving different groups a
similarity judgement task either before or after the
mapping task. As such, we had a 2 x 2 betweensubject design where the variables were task-order
(similarity task before or after mapping task) and
material-type (sparse or rich materials). Following
Davenport & Keane, all conditions presented the
materials in a distributed fashion with the target
materials being randomly distributed with fillers. We
made two predictions in the study. First, that the
similarity judgement task would have no effect on
relational responding, confirming Davenport &
Keane's finding. Second, that the sparse materials
would produce more relational responding than the
rich materials, as the prominence of the relational
•

Responses

S u b j e c t s . Forty-eight undergraduate students at
University College Dublin took part voluntarily in the
experiment and were randomly assigned to one of the
four between-subjects conditions.
Stimuli. The stimuli for this experiment consisted of
8 pairs of pictures depicting causal scenes with
matching relational structure and 16 filler pairs. Each
of these 8 pairs contained a cross-mapping as
operationalized by Markman and Gentner (1993b) in
which a pair of perceptually-similar objects were
shown which played different roles in the matching
relational structure of the two scenes (see Appendix B
for an example). In all four conditions, the 8 relational
pictures were designed so that the perceptually-similar
target object was in approximately the same spatial
position in the picture pairs (e.g., the woman in the
soccer materials is in the same central position in both
pictures). Two versions of the relational materials
were prepared. The rich set was created by adding
similar objects to both scenes of the original sparse
pictures used by Davenport & Keane (see Appendix II
for an example). In all other respects, the picturepairs were the same (e.g., in the placing of the arrow
indicating the to-be-mapped object).
Eight of the filler pairs depicted comparable
scenarios without matching relational structure (e.g.
two beach scenes, one with a man surfing another with
a child is building a sand castle) and the other 8 pairs
did not match in either scenario or relational structure
(e.g. a scene of an artist and a scene of a man in a
grocery store). The fillers were the same as those used
by Davenport & Keane.
The stimuli were presented in booklet form with one
pair on each page (one picture above the other). The
stimuli for the mapping task had an arrow placed
above an object in the top scene. For the 8 target pairs
this was the cross-mapped object, otherwise it was an
object which appeared in both scenes. The stimuli
used for the similarity rating task had a scale with the
numbers 1 through 9 at the bottom of the page. The
words Low Similarity appeared under the 1 and the
words High Similarity appeared under the 9.
Booklets in the all conditions had a completely
randomised presentation of the 24 pairs for both the
mapping and the similarity tasks.
Procedure. As in Gentner & Markman's study, the
first page of the mapping section of the booklet
instructed subjects to draw a line from the object
under the arrow to the object in the bottom scene that
"best went with that object". The first page of the
similarity judgement section instructed subjects to rate
the similarity of the two scenes by circling a number

Relational

Method

on the scale at the bottom of the page.
Subjects in the similarity-after conditions received a
booklet with the mapping task followed by the
similarity judgement task while subjects in the
similarity-before condition received a booklet with the
similarity judgement task first.
Subjects were tested in small groups of varying
sizes and each experimental session took between 10
and 15 minutes.
Scoring. As in Gentner & Markman's study,
participants' responses to the 8 target pairs in the
mapping task were determined as an object mapping if
a line was drawn from the cross-mapped object to a
featurally-similar object in the bottom scene; a
relational mapping, if a line was drawn to the object
in the same relational role in the bottom scene; or a
spurious mapping if a line was drawn to another,
unrelated object. As in previous studies, spurious
responses were removed prior to data analysis (5% of
all responses made).

Proportional

similarities is reduced in the latter by the greater
frequency of object similarities.

0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

Rich
Sparse

0.1
0.05
0
Sim-Before

Sim-After

Figure 1: The Mean Proportion of Relational
Responses in the Conditions of the Study

Results & Discussion
A two-way, between-subjects ANOVA found a
reliable effect of material-type with a higher
proportion of relational responding in the sparse
conditions (M = .37) than in the rich conditions
(M =0.19), though this difference is marginally
reliable, F(1,44) = 3.538, p=.06, MSError = 0.079 (see
Figure 1). Again, contrary to Markman and Gentner's
predictions, no reliable effect was found for the taskorder variable, F(1,44) = 2.279, p >.10. Indeed, the
direction of the difference is in the opposite direction
to that predicted; less relational responding occurs
when the similarity judgement task is before as
opposed to after the mapping task. Finally, there was
no reliable interaction between task-order and
material-type, F(1,44) = 0.804, p >.10.

General Discussion
There are two significant findings in this study. First,
it replicates Davenport & Keane's finding that

relational responding is not influenced by a prior
similarity judgement task; leaving open the question
of whether similarity judgement involves structural
alignment. Indeed, if we adopt the argument made by
Markman & Gentner, we would be bound to conclude
that structural alignment does not necessarily occur in
similarity judgements. Second, and perhaps more
surprisingly, it shows that structural alignment does
not necessarily occur in the mapping task either.
Rather, it appears that people sometimes respond on
the basis of relational similarities and other times
respond on the basis of object similarities.
Furthermore, the key factor determining the mode of
response lies in the nature of the materials themselves.
When relational similarities are prominent in the given
materials or across a set of consecutive materials then
relational responding will result, but when these
relational similarities are counter balanced by more
object similarities in a given material or across a set of
consecutive materials then object-based responding
results.
Computationally, these findings present a number of
challenges for models of similarity and analogy.
They suggest that there are two distinct modes of
processing for similarity judgement and mapping
tasks. In one mode, relational correspondences are
mainly used; this could be achieved by only
computing relational matches (e.g., a type of selective
attention to relations) or by computing both object and
relational matches and then subsequently giving a
greater weight to relational similarities. In the other
mode, object attributes are mainly used: this could be
achieved by only computing attribute matches (e.g., a
type of selective attention to object features) or by
computing both object and relational matches and then
subsequently giving a greater weight to object
similarities. Where you have two modes of processing
there has to be a trigger for switching processing from
one mode to the other. The empirical evidence
suggests that this trigger is sensitive to the relative
frequency of relational versus attribute similarities
present in a stimulus pair and a set of stimulus pairs.
Do any current models have these sort of
properties ? Goldstone's (1994) interactive activation
model gave a greater weight to attribute matches
during early stages of processing with relational
matches emerging later on; this model deals with the
finding that under time pressures people rely more on
attribute similarity (Medin & Goldstone, 1994).
However, it is not immediately clear whether it would
predict less relational responding in the rich versus the
sparse materials. Furthermore, this model would need
to have a history of previous similarity judgements to
model the effects of consecutive relational materials.
Another model, the MAX model (Goldstone, Medin &
Gentner, 1991) pools relational and attribute
similarities separately, with relational or attribute

responses being chosen based on the relative sizes of
the two pools of similarities. This model might be
able to deal with the relational prominence effect, as
the rich materials might have a larger pool of attribute
similarities relative to the sparse materials, leading to
an object-based response. However, the MAX model
does not have an account of the effects of consecutive
materials as, again, it holds no history of previous
similarity episodes. In short, no current model seems
to be able to handle this evidence.
The current results leave open the question of
whether similarities are selectively attended to with
only a subset of all possible similarities being
computed or whether all similarities are computed and
then evaluated to decide on what response mode
should be adopted. This is a key question to be
settled by future empirical work. They also leave
open the question of which mode of processing is the
default mode or, in indeed, if there is a default mode.
Attribute similarities seem to be computed more
efficiently and easily (Goldstone & Medin, 1994).
This mode of processing also has a laziness that is
characteristic of human cognitive processing, when
one considers people's mental sloth in making
elaborative, bridging relational inferences.
However, there is one conclusion that is
unavoidable given the current results: Namely, that
comparison processes -– whether they be similarity or
analogical processes – are pluralistic rather than
monolitic (see Medin, Goldstone & Gentner, 1994;
Keane & Costello, 2001). This conclusion should
shift the focus of research to the key issue of what
variables influence the mode of processing adopted in
this pluralistic computational environment.

References
Costello, F. & Keane, M.T. (2000). Efficient
creativity: Constraints on conceptual
combination.Cognitive Science.
Davenport, J. & Keane, M.T. (1999). Similarity &
structural alignment: You can have one without the
other. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K.D., & Gentner, D. (1989).
Structure-mapping engine. Artificial Intelligence,
41, 1-63.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7 , 155170.
Gentner, D. (1989). Mechanisms of analogical
learning. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. Cambridge:
CUP.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K.J., & Kokinov, B. (2001).
The Analogical Mind. Cambridge, MASS; MIT
Press.

Goldstone, R.L. (1994). Similarity, interactive
activation, and mapping. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Memory and Cognition, 20, 3-28.
Goldstone, R.L. & Medin, D.L. (1994). Time course of
comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Language, Memory & Cognition, 20, 29-50.
Goldstone, R.L., Medin, D.L., & Gentner, D. (1991).
Relational similarity and the non-independence of
features in similarity judgments. C o g n i t i v e
Psychology, 23, 222-262.
Hackett, D. (2000). Similarity judgements and the
causes of relational responding. MSc Thesis,
Department of Computer Science, University
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
Holyoak, K.J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical
mapping by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive
Science, 13, 295-355.
Hummel, J.E. & Holyoak, K.J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical
access and mapping. Psychological Review. 104,
427-466.
Keane, M.T. (1988). Analogical Problem Solving.
Chichester, England: Ellis Horwood (Cognitive
Science Series). [Simon & Schuster in N. America]
Keane, M.T. (1997). What makes an analogy difficult
?: The effects of order and causal structure in
analogical mapping. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Language, Memory & Cognition, 23,
946-967.
Keane, M.T. & Costello, F. (2001). Why Conceptual
Combination is Seldom Analogy. In D. Gentner,
K.J. Holyoak, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), T h e
Analogical Mind. Cambridge, MASS; MIT Press.
Keane, M.T., & Brayshaw, M. (1988). The Incremental
Analogical Machine: A computational model of
analogy. In D. Sleeman (Ed.), European Working
Session on Machine Learning. London: Pitman.
Keane, M.T., Ledgeway, T. & Duff, S. (1994).
Constraints on analogical mapping: A comparison
of three models. Cognitive Science, 18, 387-438.
Markman, A.B. & Gentner, D. (1993a). Splitting the
differences: A structural alignment view of
similarity. Journal of Memory and Language, 32,
517-535.
Markman, A.B. & Gentner, D. (1993b). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Markman, A.B. & Gentner, D. (1997). The effects of
alignability on memory. Psychological Science, 5,
363-367.
Medin, D.L., Goldstone, R.L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100,
254-278.
Veale, T. & Keane, M.T. (1994). Belief modelling,
intentionality and perlocution in metaphor
comprehension.
Proceedings of the Sixteenth
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Veale, T. & Keane, M.T. (1997). The competence of
sub-optimal structure mapping on ‘hard’ analogies.
IJCAI’97: The 15th International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann.
Veale, T. & Keane, M.T. (1998). Principle Differences
in Structure Mapping. In K.J. Holyoak, D. Gentner,
& B. Kokinov (Eds.), Proceedings of Analogy '98.
New University of Bulgaria Press: Bulgaria.

Appendix I. The Baseball Materials Used by
Markman & Gentner(1993b)

Appendix II. Examples of the materials used in the study showing the (a) spare kick material and (b) the rich kick material.
A.

B.

