UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Singular and General Causal Arguments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2x55n17d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Oestermeier, Uwe
Hesse, Friedrich W.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Singular and General Causal Arguments
Uwe Oestermeier (uwe_oestermeier@kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40
D-72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Friedrich W. Hesse (friedrich.hesse@uni-tuebingen.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40
D-72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Abstract
In two studies we examined arguments for singular and
general causal claims. The first study, a content analysis
of newspaper articles, revealed characteristic distributions for mechanistic, statistical, and counterfactual argumentations in singular and general problems. In a
second experimental study, subjects formulated arguments from different perspectives on general and singular problems. The results show that subjects are sensitive
to the singular-general distinction as well as to related argumentative roles and backgrounds of knowledge. This
supports a rhetorical model of causal cognition.

Introduction
Causal arguments consist of causal claims or conclusions and premises which support the causal claims as
reasons. The claims may be general (e.g. "smoking
causes cancer") or singular (e.g. "John’s cancer was
caused by his smoking") in nature. Various reasons can
be given for such claims: statistical data (e.g. "because
smokers take a much higher risk of getting cancer"),
counterfactuals (e.g. "because John would not suffer
from cancer, if he had not smoked") and mechanistic
explanations (e.g. "because the tobacco carcinogen
BPDE damages the P53 gene which is critical in the
development of lung cancer"). Statistical (Cheng 1993),
counterfactual (Lipe, 1991), and mechanistic arguments
(Ahn, Kalish, Medin, & Gelman, 1995) have been the
mostly discussed justifications for causal claims, but
there are other arguments in addition (Oestermeier &
Hesse, 2000). Our main question here is: are there
systematic relationships between the generality of the
claim and the provided arguments?
Several researchers (e.g. Ahn & Kalish, 2000; Hilton,
1995) have stressed the difference between general and
singular causal problems, i.e. cases where causal statements are in need of further justification. Unfortunately,
the distinction between singular and general problems is
not a clear cut one. In the literature on causal cognition
this distinction is often illustrated by general phenomena that occur in all relevant contexts alike (e.g. physical laws) on the one hand and particular instances that
only occur at specific points in time and place (e.g. a
particular car accident) on the other hand. These are,

however, only the extremes of a continuum because
causal problems range from single events about limited
series of occurences to universal general problems. In
the following we count only those causal problems as
singular where single (or very few events) at a specific
point in time and place are involved, and we count all
other as general. Several car accidents at different times
at a specific junction, for instance, are considered as a
general problem albeit a single property of the junction
could be the cause of the multiple accidents. Thus our
criterion roughly corresponds to the use of singular and
plural in the formulation of the causal problem (e.g.
"car accident" vs. "car accidents"). The question then is
whether this distinction between the singular and general is indeed a crucial one and whether it shows up
consistently in varieties of ordinary argumentative
discourse. More specifically, we address the following
questions: What are the characteristic arguments for
general and singular problems? Do subjects expect different arguments from persons with specific argumentative roles and epistemic backgrounds (i.e. general or
singular knowledge)?

Previous Research
Answers to these questions directly contribute to the
research about causal attribution and argumentation
(see Brem & Rips, 2000, for a recent overview). It is an
often replicated finding (Kuhn, 1991; Ahn et al. 1995;
Slusher & Anderson, 1996) that empirical evidence, i.e.
covariation information and statistical data, plays a
limited role in the justification of causal claims. Subjects seem to find information about explanatory
mechanisms much more useful and convincing. Brem
and Rips (2000), however, found that the formulation of
empirical evidence increases if the subjects can cite
evidence from whatever source they find appropriate.
Under such an ideal condition they produce more empirical backings than in those cases were they rely on
their own limited knowledge. Brem and Rips (2000)
conclude that the neglect of empirical evidence may be
largely due to pragmatic restrictions of the availability
of appropriate data.

Table 1: A taxonomy of causal arguments
Argument type
Circumstantial evidence
1. Spatio-temporal contiguity
2. Co-occurrences
3. Similarity of cause & effect
Contrastive evidence
3. Covariation
4. Statistical covariation
5. Before-after-comparison
6. Experimental comparison
7. Counterfactual
Causal evidence
9. Mechanism/causal explanation
10. No alternative
11. Typical effect

Argument schema
A caused B, because
B happened at A
A often occurred together with B
A is similar to B

Example
The poison killed him, because
a poison bottle was found near the corpse.
several people taking this poison died.
the corpse smells like the poison.

B changes with A
A increases the probability of B
B exists after A but not before A
action A led to B, action ´A to ´B
B would not have happened without A

the more he took the more ill he became.
this poison increases the risk to die.
he became ill after taking it.
poisoned rats died in the experiment.
he would not have died, if he had not taken it.

A led to C via the process/mechanism B
there is no better explanation for B
B happened and B is a typical effect of A

the poison impaired the metabolism.
no other cause leads to such a painful death.
the colour of the skin is typical for this poison

The cited research remains indeterminate with respect
to the relative impact of counterfactual, covariation, and
statistical arguments in singular (e.g. a car accident and
the death of a plant) and general (e.g. AIDS, unemployment) problems. There are, however, findings that
can be taken as a starting point. Kuhn (1991) used general problems and found that subjects formulate mechanistic arguments much more often than covariation
arguments, whereas counterfactuals formulations remained nearly non-existent. In singular problems, on
the other hand, most subjects also ask for information
about mechanism and not for covariation data (Ahn et
al. 1995). Lipe (1991), however, found a preference for
counterfactual over covariation information and alternative explanations if counterfactual information was
available in particular cases.
These findings are compatible with the following hypotheses: Mechanistic arguments occur more often than
statistical and counterfactual arguments in general
(Kuhn, 1991) and singular cases (Ahn et al., 1995) alike
because both kinds of problems are mainly solved on
the basis of prior causal knowledge. Counterfactuals are
restricted to singular cases because the relevant contrast
cases are easier to imagine in concrete cases than in
more diffuse global problems (Sherman & McConnell,
1996). Statistical arguments are inherently general and
thus restricted to such problems (Ahn & Kalish, 2000,
but see Cheng, 1993). With these hypotheses from the
literature in mind we looked at newspaper corpora with
a great diversity of causal problems.

Study 1: Singular and General Problems
Method
The content analysis of these newspaper articles was
based on our taxonomy of causal arguments (see
Oestermeier & Hesse, 2000). This taxonomy was developed from several sources: the general philosophical,
rhetorical and psychological literature on causation,
Kuhn’s (1991) interview study, a content analysis of 42

newspaper articles and a pilot study of our own. Table 1
shows the core of our taxonomy, other parts are beyond
the scope of this paper.
The first corpus for the taxonomic analysis was taken
from the ECI/MCI CD-Rom (the Multilingual Corpus 1
of the European Corpus Initiative). All Frankfurter
Rundschau articles were electronically scanned for the
keyword "verursach*" (German for "to cause"). This
scan of thousands of articles led to a sample of 1024
articles. From this collection a random subsample of 60
articles was drawn. These articles were classified by
two independent raters. Cohen’s kappa was calculated
for the agreement on implicit and explicit causal claims
(.81), the segmentation of causal arguments, i.e.
whether the text provided complete claim-ground
structures (.74), the classification of complete arguments according to our taxonomy (.66), the singular or
general nature of the causal problem (.69). The rest of
this corpus was analyzed by a single rater.
The method of electronic scanning for a keyword has
serious limitations: synonyms, counterfactuals and
implicit causal statements are ignored. Besides that all
articles of this sample dated from 1992 to 1993. In order to overcome these restrictions two additional
printed samples of other newspapers were read by a
single rater. One sample of 10 newspaper was randomly
drawn from the Schwaebisches Tagblatt (a local newspaper) of the year 1996, another sample of 30 newspapers randomly from the Koelnische Volkszeitung of the
year 1903. The rater was instructed to read all articles
for all causal arguments with singular and general conclusions and to omit only the parts without journalistic
content (like obituary notices, tables etc.)

Results and Discussion
Table 2 shows the frequencies of the argument patterns across singular and general problems. Arguments
from explanatory mechanisms were by far the most
common ones (75.1%) in both conditions. They were
followed by unspecific covariation arguments (4.3%)

and statistical covariations comparing multiple observations (3.5%). All other arguments for causal claims,
including counterfactuals, remained below 3%.
72% of the described problems were singular in nature. This gives some support to the hypothesis that singular causal problems are more important for laypeople
than general ones (Hilton, 1995). Besides that, singular
and general causal problems seem to rely, at least in
part, on different reasoning patterns. Explanations of
mechanisms dominated singular and general problems
alike, but spatio-temporal contiguity (argument 1), experimental comparisons (7) and no alternatives (10)
were offered as arguments for causal claims nearly exclusively in single case problems, whereas statistical arguments (5) remained completely restricted to general
problems. They occurred only once in the newspaper
from 1903. This observation can be best explained by
the relatively late penetration of life with statistics
which took place after 1900. Argumentations in newspaper certainly reflect historical developments. We
would, however, put not too much weight on this hypothesis from one isolated finding.
Some non-findings are also interesting. From the literature we expected that necessary and sufficient conditions should often be used as arguments for causal
claims (e.g. Einhorn & Hogarth, 1985). Astonishingly
this was not the case, we found no uses of arguments of
the form "X caused Y, because all X are followed by Y"
or "X caused Y, because Y never happens without X" in
the corpora. Even arguments based on counterfactual
necessity, although considered as essential for causal
reasoning by many researchers (e.g. Lipe, 1991), were
rare. The latter may be due to the fact that counterfactuals can be considered as implicit causal arguments that provide at the same time a ground and a
claim, whereas our content analysis looked for causal
arguments with distinct claims and grounds.

In sum, the data show that singular and general
problems cannot be reduced to the same set of argument
patterns. Mechanistic or causal explanations that infer
causal claims from prior causal knowledge are abundant
in both cases, but inductive and abductive arguments
are dependent on the problem type. Especially covariation and statistical arguments seem to be restricted
mainly to general problems.

Study 2: Roles and Epistemic Backgrounds
The distributions of arguments in the newspaper corpora can only in part be explained by chance and the
question is whether subjects are sensitive to these characteristic distributions. Such a sensitivity would be very
useful. Argumentation is a complex social activity in
which subjects try to defend their interests and gain
acceptance by others. The ability to anticipate different
arguments from people with different backgrounds of
knowledge would offer distinctive advantages in debates. By anticipating certain arguments, for instance,
one can prepare the appropriate counter-arguments in
advance and thus be in a better position to convince an
audience from one’s own perspective.
It is clear, however, that subjects can show this rhetorical competence only in settings were it is demanded.
Law suits are especially demanding in this respect and
therefore we used selected juridical causal problems
with various argumentative points of view (plaintiff,
defendant) and various backgrounds of knowledge
(witnesses, experts).

Hypotheses
We assumed that participants should be able to take the
epistemic backgrounds into account and thus expect
more often arguments with a reference to concrete
spatio-temporal relations from witnesses than from experts.

Table 2. Singular (S) and general (G) causal arguments in three newspaper corpora
Arguments
Circumstantial evidence
1. Spatio-temporal contiguity
2. Co-occurrences
3. Similarity of cause and effect
Contrastive evidence
4. Covariation
5. Statistical covariation
6. Before-after-comparison
7. Experimental comparison
8. Counterfactual
Causal evidence
9. Mechanism
10. No alternative
11. Typical effect
Other causal arguments
Total S:G

Volkszeitung (1903)
S:G

Rundschau (1992/3)
S:G

Tagblatt (1996)
S:G

3:0
1:1

2:0
2:3
1:0

5:0
0:1

10:0
3:5
1:0

1.7
1.3
0.2

5:7
0:1
4:2
2:1
5:4

2:4
0:10

2:6
0:10

8:0
1:0

4:0
1:0

9:17
0:21
4:2
14:1
7:4

4.3
3.5
1.0
2.5
1.8

183:40
4:0

94:45
1:0
2:0
1:4
110:65

344:111
10:0
4:0
31:10
437:169

75.1
1.7
0.7
6.7
(100)

67:26
5:0
2:0
9:1
103:43

21:5
224:61

S:G

Totals
S+G in %

In general problems subjects should expect more statistical arguments from experts than from witnesses because it is unlikely that a witness shares the expert’s
knowledge about statistics. In other words, the participants’ arguments should reflect their (perhaps tacit)
knowledge that witnesses typically know only about the
particular circumstances, whereas experts know about
many different cases.
As a generalization of previous findings we expected
that mechanistic arguments should dominate singular
and general problems alike, because these arguments
mirror directly the familiarity of subjects with everyday
causal explanations and theories. But singular and general problems should be different with respect to statistical arguments, i.e. arguments that compare multiple
observations. We expect more statistical arguments in
general than in singular problems, because they abstract
from particular circumstances and are inherently general. According to Sherman and McConnell (1996)
counterfactual arguments should be occur more often in
singular than in general problems.

Method
Participants. The participants were 40 paid volunteer
students from various faculties of the University of
Tuebingen (16 participants were male and 24 were female; ages varied between 18 and 44 years with a median of 24). Each subject was paid 30 DM. Participants
were tested in groups from 3 up to 6 persons and required between 90 and 120 min to complete the paper
and pencil tasks. One participant was removed from the
data set because of difficulties to understand the instructions and questions in German.
Procedure. We used a mixed repeated measurement
design. As a between subject factor 19 subjects had to
work on general problems, 20 on corresponding singular ones. The subjects were randomly assigned to
these two conditions. As within-subject variables every
participant had to work on three different problem
contents (food poisoning, allergic reactions, and car
accidents) and several perspectives on the case at issue
(plaintiff’s, defendant’s, witness’, expert’s view and the
participant’s own pros, cons and final justification). The
problem contents and issues were based on real newspaper reports and reformulated for the sake of the experiment. The order of tasks was randomized.
Each participant read three problem descriptions and
the related questions. The description of the singular
food poisoning case, for instance, read as follows:
"The organizer of the last year’s public festival at the
Rhine promenade was sued for compensation for personal suffering at the inferior court Duesseldorf. The
plaintiff Oliver K. (36), a visitor of the festival, had suffered from a serious food poisoning. He had taken a
snack at one of the snack stands. The vendor could be

identified but went into hiding several month ago. An investigation of the case revealed that the vendor had no
official license to sell food.
In the last year, the organizer had granted numerous
commercial licenses to vendors of snacks and peddlers
without checking for the necessary official licenses and
health certificates. This was not disputed by the organizer.
At issue between the parties was the cause of the food
poisoning. The question of guilt and responsibility was
set aside for the moment, at issue was only the question,
which cause lay behind this incident."

The first paragraph of the general food poisoning problem read as follows:
"Several members of the spontaneously founded interest
group ’Festival without Fear’ brought an action against
the municipality of Duesseldorf at the administrative tribunal Duesseldorf in order to lay the city under an obligation to choose another organizer for the traditional
yearly public festival at the Rhine promenade. At the last
festival numerous visitors had suffered from serious food
poisonings. The investigation of these cases revealed that
many vendors had no official license to sell food."

The other two paragraphs were identical with the former ones with the exception that plural constructions
were used where appropriate.
After the description of the problem scenario the participants were asked for free formulations of causal
claims and justifications from different point of views
and juridical roles. Single and general case versions
were identical except for number and gender:
"What is the cause of the food poisoning in the plaintiff’s
[defendant’s] point of view? Which justification do you
expect from the plaintiff [defendant] for his position?"

In addition, the subject was asked for his own conjecture about the cause and possible pros and cons that
would speak for or against his/her conjecture. Each
question was followed by three empty lines to allow for
free answers in complete sentences. The next sheet
started with a causal claim from the plaintiff’s view and
asked for possible arguments from a witness’ and expert’s point of view:
"The plaintiff argues, that the missing controls caused
the food poisoning. He cites a witness and an expert.
Which justification(s) do you expect from a witness, who
worked at the festival, [an expert, who was procured by
the court] for the claim that the missing controls caused
the food poisonings?"

Finally, the subject was asked for his/her opinion about
the cause and a final argument. The justifications that
were freely formulated by the participants were classified in terms of our taxonomy by two independent raters. On a subset of five randomly chosen survey
booklets, we calculated Cohen’s kappa as a measure of
rater agreement. When coding non-causal arguments as
a default category (i.e. "other") the result was fair (.54).
A second agreement measure was calculated solely for
the categories within the taxonomy, i.e. those cases
where both rater agreed that the argument in question

was causal in the sense of our taxonomy. This agreement was .76. Non-causal arguments (e.g. arguments
from authority) were ignored later on. Differences in
classification of arguments were resolved by discussion.

Results and Discussion
Table 3 gives a summary of the results. The overall
number of causal arguments which were produced by
the participants across all three tasks varied considerably from 5 to 33 with a median of 19.2. To compensate
for this, we computed the relative percentages of each
produced argument type per person. With the percentages of (a) statistical, (b) counterfactual, and (c)
mechanistic arguments as dependent variables we calculated three 2x3x7 (type of task x content x perspective) mixed analyses of variance (ANOVA) with general and singular problems as a between factor and task
content and perspective serving as repeated measures.
(a) Statistical arguments were less often formulated
(in total 36 formulated arguments) than mechanistic
arguments (in total 245) and especially rare under the
singular condition (9 out of 36). In consequence there
was a main effect of singular vs. general problems for
statistical arguments, F(1, 37) = 4.71, p < .05. There
was also a significant main effect of perspective, F(6,
222) = 3.30, p < .01, i.e. statistical arguments were
more often formulated under the perspective of an expert (13) than under all other perspectives (0 for witnesses).
(b) Counterfactual arguments were more often formulated in singular (24) than in general problems (19)
but in accordance with our first study and against the
hypothesis of Sherman and McConnell (1996) this difference was not significant F(1, 37) = .747, p = .39.
There was, however, a significant interaction between

task type and content, F(2, 74) = 10.894, p < .05. In the
car accident and allergic reaction tasks counterfactuals
were more often produced under the singular condition
than under the general one (14 vs. 5 respectively 5 vs.
1). In the food poisoning problem, this difference was
reversed (5 vs. 13). We can offer no explanation for this
interaction, but one can argue that our kinds of problems were perhaps not as general as necessary in order
to gain a stable effect. Our problems involved multiple
people and events but were far from universal because
the described events occurred in restricted areas. The
interactions show, however, again how content and context dependent causal argumentations are.
(c) Mechanistic arguments were the most common
ones (245 in total) and produced by all participants
alike across general (130) and singular (115) problems.
We found, however, significant main effects of task
content, F(2, 74) = 19.32, p < .001, and perspective,
F(6, 222) = 19.39, p < .001. Nearly half (120) of all
mechanistic arguments were formulated in the car accident problem. This may be due to the fact that the
participants were more familiar with plausible car accident scenarios than with allergic reactions and food
poisonings. In the latter two problem types the mechanisms behind the observable symptoms are less known
and hidden to the unaided senses. Against the general
trend of a dominance of mechanistic explanations,
participants argued from the plaintiff’s view equally
often with observational before-after-comparisons as
with mechanisms (both 20), whereas counter-arguments
offering alternative explanations (28 out of 59) were especially frequent under the defendant’s view. This
shows a clear understanding of the addressed argumentative roles.

Table 3. Frequencies of singular (S) vs. general (G) arguments by perspective and contents
Arguments

Total
Plaintiff

Defendant
S:G

Perspectives
Witness Expert
S:G
S:G

Subject*

Contents
Food
Car acci- Allergic
poisoning
dent
reactions
S:G
S:G
S:G

S:G
S:G
S:G
Circumstantial evidence
7: 1
6: 3
14: 9
2: 2
8: 5
4: 1
9: 8
37: 25
1. Spatio-temporal contiguity
1: 7
9: 8
9: 12
4: 5
10: 7
0: 2
0: 4
23: 30
2. Co-occurrences
0: 0
0: 1
0: 1
0: 0
0: 0
0: 0
0: 0
0: 1
3. Similarity of cause and effect
Contrastive evidence
2: 12
2: 9
3: 19
1: 5
0: 3
1: 3
1: 3
6: 33
4. Covariation
4: 13
5: 7
5: 10
3: 10
0: 0
1: 2
0: 5
9: 27
5. Statistical covariation
1: 6
7: 1
6: 8
2: 3
7: 15
1: 0
11: 9
6. Before-after-comparison 27: 35
0: 0
2: 1
6: 4
2: 1
0: 1
1: 1
1: 0
7. Experimental comparison 10: 7
14: 5
5: 13
8: 8
2: 2
2: 4
3: 2
9: 3
24: 19
8. Counterfactual
Causal evidence
56: 64
34: 41
37: 46
33: 29
32: 31
6: 11
7: 13
115: 130
9. Mechanism
0: 4
4: 2
3: 4
1: 3
1: 1
0: 0
1: 2
6: 10
10. No alternative
4: 1
3: 0
3: 3
6: 0
6: 2
2: 1
3: 0
20: 6
11. Typical effect
Other arguments
72: 82
6: 5
25: 21
1: 0
2: 2
35: 33
29: 24
16: 17
Note: *This column contains the pros, cons and final arguments of the subject from his/her own perspective

24: 21
13: 15
0: 0
2: 12
0: 7
19: 28
8: 6
5: 1
25: 25
2: 4
13: 5
27: 18

General Discussion
Not all researchers define singular and general arguments in the same way as we do. Basically, we distinguished claims about one and many cases. In the literature a related but different distinction is often drawn
in respect to episodic vs. semantic or conceptual knowledge. We decided to use a deviating one-many distinction for several reasons: Firstly, our criterion shows up
relatively clearly at the language surface (singular vs.
plural) whereas the distinction between episodic and
semantic knowledge is much more implicit. Phenomena
like unemployment and crime, for instance, can be
viewed as local episodic or truly universal problems
alike and it often not clear from the context whether
causal claims about these problems are intended as
propositions about the specific circumstances in a particular economy or society or as general law-like statements. Secondly, frequently cited examples for general
claims like "smoking causes cancer" sound to be
common but a closer look at non-scientific text corpora
shows that such unrestricted causal statements are rare.
They seem to be of limited importance in non-scientific
contexts.
Thus it remains an open question whether the
episodic vs. law-like distinction leads to similar
characteristic argument sets. Up to now, relatively few
studies looked directly at the verbalization of causal
arguments (Brem & Rips, 2000; Kuhn, 1991; Thagard,
1999). A reason for this may be the implicitness and
vagueness of ordinary language which makes utterances
difficult to analyze. But this obstacle is unavoidable if
one wants to understand how causal knowledge is
established and communicated in modern societies.
Taxonomic and rhetoric studies are indispensable in this
respect and in our opinion they should become import
guides for further research. The above mentioned
studies show, for instance, that statistical (Cheng, 1993)
and counterfactual (Lipe, 1991) theories of causal
reasoning in psychology have no foundation in a
prevalence of the corresponding argument patterns in
ordinary discourses. The complex distributions of argument patterns that occur in ordinary language simply
cannot be explained from theories that put their focus
on a single central and normative causal argument
pattern.
Differences in perspectives as well as differences
along the singular-general-continuum pose especially
difficult problems for reductionistic theories. If the supposed reasoning patterns are the same for all persons,
perspectives, and problems alike, it is hard to see how
differences can emerge at all. From a rhetorical perspective, however, differences in reasoning are funda-

mental and in many cases irreconcilable. Our data show
that argumentative competencies of humans are highly
sensitive to such rhetorical demands, i.e. specific contents and contexts, argumentative roles, different backgrounds of knowledge, restrictions in knowledge, etc.
We do not claim, however, that by taking a rhetorical
perspective alone, these competencies are already explained. But in our view, it is a progress if such a perspective shift leads to a more adequate description of
the pragmatic aspects of causal reasoning and argumentation.

References
Ahn, W., Kalish, C. W., Medin, D. L., & Gelman, S. A.
(1995). The role of covariation versus mechanism
information in causal attribution. Cognition, 54, 299352.
Ahn, W., & Kalish, C. W. (2000). The Role of Mechanism Beliefs in Causal Reasoning. In F. C. Keil & R.
A. Wilson (Eds.), Explanation and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brem, S. K. & Rips, L. J. (2000). Explanation and Evidence in Informal Argument, Cognitive Science, Vol
24 (4), 573-604.
Cheng, P. W. (1993). Separating Causal Laws from
Casual Facts: Pressing the Limits of Statistical Relevance. In D. L. Medin (Ed.), The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation Vol. 30, (pp. 215-264). San
Diego: Academic Press.
Einhorn, H. J. & Hogarth, R. M. (1986) Judging Probable Cause. Psychological Bulletin, 99(1), 3-19.
European Corpus Initiative -- Multilingual Corpus 1
[CD-ROM] (1996). Edinburgh: Human Communication Research Centre [Distributor].
Hilton, D. J. (1995). Logic and language in causal explanation. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J.
Premack (Eds.), Causal Cognition: A Multidisciplinary Debate, (pp. 495-529). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kuhn. D. (1991). The Skills of Argument. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lipe, M. G. (1991). Counterfactual Reasoning as a
Framework for Attribution Theories. Psychological
Bulletin, 109(3), 456-471.
Oestermeier, U. & Hesse, F. W. (2000). Verbal and
visual causal arguments. Cognition, 75, 65-104.
Sherman, S. J., & McConnell, A. R. (1996). The Role
of Counterfactual Thinking in Reasoning. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 10, 113-124.
Thagard, P. (1999). How Scientists Explain Disease.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Walton, D. N. (1989). Informal Logic: A Handbook for
Critical Argumentation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

