UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Solving arithmetic operations: a semantic approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7hn338vr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Sander, Emmanuel

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Solving arithmetic operations: a semantic approach
Emmanuel Sander (sander@univ-paris8.fr)
University of Paris 8, Department of Psychology, 2 Rue de la Liberté
Saint-Denis, 93526 France

Abstract
Systematic errors observed when solving arithmetic
operations are often considered as being procedural.
Rules induced by the learner and the errors committed
are viewed as resulting by use of general problem
solving methods. In this study, in the case of solving
column subtractions, we show that some errors may be
semantic: they are due to analogies involving different
sources that guide the interpretation of both operations
and procedures already learned. Two sources have been
identified: (i) subtracting considered as removing
something and (ii) subtracting considered as covering a
distance between two elements. Results of the 2
experiments reported here show that (i) not only all of
the predicted semantic errors were observed among
beginner children, but also that (ii) semantic errors were
still observed among more advanced learners, in a
decreasing proportion for higher level of instruction.
These results support the idea that (i) semantic aspects
have a major influence in the learning process, and (ii)
that this kind of errors still intervene in the learning
process even if the procedural aspects become more
influent (advanced students). These results suggest that a
procedural approach might be articulated with a semantic
approach.

Introduction
Many studies show that some errors made when solving
arithmetic operations (e.g. Brown & Burton, 1978;
Sleeman, 1982), and notably when solving column
subtractions (e.g. Young & O’Shea, 1981, VanLehn,
1982, 1983, 1987, 1990), are systematic in nature. As it
has been observed, some errors are quite stable, both for
within or between subjects’ measures. This led
researchers to reject the idea that all errors are
calculation errors or due to lack of attention, and
therefore, to look for mechanisms that lead to these
errors.
As it has been noticed by Ohlson and Rees (1991),
most of the investigators in this field focused attention
on procedural mechanisms. The most prominent view
for column subtractions has been developed by
VanLehn and his colleagues (e.g. Brown &
VanLehn, 1980; VanLehn, 1982, 1990) and has
promoted the repair theory that has been implemented
in the SIERRA Model (VanLehn, 1987, 1990).
In this view, conjunction of two mechanisms may
lead to error production. First, learning consists on
inducing rules in a syntactic way from lessons

composed of solved examples, using general problem
solving methods. Second, errors result from application
of problem solving heuristics to overcome the impasses
encountered when solving a new operation.
This theory can be qualified as procedural because the
only parameters which intervene in the model are
(i) knowledge about specific arithmetic facts (for
instance the fact that 2 is smaller than 5 or 7 – 4 = 3),
(ii) heuristics for deriving rules from previously solved
examples, (iii) heuristics for solving an impasse
situation which has been encountered when previously
learned rules have been applied to a new situation. One
characteristic of a procedural approach is that the
children’s interpretation of both the whole operation
and the procedure is not taken into account.

Framework
Although VanLehn (e.g. 1990) shows convincing
evidence of procedural errors, the exhaustiveness of his
description could be questioned. In this paper, we
intend to provide evidence that a procedural approach
doesn’t provide an explanation for some of the
systematic errors observed and that articulating this
approach with a semantic point of view may increase
the range of explained errors. This will show as well
that in a procedural situation par excellence, such as
solving column subtractions that could be solved in a
purely syntactical manner (Resnick, 1982), semantic
aspects still influence the solving process. This point
has some implications on problem solving mechanisms.
Some work focused on the influence of semantic
aspects in solving column subtractions (Carpenter,
Franke, Jacobs & Fennema, 1996; Fuson, 1986; Fuson
& Briars, 1990; Hiebert & Wearne, 1996; Resnick,
1982; Resnick & Omanson, 1987). Through the use of
analogies and/or concrete materials, these studies
evaluated the influence of a teaching method and aimed
on helping children to understand some of the
conceptual background of column subtractions solving
methods. The efficiency of these methods is rather
variable. In this work, we do not adopt any position in
the debate concerning virtues of providing conceptual
background versus teaching procedures as if they were
arbitrary, but we shall show that semantic aspects are
involved spontaneously even if they are not an explicit
part of the teaching method. They are expressions of a
basic analogical transfer mechanism that attributes a

meaning to a given situation. Such semantic influences
have been identified for arithmetic operations by
Fischbein (Fischbein, Deri, Nello & Marino, 1985 ;
Fischbein, 1989) with the notion of tacit models. These
are simple structural entities of a concrete and practical
nature, which control the course of the reasoning
process and are specific cases of analogy sources
(Fischbein, 1987; Sander, 2000). Fischbein and his
colleagues worked mainly with word problems and
didn’t extend their view to procedural situations such as
column subtractions.
In the case of solving column subtraction, we
hypothesize that errors are not necessarily due to a
repair used in an impasse situation. Rather, they are
sometimes a direct consequence of the interpretation of
a learned procedure: the child applies the procedures
according to her/his interpretation and the wrong result
might be predicted from this irrelevant interpretation. In
order to deal with the target situation (the column
subtraction), s/he refers to a source knowledge, which is
the knowledge associated with this new subtracting
situation. In fact, we hypothesize that the semantic
errors observed in column subtractions result from an
analogical transfer in situations for which the source is
non adequate. Thus, the errors are consequences of a
negative transfer. We consider two sources of analogy
for solving column subtractions: ‘remove’ and
‘distance’. Both of them can be evoked spontaneously
by the children or be due to the teaching method.
In the ‘remove’ view, subtracting is seen as taking a
part out of a whole: the whole and the part are the two
quantities and the result is what is left. In the ‘distance’
view, subtracting is seen as going from a given point to
another: the departure and the arrival points are the two
values and the result is the distance between them.
These interpretations are valid for each value of the
whole operation, but the negative transfer is due to its
extension to each column and to each digit of the
operation. If the operation is interpreted through these
sources, the resulting errors can be predicted by these
hypothesized sources. Using the terminology of
VanLehn (1990), those errors are described in Table 1.
It can be noticed that most of the errors might result
from distance or remove interpretations and thus, verbal
reports might be useful for identifying the source. It can
also be noticed that two errors (Diff 0-N=N and Diff 0N=0) might sometimes be particular cases of other
errors (respectively Smaller from Larger and Zero
instead of Borrow) but they might also be specific to
the cases involving zero, which could be identified
either by verbal reports or by the presence of one error
when the other is absent.
From our point of view, when starting to learn,
children build interpretations of the operation and of the
procedures through analogical transfer mechanism. This

Table 1: Definition and interpretation of semantic errors
Smaller from Larger (e.g. 457-168=311)
Definition: The smaller digit from each column is
subtracted from the larger one wherever it is situated.
Remove interpretation: When a part is removed from a
whole, the part is always smaller than the whole.
Distance interpretation: As a distance is symmetrical,
the distance from the smaller to the larger is equal to the
distance from the larger to the smaller.
Zero instead of Borrow (e.g. 457-168=300)
Definition: A zero is written instead of borrowing.
Remove interpretation: If what has to be removed is
more than what is available, then it is removed and a
zero is left. The impossibility of removing a quantity
larger than the whole might also be marked by a zero.
Distance interpretation: In this case, distance is
considered as oriented. If one considers that it is only
possible to go upward, the distance is zero when the
departure point is situated after the arrival point.
Blank instead of Borrow (e.g. 457-168=3__).
Definition: Nothing is written instead of borrowing.
Remove interpretation: No answer is given in the
corresponding column to signal the impossibility of
removing something larger than what is actually there.
Distance interpretation: The impossibility to go
backward is marked by a non-answer to the
corresponding column.
Stutter subtract (e.g. 457-3=124)
Definition: The last digit of the same line takes the
place of a blank.
Remove interpretation: Two quantities are needed when
removing a part, thus the missing quantity is replaced
by the closer one.
Distance interpretation: Departure point and arrival
point are both needed to go from one place to another.
Thus, the missing point is replaced by the closer one.
Diff 0-N=N (e.g. 400-168=368)
Definition: If one of the upward digits is zero, the
downward digit is written as the result.
Remove interpretation: Nothing can be taken from zero
so the original value is unchanged.
Distance interpretation: None.
Diff 0-N=0 (e.g. 400-168=300)
Definition: If one of the upward digits is a zero, zero is
written as the result.
Remove interpretation: The impossibility of taking
something from zero is marked by a zero result.
Distance interpretation: None.
Diff N-0=0 (e.g. 457-100=300)
Definition: If one of the downward digits is zero, the
zero is written as the result.
Remove interpretation: The impossibility of taking zero
from a quantity is marked by a zero result.
Distance interpretation: None

extends the range of application of the learned
procedures.
For instance, with the “remove” and “smaller from
larger” interpretations of a procedure, the child will
extend to “3 – 6” what has been learned from “6 – 3”.
S/he will consider that they are both cases of “removing
a part from a whole”, and that the place of the digit
(either upward or downward) is not relevant because
the part is necessarily the smaller number and the whole
is necessarily the larger number. With acquisition of
new procedures, semantic influence will persist but will
decrease since specific learned procedures will narrow
the extension of semantic interpretation. At the same
time, procedural errors, as it has been established (e.g.
VanLehn, 1990) will be developed.
Thus, we make the following hypotheses:
(i) At the beginning of learning, children will mostly
make semantic errors resulting from analogical transfer
with the hypothesized sources.
(ii) Semantic errors will persist even among more
experienced children
(iii) The relative proportion of semantic errors of the
total number of errors decreases as child level increases.
The aim of the first experiment is to test the first
hypothesis and the aim of the second experiment is to
test hypotheses (ii) and (iii).

Experiment 1
Subjects
Subjects were 50 grade 2 children who begun studying
how to subtract but haven’t began studying how to
borrow. In accordance with the ministerial directives,
the teaching methods in the classrooms were focusing
on the procedural aspects and not on the conceptual
backgrounds.

Material and procedure
Children had to solve collectively in the classroom, and
without any time limit, 20 subtractions used by
VanLehn (1982), which allowed identification of a
large variety of errors. The instruction was: “You have
to solve 20 subtractions. Do the best you can. Take all
the time you need.” Since 17 of the 20 required
borrowing, a high rate of wrong results was expected.
This situation is quite original in the didactical field,
since students are usually tested on contents that they
have supposedly already studied. However, it is
standard in problem solving paradigms that specific
knowledge about the problems is often considered as a
bias that has to be avoided. In fact, to support the
existence of a general cognitive mechanism involved in
this situation, we used an usual problem solving
paradigm in a school situation.

Furthermore, 14 of the 50 children were randomly
chosen and were tested again the next week after the
first test. They were asked to solve the same 20
operations for a new test and to explain the way by
which they solved them. Their verbal reports were
recorded.

Results
Protocols of 8 children were excluded from the data
because of their use of the borrowing procedure,
probably learned at home.
Quantitative results
Despite the fact that the subjects learned only how to
solve 15% of the operations (3 out of 20), they
answered 84.5% of the operations in average. Only one
subject answered the 3 operations corresponding to
what he had actually learned.
Table 2 displays the results. Dominant errors were
distinguished from partial errors, depending on their
rate of occurrence within a same protocol.
Table 2: Rate of semantic errors
Error
Dominant Partial
Smaller from Larger
47.6%
19.0%
Zero instead of Borrow 38.1%
16.7%
Blank instead of Borrow 4.8%
2.4%
Stutter Subtract
9.5%
11.9%
Diff 0-N=N
50.0%
7.1%
Diff 0-N=0
38.1%
16.7%
Diff N-0=0
9.5%
0.0%

Total
66,6%
54.8%
7.2%
21.4%
57.1%
54.8%
9.5%

As it can be noticed, some errors are very usual:
4 types of errors are observed for more than half of the
subjects. Furthermore, all the hypothesized errors were
observed. Few non hypothesized errors were observed,
but only for a minority of the subjects (9.5%): SmallLarge = Small; Small-Large = Large; N-N=N.
These results have to be contrasted with predictions of
procedural approaches. As a matter of fact, VanLehn
(1990), observed all those errors but did not generate a
large part of them with SIERRA, that generated only
“Smaller from Larger” and “Blank instead of Borrow”
from this list. In other words, errors as frequent as
“Zero instead of Borrow”, “Diff 0-N=N” and “Diff 0N=0” were not produced by SIERRA. All in all, 76.2%
of the children revealed errors that were not predicted
by this model, when only 9.5% of them revealed errors
not predicted by the semantic approach.
Simulations
3 levels of simulation were performed. At the first level,
each protocol was associated with a list of non
competitive errors that were observed for this protocol:
for instance, Diff 0-N=0 and Diff 0-N=N could not be
associated with the same protocol because they lead to
different results. The actual results were compared with
the ones obtained when applying the identified errors to

the operation. No calculation error was allowed for
explaining differences.
At the second level, calculation errors were taken
into account: a difference of plus or minus 1 was
accepted if this was not corresponding to another
systematic error.
At the third level, all the errors observed in the
protocol were taken into account even if some of them
were competitive.
Thus, several results could be compatible with the
same simulation and calculation errors were taken into
account as well. The results are presented in Table 3.
Table 3: Simulation with semantic errors
Sim 1
Sim 2
Sim 3
Rate of prediction
77.9%
81.3%
89.8%
Verbal reports
Verbal reports were analyzed in the following way.
First, various expressions were identified as cues for
specifying a source. For instance, “I have 3 and I
remove 4” was indicating a ‘remove’ source since ‘I
have’ was considered as referring to a quantity and
‘remove’ referring to the conception of taking part of a
whole. “Going from 0 to 7…” indicates a distance
source because of the reference of going from one place
to another. This analysis of verbal reports showed that
each child was using these kinds of expressions, which
support the idea that the operation is actually
interpreted in terms of taking part of a whole or going
from one place to another.
Second, explanations for each error were compared to
the predicted interpretations. The explanations
produced were consistent with the expected ones.
Leaving apart the debate concerning verbal protocols,
we would like to point out that verbal reports here
coincide with the expected interpretations.
Hereafter, few examples are presented.
Subject J (83-44=40; Zero instead of Borrow;
remove): “There are 3. We have to remove more than
what is there. It remains 0”
Subject A (1564-887=1000; Zero instead of Borrow;
remove): “… I have 5 candies in my hand, I cannot take
8 out of them to eat, so I take the 5 and nothing is
left…”
Subject H (6591-2697=4106; Smaller from Larger;
remove): “I have 1, no I have 7, I remove 1, 6 is left; I
have 9, I remove 9, 0 is left; I have 6, I remove 5, 1 is
left …”
Subject D (8305-3=5002; Stutter Subtract and Diff 0N=0; remove): “We put 5 on the fingers, we remove 3
and we notice that 2 are left. 0 can’t be removed from
any number so it makes 0. And 3, I remove 3, 0 is left.
For 8, I remove 3 and 5 are left from the 8.”
Subject F (6591-2697=4106; Smaller from Larger;
distance): “ We count in our head what is missing to go

from a given number to the one we need. From 1 to 7, 6
is missing, thus 7 minus 1 is 6; from 9 to 9, 0 is
missing; from 0 to 9, 9 is missing; from 5 to 6, 1 is
missing …”
Subject B (562-3=231; Stutter Subtract & Smaller
from Larger; distance). “3 minus 2 is 1 and then since
there is nothing I have to use the 3. From 3 to 6, 3 is
needed. From 3 to 5, 2 is needed”.
Discussion
As a summary, results of this first experiment support
the hypothesis that interpretative aspects are involved in
solving column subtractions.
First, despite the fact that children didn’t know how
to solve most of the problems, they tried to answer
nearly all of them. From our point of view, this result
supports the idea that what the children learned was
interpreted in a conceptual framework that provided
solutions for new situations.
Second, all the errors predicted by the semantic
perspective were actually observed, and unpredicted
errors appeared only seldom, supporting the idea that
they resulted from the predicted interpretations. Third,
depending on the kind of simulation, the semantic
perspective allowed prediction of 77.4% to 89.1% of
the errors, supporting the idea that semantic errors are
prominent in the beginning of learning. Fourth, the
analysis of the verbal reports showed that all the
children were referring to the hypothesized sources with
the predicted interpretations.

Experiment 2
Subjects
409 children who had already studied subtractions with
borrowing participated in this experiment. 158 were
children of grade 2 and 251 were grade 3. The teaching
method was the same as in experiment 1. Given that
errors rate might decrease with learning, a greater
number of participants was necessary in this experiment
to identify the errors.

Material and procedure
The material and procedure were the same as in
experiment 1. 16 participants, randomly chosen among
the ones who revealed semantic errors, were selected
here for verbal reports.

Results
Quantitative results
As in experiment 1, dominant errors were distinguished
from partial errors. 39.4% of the children had at least
one semantic error. For 13.0% of them, at least one
semantic error was dominant and for the remaining
26.4%, the semantic errors were partial. The results per
error are presented in Table 4. Results show that the

semantic errors don’t disappear with learning. They are
still present, and with a great variety, for more than one
third of the children, and they stay dominant for a
minority of the participants.
Differences between grade 2 and grade 3 children
are significant. 52.5% of the grade 2 versus 31.0% of
grade 3 children had at least one semantic error
(Chi2(1)=18.70; p<.01). The difference is also
significant for the dominant errors: 25.9% of grade 2
versus 4.8% of grade 3 children had at least one
dominant semantic error (Chi2(1)=38.52, p<.01). These
differences do not reflect only the better performance of
the grade 3 children but also a decrease in the
proportion of semantic errors among the whole range of
errors as indicated by the simulations.
Table 4: Rate of error for each semantic error
Error
Dominant Partial Total
Smaller from Larger
3.1%
11.3% 14.4%
Zero instead of Borrow 0.5%
5.6% 6.1%
Blank instead of Borrow 0.0%
0.0% 0.0%
Stutter Subtract
0.0%
7.1% 7.1%
Diff 0-N=N
8.7%
14.5% 23.2%
Diff 0-N=0
3.6%
16.7% 12.2%
Diff N-0=0
2.0%
6.6% 8.6%
Simulations
The method is similar to the one used in experiment 1.
Table 5 displays the results of the simulations, i.e. the
percentage of the errors that the semantic approach can
explain. Even if there is a strong discrepancy with the
beginners’ simulation, the semantic perspective allows
to predict within 1/4 to 1/5 of the errors for grade 2
children, depending on the kind of simulation, and
about 1/7 of the third grade’s errors. The differences
between each level (grade 2 no borrow, grade 2 borrow,
grade 3) are significant for each simulation (FisherPitman Homogeneity Tests with z values from 2.74,
p=.006 to 12.07, p<.0001).
Table 5: Simulation depending on participant level
Sim 1 Sim 2 Sim 3
Grade 2 no borrow 77.9% 81.3% 89.8%
Grade 2 borrow
21.7% 22.8% 25.3%
Grade 3
14.1% 14.7% 16.3%
These results support our hypothesis that semantic
errors persist even after procedural learning and that
their importance decreases among the whole range of
errors.
Verbal reports
Analysis of the verbal reports leads to the same
conclusion as in experiment 1: all of the children
referred to the predicted sources, with the predicted
interpretations.

Discussion
The results of experiment 2 are consistent with
hypotheses (ii) and (iii), supporting the idea that
procedures are interpreted within a conceptual
framework that definitely has a decreasing influence,
yet does not completely disappear even after learning.
This may suggest that not only two kinds of errors
exist (procedural and semantic ones) but also that the
influence of one decreases when that of the other
increases.
The plausibility of this suggestion is reinforced by
some of VanLehn’s (1990) results. Indeed, VanLehn
illustrates (chapter 7) the performance of SIERRA with
33 systematic errors. SIERRA generates 25 of them.
Among these 25, only 2 are considered as semantic by
our approach. In contrast, among the 8 that SIERRA
failed to generate, 5 are predicted by our approach.
Thus, it appears that SIERRA’s successes are failures of
the semantic approach and vice-versa. This supports the
idea of different mechanisms.

General Discussion
In this study, we showed through several converging
measures that semantic aspects were involved in a
procedural task par excellence: solving column
subtractions.
Results are consistent with the idea that
interpretative aspects should be taken into account in
problem solving situations, as it has already been
demonstrated in a body of research with some
mathematical word problems (e.g. Bassok & Olseth,
1995; Bassok, Wu, & Olseth, 1995), with puzzle
problems (Clément & Richard, 1997; Zamani &
Richard, 2000), and in learning devices (Sander &
Clément, 1997; Sander & Richard, 1997).

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Jean-François Richard, to Mojdeh Zamani
and to Michal Eisenstein for their insightful help during
the carrying out of this research and the preparation of
this manuscript.

References
Bassok, M., & Olseth, K.L. (1995). Object-based
representations: Transfer between cases of continuous
and discrete models of change. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 21, 1522-1538.
Bassok, M., Wu, L.L., & Olseth, K.L. (1995). Judging a
book by its cover: Interpretative effects of content on
problem-solving transfer. Memory and Cognition, 23,
354-367.
Brown, J.S., & Burton, R.R. (1978). Diagnostic models
for procedural bugs in basic mathematical skills.
Cognitive Science, 2, 155-192.

Brown, J.S., & VanLehn, K. (1980). Repair Theory : A
generative theory of bugs in procedural skills.
Cognitive Science, 4, 379-426
Carpenter, T.P, Franke, M.L., Jacobs, V.R., &
Fennema, E. (1996). Invention and understanding in
the development of multidigit addition and
subtraction procedures: A longitudinal study. Annual
meeting of the American Research Association, New
York.
Clément, E., & Richard, J-F. (1997). Knowledge of
domain effects in problem representation: the case of
Tower of Hanoi isomorphs, Thinking and Reasoning.
Fischbein, E. (1987). Intuition in science and
mathematics: An Educational Approach. Reider:
Dordrecht.
Fischbein, E., (1989). Tacit models and mathematical
reasoning, For the Learning of Mathematics, 9, 9-14
Fischbein, E., Deri, M., Nello, M. S., & Marino, M. S.
(1985). The role of implicit models in solving verbal
problems in multiplication and division. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 16, 3-17
Fuson, K. (1986). Role of representation and
verbalization in the teaching of multi-digit additions
and subtractions. European Journal of Psychology of
Education, 1, 35-56.
Fuson, K., & Briars, D.J. (1990). Using base-ten blocks
learning/teaching approach for first and second grade
place value and multidigit additions and subtraction.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 21,
180-206.
Hiebert, J., & Wearne, D. (1996). Instruction,
understanding, and skill in multidigit addition and
subtraction. Cognition and Instruction, 251-284.
Olhlson, S, & Rees, E. (1991). The function of
conceptual understanding in the learning of
arithmetic procedures. Cognition and Instruction,
103-180.
Resnick, L.B. (1982). Syntax and semantics in learning
to subtract. In T. P. Carpenter, J. M. Moser and T. A.
Romberg (Eds.), Addition and substraction: A
cognitive perspective (pp. 136-155). Hillsdale:
Erlbaum.
Resnick, L.B., & Omanson, S.F. (1987). Learning to
understand arithmetic. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances
in instructional psychology, vol 3 (pp. 41-95).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sander, E. (2000). L’analogie, du naïf au créatif:
analogie et catégorisation. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Sander, E., & Clément, E. (1997). The interpretative
factors of the part-whole dimension in a problem
solving situation. In proceedings of the 5th European
Congress of Psychology. Dublin: Psychological
Society of Ireland.
Sander, E., & Richard, J-F. (1997). Analogical transfer
as guided by an abstraction process: The case of
learning by doing in text editing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 23, 1459-1483.

Sleeman, D.H. (1982). Assessing competence in basic
algebra. In D. Sleeman, and J.S. Brown (Eds.),
Intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 186-199). New York:
Academic Press.
VanLehn, K. (1982). Bugs are not enough: Empirical
studies of bugs, impasses and repairs in procedural
skills. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 3, 3-71.
VanLehn, K. (1983). The representation of procedures
in repair theory. In H.P. Ginsburg (Ed.), The
development of mathematical thinking. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
VanLehn, K. (1987). Learning one subprocedure per
lesson. Artificial Intelligence, 31, 1-40.
VanLehn, K. (1990). Mind bugs: origins of procedural
misconceptions. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press
Young, R.M., & O’Shea, T. (1981). Errors in children’s
subtraction. Cognitive Science, 5, 153-177
Zamani, M., & Richard, J-F. (2000). Object encoding,
goal similarity and analogical transfer. Memory &
Cognition, 28, 873-886.

