UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Structural Determinants of Counterfactual Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3818j748

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Yarlett, Daniel
Ramscar, Michael

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Structural Determinants of Counterfactual Reasoning
Daniel Yarlett (dany@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
School of Cognitive Science, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW Scotland

Michael Ramscar (michael@dai.ed.ac.uk)
School of Cognitive Science, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW Scotland
Abstract
In this paper we explore the hypothesis that the processes underlying the matching and use of knowledge during counterfactual reasoning are the same as those that underlie reasoning
by analogy. We report two experiments which indicate that,
in common with analogical reasoning, counterfactual reasoning exhibits the following properties: (i) it is sensitive to systematic structural congruencies between representations; (ii)
when background knowledge has to be retrieved before it can
be exploited, the impact of structurally congruent background
knowledge on the counterfactual inferencing process is mediated by featural commonalities.

Introduction
If it had not been for a young student at the University of
Chicago in 1960, the Cuban missile crisis might have escalated to a nuclear war. At first blush this counterfactual
sounds absurd, a non sequitur – how can there possibly be
a link between a single student and the avoidance of nuclear
war? It turns out, though, that the assertion isn’t quite as far
fetched as one might initially think:
“Not yet twenty-one and too young to vote, the student
worked in the Kennedy campaign. He was asked by the
local Democratic organization if he would vote on behalf of a dead voter whose name was still on the rolls.
He readily agreed and, refusing the small remuneration
that was offered, forged the dead voter’s signature and
voted a straight Democratic ticket. The Illinois vote was
close – Kennedy took the state by fewer than 10,000
votes – and critical. Illinois gave Kennedy the necessary electoral votes to win the presidency.” (Lebow and
Stein, 1996, p.119).
This additional knowledge connecting the student’s actions
to Kennedy’s electoral success allows the rest of the story to
fall into place. Had the student – and, crucially, others like
him – not forged votes, Nixon may have been elected instead
of Kennedy; if Nixon had been elected he would have established a much less liberal administration; a less liberal administration would have responded more forcefully to Khruschev’s deployment of missiles in Cuba; and the odds are
that this would have led to further military escalation and,
ultimately, nuclear war.
This is not a watertight argument of course – the strength
of some of the links in the argumentative chain is questionable – but it does serve to make apparent the relation between

the two events which at first appeared utterly disparate.1 And
understanding that there is a connection between the existence of a group of students and the avoidance of nuclear
war makes the initial counterfactual seem much more plausible than it did before: if those students hadn’t existed then
we can now see that this might just have tipped the balance in
the favour of nuclear war. Background knowledge is clearly
crucial to our assessment of counterfactuals, then, but how it
is matched and used during counterfactual reasoning?
In this paper we explore the possibility that the processes underlying the matching and use of knowledge during counterfactual reasoning are the same as those that underlie reasoning by analogy. Although there has been extensive research into counterfactual reasoning over the last two
decades from a cognitive-functional perspective (for representative overviews see Roese, 1997; Kahneman & Miller,
1986; Byrne & Tasso, 1999), no-one has explicitly investigated the effect of structural congruency on the inferencing process. We report two novel findings in support of the
hypothesis that analogical mechanisms do underpin counterfactual reasoning in at least some contexts.
In Experiment 1 we show that an analogical match between background knowledge and a scenario about which
subjects have to reason counterfactually significantly boosts
their assessments of the soundness of related counterfactual
inferences. This suggests that when engaged in counterfactual reasoning subjects rely on systematic structural matches
between representations just as they do when making analogical inferences (Gentner, 1983; Holyoak and Thagard,
1995). Furthermore, previous studies in analogical inference and problem solving have found that it is difficult to exploit the information contained in analogies during real-life
problem-solving because analogies are typically difficult to
retrieve (Gick and Holyoak, 1980; Gentner, Ratterman and
Forbus, 1993). In Experiment 2 we add a retrieval requirement to the task investigated in Experiment 1, and show that
this same finding also applies to counterfactual reasoning.

Why Analogy?
Theories of counterfactual reasoning agree that similarity
plays a core role in determining legitimate inferences – in
order to evaluate what would be true if A were the case,
it makes sense to consider only the state of affairs that is
most similar to the way things actually are, except that in
1 See Lebow and Stein (1996) for a fuller analysis of the plausibility of this counterfactual sequence of events.

it A is true instead of false. This similarity constraint prevents unnecessary or extraneous alterations to the situation
under consideration that could otherwise bias the inferencing process, and is what makes counterfactual reasoning distinct from the idle entertainment of hypothetical situations.
For example, consider the relatively uncontentious counterfactual ‘If this match had been struck, it would have lit’. As
it stands this is most likely a true thing to say (depending
on the precise context of utterance), but without the similarity constraint one can trivially refute it by making unwarranted changes to the basic situation and hence considering
situations where matches are non-flammable, or where all
matches are underwater, and so on.
However, despite the central role that similarity plays in
theories of counterfactual reasoning, no consensus exists on
how it should be defined. Possible world theorists treat it as
a primitive partial ordering between possible worlds (Lewis,
1973; Stalnaker, 1968); law-based theorists treat it as the
preservation of consequences of natural laws (Chisholm,
1946; Goodman, 1947; Pollock, 1976); whilst others treat it
as minimal adjustments to autonomous causal mechanisms
represented in dependency structures (Pearl, 2000). These
formal characterisations of similarity and the constructs they
rely on make no claim to being cognitively plausible, and are
furthermore open to charges of underspecification (Lewis,
1973, §4.2; Pollock, 1976, p.17; Fine, 1975; and Bowie,
1979).
In contrast, work on the notion of similarity in cognitive
science has concentrated on the empirical testing of concrete
proposals about what it means for two things to be similar
to one another. One finding is that the shared and distinct
features of two representations play an important role in determining their similarity (Tversky, 1977), but more recent
work has also shown that the relational structure holding between features also affects judgements of similarity (Gentner
& Markman, 1997; Love, 2000).
Gentner and Markman (1997) point out the effect of structure on similarity judgements is consistent with the idea that
analogical alignment plays a role in the evaluation of similarity. If analogy really does play a role in determining similarity then, given that similarity is so central to counterfactual reasoning, it makes sense to investigate whether analogy
plays a role in counterfactual reasoning by testing for effects
of structure on the inferencing process. Furthermore, the
account of similarity provided by the analogy-based structural alignment framework (Gentner, 1983) has several merits from a cognitive perspective.
Firstly, the structural alignment framework has been subject to a program of empirical testing which provides evidence regarding its plausibility as an account of the way
that people compare representations (see Gentner & Markman, 1997, for a review). Secondly, the structural alignment process can be modelled computationally (e.g. SME;
see Falkenhainer, Forbus and Gentner, 1989) meaning that
the processes it relies upon are tractable. The final reason
for preferring the structural alignment account of similarity
over alternative accounts is that the analogical mechanisms
that it is founded upon have been explicitly connected with
many other cognitive skills – most relevantly inference (see
Holyoak and Thagard, 1995, for a good review of the many

+ Features
− Features

+ Structure
Literal Similarity
Analogy

− Structure
Surface Similarity
First-Order Relations

Table 1: The commonalities each variant category shares
with its base in the materials used by Gentner, Ratterman
& Forbus (1993).

applications of analogy) – offering yet further reason to believe that it may also be implicated in the process of counterfactual reasoning at the cognitive level.
Given these reasons, the question of whether the same empirical findings about analogical inference can also be identified in counterfactual reasoning tasks is a pertinent one. If
commonalities between counterfactual and analogical reasoning could be established empirically, this would undoubtedly be profitable to our understanding of counterfactuals
due to the mature status of research into theories and models
of analogy.

Previous Work on Analogical Matching
Experiments conducted by Gentner, Ratterman and Forbus
(1993) investigated the effect that systematically varying
featural and structural matches between two representations
of knowledge had on three measures: the retrievability of
one item given the other as a prime; on assessments of inferential soundness2 between the two items; and on the perceived similarity of the two items. Their series of studies
used materials consisting of a base scenario and four variants of this base in the 2 × 2 design depicted in Table 1. The
systematic variation of featural and structural matches in this
design allowed the influence of both factors on a range of
tasks to be assessed, and results in a taxonomy of four different types of variants to a base: literal similarity (LS), surface
similarity (SS), analogy (AN) and first-order relations (FO).
An important finding reported in this series of studies was
that the inferential soundness of two domains is determined
primarily by the sort of systematic structural congruencies
that analogy is sensitive to. Experiment 1 tests whether this
result applies to counterfactual reasoning too, by measuring
whether analogical matches to background knowledge boost
evaluations of the soundness of counterfactual inferences in
the same way as they do in analogical reasoning.
An additional finding about analogical inference is that
structural matches can only be exploited in the inferencing
process if they are first retrieved, which is typically a difficult thing for people to do (Gick and Holyoak, 1980). This
suggests another hypothesis that can be tested: if the cognitive processes underlying counterfactual reasoning are really
like those underlying analogy, then in contexts that demand
retrieval we would expect analogy based inferences to occur relatively infrequently, because the impact of structural
matches on the counterfactual inferencing process is mediated by the featural similarities that drive retrieval (Gentner,
Ratterman and Forbus, 1993; Ramscar and Yarlett, 2000).
This prediction is tested in Experiment 2.
2 Inferential soundness is defined as the degree to which knowledge about one domain can be used to generate appropriate inferences about another domain.

Experiment 1
Analogy is universally held to be determined by systematic
congruencies in the relational structure of two representations. If analogical mechanisms really do underpin counterfactual reasoning then we would expect to find that structural matches support counterfactual reasoning in exactly
the same way that they support analogically based reasoning
(Falkenhainer, Forbus & Gentner, 1989; Gentner, Ratterman
& Forbus, 1993). Moreover, we would expect a simple featural match between a counterfactual reasoning problem and
background knowledge to have no such facilitatory effect.
The simplest test for an effect of shared structure as opposed to shared features in counterfactual inference, as predicted by the hypothesis that analogical mechanisms underpin counterfactual reasoning, is to place subjects in two conditions: one in which they have information that counterfactually matches the problem scenario structurally but not
featurally (AN condition); and the other in which the opposite is the case (SS condition). The effect of the knowledge
on the soundness ratings assigned a counterfactual inference
related to the two sets of background knowledge can then
be measured relative to a pre-test condition (the a priori or
AP condition) in which subjects are provided with no background knowledge relevant to the counterfactual in question.
If counterfactual reasoning really is sensitive to analogical
matches then we would expect a significant increase from
the pre-test soundness ratings in the AN condition, but no
such increase in the SS condition.

Method
Subjects read either the SS or AN match to a base scenario,
and were then asked two comprehension questions about it
to ensure they had read it properly. They were then asked
to read the corresponding base, and reason counterfactually
about it: subjects had to rate the soundness of four counterfactual inferences which undid a key event described in
the base. Both SS and AN variants were designed to promote the same counterfactual inference by featuring it as the
outcome of the sequence of events they described. The relative effect of a featural versus a structural match between the
base problem and background knowledge on the inferencing
task could therefore be measured by comparing the soundness ratings for the same inference in each condition. Soundness ratings were elicited by asking subjects how likely the
counterfactual inference was to be true. Ratings were provided on a 9 point scale anchored by ‘extremely unlikely’ at
the lower end, and ‘extremely likely’ at the upper end.
Participants Participants were 40 undergraduate students
of the University of Edinburgh, completing an introductory
course in psychology. All participants were volunteers, and
no reward was offered for taking part in the experiment.
Materials The materials were designed to replicate the experimental design used in Gentner, Ratterman and Forbus
(1993) as summarised in Table 1, while also being compatible with a counterfactual reasoning task. 5 base descriptions
and 4 variant categories for each base (corresponding to the
LS, SS, AN, FO categories described earlier) were designed,
resulting in 25 scenarios in total. Only the SS and AN variants were used in Experiment 1.

Ostavia, Grern and Donnol were three neighbouring and
hostile states that seemed to take a particular delight in antagonising one another. It wasn’t uncommon these days
to hear of one country criticising the others, and threatening them with military action. The trouble had begun several decades ago when Ostavia had attacked both Grern and
Donnol in a failed attempt to invade them. Since then relations between the three states had gone downhill, and just
recently things appeared to be getting even worse.
Ostavia had recently launched an attack against Grern,
and although resistance was fierce it looked as though Ostavia was soon going to conquer the Grern forces. However,
Grern approached Donnol for help in the conflict, arguing
that if they didn’t prevent the onslaught then Ostavia would
be coming for them next. Donnol considered Grern’s argument and saw that its conclusion was probably correct.
Therefore Donnol sent its troops to reinforce Grern’s units,
and after an intense struggle the Ostavian attack was repelled. Soon after, Grern and Donnol formed a long-lasting
alliance, and occupied Ostavia enforcing harsh sanctions
on its citizens.

Figure 1: Example base description. The key event for this
description is shown in bold type, and the outcome altered in
the variant conditions in italics (distinctions were unmarked
in experimental materials).
Each base was structured so that it described a key event
which led to a specific outcome (see Figure 1 for an example). For each base, four alternative counterfactual outcomes
to the actual outcome described in the base were selected
(these were the alternatives rated for soundness by subjects).
The counterfactual analogy (AN) variant to the base in Figure 1 is shown in Figure 2. The counterfactual inferences
corresponding to the example base scenario that subjects had
to rate for soundness are also shown, in Figure 3.
Each of the four variants of a particular base was designed
to undo the key event described in the base while either sharing or not sharing featural and structural commonalities with
it, depending on which of the variant categories it belonged
to. All variants in a material set were constructed to end in an
identical outcome, different from that occurring in the base
of the set (in the example materials shown the four variants
ended with some form of reconciliation between the parties
involved, instead of the ‘harsh sanctions’ mentioned in the
base). The four variants can thus be regarded as providing different types of background knowledge, each of which
could serve to promote the plausibility of the same counterfactual inference. The issue of interest in this paper is how
these four categories of background knowledge, and the different ways that they are related to the base scenario, affect subjects’ soundness judgements about the counterfactual outcomes they describe.
The four variants to a base were created in the following
manner. First, a key event in each base was identified. In
those variants to a base in which a counterpart to the key
event should be easily discernible (i.e. in the LS and AN
structurally congruent variants), the appropriate counterpart
was explicitly negated to make it counterfactual to the base
with respect to the key event. In those variants in which a
counterpart of the key event should not be easily identifiable

A chess-playing craze had recently swept through the inhabitants of Chesterton, and as a result three chess clubs had
sprung up in the sleepy town over the last few years. The
clubs were, unimaginatively enough, called the Maters, the
Gambit Players and the Rank and Filers. Times were hard
for the clubs, because there simply weren’t enough players
to go around. The problems had been started by the antagonistic members of the Maters. Several months earlier
the Maters had scandalously offered reduced subscription
rates to members of the Gambit Players and Rank and Filers. Since then an air of hostility had descended upon the
chess-playing community in Chesterton.
The Maters thought about trying again to gain extra members from the other two clubs, this time by promising them
extra facilities as well as reduced subscription rates. However, eventually the Maters thought this was a bad idea
because it seemed too underhand and risky. Unbeknownst to the Maters, the other two clubs had formed a
pact with one another that they would merge and drive the
Maters out of town if they tried to steal any of their members again. However, because the Maters thought better of
their plan everyone relaxed a little, and a couple of years
later the clubs were on very friendly terms.

Figure 2: Example analogy (AN) variant. The counterfactual
counterpart of the key event is shown in bold type, and the
counterfactual outcome is shown in italics (distinctions were
unmarked in experimental materials).

general reasoning, and that they were going to be shown
a series of scenarios and asked to make some inferences
about them. Participants were further told that for each problem they were going to be provided with some background
information (this information corresponding to the SS and
AN conditions of the experiment), and then asked to reason
about a problem scenario. They were explicitly informed
that the background information may be of use, and that they
should only make use of it if they thought it was relevant to
the problem in hand.

Pre-test
A pre-test condition was run before Experiment 1 to allow the facilitatory effects of providing various categories of
background knowledge to be compared to the case in which
subjects are provided with no relevant background knowledge. 20 postgraduate students of the Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, were provided with the 5 base
descriptions in a semi-randomised order, and asked to evaluate how sound it seemed that each of 4 counterfactual alternatives would occur had the key event in each description
been undone. Ratings were elicited on a 9 point scale. Two
sets of booklets presented all 5 base descriptions and the corresponding counterfactual inferences to be rated in reverse
orders to minimise order effects. Subjects were randomly
assigned to either of the two booklet conditions.

Results
If Ostavia hadn’t decided to launch an attack against Grern and Donnol, it wouldn’t have been defeated in war and
something else would probably have happened. Rate the
following outcomes according to how likely you think they
would have been to occur if Ostavia hadn’t launched its attack (please circle one number for each of the four options):

1. All three countries would have ended up disarming,
and developing friendly relations.

The mean soundness ratings of the promoted inferences in
the SS- and AN-exposure conditions from Experiment 1,
along with the pre-test (AP) soundness ratings for the same
inferences, are shown in Figure 4. T-testing revealed no significant shift in soundness ratings from the pre-test to the SS
condition (Welch’s t = 0.36, d f = 58.05, p > 0.025, onetailed). In contrast, soundness ratings did increase significantly from the pre-test to the AN condition (Welch’s t =
2.00, d f = 58.64, p < 0.025, one-tailed).3

2. The countries would have organised a yearly carnival in
celebration of newfound connections.

Discussion

3. The countries would have merged under an even greater
threat.
4. The countries would not have learnt from their mistakes,
and would end up fighting one another again.

Figure 3: Example counterfactual outcomes that subjects
were asked to rate for soundness. The inference promoted
by the base’s four variants is shown in bold type.

(i.e. in the SS and FO conditions, where there is no structural
congruity with the base), no event was described that could
be construed as being an instance of the key event.
Procedure Subjects were exposed to four of the material
sets, two in the SS condition and two in the AN condition.
Materials were randomised across subjects, and order of presentation was counterbalanced.
The written instructions to the experiment informed participants that they were taking part in a study investigating

The results of this experiment indicate that subjects will reason counterfactually on the basis of an analogical match to
background knowledge when one is available, and that a featural match to background knowledge alone is insufficient to
support a counterfactual inference. The fact that an analogical match to background knowledge makes a counterfactual
inference seem more sound shows that people are sensitive
to the sort of systematic structural correspondences found in
analogy when engaged in this form of reasoning, and therefore supports the hypothesis that analogical mechanisms underpin counterfactual reasoning at the cognitive level.

Experiment 2
Gentner, Ratterman and Forbus (1993) present evidence that
in contexts where subjects first had to retrieve knowledge in
order to be able to exploit it to make an analogical inference
3 Both tests involved samples with unequal variances by Levene’s test, and hence Welch’s corrected t statistic was calculated.
Tests were conducted at adjusted α levels to keep the overall risk of
a Type I error at the 0.05 level, by solving 1 − (1 − α)2 = 0.05 for
α.

(i.e. where relevant knowledge is not presented in association with the base it pertains to as it was in Experiment 1),
both structural and featural matches play a role in determining the usefulness of that knowledge in the inferencing process. The effect of featural commonalities is introduced because the process of retrieval is sensitive to featural, but not
structural, matches (Gentner, Ratterman and Forbus, 1993;
Ramscar and Yarlett, 2000). Therefore, if counterfactual reasoning really is similar to analogy at the cognitive level, we
would expect the addition of a retrieval requirement to the
inferencing task of Experiment 1 to have the following effects.
First, the AN condition should no longer produce a significant boost in soundness ratings compared to the pre-test condition. We expect this because AN matches are typically difficult to retrieve (see, for example, Gick and Holyoak, 1980),
and are therefore less likely to be used in the counterfactual
inferencing process in this context. Second, the soundness
ratings of SS condition inferences should remain the same
as in Experiment 1 (because SS materials have high retrievability the additional retrieval requirement should make no
difference to the availability of this knowledge in the inferencing process). Third, and finally, the overall pattern of results over the 4 variant categories should exhibit sensitivity
to both featural and structural factors, instead of just structural factors as in Experiment 1 (because featural matches
facilitate retrieval, which mediates the influence of structure
on the inferencing process).
Experiment 2 was accordingly designed to test these hypotheses by adding a retrieval task to Experiment 1, so that
background knowledge had to be successfully retrieved before it could be used as the basis for supporting a counterfactual inference.

Method
In the first phase of the experiment subjects were asked to
read 5 variants, one from each material set. Two multiplechoice comprehension questions were asked after each story
had been read, in an attempt to ensure that subjects read the
information thoroughly. They were next asked to complete
one of two short distraction tasks. The distraction tasks were
unrelated to the present study; one investigated a spatiotemporal priming phenomenon, and the other morphological
inflection. In the second phase of the experiment subjects
were asked to perform exactly the same inferencing task as
described in Experiment 1, except that this time they had also
been provided with the LS and FO variants of background
knowledge, in addition to the SS and AN categories. However, because the connection between the base problems and
the background knowledge they were provided with in the
variants was not made explicit, subjects had to retrieve relevant knowledge before being able to use it in the inferencing process. Subjects were not told that there was any connection between the first and second part of the experiment.
This was done to determine whether subjects would be able
to spontaneously recruit (Kahneman and Miller, 1986) background knowledge in order to make their soundness judgements for the counterfactuals.
Participants Participants in this study were 148 undergraduates and postgraduates at the University of Edinburgh.

All participants were volunteers. The undergraduate students were awarded class credit for taking part in the study.
Materials All 5 bases, with their corresponding 4 variants
(LS, SS, AN and FO categories), of the materials described
in Experiment 1 were used.
Procedure 1 variant was taken from each of the 5 material
sets, to result in each prime set. This meant that there were
4 prime sets in total. Two random orderings of each prime
set were combined with two random orderings of the question set (which was the same as that used in the pre-test and
Experiment 1), to create four distinct material orderings for
each of the four prime sets. This was done to minimise the
potential for presentation effects, and resulted in 16 types of
booklet in total. The 2 distractor tasks were randomly included in the booklets, and took subjects less than five minutes to complete.
In the first part of the experiment subjects were instructed
only that they were taking part in a memory experiment, and
that they should therefore read the stories they were presented with carefully. In the second part of the experiment
no reference was made to the stories in the first part; subjects
were merely asked to provide soundness ratings as they saw
fit.

Results
The results of Experiment 2 are shown in Figure 4 (along
with the results from Experiment 1).
A 2 × 2 ANOVA was conducted on the four experimental conditions. This revealed a significant effect of
featural matches (F(1, 147) = 8.75, p < 0.01), a significant effect of structural matches (F(1, 147) = 16.76, p <
0.01), and no significant interaction between the two factors
(F(1, 147) = 3.72, p > 0.05) consistent with the predictions
of the analogy-based account of counterfactual reasoning.
The soundness ratings in neither the SS (Welch’s t = 0.81,
d f = 49.03, p > 0.025, one-tailed) nor the AN (Welch’s t =
0.90, d f = 51.61, p > 0.025, one-tailed) conditions differed
significantly from those in the pre-test.4 Whilst the effect
of SS knowledge on the counterfactual inferencing process
is unchanged between Experiments 1 and 2, the facilitation
of soundness ratings produced by the analogical knowledge
observed in Experiment 1 has disappeared. The best explanation of this difference is that the retrieval requirement introduced in Experiment 2 has prevented AN matches from
being successfully retrieved in the counterfactual inferencing process, a finding paralleled in analogy research.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 were consistent with those predicted by the analogy-based account of counterfactual reasoning. Whereas the provision of analogical knowledge in
Experiment 1 was sufficient to boost the soundness of related counterfactual inferences, the same effect of analogical
knowledge was not observed in Experiment 2. The best explanation of this seems to be that retrieval does appear to
mediate the effect of structural congruency in the solution of
4 Corrected α values were used as before. Levene’s test indicated both t-tests involved samples with unequal variances, and so
Welch’s corrected t was calculated.

References

Mean Soundness Ratings of the Manipulated Counterfactual Inferences

Experiment 1
Experiment 2

4.4

4.2

Mean Soundness Rating

4

3.8

3.6

3.4

3.2

3

2.8

1

2

3
1=AP; 2=LS; 3=SS, 4=AN, 5=FO

4

5

Figure 4: A bar chart plot of the mean plausibility of the manipulated counterfactual inferences in the pre-test and Experiments 1 and 2.

the counterfactual reasoning problems. Furthermore, both
featural and structural factors were shown to have a significant effect on the soundness ratings provided by subjects,
suggesting that both a feature sensitive retrieval process and
structural alignment have a role to play in accounting for
the way in which background knowledge is exploited during
counterfactual reasoning. This pattern is in accordance with
the research on analogical reasoning reported by Gentner,
Ratterman and Forbus (1993).

General Discussion
We have presented evidence that there are deep similarities
in the ways in which knowledge is exploited during both analogical and counterfactual reasoning. Specifically, we have
shown that an analogical match to stored knowledge of an
appropriate kind is sufficient to significantly boost the plausibility of a counterfactual inference, and that the structurematching process that we hypothesise underpins counterfactual inference is mediated by a retrieval process sensitive to
featural-matches, just as in analogical reasoning. The former
finding is most significant, perhaps, because it is unpredicted
by current theories of counterfactual reasoning.
Whilst there are limitations to the current work – chiefly
that it doesn’t explore what occurs when complete matches
to stored counterfactual knowledge are unavailable, and
counterfactual representations have to be constructed – we
nevertheless feel that the current research presents the intriguing possibility of applying existing findings about to
counterfactual reasoning, in order to improve our understanding of this important cognitive process.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Scott McDonald, Keith Stenning,
Lera Boroditsky and the three anonymous reviewers for useful comments on the work reported in this paper.

Bowie G.L. (1979). The Similarity Approach to Counterfactuals:
Some Problems. Noûs, 13, 477-498.
Byrne R.M.J. and Tasso A. (1999). Deductive Reasoning with
Factual, Possible, and Counterfactual Conditionals. Memory &
Cognition, 27(4), 726-740.
Chisholm R.M. (1946). The Contrary-to-Fact Conditional. Mind,
55(220), 289-307.
Falkenhainer B., Forbus K.D. and Gentner D. (1989). The
Structure-Mapping Engine: Algorithm and Examples. Artificial
Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Fine K. (1975). Critical Notice of Counterfactuals. Mind, 84, 451458.
Gentner D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A Theoretical Framework
for Analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner D., Ratterman M.J. and Forbus K.D. (1993). The Roles of
Similarity in Transfer: Separating Retrievability from Inferential
Soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 524-575.
Gentner D. and Markman A.B. (1997). Structural Alignment in
Analogy and Similarity. American Psychologist, 52(1), 45-56.
Gick and Holyoak (1980). Analogical Problem Solving. Cognitive
Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Goodman N. (1947). The Problem of Counterfactual Conditionals.
The Journal of Philosophy, 44(5), 113-128.
Holyoak K.J. and Thagard P. (1995). Mental Leaps: Analogy in
Mental Thought. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Kahneman D. and Miller D.T. (1986). Norm Theory: Comparing
Reality to its Alternatives. Psychological Review, 93(2), 136153.
Lebow R.N. and Stein J.G. (1996). Counterfactuals and the Cuban
Missile Crisis. In Tetlock P.E. and Belkin A. (eds.), Counterfactual Thought Experiments and World Politics: Logical, Methodological and Psychological Perspectives, Chapter 5, p.119-148,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Lewis D.K. (1973). Counterfactuals. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Love B. (2000). A Computational Level Theory of Similarity. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Conference, 316-321.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Pollock J.L. (1976). Subjunctive Reasoning. Volume 8 of Philosophical Studies Series in Philosophy, D. Reidel Publishing
Company, Dordrecht, Holland.
Ramscar M.J.A. and Yarlett D.G. (2000). A High-Dimensional
Model of Retrieval in Analogy and Similarity-Based Transfer.
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Conference, 381-386.
Roese N.J. (1997). Counterfactual Thinking. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 133-148.
Stalnaker, R. (1968). A Theory of Conditionals. In Rescher, N.
(ed.) Studies in logical theory, number 2 in American Philosophical Quarterly Monograph Series, Blackwell Press, Oxford.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of Similarity. Psychological Review,
84(4), 327-352.

