UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Supporting Understanding Through Task and Browser Design

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09q8p7gn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Wiley, Jennifer

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Supporting Understanding through Task and Browser Design
Jennifer Wiley (jwiley@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison Street (M/C 285)
Chicago, IL 60607 USA
Abstract
While electronic text offers the potential to explain,
illustrate, and scaffold understanding in powerful new
ways, few studies on educational use of electronic text
resources have shown significant learning gains, or even
measured learning outcomes in controlled experiments
(Chen & Rada, 1996; Dillon & Gabbard, 1998). In a
follow-up to previous studies (Wiley & Voss, 1999), the
present experiments study the effects of different tasks
and browser designs on navigation and reading patterns,
as well as on memory and comprehension measures from
electronic text. These studies have revealed that only
when both the task and the design support integration
(such as in a two-windowed browser) and students are
explicitly directed how to use the feature, do students
take advantage of the flexibility of the multiple-source
environment, integrate across sources, and achieve the
best level of understanding.

Introduction
One promise of using electronic text in the classroom is
the potential for students to search for, access and read
multiple forms of information about a topic. Since the
search for and navigation of digital documents is
student-initiated, requires student interaction, captures
the student’s interest, proceeds at the student’s own
pace, and allows for flexible navigation and
juxtaposition of multiple sources, a number of theorists
have suggested that the web might be a powerful tool
for student instruction (Beeman, et al 1987, Spiro &
Jehng, 1990). This optimism is consistent with a
number of recent cognitive studies demonstrating that
activities that require readers to engage in active,
constructive and integrative tasks lead to the best
understanding of the subject matter (e.g., Chi, de
Leeuw, Chiu & LaVancher, 1994; McNamara, et al.,
1996).
However, a review of the literature on educational
use of electronic text yields two striking conclusions.
First, students generally fail to utilize hypertext links
and multiple window capabilities effectively, if at all, as
they read (Foss, 1989; Gordon, et al., 1988). This is
especially true of novice users (Foltz, 1996; Gray &
Shasha, 1989; Tombaugh, Lickorish & White, 1987).
And second, few studies on educational use of
electronic documents, whether from stand-alone
hypermedia or the World Wide Web, have actually
shown significant learning gains (Chen & Rada, 1996;
Dillon & Gabbard, 1998). What is critically needed is
for experiments to determine which specific

instructional contexts may allow for effective
educational use of electronic text.
Although there has been a great deal of evaluation on
effective browser design from a Human-Computer
Interaction (HCI) standpoint, effectiveness has been
measured largely in terms of efficiency of search or
ease in information finding (Dillon & Gabbard, 1998).
While such fluency measures may be related to some
extent to the amount of information a person is able to
recall after reading from computer screens, they may
not be correlated with whether a person develops an
understanding of the text that is being read. A number
of studies have shown that conditions that produce the
best surface memory for text are not the best conditions
for producing the best understanding of text (e.g.
McNamara, et al., 1996; Mayer, 1999; Wiley & Voss,
1999). While surface memory may correlate with the
fluency or ease of information processing,
understanding may depend to some extent on the need
to put effort into developing an underlying
representation or situation model of the text (Kintsch,
1998). Thus, previous assessments from an HCI
perspective cannot reliably indicate which screen
layouts will be most effective for promoting
understanding from electronic text. Given this
educational goal, browser design must be evaluated
specifically using measures of conceptual learning.
In a review of the published studies on hypermedia
and learning outcomes between 1990 and 1996, Dillon
and Gabbard found only 11 studies that performed
controlled experiments on hypermedia and learner
performance. Of those 11 studies, there were only four
results that actually seemed to suggest an advantage for
learning from hypermedia over paper. In the majority
of studies there was no clear difference between
learning from hypermedia and learning in a control
(more traditional) setting. While this may be viewed
more optimistically as evidence that learning from
electronic resources may sometimes be no worse than
traditional classroom methods, there is hardly an
overwhelming body of evidence that the web can
generally be relied upon to provide an enriching
instructional experience.
Of the four studies that netted positive learner
performance, only two seem to indicate that hypertext
may allow students to engage in learning at a more
conceptual level. One of these reported that students
learned to recognize aircraft more efficiently and
effectively when they were able to view the images

next to each other (and even overlay two images) in a
browser during learning (Psotka, Kerst & Westerman,
1993). Clearly the ability to juxtapose and overlay
images gave subjects a better concept of the aircraft
prototypes, and this allowed them to perform well on
later recognition tasks. In a second study, Jacobson and
Spiro (1995) found that a hypermedia environment as
opposed to a linear electronic presentation of the same
materials allowed for the best performance on a
problem-solving essay task. Interestingly, the linear
presentation of the same material allowed for the best
recall of the facts. Unfortunately, no converging
evidence of better comprehension in the hypertext vs.
linear condition was obtained. However, the differences
in essay quality suggest that students in the hypertext
conditions benefitted from the flexibility and ability to
jump between sources in the hypertext format, allowing
for better synthesis of the material that was presented.
This result is consistent with perhaps the most
consistently cited study on learning in hypertext (Egan
et al, 1989) which found that a multi-window
environment called Superbook led to better essay
writing than a paper control condition.
Based on their review, and these last two studies in
particular, Dillon and Gabbard suggest that hypermedia
may afford particular advantages for learners on tasks
that require comparison across sources. Notably, when
students are not given the ability to view two sources at
once in a computer environment, they perform less well
than with paper on tasks which require integration
across two documents (Wang & Liebscher, 1988).
Consistent with the intuition provided by these previous
studies, Wiley & Voss (1999) reported that students can
show better conceptual learning from a web-like
environment when they are provided with multiple
windows and are given a task that requires them to
integrate information across sources.
In one of few empirical studies evaluating conceptual
learning from a web-like environment, Wiley and Voss
(1999) demonstrated that reading multiple sources
presented in a browser can lead to better understanding
of subject matter than reading from a textbook. In this
study, students read about the Irish Potato Famine
either from several on-line documents in a two-window
web site or they read the same information in the form
of a textbook chapter. When students were asked to
write an argument of “What produced the significant
changes in Ireland’s population” instead of a narrative,
and read the on-line sources instead of the textbook
chapter, students gained the best understanding of the
material. Understanding was assessed by the causal and
integrated nature of their essays, as well as their
performance on inference verification and analogy
identification tasks. Wiley and Voss (1999) concluded
that tasks which require students to construct their own

representations of a situation will yield the most
conceptual learning in web-like environments. The
argument writing task promoted understanding because
it required students to integrate information from across
the multiple sources as they created support for a thesis.
And, the multiple source condition may have promoted
understanding by supporting the comparison and
integration of the individual sources.
This is an important finding, demonstrating
empirically that electronic text can be an effective tool
for developing student understanding. However, it is
important to note the very specific circumstances under
which better understanding may be achieved from weblike environments. For one, only students given a task
requiring integration of information across sources
showed better learning from a browser. Otherwise,
learning from a browser was actually poorer than from
a textbook. In fact, there were a number of particular
features of the Wiley & Voss (1999) environment, any
of which may be important in order for the effect to be
obtained:
The site had a small set of documents.
The documents were selected for the user.
The documents were largely relevant.
There were no links embedded in the texts.
Each document fit in a single window.
The task was well-defined and specific.
The task required integration across sources.
The browser had two side-by-side windows.
The overview menu was accessible through an icon.
Images were presented in their own window.
Students were instructed to use both windows.
Students were instructed how to use the menu icon.
Conceptual learning was assessed in the post-test.
The present experiments directly test whether the
design of the browser with two side-by-side windows
might have been critical for the better learning in the
web source/argument writing task condition. Although
many computerized tutors and interactive environments
use multiple windows, there has been little work on
how students use multiple windows or the optimal
conditions for multiple window use (von Oostendorp,
1996). Interestingly, the three other studies that suggest
that students can gain better conceptual understanding
from hypermedia environments (Egan, et al., 1989;
Pstoka, et al 1993, Jacobson & Spiro, 1993) all used a
multi-window display. However, there have been no
studies that have manipulated the number of windows
and directly measured comprehension. With converging
data from essay tasks, comprehension tests and
eyetracking protocols, the present studies address
whether a multi-window browser supports better
understanding in a web-like environment.

Proportion of Transformed Sentences
1
0.8
0.6

Narrative

0.4

Argument

0.2
0
One window Two windows

Two
windows,
instructions

Mean Proportion Correct

Inference Verification
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Narrative
Argument

One window Two windows

Two
windows,
instructions

Similarity of Poll Tax
Mean Similarity Rating

The first experiment investigated the effect of twowindow browsers on learning historical subject matter
from a web site. This experiment tested the hypothesis
that the design of the browser had an impact on
students’ understanding. Thirty undergraduates were
asked to read 10 pages from a web site about the Irish
Potato Famine in order to write either a narrative or an
argument of what produced the significant changes in
Ireland’s population. (The pages contained 5 texts
(about 1500 words), 4 tables, 1 graph and 1 map.) In
addition, students either read the information from a
single-window browser, a two-window browser, or
from a two-window browser with specific instructions
about why they were being given two windows.
Further in this third condition the list of documents was
split across the two windows, so that in order to read all
of the information readers had to use both windows.
Student learning was assessed with a number of
learning measures taken from Wiley and Voss (1999).
Of most interest are three measures thought to reflect
understanding: the proportion of sentences in student
essays which represented an integration or
“transformation” of the presented information (as
opposed to simply copying the presented information),
an inference verification task and an analogy task. The
inference verification task (IVT) contained 10
inferences that could be generated by integrating
information across two sources, such as “As rent costs
increased, emigration from Ireland increased.” as well
as 10 distractors. The analogy task consisted of short
descriptions of potentially analogous events. Students
were asked to rate the similarity of the causes of each
event with the population decline in Ireland. These
analogies were intended to vary in surface and deep
similarity, and the critical analogy, the institution of a
Poll Tax in the U.S. South after the Civil War, was
intended to be similar only on a deep level (as it was
related to sociopolitical inequities and class power
struggles, but there was no large-scale loss of life).
Thus, recognition of the Poll Tax as causally similar to
the changes in Ireland’s population indicates a
particularly good understanding of the text. This rating
serves as the critical analogy task (CAT).
The means for each condition on each measure are
presented in Figure 1. Performance on all measures
was better when students wrote arguments as opposed
to narratives (TRSENT: F(1,24)=14.9, p<.01; IVT:
F(1,24)=10.9, p<.01; CAT: F(1,24)=11.23, p<.01).
The main effect for number of windows only reached
significance for the inference task, F(2,24)=5.3, p<.01,
as did the interaction, F(2,24)=7.89, p<.01. However,
the interaction approached significance for the
proportion of transformed sentences (p<.15) as did the
main effect for number of windows on the critical
analogy task (p<.13). Pairwise comparisons based on a
priori hypotheses revealed that the two-window/
argument writing condition significantly outperformed

Mean Proportion

Experiment 1

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Narrative
Argument

One window

Two windows

Two windows,
instructions

Figure 1: Experiment 1 Results.
the single window/narrative writing conditions on all
measures (ps<.05), but only when students were given
specific instructions.
Two other sources of data may be of interest here.
The first is anecdotal evidence from a failed pilot study
showing that students are quite reluctant to use a twowindow browser. In the first design of the two-window
browser, I failed to set the frame so that it could not be
removed. The first thing that students did when they
were seated in front of a computer with the twowindow browser was click and drag that frame off the
screen so they had one big window. It is important to
note that I designed all my materials so that they would
fit in a single side-by-side window. Thus, it was not
that students could not see all of the documents that
prompted them to want a bigger screen. Their initial
preference was for a single window. Further, even once
the two-window browser was set so students couldn’t
remove the frame, many of them still failed to ever use
the second window. Instead, many students kept the
graph in the right window and read through the sources

on the left. Only when students were given the specific
instructions and forced to use both windows did all of
the students actually use both windows.
Previous work with multiple window environments is
consistent with these findings. Foss (1989) found that
about a third of people generally prefer simple screens
and only having a single window open. This prevents
students from making important connections across
sources. Another third of readers did open more than
one window at once, but they did not use the multiple
windows effectively. Their screens quickly became
messy and busy. Only a third of Foss’ subjects were
able to use multiple windows effectively for a search
and decision making task. Tombaugh et al (1987), also
found a general preference for and better search in a
single window environment, and found that only with
practice in a multiple window environment were
participants able to use the overlapping multiple
windows efficiently. Part of these results may be due to
the overlapping window environment that was used,
however, as Instone, et al (1996) found that participants
were able to use a tiled multiple-window environment
more efficiently than an overlapping window display.
Unfortunately, all of these previous experiments
measured the effects of the windows in terms of speed
and accuracy of search for information, and not in terms
of comprehension.
Only the present study has
manipulated the number of windows and investigated
how the use of multiple windows can lead to a better
conceptual understanding of the subject matter, as it
allows for the concurrent presentation of related
concepts from different sources.
A second additional source of information about how
readers behaved in the different conditions comes from
analysis of browsing logs and eyetracking data. These
sources indicated that both general instruction about
how to use web sources and specific writing instruction
yielded different navigation and reading patterns. A
pilot eyetracking study on 4 students in the 2window/2-list condition gives us a better idea of exactly
how the students used these windows. Two of these
students were told to read with the purpose of writing a
narrative, and the other two were told the argument
instruction. Like all other students, these readers tended
to begin their task by reading through each document,
one at a time, in order. Students usually simply went
down the documents in the list on the left side of the
screen and then down the documents on the right side
of the screen. During this initial reading phase, the eyes
rarely left the document that was being read. At this
point, both readers in the narrative condition stopped
reading and declared they were ready to write their
essay.
On the other hand, both students in the
argument condition moved on to a second phase of
reading.
One student started over again from the beginning,
starting at the top of the left window list and skimmed
the documents in order. But, from time to time, she

would call up documents in the other window, or skip
to another document on the same list and look for
particular sentences. The other student in the argument
condition began the second phase by calling up pairs of
documents and alternated reading between the two.
Importantly, the sentences that these students tended to
re-read were important for inferences about the causes
of the Potato Famine. Eyetracking data revealed that
students in argument condition spent more total time on
sentences important for inferences. Thus, the selection
patterns and eyetracking evidence suggest that under
some conditions web sites can promote more active
reading patterns, suggesting more active integration of
the text at a conceptual level. Further, this second
phase of reading, or review of documents, seems to be
particularly critical for understanding. It is what
students do when they are reading from paper
documents, and what Dee-Lucas and Larkin (1995)
found when students effectively used structured
overviews in electronic text.
Taken together, these sources of data demonstrate
that students need to have both a task and an
environment that forces them to be more active in order
for students to gain the benefits of web resources. Only
when both the task and the design support integration,
and students are explicitly directed how to use the
feature, do students take advantage of the flexibility of
the multiple source environment. Only then do students
integrate across sources, selectively re-read sources,
and achieve the best level of understanding.
The second experiment is an important extension of
this work using scientific texts as content. Of particular
interest is whether the ability to juxtapose two
documents, while performing a task that supports
integration, will allow for better understanding of
scientific concepts as well.

Experiment 2
Although there may be some differences between
reading from history and science-related text, when
readers must connect information across documents, in
order to make inferences or construct global models of
causality, then simultaneous presentation of the sources
that need to be linked should help regardless of the
subject matter. Thus, the second experiment
investigated the effect of two-window browsers on
learning from a scientific web site. This experiment
tested the hypothesis that the design of the browser has
an impact on student’s scientific understanding. Forty
undergraduates were asked to read 16 pages from a web
site about Earthquakes and Volcanoes (based on
sources from the USGS web site) in order to write
either an essay or an argument of “What caused the
explosion of Mt. St. Helens?” (The pages contained 10
texts (about 3000 words), 4 diagrams, 3 maps, and 2
photographs.) In addition, students either read multiple
sources in a single-window browser, or multiple
sources in a two-window browser with specific

Conclusions and Implications
In both experiments, when both the task and the
browser design supported integration, and there was
explicit instruction how to use the two-window
browser, students were able to write more integrated
essays in a multiple window environment. This
condition also led to the best conceptual learning in
both experiments. Although in Experiment 1 it seemed

Proportion of Transformed Sentences

Mean Proportion

1
0.8
0.6

Essay

0.4

Argument

0.2
0
One window

Two windows,
instructions

Mean Proportion Correct

Inference Verification
1
0.8
0.6

Essay

0.4

Argument

0.2
0
One window

Two windows,
instructions

Similarity of Kobe Earthquake
Mean Similarity Rating

instructions about why they were being given two
windows. Further in the two-window condition the list
of documents was split across both windows, so that in
order to read all of the information readers had to use
both windows. This yielded a 2x2 (writing task x
presentation format) design with 10 students in each of
the conditions.
Student learning was assessed with a number of
learning measures similar to those used in Wiley &
Voss (1999) and in Experiment 1. The same 3
measures of understanding are reported as in
Experiment 1: proportion of transformed sentences
(TRSENT), the inference verification and analogy
tasks. The inference verification task (IVT) contained
10 inferences that could be generated by integrating
information across two sources, such as “Volcanoes are
likely to develop where continents collide” as well as
10 distractors. The critical analogy task (CAT) asked
students to rate the similarity of the causes of the Kobe
earthquake with the causes of the Mt. St. Helens
eruption. The Kobe earthquake was intended to be
similar only on a deep level (as it was related to
disturbance due to subduction of a tectonic plate, but
there was no volcanic activity). Thus, recognition of
Kobe as causally similar to Mt. St. Helens indicates a
particularly good understanding of the text, and the
relation between plate tectonics and volcanic activity.
The means for each condition are presented in Figure
2 for the 3 tasks. As in Experiment 1, performance on
all tasks was better when students wrote arguments
(TRSENT: F(1,36)=8.96, p<.01; IVT: F(1,36)=9.06,
p<..01; CAT: F(1,36)=8.81, p<.01). The main effect
for number of windows only reached significance for
the proportion of transformed sentences, F(1,36)=6.82,
p<.01.
While none of the interactions were significant, based
on previous results and a priori hypotheses, pairwise
comparisons were performed and revealed that the twowindow/argument condition outperformed the essay
conditions on all measures (ps<.08). However, it is
notable that although there was a trend toward a main
effect for number of windows on the inference task
(p<.14), there were no trends in either the windows
effect or the interaction on the critical analogy task.
This suggests that while the best essay writing may
have occurred due to combination of writing task and
two-window browser, for the learning measures, the
writing task alone was responsible for better
understanding.

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Essay
Argument

One window

Two windows,
instructions

Figure 2: Experiment 2 Results.
both the writing task and the number of windows
contributed to the effect, in Experiment 2, the effect of
the two-window browser on the understanding of the
subject matter was not as evident. The argument writing
task, however, did support better understanding in both
history and science.
There are many possible reasons for the differential
effects of the browser design in these two studies. The
most obvious are the differences in the materials that
students were presented with. More information was
presented in the scientific site. Further, looking at the
single window/narrative essay condition as a baseline,
we can see that the scientific tests were more difficult
for students. Students accurately recognized 55% of
inferences in the history test, whereas they recognized
only 40% of inferences correctly in the science site.
Further, different kinds of images were used in the
history and science sites. These findings have led to
several interesting questions that we are currently

pursuing (Wiley, Ash, Brodhead & Sanchez, 2001). Do
students simply respond to history and science subject
matter differently? Are images processed differently in
the two domains? Did the different types of images in
the two sites lead to learning differences? Or, is the
difficulty of the subject matter driving these processing
differences?
Even though we are still looking for the best
task/environment combination for conceptual learning
from scientific web sites, taken together, the present
studies demonstrate that specific conditions are
necessary for effective educational use of electronic
texts. In order for conceptual learning to occur, readers
of electronic text may need a multimedia environment
that promotes integration of the presented information
and certainly need a task that prompts integration across
sources. Only through the specification and
demonstration of which computerized learning
environments lead to better understanding, may we
begin to realize some of the educational potential of
electronic text.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the Office of
Naval Research and the Paul G. Allen Virtual
Education Foundation. Thanks to Linda Gentry, Ed
Kearney, and Rebecca Schrader for their research
assistance.

References
Beeman, W., Anderson, K., Bader, G., Larkin, J.
McClard, A., McQuillian, M. & Sheilds, M. (1987)
Hypertext and pluralism: from lineal to nonlineal
thinking. In Proceedings of Hypertext 87, pp. 67-88,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Chen, C. & Rada, R. (1996) Interacting with hypertext:
A meta-analysis of experimental studies. Human
Computer Interaction, 11, 125-156.
Chi, M., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M. & LaVancher, C.,
(1994). Eliciting self-explanations: improves
learning. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-478.
Dee-Lucas, D. & Larkin, J..(1995). Learning from
electronic texts: Effects of overviews for information
access. Cognition & Instruction, 13, 431-468.
Dillon, A. & Gabbard, R. (1998). Hypermedia as
educational technology: A review of the quantitative
research literature on learner comprehension, control
and style. Review of Educational Research, 68, 322349.
Egan, D., Remde, J., Landauer, T., Lochbaum, C. &
Gomez, L. (1989) Behavioral evaluation and analysis
of a hypertext browser. Proceedings of CHI 89, 205210.
Foss, C. (1989). Detecting lost users: Empirical studies
on browsing hypertext. INRIA Tech Report 973.

Valbonne, France: L’Institut National de Recherche
en Informatique et en Automatique.
Foltz, P. (1996). Comprehension, coherence and
strategies in text and hypertext. In Rouet, J.F. et. al.
(Eds) Hypertext and Cognition.
Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gordon, S., Gustavel, J., Moore, J. & Hankey, J.
(1988). The effects of hypertext on reader knowledge
representation. Proceedings of the Human Factors
Society 32nd Annual Meeting, 296-300.
Gray, S. & Shasha, D. (1989) To link or not to link
Behavior Research, Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 21, 326-333.
Instone, K., Teasley, B. & Leventhal, L. (1996) Lessons
learned from redesigning hypertext user interfaces.
In van Oostendorp & de Mul (Eds) Cognitive aspects
of electronic text processing. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Jacobson, M. & Spiro, R. (1995) Hypertext learning
environments, cognitive flexibility and the transfer of
complex knowledge.
Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 12, 301-303.
Kintsch, W. (1998) Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge.
Lehto, M., Zhu, W. & Carpenter, B. (1995) The relative
effectiveness of hypertext and text. International
Journal of Human Computer Interaction, 7, 293-313.
McNamara, D. Kintsch, E., Songer, N., & Kintsch, W.
(1996) Are good texts always better? Cognition &
Instruction, 14, 1-43.
Psotka, J., Kerst, S. & Westerman, T. (1993) The use of
hypertext and sensory-level supports in visual
learning. Behavior Research Methods, 25, 168-172.
Spiro, R. & Jehng, J. (1990) Cognitive flexibility and
hypertext. In D. Nix & R. Spiro (Eds) Cognition,
Education and Multimedia. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tombaugh, J., Lickorish, A. & Wright, P. (1987) Multiwindow displays for readers of lengthy texts.
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 26,
597-615.
van Oostendorp, H. (1996) Studying and annotating
electronic text. In J.F. Rouet, et al (Eds.) Hypertext
and Cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wang, X. & Liebscher, P. (1988) Information seeking
in hypertext: Effects of physical format and search
strategy. Proceedings of the ASIS Annual Meeting,
25, 20-205.
Wiley, J., Ash, I., Brodhead, A. & Sanchez, C. (2001,
May) The impact of images in learning from web
pages on science and history. Paper presented at the
Midwestern Psychological Association, Chicago, IL.
Wiley, J. & Voss, J. F. (1999) Constructing arguments
from multiple sources: Tasks that promote
understanding and not just memory for text. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 91, 1-11.

