UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Velocity in Affect Discrimination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3191m9bh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Paterson, Helena M.
Pollick, Frank E.
Sanford, Anthony J.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Velocity in Affect Discrimination
Helena M. Paterson (helena@psy.gla.ac.uk)
Glasgow, G12 8QB

Frank E. Pollick (frank@psy.gla.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 58 Hillhead Street,
Glasgow, G12 8QB

Anthony J. Sanford (tony@psy.gla.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 58 Hillhead Street,
Glasgow, G12 8QB

Abstract
Two experiments are described that examine the role of speed
in the categorisation of affective biological motion displays.
For the first experiment movements were recorded for 10
affects and the point-light animations of them were shown to
participants in a recognition task. The resultant confusion
matrices were analysed using the ALSCAL multi-dimensional
scaling procedure and produced a 2-dimensional
psychological space.
The psychological space for
discrimination was similar to that from recent models of
experienced affect in that the first dimension corresponded to
the activation dimension from these models. A strong
correlation between the movement speed and the activation
dimension confirmed the finding. From these results it would
appear that the mapping between stimulus properties and
representation of activation in affect is a fairly direct one. For
the second experiment more sad, angry and neutral
movements were collected. New movements of different
duration, but identical spatial displacement were made using
an interpolation algorithm. Observers viewed the movements
as point light displays and heir task was to rate intensity of
affect. Results from this experiment indicate speed plays a
major role in modulating the intensity of activation in
perceived affect.

Introduction
Humans can easily tell each other apart and interpret
subtle differences in behaviour that communicates
intentions, identity and emotions easily. Cues from
facial features are used for much of this recognition,
however, highly impoverished stimuli - such as pointlight displays - convey sufficient information for the
recognition of such person properties (Barclay, Cutting
& Kozlowski, 1978, Cutting & Kozlowski, 1977;
Dittrich, Troscianko, Lea & Morgan, 1986; Hill &
Pollick, 2000; Kozlowski & Cutting, 1978; Mather &
Murdoch, 1994; Runeson & Frykholm, 1981; Runeson
& Frykholm, 1983; Walk & Homan, 1984). The cues
that convey this information in biological motion are of
primary interest to us and using point light displays of

human arm movements, we have concentrated on the
recognition of emotion from biological motion.
In exploring the way in which humans recognise
affect, it is possible not only to look at the accuracy
with which an affect is recognised, but also at the
structure of the representation of affect. A number of
models for the structure of experienced affect have been
suggested that resemble each other in a number of
factors (Russell, 1980; Watson and Tellegen, 1985;
Thayer, 1989, Larsen and Diener; 1992; Feldman,
Barrett and Russell, 1999). The similarities between
these models are that the structure of affect is a twodimensional and continuous structure. This structure is
referred to as a circumplex model (Feldman, Barrett and
Russell, 1999). The two dimensions of the circumplex
models are bipolar and independent. One dimension
represents valence (for instance hedonic tone, pleasant
– unpleasant) and the other, arousal or activation
(arousal – sleep/ activated – deactivated). The models
are also continuous, with affects falling on a circle,
centred on the origin of the psychological space defined
by the two dimensions.
Although these models were established as
representing one’s own experience of affect, there is
recent evident to suggest that experience and perception
interact when observing another person’s actions
(Decety and Grezes, 1999; Rizzolatti, Fadiga, Gallese
and Foggassi, 1996). Additionally biological motion
relies on both specialised bottom-up processes of
motion detection (Mather, Radford and West, 1992;
Neri, Morrone and Burr, 1998) and interactions
between these and top-down processes (Shiffrar and
Freyd, 1990, 1993; Thornton, Pinto and Shiffrar, 1998).
In the case of affect perception such a top-down process
may well originate from the influence of an internal
structure of affect.
It seems reasonable, therefore, to further explore the
possible relationship between perception and structure
of affect. There is also, currently, little research that
concentrates specifically at the recognition of emotion

from biological motion.
The special case of
interpreting stylised dance movements from point-light
displays, has received some attention (Dittrich,
Troscianko, Lea & Morgan, 1986, Walk & Homan,
1984). Dittrich et al found good evidence that these
movements can be expressive, however, they did not
address more typical movements.
Two experiments are reported that highlight the
relationship between the structure of experienced affect
and perception of other’s affect from simple arm
movements. We also report the importance of the role
that the speed of such movements, play in affect
discrimination.

psychological space to physical properties of the
movements.

Experiments

Stimuli and Participants All 118 movements were
displayed as above to fourteen Glasgow University
student volunteers. Participants were naïve to the
purpose of the study and were paid for their
participation.

Movement Collection Arm movement data was
obtained
using
a
three-dimensional
position
measurement system (Optotrak, Northern Digital).
Actors read the emotional scene setting story and then
performed drinking and knocking actions. While they
made the movements, the position of their head, right
shoulder, elbow, wrist, and the first and fourth
metacarpal joints were recorded using infra red emitting
diodes.
Each movement record was processed to obtain the
start and end of the movement as well as other
kinematic properties such as tangential velocity,
acceleration and jerk of the wrist. The start of the
movement was defined as the point 116 msec before the
tangential velocity of the wrist rose above a criterion
value, and the end by the point 116 msec after the
velocity passed below the criterion. This start/end
velocity criterion was defined as 5% of the peak
tangential velocity of the wrist. To measure kinematics,
instantaneous measures of the wrist kinematics
(velocity, acceleration and jerk) were taken and
kinematic markers of duration, average velocity, peak
velocity, peak acceleration, peak deceleration and jerk
index were identified. Jerk index was defined as the
magnitude of the jerk averaged over the entire
movement and relates to the smoothness of a movement
(Flash & Hogan, 1985).
Stimuli In all experiments each recorded point of the
arm movement was presented as a point light on a
graphics computer (Octane, SGI) from a sagittal view.

Experiment 1
We presented knocking and drinking movements with
10 different affects and measured the ability of
participants to categorise affect. We examined the
perception of affect within the framework of a
psychological space and related aspects of this

Movement Collection Knocking and drinking
movements were recorded with affect. Two actors read
a brief story that set the emotional scene for each
movement. Measurements of the 10 affects (afraid,
angry, excited, happy, neutral, relaxed, sad, strong, tired
and weak) were obtained. This yielded a total of 120
movements (10 affects X 2 actors X 2 actions X 3
repetitions), however, due to recording difficulties data
was lost for 2 movements of one actor.

Design and Procedure Displays were blocked by the
possible combinations of actor and action (2 actors x 2
actions). There were 4 trial blocks and a practice
session of four trials. The order of blocks was
randomised and participants were told that they would
see a knocking or drinking arm movement. For each
trial, participants viewed a computer display of the
movement and were then presented with a dialog box
that contained the names of the ten possible affects.
Their task was to identify the affect by selecting one of
the 10 choices.

Results
Over all the trials participants answered correctly 30%
of the time; ranging from 15% (strong) to 50% (afraid)
correct, this was significantly better than the chance
value of 10% [t (13) = 20.3, p < .005, two-tailed].
Although the overall recognition rate was not high this
2

Dimension 2

General Methods

Methods

Relaxed
1 Neutral
Tired

-2

Sad
Weak 0
-1
0
-1
Afraid
-2

Happy
Strong

1
Angry
Excited

Dimension 1
Figure 1. The psychological space obtained for
Experiment 1

2

Comparison of Psychological
Movement Kinematics.

Space

to

We examined the movement kinematics to see whether
any physical properties of the movement were related to
either of the two dimensions defining the psychological
space.
One of the striking things in the movement data is that
the kinematic markers we measured consistently and
smoothly differed between affects. For instance, sad
movements were always slower than neutral
movements and both these were slower than angry
movement. This seems to correspond to the activation
dimension from the models of affect. To test this, the
kinematic markers were correlated to Dimension 1 and
Dimension 2 co-ordinates of the 10 affects in the
psychological space. Results of all these correlations
are presented in Table 1, and Figure 2 shows an
example of this relationship.
From Table 1 we can see the Dimension 1
(activation) co-ordinate of an affect correlated with the
kinematic markers in such a way that energetic
movements were positively correlated with shorter
duration and greater magnitudes of average velocity,
peak velocity, acceleration, deceleration and jerk. For
Dimension 2 we found that, to a lesser extent there was
a tendency of longer duration and smaller magnitude of
the other kinematic markers to be correlated with
positive affect. We examined this further by rotating
the psychological space to find the orientation that
maximised the r-squared values of the correlation with
the six kinematic markers. It was found that a 27°
counter-clockwise rotation resulted in the highest
correlation with the kinematic markers with a r2 value of
0.88 for Dimension 1 and 0.03 for Dimension 2. From
these results it can be seen that while the original

psychological space is roughly oriented so that energy
in Dimension 1 is correlated with the speed of the
movement, rotation of the space can improve the
correlation.

Experiment 2
The aim of this experiment was to further investigate
the role of speed in the recognition of affect from
human movements. New sad, neutral and angry lifting
and knocking movements were recorded from 3 women
and 3 men. Through time warping (Bruderlin and
Williams, 1995) the duration of movements were
manipulated to change their speed. The original and
morphed movements were displayed as point light
stimuli to 10 participants who judged the intensity of
affect.

Methods
Movement Collection Movements from 6 actors were
recorded as they performed lifting and knocking actions
with the three affects - angry, neutral and sad. As
before, there were differences between kinematic
markers for the movements. Angry movements had the
Table 1. Correlation of Movement Kinematics with
Dimension 1 & 2 of psychological space. All
values are Pearson’s r and are significan at p<.oo5
Kinematic Properties
Duration
Average Velocity
Peak Velocity
Peak Acceleration
Peak Deceleration
Jerk Index

Dimension 1
-0.85
0.92
0.91
0.83
-0.79
0.83

Dimension 2
0.65
-0.49
-0.53
-0.68
0.57
-0.59

900

Average Velocity

could be partially accounted for by some consistent
misidentifications. For example, weak movements
were identified as weak, sad or tired with equal
frequency.
To better understand the structure of the results, a
psychological space of the affects was constructed
using the INDSCAL multidimensional scaling
procedure (Kruskal and Wish, 1978). The 10x10
confusion matrix for each of the 4 block conditions was
converted to measures of dissimilarity and input to the
INDSCAL algorithm. The resultant solution was a
unique 2-dimensional psychological space (see Figure
1) with r2 = .87 and stress = .15. The first dimension
accounted for approximately 70% of the variance and
the second dimension for 17% of the variance. The
two-dimensional structure of the psychological space is
similar to that which would be predicted from a
circumplex model of affect (see introduction) with the
first dimension representing activation and the second
dimension representing pleasantness.

800
700

Excited
Angry

600
500

Happy
Strong

Sad Afraid

400
300

Tired
Weak

200

Neutral
Relaxed
2

100

R = 0.839

0
-2

-1

0

1

2

Dimension 1
Figure 2. Plot of the average velocity of an affective
movement versus the Dimension 1 coordinate
obtained in the psychological space. Similar results
are obtained for plots of the otherkinematic markers
versus Dimension1.

shortest duration and highest velocities and sad the
longest duration and lowest velocities.
For each movement the start and end points were
defined using their velocity profile.
Movement
duration was defined as:
Duration = End point - Start point
For each actor a temporal step-size was calculated:
Step-size = (Sad Duration - Angry Duration)/2
The natural movements and the step-size calculation,
were used in an interpolation algorithm (Hill and
Pollick, 2000) to obtain 5 movements of differing
duration for each affect. This yielded 15 movements
for each actor, 3 of which were the natural movements.
The interpolation preserved spatial properties of the
movements such as the distance travelled by points
between frames, but caused changes in spatio-tempotal
properties, such as the average and peak velocities (see
figure 3 and 4a). Movements had the following
duration. A slow duration that was slower than the
natural sad duration by one step-size; a natural sad
duration; a central duration between angry and sad, this

was very similar to the natural neutral movement
duration; a natural angry duration; a fast duration, faster
than the angry duration by 1 step-size. The central
duration for neutral movements was the natural
duration.
Participants Ten Glasgow University paid student
volunteers participated in the experiment. All were
naïve to the purpose of the study.
Design and Procedure Displays were blocked by
action ( 2 actions). There were two blocks of trials,
randomly ordered between participants. Participants
were told that they would see human knocking and
lifting movements. For each trial, participants viewed a
computer display of the movement and were then
presented with a dialog box that contained a 100-point
scale for them to manipulate. First participants had to
categorise the movement, then to rate its intensity.
A score between 1 and 49 indicates that the movement
was perceived as angry, 1 being intense anger and 49,
mild anger. A score of 51-100 indicates that the
movement was perceived as sad, 51 being mildly sad
and 100, intense sadness. A score of 50 indicates that
the movement was neutral.

1600
Average Velocity (mm/second)

a

1400

Knock

Lift

1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Slow

Sad 51-100

Sad

Central Natural

Fast

Slow

Sad

Angry

Natural Angry

Fast

Slow

Neutral

Natural Central Angry

Fast

Sad

90

Knock

Lift

80
70
60

Neutral 50
Angry 1-49

Rating

b

100

40
30
20
10
0
Slow

Sad

Central Natural

Angry

Fast

Slow

Sad

Natural Angry

Neutral

Fast

Slow

Natural Central Angry

Fast

Sad

Frigure 3 a) The velocity of movements averaged across 6 actors and b) the rating participants gave to
each movement, averaged across 6 actors and 10 participants. The x-axes illustrate the affect and
duration used in the interpolation procedure. In b the rating scale is illustrated on the y-axis.

Results
For each affect there was a clear change in the
classification and intensity ratings of affect as
movement duration increased (figure 4b). This was the
case for all three emotions, however, angry movements
were seldom categorised as sad or neutral.
These
results are better illustrated when the rating data is
correlated with kinematic markers, table 2 summarises
these results.
Table 2. Correlation of kinematic markers with
rating data, all values are Pearson’s r and are
significant at p< .001
Affect

Duration

Angry
Neutral
Sad

0.81
0.91
0.96

Peak
Velocity
-0.67
-0.79
-0.79

Average
Velocity
-0.62
-0.79
-0.82

Discussion
In this experiment the speeds of affective human arm
movements were manipulated by changing movement
duration. When new and original angry movements
were viewed, they generally retained their identity as
angry affect, but the intensity of perceived affect was
modulated by velocity changes. Sad and neutral
movements were similarly affected by changes in
velocity, but faster movements were categorised as
angry. These results further emphasise the role of
velocity in affect, however, it is clear that there are
other properties of the movements that were not
controlled by velocity, but that play a role in the
discrimination of affect. Currently it is only possible to
speculate about what these properties are, but they may
include spatial relationships, such as posture, between
points of the displays; phase relations between the
points or more dynamic properties, such as perceived
force. It is clear, however, that velocity plays a major
role in the recognition of affect from biological motion
displays, particularly in modulating the intensity of
perceived affect.

General Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 showed that the perceived
affect of arm movements conformed well to models of
experienced affect (Russell, 1980; Watson and
Tellegen, 1985; Thayer, 1989, Larsen and Diener;
1992; Feldman Barrett and Russell, 1999). Moreover,
the activation axis of these models was correlated to
physical characteristics of the movement in a consistent
manner such that greater activation was related to
greater magnitudes of velocity, acceleration and jerk of
the movement.

The finding of a circumplex structure for perceived
affect is consistent both with duality between the
perception and production of movement as well as a
role for high-level information in the interpretation of
motion derived from human movement. In addition,
the continuous structure of the circumplex model
parallels the smoothly varying range of speeds with
which a movement can be performed. Thus, it would
appear that the mapping between stimulus properties
and representation of affect is a fairly direct one for the
activation axis. However, such a direct connection
between stimulus and representation has proven elusive
for the second dimension of pleasantness. Other
research has suggested that subtle phase relations
between the joints (Amaya, Bruderlin and Calvert,
1996) might possibly carry information about affect.
The results from Experiment 2 further showed the
way in which speed modulates interpretation of
affective movements. However, factors controlling
dimension 2 of the psychological space, could not be
entirely discounted. For sad and neutral movements it
was possible to change the percept to be angry, but
angry movements remained discriminable as angry at
most speeds. This suggests that angry movements are
distinct form the other movements in some other way
and that humans are sensitive to this difference. Indeed,
angry, afraid and excited movements fell at a different
location on the second dimension in Experiment 1, than
the other movements. So perhaps whatever properties in
the movements control this dimension also act as
“danger indicators”. From an evolutionary point of
view such indicators makes good sense and it could be
argued that this would enhance the models of
experienced affect, since pleasantness may be just
another way of discriminating emotions that a person
seek out, from those they avoid.

References
Amaya, K., Bruderlin, A. & Calvert, T. (1996).
Emotion from motion. In Graphics Interface ‘96,
W.A. Davis & R. Bartels, Eds., pp 222-229.
Barclay, C.D., Cutting, J.E. & Kozlowski, L.T. (1978).
Temporal and spatial factors in gait perception that
influence gender recognition.
Perception and
Psychophysics, 23, 145-152.
Bertenthal, B.I. & Pinto, J. (1994). Global processing
of biological motions. Psychological Science, 5, 221225.
Bruderlin, A. & Williams, L. (1995). Motion Signal
Processing. In Graphics Interface ‘95, W.A. Davis &
R. Bartels, Eds., pp 97-104.
Cutting, J.E. & Kozlowski, L.T. (1977). Recognizing
friends by their walk: Gait perception without
familiarity cues. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society,
9, 353-356.

Cutting, J.E. (1978). Generation of synthetic male and
female walkers through manipulation of a
biomechanical invariant. Perception, 7, 393-405.
Cutting, J.E., Proffitt, D.R. & Kozlowski, L.T. (1978).
A biomechanical invariant for gait perception.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 4, 357-372.
Decety, J. & Grezes, J. (1999). Neural mechanisms
subserving the perception of human actions. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 172-178.
Dittrich, W.H., Troscianko, T., Lea, S.E.G. & Morgan,
D. (1996). Perception of emotion from dynamic
point-light displays represented in dance. Perception,
25, 727-738.
Flash, T & Hogan, N. (1985). The coordination of arm
movements:
An
experimentally
confirmed
mathematical model. Journal of Neuroscience, 5,
1688-1703.
Hill, H & Pollick, F.E. (in press). Exaggerating
temporal differences enhances recognition of
individuals from point light displays. Psychological
Science.
Johansson, G. (1973). Visual perception of biological
motion and a model for its analysis. Perception and
Psychophysics, 14, 201-211.
Kozlowski, L.T. & Cutting, J.E. (1977). Recognizing
the sex of a walker from a dynamic point-light
display. Perception and Psychophysics, 21, 575-580.
Kruskal, J.B. & Wish, M. (1978). Multidimensional
Scaling, Sage University Paper series on Quantitative
Applications in the Social Sciences, 07-011, Beverly
Hills and London: Sage Publications.
Mather, G., Radford, K., & West, S. (1992). Low-level
visual processing of biological motion. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of Londdon B, 249, 149-155.

Mather, B. & Murdoch, L. (1994).
Gender
discrimination in biological motion displays based on
dynamic cues. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Londdon B, 258, 273-279.
Neri, P., Morrone, M., & Burr, D. (1998). Seeing
biological motion. Nature, 395, 894-896.
Shiffrar, M. & Freyd, J.J. (1990). Apparent motion of
the human body. Psychological Science, 1, 257-264.
Shiffrar, M. & Freyd, J.J. (1993). Timing and apparent
motion path choice with human body photographs.
Psychological Science, 4, 379-384.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Gallese, V., & Fogassi, L.
(1996). Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor
actions. Cognitive Brain Research, 3, 131-141.
Runeson, S (1994). Perception of biological motion:
The KSD-principle.
In Perceiving Events and
Objects, G. Jansson, S.S. Bergstrom & W. Epstein,
Eds., pp 383-405.
Runeson, S., & Frykholm, G. (1981).
Visual
perception of lifted weight. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 7,
733-740.
Runeson, S., & Frykholm, G. (1983). Kinematic
specification of dynamics as an informational basis
for person and action perception: Expectation, gender
recognition, and deceptive intention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 112, 585-615.
Thornton, I.M., Pinto, J. & Shiffrar, M. (1998). The
visual perception of human locomotion. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 15, 535-552.
Walk, R.D. & Homan, C.P. (1984). Emotion and dance
in dynamic light displays.
Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 22, 437-440.

