UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Fate of Irrelevant Information in Analogical Mapping

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0z30q626

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Stilwell, C. Hunt
Markman, Arthur B.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Fate of Irrelevant Information in Analogical Mapping
C. Hunt Stilwell (stilwell@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Mezes Hall 330
Austin, TX 78712

Arthur B. Markman (markman@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Mezes Hall 330
Austin, TX 78712

Abstract
Research on analogical mapping has not yet focused on
the fate of information about the base and target domains
that is not relevant to the correspondence. We suggest
that there are two methods for dealing with irrelevant
information in analogies. Nonalignable objects are
ignored, while irrelevant attributes of alignable
differences are packed away using a process that is a
long term equivalent to the suppression process observed
in the text comprehension literature. We report one study
that supports this hypothesis by demonstrating that
unpacking irrelevant information interferes with memory
for domains involved in a comparison.

Introduction
Analogical reasoning allows people to compare across
domains that might not seem similar on the surface
(Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1995; Keane,
Ledgeway, & Duff, 1994). For example, the atom is
like the solar system, because something (electrons and
planets) revolves around something else (the nucleus
and the sun) in each. An open question in analogy
research is what happens to the knowledge that is not
relevant to this similarity (e.g., electrons are very small
and planets are very large)? Most research on
comparisons and analogies has focused only on the
relevant information. However, the fate of irrelevant
information such as the size of the orbiting object in the
above example can have important implications for
models of analogy and comparisons in general.
In order to place this issue in context, we first discuss
the structural alignment process. We then propose a
mechanism for dealing with irrelevant information,
called packing, and compare it to a similar mechanism
in language comprehension. Finally, we report an
experiment testing this mechanism.

Irrelevant information in analogy
The structural alignment process is used to compare
two domains in an analogy. The process operates over
structured representations in which the relations
between objects are explicit. This leads to two types of
information that can be used in the analogy: relational

information and object information. Relational
information is simply information about the relations
between objects, while object information includes the
relations the object participates in and the attributes of
the object. In an analogy, the two domains are aligned
so that their common relational structures are placed in
correspondence, and this leads to relational information
becoming focal (Markman & Gentner, 1997).
In structural alignment’s original formulation, only
relational information was used in the comparison of
domains (Gentner, 1983, 1989). However, when the
theory was extended to ordinary similarity comparisons
(Gentner & Markman, 1997; Markman & Gentner,
1993; Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993), object
attribute information became relevant. In a similarity
comparison, if the object match is better than the
relational match, then it will be preferred. There is also
evidence that attribute information influences
analogical comparisons. For example, analogs are
easier to retrieve if they share attribute similarity to the
target than when they share only relational similarity
(Gentner, Rattermann, & Forbus, 1993). The fact that
attribute information is available in analogical
comparisons raises an important question: How does
structural alignment deal with attribute information in
analogies, where it is not relevant?
One way in that superfluous attribute information
might adversely affect the comparison process is by
taxing working memory. Recently the role of working
memory in analogy has become a topic of study
(Hummel & Holyoak, 1997; Waltz, et al., 2000). One
finding from this work is that straining working
memory hinders the discovery of common relational
structures. This is because relational matches take up
more working memory capacity than do surface
(attribute) matches. Thus anything that decreases the
working memory load (e.g., making attribute
information less available) will facilitate relational
comparisons.
Structural alignment handles some irrelevant
information through the concept of alignability.
Alignable objects, or objects that participate in the
relational correspondence, are relevant to the
comparison. In analogies, these objects are generally
alignable differences, i.e., nonidentical objects that are

placed in correspondence by virtue of playing a
common role in a matching relational structure.
Alignable differences can be contrasted to nonalignable
differences, which are objects that do not participate in
the common relational structure. Alignable differences
are more focal to comparisons than are nonalignable
differences.
In this paper we are interested in a second type of
irrelevant information that has not received much
attention in the analogy literature. In particular, when
an alignable difference is found, some of the attributes
of the corresponding objects are likely to be irrelevant
to the relational match. For example, in Figure 1, the
pig in the top scene and the baby in the bottom scene
are an alignable difference, because each is making a
mess. Attribute information about the pig such as its
snout and ears are not relevant to the relational match.
Is information like this treated as focal to the
comparison because it is part of an alignable difference,
or is it treated like a nonalignable difference because it
is irrelevant to the relational correspondence?

Packing and Suppression
The comparison process might deal with irrelevant
attribute information by packing it away, or making it
less available for processing. On this view, when a
representation is packed during a comparison, the
representations involved are changed so that only the
information relevant to the match between domains is
immediately available.
A similar mechanism—called suppression—has been
suggested in the language comprehension literature.
Suppression inhibits superfluous information about a
word or concept during comprehension. For example,
in the sentence "He won the match," borrowed from
Gernsbacher & Robertson (1999), the inappropriate
meaning of "match as a stick used to light a fire is
inhibited. This mechanism is also useful for limiting
the amount of information in working memory during
processing. Nonetheless, there are key differences
between the processes of analogical comparison and
language comprehension that might limit the utility of a
suppression mechanism in analogical reasoning. For
one, language comprehension - and therefore
suppression - occurs very rapidly, while analogies form
over a longer period of time. In addition, suppression is
short-lived, because the suppressed meaning of a word
might be needed (and therefore accessed) in subsequent
sentences.
In contrast, packing involves
representational change, and so we would expect
longer-term effects than those observed with
suppression.
If irrelevant information about a comparison is
packed away, then attributes of alignable differences
that are irrelevant to the relational match should be
treated like nonalignable differences in comparisons.
We tested this possibility by extending a previous study

Figure 1: Example Scene Pair. In the top scene the
pig is an alignable difference and the helicopter is a
nonalignable difference.
by Markman & Gentner (1997). Their study showed
that nonalignable differences make poor recall cues,
while alignable differences make effective recall cues.
In this experiment, subjects were shown pairs of scenes
like the one in Fig. 1, and were asked to rate their
similarity. As in Fig. 1, there was a target scene on top,
which contained both alignable differences (e.g., the
pig) and nonalignable differences (e.g., the helicopter)
with the comparison scene on the bottom. After a filler
task, subjects were given pictures of objects that were
either alignable differences (the pig) or nonalignable
differences (the helicopter), and they were asked to
recall as much as they could about the scene in which
the object had originally appeared. Subjects recalled
more information when given the alignable cues than
when given the nonalignable cues. This finding
suggests that alignable differences are more focal than
nonalignable differences.
What aspect of the alignable object is making it a
good retrieval cue? The packing mechanism we
propose suggests that the connection of the object to
relational information is important for retrieval, and that
the attributes of the object that are irrelevant to the
relational match are packed away. If these attributes
are made more salient, the alignable object may be
treated more like the nonalignable object, and its
efficacy as a recall cue will decrease. To test this idea
we added an unpacking task in between the comparison
and recall tasks of the Markman and Gentner (1997)
experiment. In the unpacking task subjects were shown
either the alignable or nonalignable difference from the

original scene, and were asked to describe what the
object looked like. Listing properties of the objects
should cause subjects to focus on the attribute
information. If the comparison process made this
information less available by packing it away, then
when this object is later used as a retrieval cue, it
should be ineffective. In particular, the encoding
specificity principle suggests that the likelihood of
retrieving an item in memory increases with the
similarity between the context at retrieval and the
context at encoding (Tulving & Thompson, 1973).
Thus, if the unpacking task focuses subjects’ attention
on irrelevant information that was packed away during
comparison, the alignable object should no longer be an
effective recall cue. In addition, because nonalignable
objects are not emphasized by the comparison process,
unpacking them should not have any effect on their
efficacy as recall cues.
In addition to the unpacking task, we added a packing
task in between the comparison and recall tasks. This
task was designed to reinstate the analogical mapping.
First, during the initial comparison, people were asked
to label each pair. This label generally referred to the
relational match between the pictures. Later, subjects
were asked to recall the titles. Recalling the titles
should reinstate the relational mapping for the pair of
scenes given that title, resulting in a pattern of recall
similar to that observed by Markman and Gentner
(1997), with alignable objects serving as effective cues
and nonalignable differences as poor recall cues.
In pilot experiments conducted with the packing and
unpacking tasks, the results fit with these predictions.
When given the unpacking task, alignable cues were no
longer effective recall cues. In contrast, when given the
packing task, alignable objects retained their efficacy as
recall cues. In the present experiment, each subject
completed both the packing and unpacking tasks before
recall. We predict that the tasks that subjects do last
(before recall) should have the most influence on their
ability to recall the original scenes. If subjects
complete the unpacking task last, the unpacked
alignable cues should be no better than the nonalignable
cues because attention is focused on the irrelevant
attributes. In contrast, if they complete the packing task
last, and thus reinstate the relational mapping between
scenes, the alignable cue should be a better recall cue
than the nonalignable cue.

Method
Participants
Subjects were 172 undergraduates at the University of
Texas, Austin, who participated for course credit. The
data from 44 subjects was not used due to their failure
to follow directions. Most of these either listed
properties during the recall task or failed to complete
one of the tasks. This left 128 subjects for analysis.

Procedure
The procedure is summarized in Figure 2. As this is a
between subject design, each subject saw the tasks in
the order specified by either the right or left column in
this figure.
Encoding
(Comparison
and Title)

Unpacking
(Listing
Features)

Packing
(Recalling
Titles)

Packing
(Recalling
Titles)

Unpacking
(Listing
Features)

Cued Recall

Figure 2: Design of the Experiment.
Subjects sat in cubicles and performed the experiment
at their own pace. They were instructed to fill out a set
of packets in order, from top to bottom, without looking
back or ahead. The Comparison Task packet, which
was always completed first, instructed subjects to look
at each pair of scenes and rate their similarity on a ninepoint scale. They were also instructed to write a
descriptive title for the pair of scenes at the bottom of
the page after rating their similarity. Participants took
approximately 5-10 minutes to complete this task.
Subjects then completed an unrelated filler task that
took approximately 15-20 minutes.
After the filler task, subjects were given either the
Packing Task packet or the Unpacking Task packet. In
the Packing Task, subjects wrote down as many of the
titles that they had given the scene pairs as they could
remember. In the Unpacking Task, subjects wrote
down as many properties of the objects, which had been
either alignable or nonalignable objects in the
comparison scenes, as possible on the lines provided.
Each subject completed both the Packing and
Unpacking Task. They then completed another
unrelated filler task, which took approximately 15-20
minutes.
Finally, subjects were given the cued-Recall Task
packet. They were told that they would see a series of
objects that had appeared in the scenes they had seen
earlier. They were instructed to write down as much as
they could remember about the scenes in which the
objects had originally appeared. These objects were

either the alignable or nonalignable objects from the
comparisons scenes, as in the Unpacking Task.

Design
The study used a 2(Task Order: Packing Last vs.
Unpacking Last) X 2(Unpacked Object: Alignable vs.
Nonalignable) X 2(Recall Object: Alignable vs.
Nonalignable) design. All ten items were run in all
conditions. Task order was between subjects. A total
of 8 subjects was required to get one observation for
each item in each condition.

Mean # of Properties Recalled

Unpacking Alignable Objectect
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

Unpacking Last

Packing Last

Last Task Prior to Cued-Recall

Nonalignable Cue

Alignable Cue

Unpacking Nonalignable Object
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

Unpacking Last

Packing Last

Last Task Prior to Cued-Recall

Figure 3a & 3b: Mean number of Properties
Recalled.

Results
Figure 3a shows the pattern of recall for subjects who
unpacked the alignable object during the Unpacking
task. Figure 3b shows the recall data for subjects who
unpacked the nonalignable object.. A repeated
measures 2(Task Order) X 2(Unpacking) X 2(Recall)
ANOVA was performed, by item, on the mean number
of properties recalled. There was a main effect of
recall, F(19,1) = 6.33, p < .05. This reflects the fact that
alignable cues are generally better than nonalignable

cues. There was also a significant Task Order by
Recall interaction, F(19,1) = 2.41, p < .05. As
predicted, there was a significant Task Order by
Unpacking by Recall interaction, F (19, 1) = 8.76, p <
.05.
The critical predictions for this study center on the
conditions in which the alignable difference was
unpacked. When the unpacking task was done last (i.e.,
most recently before recall), we expected this task to
interfere with recall. In this case, the alignable
difference should not be a good retrieval cue. In
contrast, when the packing task was done last, subjects
should be able to reinstate the analogical mapping. In
this case, the alignable difference should be a much
better retrieval cue than the nonalignable difference.
Consistent with this prediction, when subjects
completed the unpacking task last and unpacked
alignable objects, the difference between alignable vs.
nonalignable recall cues was not significant, t(38) =
.27, p > .10. However, as predicted, when the packing
task was completed last, the alignable cue was a better
recall cue than the nonalignable cue, for subjects who
unpacked the alignable object, t (38) = 3.03, p < .05.
These data are shown in Figure 3a.
A different pattern of data was obtained when the
nonalignable difference was unpacked. In this case,
unpacking should not affect the efficacy of the
alignable difference as a retrieval cue. Consistent with
this prediction, subjects recalled more differences given
the alignable difference cue than given the nonalignable
difference cue regardless of whether the nonalignable
difference was unpacked before or after the packing
task was performed. These data are shown in Figure
3b.
Further tests were performed taking into account
whether subjects remembered the title for the scene.
This analysis is important for determining if it was the
reinstatement of the relational mapping through
recalling the title that resulted in the different patters of
recall. For this analysis an additional factor, Title
Recall, was added to the previous analysis. In the
packing last condition, subjects who unpacked the
alignable object and received the alignable recall cue
recalled significantly more properties of the original
scene when they recalled the title (m = 3.97) than when
they did not (m = 2.48), t(38) = 2.36, p < .05. The same
was true for subjects in the unpacking last condition.
They recalled more when they remembered the title (m
= 3.47) than when they did not (m = 2.08), t(38) =2.63,
p < .05. This finding suggests that successfully
recalling the title of a pair, and thus reinstating the
mapping, was beneficial for later recall.
We also looked at whether subjects recalled at least
one thing about the original scene in the recall task.
This tells us whether they were able to retrieve the
original representation of the scene. The mean

proportions of subjects recalling at least one property of
the scene are presented in Table 1. The proportions
data shows the same pattern that the mean recall data
showed. A 2(Task Order) X 2(Unpacking) by 2(Recall)
ANOVA was performed on the proportions data, and
showed the same results as the mean recall data. There
was a main effect of recall, F(19, 1) = 18.92, p < .05,
again showing that alignable cues are generally better
than nonalignable cues at facilitating recall. Again,
there was also an Order by Recall interaction, F(19, 1)
= 6.35, p < .05. Most importantly, the Order by
Unpacking by Recall interaction was significant, F(19,
1) = 9.22, p < .05. Thus the results exhibited the same
pattern both for total amount of recall as well as
proportion of subjects who recalled anything about a
scene. This finding suggests that the packing task
facilitates access to the original mapping rather than
increasing the availability of additional properties of the
scene.
Table 1: : Proportion of trials on which one or more
properties were recalled
Unpacking Alignable Object

Packing Last
Unpacking Last

Alignable
Cue

Nonalignable
Cue

0.70
0.58

0.39
0.51

Unpacking Nonalignable Object

Packing Last
Unpacking Last

Alignable
Cue

Nonalignable
Cue

0.63
0.66

0.47
0.46

relational mapping. One piece of evidence in favor of
this interpretation is that recalling the title provides a
significant boost in the level of recall. One aspect of
the data that bears further scrutiny is the observation
that successfully recalling the title of a pair increased
the efficacy of the alignable cue regardless of whether
the unpacking task was done before or after unpacking
the alignable object.
This experiment raises several questions about the
packing phenomenon that can be addressed in future
research. First, how long lasting are the representational
changes that occur when a representation is packed or
unpacked? The results of this experiment demonstrate
that the effects of packing or unpacking a representation
last at least 10-15 minutes. This time course contrasts
with the suppression mechanism (Gernsbacher &
Robertson, 1999), which lasts a much shorter period of
time. Future research could examine the effects of
these tasks over longer delays.
A related question involves how packing or unpacking
a representation affects future comparisons using that
representation. One possibility is that the role of
surface similarities, which have been shown to figure
prominently in the early stages of comparisons
(Goldstone & Medin, 1994; Ratcliff & McKoon, 1989)
might be attenuated if packing makes these surface
features less available than relational information.
This research is an initial step toward exploring the
fate of irrelevant information in comparisons. The
packing phenomenon is likely to be useful in guiding
future research. It is consistent with the current interest
in the role of working memory in analogical mapping,
and may prove useful in answering questions about how
relational information and working memory interact. In
addition, it may provide valuable constraints for current
models of analogy, which typically focus selectively on
the relevant information in a comparison.

Discussion

Acknowledgments

This study provides evidence that information about
alignable differences that is not relevant to the
relational match is packed away during comparison. As
expected, when people unpacked information about the
alignable difference by listing properties of it, the
efficacy of the alignable difference as a retrieval cue
was reduced. Nonalignable differences, which are not
focal in comparison, were not influenced significantly
by the unpacking task. These data did not simply
reflect a general interaction between the packing task
and the retrieval task, because performing the packing
task (in which subjects recalled titles they had given to
the pair) restored the efficacy of the alignable
difference as a recall cue.
It is straightforward to view the packing task as
increasing the salience of properties of the alignable
differences that had been packed away. It is less clear
what is happening during the packing task. We suggest
that recalling the title causes subjects to reinstate the

This research was supported by NSF grant SBR9905013 given to the second author. The authors thank
Eric Dietrich for discussions that laid the theoretical
foundation for this work. They thank Sam Day, Dedre
Gentner, Ryan Gossen, and Gregory Murphy for
contributing to the ideas in this paper. Finally, the
authors thank Kerry Collins for his performance all
season (except in that last game).

References
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155170.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure
mapping in analogy and similarity. American
Psychologist, 52(1), 45-56.
Gernsbacher, M. A., & Robertson, R. R. (1999). The

role of suppression in figurative language
comprehension. Journal of Pragmatics, 31(12), 16191630.
Goldstone, R. L., & Medin, D. L. (1994). Time course
of comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 29(1), 29-50.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps:
Analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, MA:MIT
Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical
access and mapping. Psychological Review, 104(3),
427-466.
Keane, M. T., Ledgeway, T., & Duff, S. (1994).
Constraints on analogical mapping: A comparison of
three models. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 387-438.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1997). The effects of
alignability on memory. Psychological Science, 8(5),
363-367.
Medin, D.L., Goldstone, R.L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review,
100(2), 254-278.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. Similarity information
versus relational information: Differences in the time
course of retrieval. Cognitive Psychology, 21(2),
139-155.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding
specificity and retrieval processes in episodic
memory. Psychological Review, 80, 352-372.
Waltz, J. A., Lau, A., Grewal, S. K., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2000). The role of working memory in analogical
mapping. Memory and Cognition , 28(7), 1205-1212.

