UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Emergence of Words

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/94m845tn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Regier, Terry
Corrigan, Bryce
Cabasaan, Rachael
et al.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Emergence of Words
Terry Regier (regier@psych.uchicago.edu)
Bryce Corrigan (b-corrigan@uchicago.edu)
Rachael Cabasaan (rrcabasa@uchicago.edu)
Amanda Woodward (alw1@psych.uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Michael Gasser (gasser@indiana.edu)
Linda Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Children change in their word-learning abilities sometime
during the second year of life. The nature of this behavioral change has been taken to suggest an underlying
change in mechanism, from associative learning to a more
purely symbolic form of learning. We present a simple
associative computational model that accounts for these
developmental shifts without any underlying change in
mechanism. Thus, there may be no need to posit a qualitative mechanistic change in the word-learning of young
children. More generally, words, as symbols, may emerge
from associative beginnings.

and Plunkett, 1994; Elman et al., 1996; Merriman, 1999;
Plunkett et al., 1992). However, the specific cluster of
behavioral issues we address have not, to our knowledge,
yet been accounted for computationally.
We begin by briefly outlining the empirical evidence
for a change in word-learning during the child’s second year of life. We then present an associative computational model, and demonstrate that it accounts for
this change. We also highlight predictions made by the
model, and some preliminary evidence in favor of them.
We conclude with a discussion of the ramifications of
this account.

Overview

Empirical Evidence

Word-learning is likely to rely heavily on associative
learning, such that the child comes to associate the sound
“dog” with dogs, the sound “cat” with cats, and so on.
However, children’s word-learning abilities change significantly during the second year of life, and some have
proposed that this behavioral change reflects an underlying mechanistic shift away from a purely associative
base. In particular, it has been proposed that sometime
during the child’s second year, a conceptual insight into
the symbolic, referential nature of words occurs (McShane, 1979). This insight then supports a more purely
symbolic form of learning, in contrast with the simple
associative learning that preceded it.
A number of changes in word-learning occur at around
this age. When viewed as a totality, this array of behavioral changes does suggest a mechanistic change of some
sort. We shall argue, however, that these changes may be
accounted for without recourse to any posited conceptual
insight, or any qualitative mechanistic change in the nature of word-learning. Instead, they flow naturally from a
purely associative mechanism, operating over similaritybased representations. As these representations gradually become more peaked and finely differentiated, the
child’s linguistic behavior becomes more recognizably
“symbolic”. We argue this point by presenting an associative computational model, and demonstrating that
it matches the developmental shifts of 1- to 2-year-old
children. Thus words, as discrete arbitrary symbols, may
emerge from fundamentally associative, similarity-based
mental material.
We are not the first to propose this general idea, nor
to present a computational model supporting it (Cottrell

During the second year of life, the child’s word-learning
behavior changes in at least four respects: ease of learning, honing of linguistic form, honing of linguistic meaning, and the learning of synonyms.

Ease of learning
As children first begin to produce words, their acquisition of new words is slow and errorful. New words are
added at the rate of 1 or 2 every few weeks (GershkoffStowe and Smith, 1997). Then between 18 and 22
months (when the child has about 50 words in productive vocabulary), the rate of new word acquisition accelerates dramatically, with reports from detailed diary studies of children learning as many as 36 words in a single
week (Dromi, 1987). Experimental studies replicate this
shift in the laboratory. At the beginning of word learning,
13- to 16-month-olds can acquire a word-object linkage
in comprehension based on 4-8 training trials (Bird and
Chapman, 1998). By the time children are 2 to 3 years of
age, a single learning trial is sufficient for word learning
in comprehension and production, and for generalization
to an appropriate range of referents. Thus, children appear to shift from learning as a gradual process to the sort
of all-or-none process that often characterizes symbolic
learning.

Honing of linguistic form
Infants must learn what counts as a word in the language
they are learning, and what does not. The developmental evidence suggests that in the beginning, words function as ordinary members of the open set of possible associates. Later, however, the range of acceptable word

forms becomes narrower. For example, Namy and Waxman (1998) found that 18-month-olds readily accepted
a hand gesture as a word form — in that they learned to
associate the gesture with a referent. Older children however, 26-month-olds, did not learn the association. This
developmental trend has been replicated using other nonphonological “words” (Woodward and Hoyne, 1999).
There is other evidence that the process is one of “honing” or narrowing the set of possible forms. Although infants readily discriminate between individual phonemes
in perceptual tasks, they do not exploit this level of detail
in their initial representations of words (Stager & Werker,
1997; see also Bird & Chapman, 1998). Specifically,
at the beginning of word learning, at 14 months, babies
cannot learn that bih and dih refer to different items, although they can learn this for globally different forms
such as lif and neem. Thus children seem to move from a
state in which they are sensitive primarily to overall similarity or difference between word forms to one in which
they are acutely sensitive to minor differences.

Honing of meaning
Just as forms become progressively restricted with development, so do meanings. Early in word learning, 13- and
18- month old children generalize a newly learned object name to new referents by overall similarity across all
dimensions (Smith, Jones, Gershkoff-Stowe & Samuelson, 1999). But older children systematically generalize
novel names for artifact-like things using the specific dimension of shape (Smith et al., 1999). Thus, children
come to pay attention to particular dimensions of referents and disregard others - much as they do with word
forms. (A distinction however is that this “shape bias”
holds for object names and not other sorts of names.)

Synonyms
Children assume that two different forms carry two different meanings. This has been termed the mutual exclusivity assumption. One specific manifestation of this
assumption is that young children tend to resist learning
synonyms. Liittschwager and Markman (1994) found
that 16-month-olds, who can learn a new word for an asyet-unnamed object, have trouble learning a new word
for an already-named object (i.e. a synonym). However,
24-month-olds learn novel names and synonyms equally
well - they do not exhibit a particular resistance to learning synonyms. Thus, there is a shift in the ease of learning synonyms, one that occurs at about the same age as
the other changes in word-learning outlined above.
These roughly simultaneous changes, in ease of
learning, form-honing, meaning-honing, and synonymlearning, may suggest an underlying change of mechanism sometime near the second birthday. However, we
shall argue that no qualitative change in mechanism is
necessary to account for these parallel developmental trajectories. They emerge naturally from a single fundamentally associative mechanism.

Foundational Assumptions
As we have seen, children do not enter the world with a
clear sense of what counts as an acceptable word form.
But if this is the case, what differentiates word forms
from meanings in the first place, in the mind of an infant? Both are experiences of events or objects in the
world. We assume that the answer lies in the child’s
awareness of her interlocutor’s stance as a social other.
Specifically, we assume that the child will take the object of the interlocutor’s attention as a potential referent
(Baldwin et al., 1996). Further, we assume that those
intentional actions of the interlocutor to which the interlocutor is not attending are taken as potential forms
– this will include verbal utterances, gestures, and any
other unattended action. It is known that pre-linguistic
infants are sensitive to the object of attention of another
person (Corkum and Moore, 1998). Thus, the deployment of the interlocutor’s attention serves as a plausible
starting-point for the development of the form/meaning
distinction.

The Model
The model, shown in Figure 1, builds on these social
assumptions. It accepts as input a potential form and a
potential referent, which are assumed to have been determined by the interlocutor’s deployment of attention.
These inputs are each represented by a bank of nodes,
corresponding to features of experience. Form and referent are associated in the top layer of the network, which
holds a localist lexicon - in which each node stands for
a distinct pairing of form and meaning. The form and
meaning for a given lexicon node are encoded on its incoming weights. New nodes are added to this lexicon as
new form-meaning pairings are encountered (Carpenter
and Grossberg, 1988).
The central concept of the model is that different dimensions of experience acquire different degrees of communicative significance, or selective attention (Nosofsky,
1986). This is true of both form and meaning, which
are represented in the same psychological space. At the
beginning of learning, all dimensions are equally, and
weakly, weighted, and the model responds in a graded
fashion, on the basis of overall similarity. Later in learning, however, some dimensions become very significant,
and others insignificant. The model then responds categorically, in the all-or-none fashion characteristic of
symbolic representations. It is this transition that we suggest underlies the emergence of words, as symbols.
Formal presentation: Given any input, the model computes the distance of the current input from the weight
vector of each lexicon node:

di = ∑ s j (i j − wi j )2
j

Here s j is the communicative significance of dimension
j, i j is the current value (+/-1) of input dimension j, and
wi j is the weight on the connection from input node j to
lexicon node i. Note that distance is computed over both

lexicon

. . .

novelty

. . . .

attention to dimensions

perception

speech

gestures

("ball")

objects

other

(a ball)

potential form

potential referent

Figure 1: A model of early word learning.
form and meaning dimensions, together. The activation
of the lexicon node is then an exponential function of this
psychological distance (Shepard, 1987):
ai = exp(−di )
Thus, the activation for a lexicon node i will be at its
maximum (1.0) when di is zero - which will occur when
the input and weight vectors are identical along significant dimensions. There is also a “novelty node”, a novelty detector that is activated to the extent that no existing
lexicon node is activated:
anovelty = 1 − maxi (ai )
Given these activations, we can compute a probability
distribution over the lexicon, including the novelty node,
using the Luce choice rule:
pi =

ai
∑j aj

A new lexicon node is then created with probability
pnovelty – the probability associated with the novelty
node. If this node-creation does occur, the newly-created
node k is incorporated into the lexicon, and its weights
are set by the current input values, multiplied by pnovelty
(Hebb, 1949). Thus, the more clearly novel the input
is, the stronger the weights on the newly allocated nodes
will be.1
wk j = i j × pnovelty
If a new node is not created, the most highly activated
node k in the lexicon is selected for training. The model
is then trained under gradient descent, with a target value
of 1.0 for pk , and target values of 0.0 for all other
pi , i = k. This will reinforce node k’s representation of
the form-meaning pairing currently presented as input,
moving its weights wk closer to the current input, and
those of competing nodes farther away. Similarly, the s
1 Nodes that are created but not revisited within a given
number of epochs are pruned from the lexicon. In current simulations, that number of epochs is 1.

values (significance weights) will be adjusted to help discriminate lexicon nodes from each other. We then train
again with only the form as input, and with the same target outputs. And finally, we train again with only the
referent as input, and with the same target outputs. This
three-step training causes the selected node k to act as a
category node for both form and referent - and thereby to
link the two.
The equations above, with the exception of the novelty node activation and creation, are adapted from existing models of categorization (Kruschke, 1992; Nosofsky,
1986). Merriman (1999) has shown that a similar formalism can account for the mutual exclusivity bias and
shape bias in word-learning – the present model builds
on this work. The combination of form and meaning in
a single representation echoes the linguistic production
model of Dell et al. (1997). This links theoretically central aspects of our model to existing models of related
processes, models that have already received empirical
support in their own right.
Testing: Once a set of words has been learned, one may
test the model on either comprehension or production of
a learned word. In a comprehension test, the word form
is supplied to the network, but no referent is supplied. A
winning lexicon node k is selected, as above, but from
a competition based on the form dimensions only. The
referent dimensions of node k’s weight vector wk are then
projected down to the referent inputs:
i j = wk j
This reconstructed referent constitutes the model’s response to the word form supplied as input. Production
tests proceed analogously, but with the referent supplied
as input, and the form produced as output.

Accounting for Existing Data
In the simulations reported here, the model was trained
on a dataset of form-meaning pairings, and tested at various points during training. There were 6 dimensions
for form: 4 were significant (such that a pattern over
these dimensions was predictive of the referent), and 2

were insignificant (not predictive). Similarly, there were
6 dimensions for meaning: 4 significant (such that a pattern over these dimensions was predictive of the form),
and 2 insignificant (not predictive). The training set consisted of 75 variants of 5 words; a variant of a word preserved the significant dimensions of the word while altering insignificant dimensions. The words and their variants were represented by either +1 or -1 on each dimension. The specific values were chosen randomly, subject
to the constraint that patterns over the significant dimensions of form be predictive of significant dimensions of
meaning, and vice versa. The model was trained on this
dataset for 100 epochs. The learning rate was 0.05. As
expected, the significance weights differentiated significant from insignificant dimensions increasingly clearly
over the course of training. At epoch 6, the difference between the average significance weight over dimensions
intended to be significant and the average significance
weight over dimensions intended to be insignificant was
1.06608. By epoch 60, this difference was 2.74704, reflecting clearer differentiation with training.
During training, tests were performed in order to probe
the model’s behavior on the four empirical trends noted
at the beginning of the paper. In all cases, this involved
presenting a new form-meaning pairing for the model
to learn, and then determining the probability of correct
comprehension or production. We define a “correct” response to be one that is within 0.9 of the target along all
significant dimensions (which generally vary from -1 to
1), using the comprehension and production output rules
outlined above. We then calculate the summed probability across all lexicon nodes that would produce a correct
response: this yields the probability of correct response.
Ease of learning: We first tested how easily the model
could learn a novel form for a novel object, and how that
ease changed with age. A new word was created that
was representationally distant from the existing words in
the training set – specifically, each of form and meaning in this new word differed from those for existing
words along all significant dimensions. We shall refer
to this word henceforth as the “novel” word. We examined the probability of correct comprehension of this new
word after simulating one learning trial on the word at
two points during the learning of the training set mentioned above: after 6 epochs, and after 60 epochs. The
results are displayed in Figure 2(a). As the model’s space
stretches along significant dimensions, this new word is
increasingly easily learned, eventually being reliably correctly comprehended given only 1 training trial. This
progression into 1-trial learning reflects the behavior of
1-2 year old children. Importantly, once the model had
learned the novel word, it was removed from the lexicon;
thus, later “ages” of the model did not have the benefit
of earlier training on the novel word – only of an appropriately stretched psychological space, which caused the
word to be perceived as distinct, and therefore easily remembered.
Honing of linguistic form: We next examined the learning of a new word that was similar in form to an existing

word in the training set. The form of this new word differed from that of an existing word in the lexicon by only
1 significant dimension, while the meaning dimensions
differed from other words along all significant dimensions. Thus, this test simulates the potential confusion of
learning “bih” and “dih” associated with different sorts
of objects (Stager and Werker, 1997). The probability of
correct comprehension after one training trial is shown
by the crosshatched bars in Figure 2(b). In this figure, the
solid bars duplicate the presentation of the model’s behavior on the novel (dissimilar) word in (a), for purposes
of comparison. As is true of children, similar words are
initially somewhat more difficult to learn than are globally dissimilar words. However, eventually these similar
words are also successfully learned given one training
trial, as the relevant dimensions of space are highlighted,
counteracting the confusing similarity. This allows fast
learning of minimal pairs such as “bit” and “pit”.
Honing of meaning: We were interested in determining
whether the model would exhibit a strengthening shape
bias, as children do. To test this, as before, we trained
the model on the novel word, and then tested the probability of producing the novel word for a different object, which differed from the original in meaning along
insignificant (non-shape) dimensions only. This probability of generalization is shown in Figure 2(c). The
increasing strength of generalization along the significant dimensions follows directly from the increasing
perceived communicative significance of those dimensions (see Merriman (1999) for a similar demonstration).
This is analogous to the honing of linguistic form. This
account is incomplete however. In actuality the shape
bias applies only to object names; thus an additional
mechanism would be required to determine whether a
given word is an object name, and therefore whether the
model’s bias should apply.
Synonyms: A synonym for an existing word in the lexicon should be difficult to learn, since it is similar (identical in meaning) to that existing word. Figure 2(d)
shows that this is the case in the present model; Merriman (1999) reports similar results with a similar model.
The probability of correct comprehension after one training exposure is initially lower for a synonym of an existing word in the lexicon than it is for the (dissimilar)
novel word examined above. This matches the findings of Liittschwager and Markman (1994). Eventually
however the synonym and the non-synonym are approximately equally likely to be learned – as is eventually
true with children. In the model, this is accounted for
by the stretching of the underlying psychological space
with age, such that even similar lexical entries are kept
distinct, and thereby effectively learned.

Predictions
The model makes two predictions. The first is that young
children should experience difficulty learning homonyms
(a single form with multiple meanings, such as the
“bank” of a river, and a “bank” as a financial institution). Moreoever, this difficulty should be correlated

Ease of Learning

Form Honing

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8
P(correct)

P(correct)

Novel

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Novel
Similar

0.6
0.4
0.2

6

0.0

60
Epochs

6

(a)

60
Epochs

(b)

Meaning Honing

Synonyms

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8
P(correct)

P(generalization)

Novel

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Novel
Synonym

0.6
0.4
0.2

6

60
Epochs

(c)

0.0

6

60
Epochs

(d)

Figure 2: Developmental trends, as exhibited by the model.
with the difficulty of learning synonyms, as the reason
for the difficulty is analogous. Half of the model’s lexical representation for a homonymous or synonymous
word will be identical to that for another word in the lexicon: the identical half is the form for homonyms, and
the meaning for synonyms. This means that the two
lexical entries in question will tend to be nearer each
other in psychological space than two non-homonyms
or two non-synonyms, and will therefore interfere with
each other. Doherty (2000) has found that understanding
of homonymy is strongly associated with understanding
of synonymy, in 3-4 year old children.2 Similar tests on
younger children would more directly test this prediction.
The second prediction also concerns the interaction
of form and meaning. As we have seen, 14-month-olds
have trouble associating similar sounds such as “bih” and
2 These

false belief.

were both also correlated with understanding of

“dih” with different referents (Stager and Werker, 1997).
On the model’s account, this is because the forms are
too similar, such that the two lexical representations lie
confusingly near each other in psychological space. But
since that space contains both form and meaning dimensions, the model predicts that an exaggerated semantic
difference between the referents should compensate for
the confusing formal similarity of “bih” and “dih” in
such a task, and should make learning easier. This prediction has not yet been tested.

Discussion
1- to 2-year old children seem to undergo a qualitative
change in the manner in which they learn words. It has
been suggested that this behavioral change reflects a conceptual insight into the symbolic nature of words. The
model we have presented, however, suggests a different, and more parsimonious, account of the same phenomenon. The behavioral change may result not from

an abrupt insight, but rather from an associative learner
gradually determining which aspects of the world are relevant for communication. In this manner, the symbolic
use of words may emerge from an associative base.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grant R01-DC03384 from
the National Institutes of Health.

References
Baldwin, D., Markman, E., Bill, B., Desjardins, R., and
Irwin, J. (1996). Infants’ reliance on a social criterion for establishing word-object relations. Child
Development, 67:3135–3153.
Bird, E. K. and Chapman, R. S. (1998). Partial representation and phonological selectivity in the comprehension of 13- to 16-month-olds. First Language,
18:105–127.
Carpenter, G. A. and Grossberg, S. (1988). The ART
of adaptive pattern recognition by a self-organizing
neural network. Computer, pages 77–88.
Corkum, V. and Moore, C. (1998). The origins of joint
visual attention in infants. Developmental Psychology, 34:28–38.
Cottrell, G. and Plunkett, K. (1994). Acquiring the mapping from meaning to sounds. Connection Science,
6(4):379–412.
Dell, G., Schwartz, M., Martin, N., Saffran, E., and
Gagnon, D. (1997). Lexical access in aphasic
and nonaphasic speakers. Psychological Review,
104(4):801–838.
Doherty, M. J. (2000). Children’s understanding of
homonymy: Metalinguistic awareness and false belief. Journal of Child Language, 27:367–392.
Dromi, E. (1987). Early Lexical Devlopment. Cambridge
University Press, New York.
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., KarmiloffSmith, A., Parisi, D., and Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective
on Development. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L. and Smith, L. B. (1997). A curvilinear trend in naming errors as a function of early
vocabulary growth. Cognitive Psychology, 34:37–
71.
Hebb, D. (1949). The Organization of Behavior. Wiley.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological Review, 99:22–44.
Liittschwager, J. and Markman, E. (1994). Sixteen and
24-month-olds’ use of mutual exclusivity as a default assumption in second label learning. Developmental Psychology, 30:955–968.
McShane, J. (1979). The development of naming. Linguistics, 17:879–905.

Merriman, W. (1999). Competition, attention, and young
children’s lexical processing. In MacWhinney, B.,
editor, The Emergence of Language, pages 331–
358. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
Namy, L. L. and Waxman, S. R. (1998). Words and gestures: Infants’ interpretations of different forms of
symbolic reference. Child Development, 69:295–
308.
Nosofsky, R. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 115(1):39–
57.
Plunkett, K., Sinha, C., Moller, M., and Strandsby, O.
(1992). Symbol grounding or the emergence of
symbols? vocabulary growth in children and a connectionist net. Connection Science, 4:293–312.
Shepard, R. (1987). Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological science. Science,
237:1317–1323.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S., Gershkoff-Stowe, L., and
Samuelson, S. (1999). The origins of the shape bias.
Submitted to the Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development.
Stager, C. L. and Werker, J. F. (1997). Infants listen for
more phonetic detail in speech perception than in
word-learning tasks. Nature, 388:381–382.
Woodward, A. L. and Hoyne, K. L. (1999). Infants’
learning about words and sounds in relation to objects. Child Development, 70:65–77.

