UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Origin of Somatic Markers: A Suggestion to Damasio's Theory Inspired by Dewey's
Ethics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/21w43609

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Filipic, Suzanne

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Origin of Somatic Markers:
A Suggestion to Damasio's Theory Inspired by Dewey's Ethics
Suzanne Filipic (suzannefilipic@hotmail.com)
Université de Paris III-Sorbonne Nouvelle
39 avenue de la citadelle 21240 Talant France

Damasio vs. Dewey
My goal is not to propose a criticism of Damasio's
theory, but to suggest how it might be possible to carry
it further, to wipe out even more efficiently the
traditional dualism opposing our reason and emotions.
Damasio's theory of somatic markers is for me a very
efficient means of exposing the importance of emotions
on the workings of reason, but my fear is that it might
lead a few to replace the old dualism opposing an
efficient reason to disruptive emotions by a new one
overemphasizing the power of emotions on a weak
influenced reason.
An important part of Dewey's Ethics deals with this
dualism. I suggest that, although Damasio's experiments
can be seen as providing amazing clarity and precision
to Dewey's philosophical intuitions, Dewey's
elaboration on the reciprocal influence of reason and
emotions goes one step further in questioning whatever
supposedly opposes them.

Dewey's Ethics
Since Dewey's Ethics is probably much less known
today than Damasio's Descartes' Error, let me start by
presenting what interactions Dewey imagines between
our emotions and our reason.
For Dewey, when we think we are making a choice
between following our emotions, or following our
reason, reality is always more complex:
while there is conflict, it is not between desire and
reason, but between a desire which wants a near-by
object and a desire which wants an object which is
seen by thought to occur in consequence of an
intervening series of conditions, or in the "long
run". (1932)
When facing a new situation, when are emotions
necessary if thought must lead us to action ? Dewey's
first intuition is that emotions provide the necessary
starting point of reflection, or the energy necessary to
its activity:
Unless there is a direct, mainly unreflective
appreciation of persons and deeds, the data for
subsequent thought will be lacking or distorted. A
person must feel the qualities of acts as one feels
with the hands the qualities of roughness and
smoothness in objects, before he has an inducement
to deliberate or material with which to deliberate.
(1932)

Dewey also thinks that any outcome of a thinking
process must be emotionally "appreciated," otherwise it
would not stir us to action. I quote Ethics again: "no
matter how elaborate and how rational is the object of
thought, it is impotent unless it arouses desire".
At this point, we might wonder two things. Are the
emotions which stimulate reflection and those which
motivate action of the same kind? And doesn't Dewey
overemphasize the importance of emotions, by giving
them a crucial role at the beginning and at the end of
the process of thought?
In the fourteenth chapter of Ethics, Dewey works on
distinguishing valuation, as a judgment of value, in
which reason evaluates an object by its consequences,
and valuing, as an immediate emotional reaction. For
Dewey, valuation and valuing are not opposed, but
linked: "We esteem before we estimate, and estimation
comes in to consider whether and to what extent
something is worthy of esteem [...]. All growth in
maturity is attended with this change from a
spontaneous to a reflective and critical attitude".
(1932)
Therefore, even if emotional reactions always come
first, reason can and should have an effect upon later
ones: "judgments of value are not mere registrations
[...] of previous attitudes of favor and disfavor, liking
and aversion, but have a reconstructive and
transforming effect upon them by determining the
objects that are worthy of esteem and approbation".
(1932)
Dewey thus distinguishes between primary emotions,
which one has at the beginning of one's life, and adult
emotions. These ones are of two different kinds: the
spontaneous ones, which are immediate, but probably
the result of past value judgments, and the transformed
emotions, which have just evolved, as an effect of a
new value-judgment.
Therefore, to go back to my two questions, we can
conclude that Dewey ends up giving emotions an
important influence on reason, and the two kinds of
emotions he imagines in this regard might coincide with
the two kinds of emotions he had noticed as necessary
to reflection. The emotions providing energy to the
thought process might be the spontaneous ones,
occurring before the thought process, and the
transformed emotions, produced by valuation, might be
the ones necessary to act.

If one accepts this interpretation, we could conclude
that in front of a situation, Dewey imagines that our
reaction follows a pattern similar to this one: a new
situation provokes spontaneous emotions which
stimulate reflection which produces a value-judgment
and a transformed emotion which enable us to act.
What suggestion will this theory enable us to make
on Damasio's theory of somatic markers?

Damasio's Theory of the Somatic Markers
The starting point of Damasio's research is Elliot, a
reasonable and intelligent man, who, because of a brain
tumor, became unable to take any sound personal
decision.
After running a series of tests, Damasio became
convinced that Elliot was still able, in front of most
situations, to imagine different action plans, but that he
was never able to choose the right one in practice. To
link his lack of emotions to his inability to assign values
to the different plans he is still able to produce,
Damasio proposes his theory of the somatic marker.
To explains what he means by a "somatic marker,"
Damasio asks his reader to imagine himself as an owner
of a large business, "faced with the prospect of meeting
or not with a possible client who can bring valuable
business but also happens to be the archenemy of your
best friend, and proceeding or not with a particular
deal" (1994).
For Damasio, using a cost/benefit analysis of all the
scenarios you imagine is not going to work; at best, it
would take you too long to make a decision. However,
he thinks that without reasoning about it, some of the
options you imagine are automatically eliminated. If,
from experience, a connection has been made between a
specific response option and its bad outcome, a somatic
marker will be activated. This marker would then
operate either outside consciousness, by inhibiting a
tendency to act, or consciously, by letting you
experience an unpleasant gut feeling, thus convincing
you to avoid this option.

Damasio's Theory as an Explanation
of Dewey's Intuitions
Before going any further, I would like to suggest that
Damasio's theory can first be read as an explanation of
Dewey's relatively vague notions. When Damasio
writes, " a somatic state, negative or positive, caused by
the appearance of a given representation, operates not
only as a marker for the value of what is represented,
but also as a booster for continued working memory
and attention" (1994), it can easily be read as an
explanation of what Dewey meant when he wrote that
emotions provide reflection with "material with which
to deliberate," and "an inducement to deliberate"
(1932).

The Origin and Evolution of Somatic
Markers
Somatic markers are, according to Damasio, what
enable us, in new circumstances, to experience feelings
before we start evaluating the situation rationally. For
Dewey, these "intuitions" which are necessary for
reflection because they provide its material and its
motivation, are in the long run the product of our valuejudgments. Thus, he estimates that our emotions are as
necessary to our reason, than our reason to our
emotions.
I think that Damasio considers that only emotions are
at the source of somatic markers. Since he sees them as
necessary to the thinking process, it leads him to
conclude that our reason is based on our emotions, but
he forgets to consider whether our emotions are
influenced by our reason.
At this point, my goal is to question Damasio's
apparent one-sided view on the reason/emotions
interaction. My first remark is simply theoretical.
Following Damasio's experiments, I think we can reach
different conclusions. For him, when a chosen option
leads to a negative outcome, the consecutive somatic
state (the painful emotion) allows a new marker to be
created. Damasio thus insists on the fact that emotions
are what create somatic markers.
However, I think it is just as logical to conclude that,
since we also use our reason to choose an option, our
reason is also an important cause of the resulting
somatic state, and thus of the new marker. In other
words, if our reason had enabled us to make a better
choice, the final emotion would have been different,
and therefore the new marker would have been
different.
I think Damasio does consider reason as an important
step in the decision-making process. Yet, because his
experiments led him to re-evaluate the importance of
emotions, he stopped at the conclusion that emotions
are the foundations of reason, and it might be asked
whether we should not also consider that our emotions
might be just as much the products of our reason.
My second remark is about Damasio's main
experiment. I think that Damasio ends up giving
emotions such a one-sided influence on reason because
the experiments he works from are cases in which the
role of emotions is much more important than any
conscious evaluation, in the production and the
evolution of somatic markers. I will try to analyze the
"gambling experiments" proposed in chapter 9 of
Descartes' Error.
I think it may be necessary to distinguish between
two different processes: the production, and the
evolution of somatic markers. My point is not to
suggest that these two processes are totally distinct, but

rather that the second one progressively distinguishes
itself from the first. If these two processes are thought
of as different, I think we can consider how much
Damasio's experiments do reproduce real-life decisionmaking circumstances, and how much they differ from
them.
Damasio's experiments consist of asking his patients
and "normal" individuals to gamble, playing with four
decks of cards, two decks giving out high rewards but
also high penalties, and thus leading the players to
bankruptcy, and two other decks, causing lower rewards
but also much lower penalties, enabling the players to
win the game. These experiments are a success since
they enable Damasio to distinguish patients, who loose
the game, from normal individuals, who win, because
they learn to avoid the bad decks of cards.
If we consider how somatic markers are created,
which means if we consider a limited number of the
same kind of experiences, I think Damasio's gambling
experiments reproduce what happens in real life. An
experience which leads you to a success, produces a
positive marker which will be activated in the future if
the same circumstances are experienced again (in this
case, decks C and D); whereas an experience which
ends as a failure produces a negative marker (as for
decks A and B).
However, if we consider the way if which markers
evolve, I think these gambling experiments only allow
us to study a limited category of our real-life
experiences. If we consider "normal" individuals, after
a few cards have been turned down, when the question
comes up again to choose a deck of cards, the different
stages of the decision-making process are the following.
After the different response options have been produced
(in this case, there will be four options, since there are
four decks of cards), the negative marker associated
with two of the four options allows them to be
eliminated quickly, and then a choice has to be made
between the two remaining ones, either automatically,
or consciously. When the decision is made, the player
picks up a card, experiences an emotion (positive or
negative, depending on the efficiency of the preceding
markers), the emotion then makes the marker evolve,
reinforcing it, if the bet was successful, or modifying it,
if it was not the case.
However, I think we can wonder whether this process
does not permit survival only if one repeatedly faces the
same sets of circumstances (a hundred cards have to be
turned down, for the experiment), in which the possible
response options are always exactly the same (make a
choice between four decks of cards), and in which
response options have very similar consequences. Is it
the case in real life? Survival in our societies might
require much more complex decision-making
processes. Damasio was obviously trying to simplify a
typical decision-making experience when he devised

these gambling experiments. However, these
experiments probably do not enable us to consider the
importance of another "typical" decision-making
experience, where conscious evaluation has a much
more decisive role.
In other words, we might suggest that as long as an
environment is stable, human needs do not evolve, and
thus the situations or the objects that humans look for
are always similar. Their survival is much more easy to
achieve if an automatic process (like the action of
somatic markers, if we accept Damasio's theory)
enables them to predict the outcome of familiar
experiences. Yet, in a constantly evolving environment,
in which many experiences are unique, an automatic
decision-making process might not always be the most
efficient one.
Another difference seems essential between
Damasio's experiment and life. Damasio says from the
beginning that this game is like life because chance
rules it. Then, to explain why this test enables him to
measure so well his patients' errors in decision-making,
he writes that, like in real-life, this test gives the
possibility to make choices, but the player does not
know neither how, nor when, nor what to choose.
These two passages are for me very surprising, and I
think Damasio would agree with me that an individual
successful "at the game of life" does not always make a
good poker player, and vice versa. Why? Because
successes and failures in life usually have a cause,
whereas in the experiment they do not. Successes and
failures in life can be analyzed, whereas the rules of the
gambling experiment, because they are arbitrary, by
nature resist analysis. When going through Damasio's
experiment, it is necessary to choose the "wrong" decks
several times before being cautious because nothing can
explain that choosing a particular deck will be, on the
whole, a bad option. The only way to persuade oneself
is to repeat the mistake.
In life, failures probably encourage analysis a lot
more easily. It is not necessary to burn oneself many
times to be cautious with fire or hot objects. The first
time a child burns himself, he can learn only to never
touch again the same kind of object. However, the
second time, he has to wonder what it is that these two
objects have in common, that makes them objects to
avoid.
What is it that enables us to learn from experience, in
all experiences where chance is not the strongest
element? Our ability to compare experiences, to analyze
them, to deduce rules of behavior from individual
occurrences, in a word, our reason, even if it is
motivated by somatic markers.
To summarize my position, I would say that these
gambling experiments are a success because they are an
efficient test to distinguish normal individuals from
patients. Moreover, skin conductance tests show that it

is probably because a somatic state is activated in
normal individuals before they make a decision, that
their actions are beneficial on the long term. These
experiences thus verify that the activity of somatic
markers is a necessary condition if decision-making
processes are to help the organism survive. The patients
do not succeed at this game, as they do not succeed "in
life," because they are unable to produce new somatic
markers.
However, these games do not prove that emotions are
overall a more important factor than reason in
influencing the evolution of somatic markers. The
patients might loose the game because their emotions
do not produce markers, but they might make wrong
decisions in life because their emotions and valuejudgments combined do not produce somatic markers
either.

The Limited Value of Intuitive Appraisals
Decisions made automatically or unconsciously, on
which reason does not have any influence, appear to me
as of a limited value, to repeat Dewey's words.
There is a permanent limit to the value of even the
best of the intuitive appraisals [...]. These are
dependable in the degree in which conditions and
objects of esteem are fairly uniform and recurrent.
They do not work with equal sureness in the cases
in which the new and unfamiliar enters in. (1932)
The mechanism Damasio describes is probably the
one which is at work in his experiments, and in all reallife experiences which have to be undergone in order to
survive. (Or at least his book convinced me that this
was the case). In these experiences, an automatic
learning process can take place, and this mechanism
probably enables us to avoid the mistakes we already
made.
But what are the processes that enable us to make
decisions, when survival is secured? What is the role of
conscious reasoning in those processes, probably the
last to have appeared in evolution, and still the least
important in quantity, that enable us to imagine a
solution to a new problem, or a new solution to an old
problem, a melody, a new energy?
If I insist on the importance of conscious reasoning
on the evolution of somatic markers, it is not to suggest
that Damasio does not sufficiently consider the share of
conscious reasoning in each experience, but rather to
reevaluate the influence of past value-judgments on the
unconscious processes that each experience activates.
I do not oppose any element of the somatic marker
theory. I only suggest that Damasio might have
underevaluated the importance of reason in the longterm evolution of somatic markers, and therefore in our
subjective experience, probably because he mostly
wanted to demonstrate how limited the influence of

reason was on the short-term, when we choose to act in
response to a situation.

What are the Consequences of Each
Theory?
Damasio's theory can be summarized very briefly as:
emotions are what enable us to produce markers, make
them evolve, and thus emotions are the necessary
conditions of the functioning of our reason.
We can conclude, with Damasio, that emotions have
a crucial role, worry that they are given so much
importance when their mechanisms are not yet
understood: "What worries me is the acceptance of the
importance of feelings without any effort to understand
their complex biological and sociocultural machinery,"
and want the fragility of the "foundations" of reason to
be recognized:
The idea of the human organism outlined in this
book, and the relation between feelings and reason
that emerges from the findings discussed here, do
suggest, however, that the strengthening of
rationality probably requires that greater
consideration be given to the vulnerability of the
world within. (1994)
Or, with Dewey, we can estimate that if emotions do
have a great influence on the workings of reason, our
reason can also influence our emotions. Our rationality
is probably fragile, because it is based on emotions, but
it is "constructible," since our conscious choices
probably have in return a strong influence on the
evolution of our emotions.
This process might even be just as automatic as the
first one. Our valuations end up modifying our tastes.
Without even wanting to change, we do not always like
as adults what we liked as children. However, Dewey
thinks that some of our "intuitions" (we could probably
say: markers) resist analysis:
The very fact of the early origin and now
unconscious quality of the attendant intuitions is
often distorting and limiting. It is almost impossible
for later reflection to get at and correct that which
has become unconsciously a part of the self. (1932)
To conclude on this, I would like to suggest that the
task Dewey assigns to reason, that of evaluating if our
spontaneous emotions are the result of sensible
evaluations, may be a feasible one if one follows the
precautionary measure given by Damasio. I suspect that
from education we might be able to learn either to mind
our somatic states and analyze their causes, or to ignore
them.
For example, in the situation imagined by Damasio
where you wonder if you should meet a potential client,
who happens to be the enemy of your best friend, I
think that if one asks himself the question consciously,
it may be possible to perceive one's somatic states, and

thus to decide whether to "follow their advice" or not.
However, if one pretends to ignore them, instead of
diminishing their influence, and let reason work freely-according to those who think that we should not let
emotions interfere with reason, their influence will
probably be even more important. If an organism learns
to ignore its somatic states, the markers will influence
the decision-making process anyhow, but without
giving reason a chance to influence the decision.

Two Definitions of Reason
In the end, their contrasted definitions of reason seem to
be what prevents Dewey and Damasio's theories to
coincide. What is reason?
For Damasio, reason seems to be a faculty. When
Damasio takes the example of choosing whether to
meet your best friend's enemy or not, he opposes his
somatic marker hypothesis, to a "pure" reason
hypothesis. This is the passage I want to analyze here.
For Damasio, pure reasoning will at best enable us to
make a decision, but after "an inordinately long time"
(1994). However, he thinks that in most cases, a
decision will be impossible to make for two reasons.
First, Damasio evokes the limits of our attention and
working memory. However, this does not seem to be a
sufficient argument, otherwise it would suggest that the
patients Damasio works with could solve their problems
if they only took a paper and pencil when they need to
make a decision. Their cases would probably not have
inspired so many ideas to Damasio, if the solution to
their problems was that simple.
His second argument is simply that reason's strategies
can often be defective. What "strategies" does he have
in mind? The answer is for me very surprising, it is the
"humans’ devastating ignorance and defective use of
probability theory and statistics" (1994).
Do we mostly face pure chance? Are probability and
statistics calculations our only way to evaluate how
others behave, or how society works? Is the reflection
on the causes of what happens to us, which should
enable us to predict the consequences of what we will
choose to do, an impossible task? Because somatic
markers enable us to assimilate automatically and to a
certain extent the recurrences of reality, can reason only
face the "rest," which would be pure chaos?
Shouldn't we consider that after many experiences,
we retain not only new somatic markers, which when
activated will be able to arouse future somatic states,
but that we also retain "markers" of a different kind,
which might enable us to make positive choices, and
that we call, for lack of more scientific terms, ideas,
conscious value criteria?
Why doesn't Damasio write about reason's
acquisitions? His theory seems to oppose not only
conscious reasoning and the automatic unconscious

selection process, but also reason as an empty faculty,
and emotions as a content, which can be modified by
experience.
Yet, this opposition seems to be more linguistic than
proved experimentally. Reason is usually defined (in
French as in English) as a capacity, and emotions as
states, and it seems that Damasio ratifies this dualism.
The fact that his patients are unable to learn from
experience may prove that the memory of conscious
ideas depends on the activity of somatic markers, but it
does not prove that it does not exist in normal
individuals.
For Dewey, our reason works from ideas, acquired
through one's personal experience and through
communication:
Experience is intellectually cumulative. Out of
resembling experiences general ideas develop;
through language, instruction, and tradition this
gathering together of experiences of value into
generalized points of view is extended to take in a
whole
people
and
a
race.
Through
intercommunication the experience of the entire
human race is to some extent pooled and
crystallized in general ideas. These ideas constitute
principles. We bring them with us to deliberation
on particular situations. (1932)
Just once, Damasio speaks of the necessity of
possessing a logical strategy, that would evolve with
experience. Was this remark only about our capacity to
use statistics and probability better and better?
The primary task of our reason may be to help us
reach goals rather than to help us avoid unfavorable
situations. It seems probable to consider that in
evolution, where one mechanism is sufficient (the
somatic markers), a second one does not try to
accomplish the same things. At the risk of
oversynthetizing Dewey's and Damasio's theories, I
think we can suggest that, in case of a failure as of a
success, the goal of a thought process will probably be
to reach by analysis a plan of future action (better than
the one imagined before the just-accomplished action),
or even simply to define a set of necessary conditions in
hope of attaining this new goal. This would create
another kind of "marker," a positive one, which would
encourage action, if this set of conditions happens to be
experienced in the future. Emotions would then be more
efficient at composing a memory of the past, and reason
better at building a memory of the future, to quote
Damasio's phrase ("memories of the future").

On Strength of Will
Finally, the difference in Dewey's and Damasio's
definition of strength of will seems to be very
significant of how Dewey considered more than

Damasio the possible consequences of a joint activity of
our capacities to reason and to experience emotions.
For Damasio, strength of will is what enables us to
endure something painful short term, in exchange for
positive consequences on the long term: "Willpower is
just another name for the idea of choosing according to
long-term outcomes rather than short-term ones"
(1994). Willpower can be explained by the action of a
positive marker, reason is not evoked.
However, the examples he chooses to illustrate this
definition are not decisions one takes easily. On
deciding whether to undergo yet another surgery, one
might have to decide for it, although it might mean to
need to overcome strong negative feelings. The
automatic decision-making processes do not seem
sufficient in this case.
For Dewey, it is neither reason alone, nor a positive
somatic marker, but the product of the union of both, a
well thought-of judgment and a "transformed" emotion,
that enable us to think in the long term:
In reality "strength of will" (or, to speak more
advisedly, of character) consists of an abiding
identification of impulse with thought, in which
impulse provides the drive while thought supplies
consecutiveness, patience, and persistence, leading
to a unified course of conduct. (1932)

Anti-dualism
It might have seemed that I was "defending" the
primacy of Reason, but it was not my goal. I think
Damasio's theory is essential because it brings to light
how necessary emotions are to decision-making
processes. I did not intend to refute this, and to argue
that reason was more important to decision-making than
emotions.
It just seemed appropriate to recall its importance so
that, doing away with the dualism opposing an efficient
reason to disturbing emotions, we would not clear the
way for a new one, opposing influent emotions to an
influenced reason. Dewey's hypotheses, as vague and
intuitive as they are, seem to sketch a more vague but
more global scheme of the reciprocal influence of
emotions on reason, and vice versa.
The exception to his theory which Damasio evokes in
The Feeling of What Happens, the pianist Maria João
Pires, who can control by will whether she experiences
the emotions that music arouses in her, evokes for me
the possibility that we might be considering for now
only a very slight portion of the possible interactions
between reason, or consciousness, willpower, and
emotions.
To come back to my remarks on Damasio's theory
suggested by Dewey's writings, I do not know what
Damasio would think of them. The theoretic starting
point of my analysis, on the "not enough" anti-dualist

character of Damasio's theory can seem arbitrary.
However, it was precisely the goal of this reflection, to
try to show that Dewey's anti-dualism, though a theory,
might well be a roundabout way to question reality
without being influenced by dualisms handed down to
us by culture. Even if we should hope that science will
one day have exhausted the hypothesis "resources" of
John Dewey's philosophy, I hope I suggested that his
anti-dualism can still today inspire scientific research,
and thus resolve, if only momentarily, the dualism
which so frequently opposes scientific research to
philosophical research.
To come back to my fear of seeing a new dualism
replace an old one, I will end my discussion by noting
that Dewey and Damasio agree in pointing to the
dualism opposing mind and body as one of the major
sources of (what Stephen Jay Gould calls) "our
lamentable tendency to taxonomize complex situations
as dichotomies of conflicting opposites" (2000). I think
Dewey would have been delighted to hear Damasio
correct Descartes' error: "We are, and then we think,
and we think only inasmuch as we are, since thinking is
indeed caused by the structures and operations of
being". (1994)

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Marie-Christine Lemardeley
Cunci (Paris 3) for accepting this research as a possible
master's degree dissertation, Christiane Chauviré
(Paris 1) for her interest in this novice analysis of
Dewey's works, and William Schubert (UIC) for his
encouragements. I would also like to thank the French
Department of the University of Illinois at Chicago for
the 1999-2000 teaching assistantship they awarded me,
which enabled me to complete this research.

References
Damasio, A. R. (1994) Descartes' Error-Emotion,
Reason and the Human Brain. New York, NJ: G. P.
Putnam's Sons.
Damasio, A. R. (1994) The Feeling of What Happens,
Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciouness.
New York, NJ : Harcourt Brace & Company.
Dewey, J. (1932) Ethics in The Collected Works of John
Dewey, (1969-1991) edited by Jo Ann Boydston.
Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Stephen, J. G. (2000) Deconstructing the 'Science Wars'
by Reconstructing an Old Mold. Science, 287, 253261.

