UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Feedback in Categorisation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5704c09z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Suret, Mark
McLaren, IPL

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Feedback in Categorisation
Mark Suret (m.suret@psychol.cam.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology; Downing Street
Cambridge, CB2 3EB UK

I.P.L. McLaren (iplm2@cus.cam.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology; Downing Street
Cambridge, CB2 3EB UK
Abstract
The most popular theories of associative learning require
some kind of external teaching signal, whether it be feedback on category membership or the presence of a US to
determine whether a trial has been successful. However,
under some circumstances (Bersted, Brown & Evans, 1969;
Evans & Arnoult, 1967; Estes, 1994), it appears that such a
signal is not required to produce accurate categorical decisions. The work presented here was motivated by Wills &
McLaren (1998), which looked at Free Classification and
demonstrated that human participants could accurately extract category structure with no feedback during the task.
The current experiments compare performance on a generalisation task after training using one of a number of different conditions including Free Classification, allowing a
comparison with participants who have had a teaching signal during training. The results seem to indicate that under
some conditions, it is not feedback during training, rather
the need for a decision to be made which is critical. The
data also shows that there is no difference in accuracy between the ability of the groups to generalise, no matter
what their initial training, rather the differences are manifested in the reactions times.

Introduction
There has been little work done on directly comparing
performance on tasks where one group of participants receives feedback and another does not, as it seems intuitively obvious that if there is some external feedback, then
this will aid rather than retard learning. The familiar notion that consistent feedback always produces the best
performance (Homa & Cultice, 1984) can be challenged,
however, with data showing that a teaching signal may
not provide any advantage. Real world scenarios, where
feedback may be absent, and theories of natural categorisation (Rosch & Mervis, 1975) seem to be in line with this
idea. If we allow that reliable feedback is not always the
key to success, then there must be other factors which
participants are only able to take advantage of in some
circumstances. Estes (1994) provides an experiment
where two different types of feedback are compared. Observational training is the same as the Label condition described later in this report, where a label is provided with
the stimulus and denotes which category it belongs to,
with no decision being made by the participant.
This is compared to standard training, which has corrective feedback after a decision has been made about the
category membership of a given stimulus by the participant. In Estes’ study, the observational training was found
to be more effective than the standard training on test, and

it was deduced that the observational training was more
consistent with the participants’ perception of the categories. Both these types of training were included in the current experiment, as well as a free classification condition,
and two other conditions designed to control for potential
effects of response practice.

Experiment 1
Participants and Apparatus
The participants were 60 adults, aged between 18 and 35,
who were paid for their participation. All were graduate
or undergraduate students from the Cambridge area. Participants were tested individually in the same quiet experimental cubicle. The room contained an Acorn RISC
PC600 microcomputer connected to a 14 inch colour
monitor, model AKF60. Responses were made using a
standard keyboard. Participants sat about one metre away
from the screen which was approximately at eye level.

Stimuli
Each stimulus was a 16 × 16 array of black and white
squares. These “chequerboards” measured 2.5 cm on a
side and were presented on the centre left of the screen
against a mid grey background. In some experimental
conditions, a label for the chequerboard, either the letter
‘A’ or ‘B’ was presented in white on the centre right of
the screen. The label was approximately the same size as
the stimulus. For each participant, a new master pattern
was created, and this was used as one of the prototypes
during the experiment. The master pattern was a chequerboard of 128 white and 128 black squares randomly arranged, hereafter chequerboard A. A second prototype
was created from the master pattern by selecting 120 of
the squares (60 black and 60 white) and reversing the
shade of those squares (black to white or vice versa),
hereafter chequerboard B. The examples that were actually shown to the participants depended upon the phase of
the experiment. During training the stimuli shown were
created from the prototypes by subjecting each square to a
small independent chance (p = 0.05) of reversing its colour. On test all stimuli were created from the master pattern and had a set number of squares reversed in colour,
ranging from 0 to 120 in steps of 10, covering the artificial continuum between the prototypes. Each test stimulus
reversed the colour of a different, randomly selected set of
squares, depending on its position along the continuum
between the prototypes. For example if a stimulus was in

position 4 out of 12, then 40 of the master pattern squares
would be changed to be the same as those in the second
prototype. Another stimulus at position 4 would have a
different set of 40 squares reversed in colour so as to
match those in the other prototype.

Design
The experiment incorporated one of five different training
conditions, all followed by an identical test session.
Labelled
Participants were presented with the training chequerboards accompanied by a consistent label, either A or B
during training. No response was required and the participants were asked to try to learn what features made a
pattern either an A or a B.
Free Classification
Participants were presented with the training chequerboards, but without a label being present. They were
asked to divide the stimuli that they were being shown
into two groups, in any way which they saw fit, by pressing one of the appropriate keys. No feedback was given
throughout.
Corrective Feedback
Participants were presented with the training chequerboards alone and had to learn which of the two keys to
press when they saw a given chequerboard. Corrective
feedback in the form of a beep from the computer indicated when the participant had pressed the wrong key. No
label was presented.
Mental Decision
Participants were given similar instructions to the Free
Classification group, except no response was required in
this condition. All the participants had to do was decide to
which one of the two groups the pattern belonged. No label was presented.
Matching to Label
Participants were given similar instructions to the Labelled condition, except that they were required to make a
keypress once the chequerboard had disappeared. The key
they pressed simply corresponded to the label that was
presented with the stimulus. This same key assignment
was carried over into the generalisation phase.

Procedure
Each participant was asked to read the general experimental description which was displayed on the computer
screen. This included a brief description of the whole experiment, more detailed instructions about the training
phase and an example stimulus, with a label if appropriate. Participants were told to try to learn as much as they
could in the first part of the experiment, as they would
need this information for the final part. Once the participant had read the instructions, the experimenter verified
that they had understood them, and then left the room for
the remainder of the experiment. Participants started the

training phase by pressing the ‘Y’ key at the top of the
keyboard, and then proceeded through the 60 training trials in a fashion determined by the experimental condition.
During training, the stimuli (and label if appropriate)
were displayed for 5 seconds before disappearing from
the screen. If a response was required, then participants
were allowed to press an appropriate key, either the ‘x’ or
the ‘>‘ key, once the stimulus had gone from the screen.
If no response was required during training, then there
was a two second inter-stimulus interval. Training consisted of 30 presentations of A and 30 of B in a random
order. All participants were told that the chequerboards
that they were to be shown could be divided into two
groups, and that this was their task.
After the final training trial, the instructions concerning
the test phase were displayed. The test phase was identical
for all participants regardless of their training condition
and consisted of 130 trials which displayed a chequerboard on its own. The instructions asked each participant
to continue placing the stimuli into two groups in the
same way as before, but were informed that there would
now be no label, if there had been one before, and that a
response was required for each chequerboard. In conditions where a label had been presented to the participants
a key mapping was provided, for example, “Press ‘x’ if
it’s an A”. If no label had been present during training,
participants were simply asked to carry on placing the
chequerboards into the most relevant group. The instructions for the Mental Decision group required them to
make an arbitrary assignment of the groups they had
formed during training to the keys to be used during the
test phase. Once a response to a test stimulus had been
made, it was immediately replaced by another stimulus. If
any other key apart from the two that were designated was
pressed, the computer beeped, and another response was
required. Participants were asked to focus more on accuracy rather than speed in this part of the experiment, and
there was no explicit time-out procedure, so participants
cannot be considered to be under any time pressure.
The design of the test phase was such that participants
were shown stimuli along the continuum from the master
pattern (A) to the second prototype (B). Each test stimulus
had a multiple of 10 squares changed from A, to make it
more like B. As A and B differed by 120 squares, there
are 13 steps along such a continuum and with each point
being sampled 10 times, this gives 130 test trials. The 10
stimuli for any given point on the continuum were all different, and generated as described above.
At the end of the experiment the computer automatically recorded responses and reaction times from the
training phase where possible, and from the test phase in a
data file. Each participant was paid for their time and
thanked for their participation.

Results
The two measures of performance recorded during the
generalisation test phase were response and reaction time,
and they are dealt with separately. The independent
measure on the plots in this section is distance along the

Table 1: Factors in Experiment 1
Information

No Information

Keypress

Match to Label

Free Classification

No Keypress

Label

Mental Decision

B-A continuum, with B at one end and A the other, and
the intermediate values being examples of B with (10 ×
distance) squares changed to make the stimulus more like
A. Data was analysed firstly by comparison of the groups
using ANOVA. A factorial design was also used, as illustrated below (Table 1). The conditions included in the experiment have tried to control for possible effects of
making a response interacting with the presence of accurate information about category membership.
Responses
A single mixed design analysis of variance (ANOVA),
with one within-subject variable (continuum position, 13
levels) and one between subjects variable (training condition, 5 levels) was performed on the mean number of B
responses at each point on the continuum for each participant. This failed to reveal any significant difference between the groups F(4,55) = 2.25, p<0.1 or any interaction
between the groups and the position along the continuum
F(48,660) = 0.647, p>0.9. There was a significant main
effect of position along the B-A continuum F(12,660) =
6.88, p<0.001. No further analyses were carried out on the
response data, as there was no clear difference between
the groups at this stage. The mean responses for each
group at each point along the continuum are plotted in
Figure 1. A mixed design ANOVA, with one within subject variable (continuum position, 13 levels) and two between subject variables (the presence or absence of
consistent information about category membership and
the requirement to make a keypress) was performed. The
Label
Free

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

analysis yielded a significant main effect of both the requirement to make a keypress, F(1,44) = 4.76, p < 0.05
and of continuum position, F(12,528) = 99.45, p < 0.001.
No other effects approached significance in this analysis,
p > 0.15. The mean responses for each level at each point
along the continuum are plotted in Figure 2.
Reaction Times
Participants were not considered to be under any time
pressure, so the reaction times provide a secondary performance measure. The mean reaction times for each
group are plotted against the distance from B along the BA continuum in Figure 3. ANOVAs were performed on
the mean reaction times for each participant. A single
mixed design ANOVA, with one within subject variable
(continuum position, 13 levels) and one between subjects
variable (training, 5 levels) revealed a significant main
effect of group, F(4,55) = 5.00, p<0.01, and of position
along the continuum, F(12,660) = 6.28, p<0.001. There
was no significant interaction between the two factors,
F(48,660) = 1.18, p > 0.15.
A Tukey HSD test performed on the group factor revealed that each of the Free Classification, Mental Decision and Feedback conditions were significantly faster
than the Label condition, all p< 0.05, with no other comparisons reaching significance. Pairwise analysis of the
conditions reveals a significant quadratic interaction between the Label and Free Classification conditions,
F(1,22) = 5.84, p < 0.05, and the Matching to Label and
Free Classification conditions, F(1,22) = 7.05, p < 0.05,
no other comparison of quadratic trends reached significance, p > 0.1.
A mixed design ANOVA, with one within subject variable (continuum position, 13 levels) and two between
subject variables (the presence or absence of consistent
information about category membership and the require-

4

Label
Feedback
Match

Free
Mental

3.5

Feedback
Mental
Match

3
2.5
2
1.5
1

B

2

4
6
8
10
Continuum Position

Figure 1: Response Data for All Groups in
Experiment 1

A

B 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 A
Continuum Position
Figure 3: Reaction Times for All Groups in
Experiment 1

Label
No Label
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
B

2

4
6
8
10
A
Continuum Position
Figure 4: Effect of Label in Experiment 1
ment to make a keypress) was performed. This revealed a
significant effect of information, F(1,44) = 13.67, p =
0.001, the expected main effect of continuum position,
F(12,528) = 4.83, p < 0.001 and an interaction between
these two factors F(12,528) = 2.77, p < 0.05. No other effects approached significance in this analysis, p > 0.25.
The mean reaction times for each level at each point along
the continuum are plotted in Figure 4.

Discussion
Experiment 1 provides evidence for a number of novel
results with respect to the effect of feedback on categorisation. Whilst there is no significant observable effect of
training condition on response performance, there is a
significant effect on the reaction time data collected. Initially surprising is the fact that groups trained with a completely errorless teaching signal (Labelled and Match to
Label) recorded the slowest reaction times. Two other
groups received no feedback (Free Classification and
Mental Decision), and both are found to be significantly
faster than the Labelled condition. The response curves
show that this speed advantage cannot be due to speedaccuracy trade off, and so there must be some other explanation for the deficit in performance observed in
groups which intuitively should be the best at the task.
The main effect of labelling in the factorial analysis for
the reaction time data confirms this finding, with the presence of a category label causing an increase in response
time on generalisation. The effect of making a keypress
can be seen in the response analysis, but can be regarded
as relatively uninteresting as there is no sign of an interaction which might point to the task having been learnt
better, causing one group to have a more step-like function.
The most obvious reason for the speed advantage seen
for those groups who do not have a consistent piece of
information relating to category membership is that they
are required to make a decision about category membership during the training phase. This seemingly essential
part of training is not present when a label is provided, as
the stimulus and its category name are presented simultaneously. In the Feedback condition, even though there is
consistent category information, a decision must be made
before this feedback can be received and integrated. In the

conditions where no feedback it present, a decision made
internally about previous stimuli is the only information
available when deciding to which group subsequent stimuli should be assigned. The similarity of the generalisation functions implies that all groups have learnt how to
differentiate between the two categories to the same extent. However it may be that the application of this
knowledge is mediated by a response mechanism which is
yet to be set up by those groups which are not required to
make a decision as to category membership during training. This leads to the difference seen between the relatively flat reaction time curves for the three conditions
where decisions are required in training and the inverted
U-shaped reaction time curves produced by those participants who are presented with the label during training.
The inverted U-shaped curves are typical of those produced during generalisation along a continuum using
these procedures (Jones, Wills & McLaren, 1998). The
centre point of the continuum is no more like an A than a
B, so any response made to these stimuli must be indeterminate, and hence produces a longer latency than those
responses to items which are more like those in training.
Despite the potentially simple explanations for the differences observed between the groups, it is still an interesting result to have the Free Classification and Feedback
conditions indistinguishable from one another even with
the supposed added advantage of corrective feedback.
This may be due to some motivational factor, as participants in the Free Classification group are never told that
they are wrong, however with feedback, participants may
be relatively sure that the stimulus that they are seeing is
an A, but in fact turns out to be a B, which may disrupt
their representation of the conditions for category membership. The feedback that they get may be consistent
within the framework of the experiment, but may be inconsistent internally, and this may be part of the reason
for the lack of benefit for the Feedback condition.
The reason the Label condition is so slow may be because it takes time to learn, and then to use, the response
mapping. It cannot be entirely due to motor learning as
although there is some advantage for the Matching to Label group over the Label group, there is still a difference
between the Matching condition and the three where a
decision was made during training. The results from the
Mental Decision group also tend to discount this line of
reasoning as they were not required to form a key mapping before the test phase but their responses are indistinguishable from the Feedback and Free Classification.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed in a factorial fashion to investigate the effect of both feedback and consistent labelTable 2: Factorial Design of Experiment 2
Feedback

No Feedback

Label

Match to Label (FB)

No Label

Corrective Feedback

Match to Label
(NFB)
Free Classification

ling of the stimuli. In this respect it was similar to Experiment 1, but attempted to control for the formation of
response mappings during training. Experiment 2 forced
all participants to adopt a key mapping during training, so
that any effect on test would be due to the actual training
rather than differences in procedure. All participants were
forced to make their responses to the stimuli within two
seconds of the stimulus disappearing using the same keys
as before.

0.9
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

These were identical to those in Experiment 1.

0.3

Participants and Design

0.2

Forty-eight Cambridge University students took part in
the experiment. All were aged between 18 and 25. The
experiment was designed to test the effect of two factors
when learning an artificial categorisation problem. These
were the presence and absence of feedback on the responses that were made during training, and the presence
or absence of a consistent category label during training
The design was similar to Experiment 1, with the test
phase being identical, and is shown in Table 2.

0.1

The procedure was similar to Experiment 1. The only differences were during training. All groups were presented
with a stimulus and asked to respond within two seconds
to that stimulus once it had disappeared. The training differed from Experiment 1 by presenting the label, if necessary, before the stimulus rather than concurrently. For
those conditions without a label, a ‘#’ symbol was presented before each stimulus, whether it was nominally an
A or a B, in place of the label to equate the training time.
The appropriate label or ‘#’ was displayed for five seconds before the five second presentation of the stimulus.
The instructions were identical to those from Experiment
1 apart from detailing the separate presentation of the label or ‘#’ and the stimulus and informing the participants
of their two second time limit.

Results
As with Experiment 1, there were two dependent variables, response selection and reaction time, and as a time
limit had been imposed, the reaction times can be considered a more informative performance indicator. The data
were analysed using an appropriate ANOVA. The performance of individual groups was analysed along with
the effect of the factors built into the experiment.
Responses
A single mixed design analysis of variance (ANOVA),
with one within-subject variable (continuum position, 13
levels) and one between subjects variable (training condition, 4 levels) was performed on the mean number of A
responses at each point on the continuum for each participant. This failed to reveal any significant difference between the groups F(3,44) = 0.76, p>0.5 or any interaction
between the groups and the position along the continuum

Match (NFB)
Feedback

0.8

Stimuli and Apparatus

Procedure

Match
Free

1

0
A 1

2

3

4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 B
Continuum Position

Figure 5: Response Data for All Groups in
Experiment 2
F(36,528) = 0.65, p>0.5. There was a significant main effect of position along the A-B continuum F(12,528) =
55.73, p<0.001. No further analyses were carried out on
the response data, as there was no clear difference between the groups at this stage. The mean responses for
each group at each point along the continuum are plotted
in Figure 5.
A mixed design ANOVA, with one within subject variable (continuum position, 13 levels) and two between
subject variables (the presence or absence of consistent
information about category membership presence of feedback) was performed. The analysis yielded only a significant main effect of continuum position, F(12,528) =
55.73, p < 0.001. No other effects approached significance in this analysis, p > 0.15.
Reaction Times
The mean reaction times for each group are plotted
against the distance from A along the A-B continuum in
Figure 6. ANOVAs were performed on the mean reaction
times for each participant.
A single mixed design ANOVA, with one within subject variable (continuum position, 13 levels) and one between subjects variable (training, 4 levels) revealed a
significant main effect of group, F(3,44) = 3.38, p =
0.026, and of position along the continuum, F(12,528) =
5.64, p < 0.001. There was no significant interaction between the two factors, F(36,528) = .90, p > 0.6. A Tukey
HSD test performed on the group factor revealed that the
Match to Label condition with feedback was found to be
significantly slower than the Free Classification condition, p < 0.05. A mixed design ANOVA, with one within
subject variable (continuum position, 13 levels) and two
between subject variables (the presence or absence of
category membership information and the presence of
feedback) was performed. This revealed a significant effect of category information, F(1,44) = 4.54, p = 0.039,
with the label conditions showing the longer mean

1.35

systems (Rumelhart & Zipser, 1986; Saksida, 1999)
which are able to extract the necessary information from
the stimuli encountered to form coherent categories
through exposure to the stimuli alone. It may be the case
that all that is needed is exposure to stimuli in order to
extract information about them, and this raises the interesting question of what exactly feedback does if it does
not always aid decision making.

1.25

References

1.15

Bersted, C.T., Brown, B.R. & Evans, S.H. (1969). Free
sorting with stimuli in a multidimensional attribute
space. Perception and Psychophysics, 6B, 409-413.
Estes, W.K. (1994). Classification and Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Evans, S.H. & Arnoult, M.D. (1967). Schematic concept
formation: Demonstration in a free sorting task. Psychonomic Science, 9(4), 221-222.
Homa, D., & Cultice, J. (1984). Role of Feedback, Category Size, and Stimulus Distortion on the Acquisition
and Utilization of Ill-Defined Categories. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 10, 83-94.
Jones, F.W., Wills, A.J. & McLaren, I.P.L. (1998). Perceptual Categorisation: Connectionist modelling and
decision rules. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51(B), 33-58.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C.B. (1975). Family resemblance:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Rumelhart, D.E., & Zipser, D. (1986). Feature discovery
by competitive learning. In D.E. Rumelhart, J.L.
McClelland, & The PDP research group. Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Saksida, L.M.(1999). Effects of similarity and experience
on discrimination learning: A nonassociative
connectionist model of perceptual learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
25, 308-323.
Wills, A.J. & McLaren, I.P.L. (1998). Perceptual Learning and Free Classification. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51(B), 235-270.

1.65

Match
Free

Match (NFB)
Feedback

1.55
1.45

1.05
0.95
0.85
0.75
A 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 B
Continuum Position
Figure 6: Reaction Time Data for All Groups in
Experiment 2
reaction times, and the expected main effect of continuum
position, F(12,528) = 5.64, p < 0.001. No other effects
were significant in this analysis, p > 0.09.

General Discussion
The results from Experiment 2 are broadly in line with
those obtained in Experiment 1. The inclusion of a consistent category label appears to have a detrimental effect
when compared with the requirement to make an active
decision about category membership. However, there appears to be a speed-accuracy trade off present in the results. Whilst the Match to Label with feedback (MFB)
group are slowest, they also show the greatest difference
between the ends of the generalisation gradients. Although this difference is not significant it would be difficult to conclude anything definite on the basis of this
alone. However, taken with the results from Experiment
1, it seems clear that the fact that feedback is not present
does not seem to have a detrimental effect on the performance shown by participants. Instead it seems that, in
some cases, providing an entirely consistent label for the
stimuli during training causes participants to perform
worse. This is not what would be predicted from Homa &
Cultice (1984), and is at odds with the results from Estes
(1994) who showed that a condition analogous to the Label condition in Experiment 1 gave better performance on
test than when participants were trained using a corrective
feedback approach. It may be that the real advantage lies
in being able to make active (i.e. self-generated) decisions
during training rather than simply being exposed to the
stimuli and the appropriate category information (Figure
4). Thus it may be the case that different processes are at
work

Conclusion
It seems likely that the most successful approach to modelling such data will come form simple self-organising

