UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Roles of Body and Mind in Abstract Thought

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2wj846s2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Boroditsky, Lera
Ramscar, Michael
Frank, Michael C.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Roles of Body and Mind in Abstract Thought
Lera Boroditsky (lera@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Bldg420
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA

Michael Ramscar (michael@dai.ed.ac.uk)
University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, Scotland

Michael C. Frank (mcfrank@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Bldg420
Stanford, CA 94305-2130 USA

Abstract
How are we able to think about things we've never
seen or touched?
We demonstrate that abstract
knowledge is built analogically from more experiencebased knowledge. People’s understanding of the
abstract domain of time, for example, is so intimately
dependent on the more experience-based domain of
space, that when people make a an air journey or bet
on a racehorse, they also unwittingly (and
dramatically) change their thinking about time.
Further, it appears that abstract thinking is built o n
representations of more experience-based domains
that are functionally separable from those involved
directly in sensorimotor experience itself.

How are we able to think about things we've never seen
or touched? Whether we are theorizing about invisible
forces, studying the behaviors of atoms, or trying to
characterize the nature of private mental experience,
much scientific progress depends on generating new
ways of describing and conceptualizing phenomena
which are not perceivable through the senses. We face
the same problems in everyday life with abstract
notions like time, justice, and love. How do we come
to represent and reason about abstract domains despite
the dearth of sensory information available about them?
One suggestion is that abstract domains are
understood through analogical extensions from richer,
more experience-based domains (Boroditsky, 2000;
Gentner et al., in press; Gibbs, 1994; Holyoak &
Thagard, 1995; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, 1999). This
experience-based structuring view can be formulated in
several strengths.
A very strong “embodied”
formulation might be that knowledge of abstract
domains is tied directly to the body such that abstract
notions are understood directly through image schemas
and motor schemas (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999). A
milder view might be that abstract knowledge is based

on representations of more experience-based domains
that are functionally separable from those directly
involved in sensorimotor experience.
The studies reported in this paper show that
people’s understanding of the abstract domain of time is
substrated by their knowledge and experiences in the
more concrete domain of space1. In fact, people’s
representations of time are so intimately dependent on
space that when people engage in particular types of
spatial thinking (e.g., embarking on a train journey, or
urging on a horse in a race), they unwittingly also
change how they think about time. Further (and
contrary to the very strong embodied view), it appears
that abstract thinking is built on representations of
more experience-based domains, and not necessarily on
the physical experience itself.
Suppose you are told that next Wednesday's
meeting has been moved forward two days. What day is
the meeting now that it has been rescheduled? The
answer to this question depends on how you choose to
think about time. If you think of yourself as moving
forward through time (the ego-moving perspective),
then moving a meeting “forward” is moving it further
in your direction of motion—that is, from Wednesday
to Friday. If, on the other hand, you think of time as
coming toward you (the time-moving perspective), then
moving a meeting “forward” is moving it closer to
you—that is, from Wednesday to Monday (Boroditsky,
2000; McGlone & Harding, 1998; McTaggart, 1908).
In a neutral context, people are equally likely to think
of themselves as moving through time as they are to
think of time as coming toward them, and so are equally
1

This paper only examines one aspect of how people think
about time. The domain of time comprises an incredibly
complex, heterogeneous and sophisticated set of
representations, and much more investigation will be
necessary to properly characterize the domain as a whole.

likely to say that the meeting has been moved to Friday
(the ego-moving answer) as to Monday (the timemoving answer) (Boroditsky, 2000; McGlone &
Harding, 1998).
But where do these representations of time come
from? Is thinking about moving through time based on
our more concrete experiences of moving through
space? If so – if representations of time are indeed tied
to representations of space – then getting people to
think about space in a particular way should also
influence how they think about time.

Study 1
To investigate the relationship between spatial thinking
and people’s thinking about time, we asked 239
Stanford undergraduates to fill out a one-page
questionnaire that contained a spatial prime followed by
the ambiguous “Next Wednesday’s meeting...” question
described above. The spatial primes (shown in Figure
1) were designed to get people to think about
themselves moving through space on an office-chair
(see Figure 1a), or of making an office-chair come
toward them through space (see Figure 1b). In both
cases, participants were asked to imagine how they
would “manuever the chair to the X,” and to “draw an
arrow indicating the path of motion.” The left-right
orientation of the diagrams was counterbalanced across
subjects. Immediately after subjects completed the
spatial prime, they were asked the ambiguous “Next
Wednesday’s meeting has been moved forward two days”
question described above. We were interested in whether
subjects would think differently about time right after
imagining themselves as moving through space, or
imagining things coming toward them.

Figure 1a: Spatial prime used in Study 1.
Participants were given the following instructions
“Imagine you are the person in the picture. Notice there
is a chair on wheels, and a track. You are sitting in the
chair. While sitting in the chair, imagine how you
would manuever the chair to the X. Draw an arrow
indicating the path of motion.”

Figure 1b: Spatial prime used in Study 1.
Participants were given the following instructions
“Imagine you are the person in the picture. Notice there
is a chair on wheels, and a track. You are holding a
rope attached to the chair. With the rope, imagine how
you would manuever the chair to the X. Draw an arrow
indicating the path of motion.”
As predicted, people used primed spatial
information to think about time. Subjects primed to
think of objects coming toward them through space,
were much more likely to think of time as coming
toward them (67% said Wednesday’s meeting had moved
to Monday), than they were to think of themselves as
moving through time (only 33% said the meeting has
moved to Friday).
Subjects primed to think of
themselves as moving through space showed the
opposite pattern (only 43% said Monday, and 57% said
Friday), chi-square=13.3, p<.001. It appears that
people’s thinking about time is indeed tied to their
spatial thinking. This raises a further question: do
people unwittingly change their thinking about time
during everyday spatial experiences and activities (not
just when processing specially designed spatial primes
in a laboratory setting)?

Study 2: The Lunch-line
To investigate the relationship between spatial
experience and people’s thinking about time, we asked
70 people waiting in a lunch-line the ambiguous
question about Wednesday’s meeting described above.
The lunch-line was for a café in the basement of
Stanford’s Psychology department. The line is usually
about 50 meters long, but moves quickly with a
waiting time of about 10 minutes. After participants
answered our ambiguous question, we asked them how
long they felt they had waited in line, and also recorded
which quartile of the line they were in when
interviewed. This second index served as an objective
measure of how much forward motion in line people
had experienced (with people furthest along in line
having experienced the most motion).
We were
interested in whether the spatial experience of moving
forward in a line would make people more likely to also
think of themselves as moving forward in time (as
opposed to thinking of time as coming toward them).
As predicted, the further along in line people were
(the more forward spatial motion they had experienced),
the more likely they were to also think of themselves as
moving through time (to say the meeting had been
moved to Friday), r=.33 , p<.005 (see Figure 2).
People’s estimates of their waiting time were also
predictive of their answers to the question about next
Wednesday’s meeting (r=.26, p<.05). Interestingly,

people’s estimates of their waiting time were less
predictive of their answer to the “Next Wednesday’s
meeting…” question than was their spatial position in
line. When the effect of spatial position was controlled
for, people’s estimates of their waiting time were no
longer predictive of their answers to the ambiguous
question about time, r=.05, p=.67. It appears that
spatial position in line (and hence the amount of
forward spatial motion that a person had just
experienced) was the best predictor of their thinking
about time.

necessary to change one’s thinking about time, or if
just thinking about motion was enough.

Figure 3: Responses of 333 people queried at the
airport. People who had just flown in were most likely
to produce an ego-moving response (say that next
Wednesday’s meeting has been “moved forward” to
Friday).

Figure 2: Responses of 70 people waiting in a lunchline. Responses are plotted by position in line (from
the end quartile of the line to the quartile closest to the
food). The further along in line people were (and hence
the more forward spatial motion they had experienced),
the more likely they were to take the ego-moving
perspective on time (say that next Wednesday’s meeting
has been “moved forward” to Friday).
In the next study we were interested in whether
spatial motion per se was necessary, or whether simply
thinking about or anticipating a journey would be
enough to influence how people think about time.

Study 3: The Airport
To investigate the relationship between spatial
experience and people’s thinking about time, we asked
333 visitors to San Francisco International Airport the
ambiguous question about Wednesday’s meeting
described above. After the participants answered, we
asked them whether they were waiting for someone to
arrive, waiting to depart, or had just flown in. We were
interested in two things: (1) whether a lengthy
experience of moving through space would make people
more likely to take the ego-moving perspective on time
(think of themselves as moving through time as
opposed to thinking of time as coming toward them),
and (2) whether the actual experience of motion was

As shown in Figure 3, people who had just flown
in were much more likely to take the ego-moving
perspective (think of themselves as moving through
time and answer Friday) (76%) than people who were
just waiting for someone to arrive (51%), χ2=14.3,
p<.01. Further, even people who hadn’t yet flown, but
were only waiting to depart were already more likely to
think of themselves as moving through time (62%),
χ2=4.3, p<.05 (when compared to people waiting for
someone to arrive). This set of findings suggests that
(1) people’s ideas about time are indeed intimately
related to their representations of space, and (2) just
thinking about spatial motion is sufficient to change
one’s thinking about time. But this also raises an
interesting question: why were people who had just
flown in more likely to take an ego-moving perspective
than people who were only about to depart? Was it
because they had spent more time actually moving
through space, or was it just because they had had more
time to think about it?

Study 4: The Train
To investigate this further, we posed the ambiguous
question about Wednesday’s meeting to 219 patrons of
CalTrain (a train-line connecting San Francisco and San
Jose). Of these, 101 were people waiting for the train,
and 118 were passengers actually on the train. All of
them were seated at the time that they were approached
by the experimenter. After participants answered our
question, we asked them about how long they had been
waiting for (or been on) the train, and how much further
they had to go.
Participants indicated their

waiting/travel times
using
a
multiple-choice
questionnaire.
First, we found that both people waiting for the
train and people actually riding on the train were more
likely to take the ego-moving perspective (63%) than
the time-moving perspective (37%), χ2=13.9, p<.01.
Interestingly, the data from people waiting for the train
didn’t look any different from those of people actually
on the train (61% and 64% ego-moving response
respectively), suggesting that it is not the experience of
spatial motion per se, but rather thinking about spatial
motion that underlies our representation of time.
We then examined people’s responses based on how
long they had been waiting for the train (see Figure 4).
The longer people sat around thinking about their
journey, the more likely they were to take the egomoving perspective for time. People who had waited
less than a minute were equally likely to think of
themselves as moving through time as they were to
think of time as coming toward them. People who had
had five minutes of anticipating their journey, were
much more likely to take the ego-moving perspective
on time (68%), χ2=4.5, p<.05 (when compared to
people waiting less than a minute).

Figure 4: Responses of 101 people waiting for the
train plotted by time spent waiting. The more time
people had to anticipate their journey, the more likely
they became to adopt the ego-moving perspective on
time (say that next Wednesday’s meeting has been
“moved forward” to Friday).
Finally, we analyzed the responses of people on the
train based on whether they had answered our
ambiguous time question at the beginning, middle, or at
end of their journey. We conjectured that people should
be most involved in thinking about their journey when
they had just boarded the train, or when they were
getting close to their destination. In the middle of their
journey, people tend to relax, read, talk loudly on cell-

phones, and otherwise mentally disengage from being
on the train.

Figure 5: Responses of 118 passengers on the train
plotted by point in journey. People became much more
likely to adopt the ego-moving perspective for time (say
that next Wednesday’s meeting has been “moved
forward” to Friday) when they were most engaged in
thinking about their spatial journey (at the beginnings
and ends of the trip). In the middle of their journey,
people were about equally likely to adopt the egomoving perspective (say the meeting has been “moved
forward” to Friday) as the time-moving perspective (say
the meeting has been “moved forward” to Monday).
Amazingly, people’s biases for thinking about time
mimicked this pattern of engaging and disengaging from
spatial thinking perfectly (see Figure 5). Within five
minutes of getting on the train, people were very likely
to take the ego-moving perspective on time (78%),
χ2=6.38, p<.02 (when compared to people in the middle
of their journey). People were also very likely to take
the ego-moving perspective when they were within ten
minutes of arriving at their destination (80%), χ2=5.63,
p<.02 (when compared to people in the middle of their
journey). Passengers in the middle of their journey,
however, showed no ego-moving bias. They were just
as likely to think of themselves as moving through
time (54%), as they were to think of time as coming
toward them (46%). Once again it appears that people’s
thinking about time is substrated by thinking about
spatial motion and not necessarily by the experience of
motion itself. Although all three groups of passengers
were having the same physical experience (all were
simply sitting on the train), the two groups that were
most likely to be involved in thinking about their
journey showed the most change in their thinking about
time.

Study 5: The Race-Track
So far, we have only looked at people who themselves
were moving or planning to move. Could thinking

about spatial motion have a similar effect even when
people are not planning any of their own motion? To
investigate this question, we asked the “Next
Wednesday’s meeting…” question of 53 visitors to the
Bay Meadows racetrack. We predicted that the more
involved people were in the forward motion of the
racehorses, the more likely they would also be to take
the ego-moving perspective on time (and say that the
meeting has been moved to Friday). After asking
people the question about next Wednesday’s meeting,
we also asked them how many races they had watched
that day and how many races they had bet on. Both
indices turned out to be good predictors of people’s
answers to the “Next Wednesday’s meeting…” question.
As shown in Figure 6, people who hadn’t bet on any
races were as likely to think of themselves as moving
through time (50% said Friday), as they were to think
of time as coming toward them (50% said Monday). In
contrast, people who had bet on 3 races or more were
three times more likely to think of themselves as
moving through time (76% said Friday) than they were
to think of time as coming toward them (24% said
Monday), %), χ2=12.39, p<.01 (when compared to
people who hadn’t bet on any races). It appears that
simply thinking about forward motion (willing a horse
towards a finish line, as opposed to actually planning to
go somewhere yourself) is enough to change people’s
thinking about time.

Figure 6: Responses of 53 visitors to the racetrack
plotted by number of races bet on. People who had bet
on more races (and so were more involved in the forward
motions of the racehorses) also became much more
likely to adopt the ego-moving perspective for time (say
that next Wednesday’s meeting has been “moved
forward” to Friday).

Study 6: The Office-Chair Rodeo
Thus far we have shown that people’s thinking about
spatial motion is a good predictor of their thinking
about time and that actual spatial motion is not
necessary. A further question is whether actual motion
is sufficient to influence people’s thinking about time
even in the absence of involved spatial thinking.
To try to address this question, we designed a realmotion version of Study 1 (see Figure 1). We set up a
25 ft track outside of the Stanford University Bookstore
and invited students to participate in an “office-chair
rodeo.” Half of the participants were asked to ride an
office chair from one end of the track to the other (the
ego-moving prime), and half were asked to rope the
chair in from the opposite end of the track (the timemoving prime) (see Figure 1 for a diagram). The track
was marked out in the asphalt using colored masking
tape, with one end of the track marked in red, and one in
yellow.
Seventy-eight Stanford undergraduates
participated in the study in exchange for lollipops. The
verbal instructions were the same in both conditions.
Participants riding the chair sat in an office-chair at one
end of the track and were asked to “maneuver the chair
to the red/yellow line” (whichever was at the opposite
end of the track). Participants roping the chair were
given a rope that was connected to the office-chair at the
opposite end of the track and were likewise instructed to
“maneuver the chair to the red/yellow line” (whichever
was where the participant was standing).
Immediately after the participant completed the
motion task (either riding or roping the chair), they
were asked the question about next Wednesday’s
meeting. Interestingly, performing these spatial motion
tasks had no effect on subjects’ thinking about time.
People riding the chair (actually moving through space),
were as likely to think of themselves as moving
through time (55% said the meeting would be on
Friday), as were people roping the chair (actually
making and object move toward them) (58% said the
meeting would be on Friday). It appears that just
moving through space, is not sufficient to influence
people’s thinking about time.
This finding is
especially striking when compared to the findings of
Study 1 where just thinking about spatial motion (in
the absence of any actual motion) was enough to
influence people’s thinking about time (see also
Boroditsky, 2000).

Discussion
Taken together these studies demonstrate the intimate
relationship between abstract thinking and more
experience-based forms of knowledge. People’s thinking
about time is closely linked to their spatial thinking.

When people engage in particular types of spatial
thinking (e.g., thinking about their journey on a train,
or urging on a horse in a race), they also unwittingly
and dramatically change how they think about time.
Further, and contrary to the very strong embodied view,
it appears that this kind of abstract thinking is built on
representations of more experience-based domains that
are functionally separable from those directly involved
in sensorimotor experience itself.
A further question is how do these relationships
between abstract and concrete domains come about in
the first place? Surely, some relationships come from
correspondences that can be observed in experience. For
example, progression in space and time are often
correlated -- movements that are longer spatially are also
likely to take a longer amount of time. These simple
correspondences in experience can then be amplified and
built on by language. People often use metaphors from
more experienced-based domains to talk about more
abstract domains, and often these metaphors go beyond
what can be observed in experience. This means that
some abstract knowledge might be constructed and
shaped by language. In fact, this turns out to be the
case. For example, English and Mandarin speakers use
different spatial metaphors to talk about time, and this
difference in language leads to important differences in
the way the two groups think about time (Boroditsky,
in press). It follows that to properly characterize
abstract thought, it will be important to look not only
at what comes from innate wiring and physical
experience, but also at the ways in which languages and
cultures have allowed us to go beyond these to make us
smart and sophisticated as are.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Amy Jean Reid, Justin
Weinstein, and Webb Phillips for their heroic feats of
data collection.
Correspondence and requests for
materials should be addressed to Lera Boroditsky (email:
lera@psych.stanford.edu).

References
Boroditsky, L.
(2000).
Metaphoric structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors.
Cognition, 75(1), 1-28.
Gentner, D., Bowdle, B., Wolff, P., & Boronat, C. (in
press). Metaphor is like analogy. In Gentner, D.,
Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. N. (Eds.) (in press).
The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive
science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gibbs, R.J. (1994). The poetics of mind: Figurative
thought, language, and understanding. New York,
Cambridge University Press.

Holyoak, K.J. & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps:
Analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, The MIT
Press.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live
by. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the
Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to
Western Thought. Basic Books, New York.
McGlone, M.S. & Harding, J.L. (1998). Back (or
forward?) to the future: the role of perspective in
temporal language comprehension. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition, 24(5), 1211-1223.
McTaggart, J. (1908). The Unreality of time. Mind,
17, 457-474.

