UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Utility of Reserved Transfers in Metaphor

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3vw4s91k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Author
Barnden, John A.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Utility of Reversed Transfers in Metaphor
John A. Barnden (J.A.Barnden@cs.bham.ac.uk)
School of Computer Science; University of Birmingham
Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom

Abstract
In metaphor research there is usually some notion of
transfer of aspects of the source domain to the target domain. More rarely, transfers in the opposite direction
are countenanced, affecting one’s perception of source
as well as target. This paper argues that, even without this aim, transfers from target to source should happen. One radical claim here is that it is often better to
translate information from literal sentences into prevailing metaphorical terms than to translate the information
from metaphorical sentences into literal terms. The issues
have been obscured by confusion between intuitive directions of static source/target mappings, directions of individual transfer actions, and direction of main intended information flow. Relevance to an implemented AI system
for metaphorical reasoning, ATT-Meta, and to Blending
Theory are briefly mentioned. Asymmetry of metaphor is
also addressed.

Introduction
In this paper, metaphor is thinking or communicating
about some target scenario TS in a way that relies on
or is motivated by seeing it as something one takes to
be qualitatively different from it. Consider: “In the far
reaches of her mind, Anne knew Kyle was having an affair” (from real discourse: Gross, 1994). TS is what is
going on in Anne’s mind. Her mind is being seen as a
physical space that has “far reaches.” The utterance relies
on or is motivated by a metaphorical view of MIND AS
PHYSICAL SPACE. In this view, the source domain is
the knowledge domain concerned with physical spaces,
locations, etc., and the target domain is concerned with
minds and mental states/processes. My term metaphorical view means much the same as conceptual metaphor
(Lakoff, 1993). However, I use a different term partly because Lakoff makes claims about conceptual metaphors
that do not affect the present paper.
In analyses of metaphor there is usually a notion of
transfer of aspects of the source domain to the target
domain. The transfer involves copying or in some way
translating the source aspects. An “aspect” is an entity, property, relationship, proposition, ... that features in source-domain knowledge. The centrality of
source-to-target (S→T) transfer is especially evident
in feature-transfer accounts (e.g., Ortony, 1979) and
analogy-based accounts (e.g., Falkenhainer et al., 1989;
Holyoak & Thagard, 1989). In the former, understanding of metaphorical utterances is meant to proceed by

finding one or more suitable features of a source entity
and ascribing them to, or emphasizing them in, a target
entity. In analogy-based accounts, the understander either already possesses an S→T mapping handling some
aspects of the source or constructs such a mapping on
the fly. The understander uses that mapping in transferring further aspects of the source to become potentially
new target aspects, or at least target aspects that were not
previously attended to or not dealt with in the original
mapping. The rest of the paper will be geared ostensibly
to analogy-based accounts. However, observations to be
made generalize to other accounts as long as they involve
notions of mapping and/or transfer.
A mapping generally maps more than one aspect of
a domain. I call a part of the mapping that is concerned with one specific aspect a mapping relationship.
Consider the Socrates-as-midwife metaphorical view in
Plato’s Theaetetus, analyzed by Holyoak & Thagard
(1989). This involves, amongst others, a mapping relationship between a midwife and Socrates, one between
students (even if male) and mothers, one between babies and ideas, and one between pregnancy and ideadevelopment.
Mappings must be distinguished carefully from actions related to them. A mapping is just a set of relationships between aspects of two domains. It is to be distinguished from the act or process of creating the mapping (another possible meaning of the word “mapping”).
Also, a transfer is an action. In fact, a transfer generally
rests in part on acts of using the existing mapping. For instance, we might transfer the source-domain proposition
that Socrates helps Theaetetus to give birth to [a particular idea] to become the target-domain proposition that
Socrates helps Theaetetus to produce [that idea]. Here
the particular proposition transferred was not previously
mapped, but its parts were. There could be more creative transfers as well, such as transferring the cleaning
up of the afterbirth to eliminating useless side-effects of
a produced idea. Either sort of transfer involves actions
exploiting existing mapping relationships (e.g., the one
from babies to ideas).
Metaphorical views are generally (and perhaps always) considered to be directed, in a natural and intuitive
way. A view of midwives as teachers is clearly distinct
from a view of teachers as midwives. This is the asymmetry of metaphor. In a view of A as B, the direction

of the metaphor is from B to A. Also, in all mappingbased accounts I have seen, the intuitive direction of the
mapping is usually taken implicitly or explicitly to be the
same as the direction of the metaphor.
But there is a further direction, namely the direction
of information flow. In most examples in the literature,
the information flow is from source to target, in that all
that is discussed is informational effects on the target.
However, in some accounts, notably interaction accounts
(Black, 1979; Waggoner, 1990) and the blending-based
account (Turner & Fauconnier, 1995), information flow
from target to source (T→S) is allowed for, though much
less commonly analyzed than S→T flow. Thus, in general, the direction of the metaphor may not be the same
as the direction of all information flow. A major task of
this paper is to expand on this point beyond where the
literature has taken it so far, showing that it is of much
more general importance than heretofore realized.
The plan of rest of the paper is as follows. The next
section explains why the direction in which a mapping
relationship is used (e.g., during a transfer) is theoretically independent of its intuitive direction. The third section shows argues for T→S as well as S→T informationflow and mapping-usage actions. The fourth section explains that it is inappropriate to think of the direction of
mapping always being (wholly) the same as the direction of the metaphor. The fifth section comments on the
asymmetry of metaphor. The sixth links the considerations to an implemented AI system, ATT-Meta, that performs some of the reasoning needed in metaphor understanding (Barnden et al., 1996; Barnden & Lee, 1999,
2001).

Directionality: Relationship versus Usage
As stated above, mappings are usually described informally as going from source domain to target domain.
(Some authors, e.g., Holyoak & Thagard, 1989, occasionally depart from this). Each mapping relationship
can just be denoted as an ordered pair (s,t) where s is the
source-domain aspect mapped and t is the target-domain
aspect it maps to. For instance, in Socrates-as-midwife, a
source-domain scenario containing a particular midwife
mw1 is assumed, and we have the mapping relationships
(mw1, Socrates) and (give-birth, produce-idea).
Now, it is normally assumed that the use of a mapping
relationship (s,t) is in the direction from s to t. At one
point in processing, a source-domain structure involving
s may be being worked on; and then, typically as a result of an attempted transfer, a structure involving t will
be considered. But, in principle, the direction of use is
independent of the direction of the relationship. If for
some reason it were beneficial to create source-domain
structures that paralleled existing target-domain ones according to the metaphorical view at hand, a mapping relationship (s,t) could be used, in reverse, to go from t
to s. Equally, we could just as well have mapping relationships that intuitively go from target to source without
affecting their usability from source to target.
In much work on analogy and metaphor, mappings are

required (e.g., in SME, Falkenhainer et al. 1989) or preferred (e.g., in ACME, Holyoak & Thagard, 1989) to be
one-to-one. A one-to-one mapping does not allow there
to be two different mapping relationships (s,t1) and (s,t2)
or two different mapping relationships (s1,t) and (s2,t).
Clearly, if a mapping violated the former condition, some
attempted S→T transfers would be faced with extra complication because of the choice between target aspects;
and a mapping violating the latter condition would similarly complicate some attempted movements from target to source. These difficulties do not, however, stop
a particular (s,t) or (t,s) relationship in a non-one-to-one
mapping being usable in either direction.

Usefulness of Target-to-Source Transfers
Some accounts of metaphor (notably interaction accounts and Blending Theory) allow for T→S transfers.
Such transfers therefore use mapping relationships in
the T→S direction. However, in those accounts, attention is focused on cases where the ultimate effect is to
make some relatively long-term change in the understander’s appreciation of the source domain. In contrast,
the present paper argues that T→S transfers can be useful even when there is no effect on the source domain that
outlives the short-term purposes of the current processing
(e.g., understanding a sentence), and where the original
goal of the processing is purely to add information to the
target domain. The general argument is that T→S transfers can create source-domain information that feeds into
within-source-domain processing that in turn ultimately
feeds back into some S→T transfer. We therefore have
a distinction between direction of ultimate information
flow, which is normally S→T, from direction of individual transfers, which can be T→S, although there must be
at least one S→T if ultimate information flow is to be in
this direction.
The next three subsections look at different types of
T→S transfer.

T→S Transfer: Certainty Downgrading
In a teacher-as-midwife scenario, suppose that reasoning within the source domain establishes, to some level
less than absolute certainty, that Adonis [a student] gave
birth to the idea J (J viewed as a child). Let us call this
proposition SP. Suppose that by ordinary S→T transfer
this creates the target-domain proposition TP that Adonis
produced J. But, finally, suppose that there is an independent argument in the target domain that Adonis did not
produce J, and that this argument is deemed stronger than
the metaphor-based argument. Thus the certainty level
ascribed to TP must be downgraded. Now, in discussions
of such conflict in the literature, it is not pointed out that
therefore it may be desirable or perhaps even necessary
(a) to downgrade correspondingly the certainty level ascribed to the source-domain proposition (here SP) from
which the downgraded target-domain proposition (here
TP) came, and possibly also (b) to affirm the negation of
SP.

Action (a) is T→S transfer of certainty downgrading.
The motivation for it is that the original source-domain
proposition (SP) could have been used to support other
propositions in the source domain scenario (e.g., that
Socrates has acted as a midwife for Adonis). The downgrading of SP may therefore be needed so that those other
propositions can be properly downgraded—and this may
then require withdrawal of earlier S→T transfers of those
propositions. Somewhat similarly, affirmation of the
negation of SP in the source domain could be useful as
it could lead to new inferences in the source domain and
hence new S→T transfers.

Metaphorization of the Literal
There is a much stronger and more explicit type of T→S
transfer. Consider the following discourse fragment:
Socrates helped Adonis to give birth to [the idea J].
Similarly, John helped Mary to produce [some idea
K].
It would surely be natural to take John’s help to be
metaphorically a matter of helping a birth. That is, to
transfer the target-domain proposition that John helped
Mary produce K to become the source-domain proposition that John helped Mary give birth to K. Then, the rich
resources of the source-domain scenario are available to
make further inferences. One such inference, albeit an
uncertain one, could be that John acted as a midwife for
Mary. There could then be a further inferences that John
was instrumental in introducing Mary to the responsible
sexual partner. This matchmaking function of (ancient
Greek) midwifery is explicit in Theaetetus. Such further
propositions could then lead by ordinary S→T transfer
to new propositions in the target domain, for instance
that John introduced Mary to people who stimulated her
ideas.
Notice the contrast to the following method: derive
target domain propositions from the first, metaphorical,
sentence; then extract target-domain propositions from
the second, non-metaphorical, sentence; then integrate
the two sets of propositions. Most existing accounts
of metaphor, in not properly dealing with the role of
metaphorical utterances in discourse leave one with the
impression that this would have to be the method. But
it is highly impoverished compared to the method in
the preceding paragraph, as it does not access the rich
source-domain scenario. The impoverished method does
allow room to infer that John is Socratic, partly because
of the word “similarly”; but once the metaphor used in
the first sentence has been left behind there is no strong
impetus to make that inference, rather than simply interpreting the word to be pointing out that John is like
Socrates purely in having helped someone produce an
idea.
In any case, the argument does not depend on the word
“similarly.” The alternative second sentence “Socrates
also helped Theaetetus to produce [idea K]” could again
be felicitously be processed by doing a T→S transfer to

get the proposition that Socrates helped Theaetetus give
birth to K.
The argument somewhat relies on the source domain
scenario not having a complete, equally rich and extensive correspondent in the target domain. That is,
reasoning in the source domain uses much knowledge
about midwives and their role in (ancient Greek) society,
where that knowledge is not all mapped to corresponding
knowledge in the target domain. That this lack of mapping is common in metaphor is argued further in (Barnden et al., 1996; Barnden & Lee, 2001), but is also linked
to common themes in metaphor research such as the relative unparaphrasability of many metaphorical utterances
(see, e.g., Waggoner, 1990) and the relative familiarity,
richness and accessibility of source domains as opposed
to target domains (see, e.g., Lakoff, 1993). Indeed, even
if the metaphorical mapping captured all the richness of
facts in the source domain, that would still not be enough
because methods of reasoning peculiar to the source domain may need to be captured as well. Also, if familiarity
of subject matter can affect the facility of people’s reasoning even if the pattern of reasoning is kept constant
(see, e.g., Johnson-Laird, 1983:29–34), source-domain
reasoning stands to have an advantage just from this factor.
Also, it is a mistake to think that if there is an
extended use of a metaphor across a stretch of discourse then target-domain information has to be derived
from each metaphorical patch in the stretch. It may
only be necessary to switch to the target-domain once
some source-domain conclusion has been obtained from
within-source-domain reasoning that the stretch stimulates. Thus it may not only be fruitful but also much more
economical to metaphorize intervening literal statements
than to literalize the metaphorical ones.
In sum, in many cases the proper way to integrate
metaphorical discourse elements with non-metaphorical
ones is not to literalize the metaphorical ones and then do
integration (that’s the impoverished method above) but
rather to metaphorize the literal ones and then integrate.
This technique is a radical departure from other research
on metaphor, even when discourse-sensitive as in Hobbs
(1990). Hobbs does not preclude metaphorization, but he
does not appear to have argued for it.

T→S Transfer: Reasoning Queries
One sense in which T→S transfers can occur is through
query-directed reasoning (goal-directed reasoning). This
is a powerful and important technique in AI generally. In
particular, it can be used to focus metaphorical processing fruitfully, and this is especially important given the
notorious indeterminacy of the process of extracting information from metaphorical utterances. The ATT-Meta
approach places great stress on the technique. In querydirected reasoning, the process starts with a query—a
question as to whether something holds. Queries are
compared to known propositions and/or used to generate
further queries, which, if eventually established, could
help provide an answer to the original query; and the in-

vestigation of these queries results in turn from recursive application of the same principle, or by a match to
given information. Suppose the discourse at hand is using the Socrates/midwife metaphor, and one reasoning
query that has been posted in the target domain (as a result of processing of surrounding discourse) is whether a
student produced a particular idea J. By virtue of suitable mapping relationships, this query could give rise to
the query as to whether the student gave birth to J. We
can say therefore that the target-domain query has been
transferred to become a source-domain query.
Query-directed reasoning of this sort in metaphor or
analogy has been advocated by others (e.g., Markman,
1997), and for the particular purposes of the present paper it involves a relatively uninteresting sort of T→S
transfer, as it is only useful if it eventually leads to
a proposition transfer from source to target. In the
student-producing-idea example, the task is to find support for the student-gives-birth proposition in the source.
This supportedness in the source must be transferred to
turn the student-produces-idea query in the target into a
proposition. Thus, the proposition transfer is S→T even
though the query transfer is T→S.

Directionality: Mapping vs Metaphor
Given that the intuitive direction of a metaphor of A-as-B
is from B to A, it seems obvious that the intuitive direction of the mapping involved in the metaphor should be
the same. However, this is simplistic—there are exceptions. They may be quite common, and different mapping relationships in a given metaphorical view may intuitively and theoretically be best viewed as going in different directions.
Metaphorical views of IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS and MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE are used in
the sentence “The idea was hidden behind a door in
Mary’s mind.” Note that whereas the mentioned idea
is being viewed as a physical object, so there is indeed
a physical object in the source-domain scenario that is
mapped to the idea, other implied physical objects in the
source-domain scenario, such as the door, should presumably not be mapped to ideas. If, therefore, one takes
the property of being a physical object to map to the
property of being an idea, one would have to say that not
all applications of being-physical-object in the sourcedomain scenario map to being-idea in the target domain.
This is an unfortunate gap between the property and its
applications, and brings into question the idea that the
being-physical-object property maps to being-idea after
all.
One could, of course, say that the being-physicalobject property does not map at all, and that it is only
particular physical objects that map. But that is surely
less intuitively appealing than having some sort of mapping of a property. In fact, it is better to take the following, reversed, stance: the property being-idea maps
to the property being-physical-object. This is a natural
mapping relationship because it is a reasonable assumption that if one idea in the specific target-domain scenario

at hand is being viewed as a physical object then others
are too. Consider for instance the following hypothetical
discourse segment:
Many ideas were whizzing around inside Mary’s
mind. John’s question made her think up even more.
This again uses both IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS
and MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE. It would be natural
to assume that the further ideas implied by the second
sentence are also physical objects inside Mary’s mindspace (and indeed whizzing around in it). This is another
example of metaphorization. Thus, it is plausible that
the mapping of being-idea to being-physical-object has
uniform application to all ideas mentioned in the local
discourse context.
As for MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE, the point is yet
starker. Consider “The idea was in the recesses of their
minds.” The minds of all the people concerned are being
viewed as physical regions. However, not all physical regions in the source-domain scenario are being viewed as
minds: in particular, the recesses are not. It is therefore
much more natural to think in terms of a mind-to-region
mapping relationship rather than the other way round.
We can always restrict a not-uniformly-applicable
property (or relationship) in such a way that the resulting
property (or relationship) does apply uniformly. However, the restriction may be highly unnatural. For instance, in IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS the property being-physical-object, restricted to apply only to a
physical object that happens to correspond to a particular mentioned idea trivially coheres with its applications,
with respect to to the metaphorical mapping. Of course,
the italicized restriction is not itself a restriction framed
in terms of the source domain.
Given that a metaphorical mapping typically involves
several mapping relationships (e.g., applying to different properties), the possibility arises of having its component relationships go in different directions. Also, a
given mapping relationship together with its inverse may
both be intuitively part of the mapping. To accommodate these possibilities we can either broaden the notion
of mapping to allow relationships to go in different directions, or we can replace the single mapping by two
mappings, one consisting of S→T relationships and the
other of T→S ones.

Asymmetry of Metaphor
It is frequently pointed out (e.g., Way, 1991) that
metaphor is asymmetric (see Introduction above). The
present paper might be thought to conflict with this, as it
claims that the direction of the metaphor does not completely determine the direction of transfers or even the
intuitive direction of mapping relationships. However,
there is no conflict, because of the following points.
There must still be some information flow from source
to target, i.e. in the direction of the metaphor: it is the
target domain that contains the topic being attended to.
Even if teachers-as-midwives and midwives-as-teachers

both happened to use exactly the same mapping relationships (up to inversion), it is very different to conclude,
say, that in reality certain teachers help certain students
from concluding, say, that in reality certain midwives
help certain pregnant mothers.
But, in any case, the present paper in no way implies
that A-as-B would indeed involve exactly the same mapping relationships as B-as-A, even though in practice
there may well be considerable overlap, especially as a
structural isomorphism between parts of two domains is
an inherently symmetric thing. The isomorphism that is
appropriate for one direction of metaphor may be slightly
or greatly different from the one appropriate to the other
direction. (For one thing, even with a fixed direction
there can be competing possibilities for partial isomorphism. Such competition is an important aspect of SME
and ACME.) Whereas in some particular discourse a use
of teachers-as-midwives might involve an isomorphism
between the process of giving birth and the process of
producing an idea, a use of midwives-as-teachers in another discourse might rest on an isomorphism between
the process of a mother coming to bond with her alreadyborn baby and the process of a person producing an idea.
Finally, mapping relationships for A-as-B and B-asA could be intuitively similar but be different in detail.
We saw that for IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS, not
all physical objects in the source-domain scenario are
mapped to ideas, whereas all ideas in the target-domain
scenario are likely to be mapped to physical objects. If a
metaphorical view of PHYSICAL OBJECTS AS IDEAS
were to be used in discourse, it could similarly be that not
all ideas in the source-domain scenario were mapped to
physical objects but that all physical-objects in the targetdomain scenario were mapped to ideas. Asymmetry is
addressed again at the end of the next section.

The ATT-Meta System
The ATT-Meta system is too complex to be described at
any length here. It is described in Barnden & Lee (1999,
2001). The present section summarizes how the system
is related to the issues in previous sections.
The system is aimed at performing the reasoning
needed for understanding a broad class of metaphorical utterances that we call map-transcending utterances
based on familiar metaphors. Here the understander already knows the metaphorical views used, and therefore possesses source/target mappings underlying those
views; however, the utterance uses aspects of the source
domains(s) that are not mapped by the known mappings.
The system is designed on the principle that there should
by default be no attempt to create new mapping relationships to handle those aspects; rather, the system should
try to do reasoning that links those aspects to source aspects that are already mapped. For example, consider
again the sentence “ In the far reaches of her mind, Anne
knew Kyle was having an affair.” ATT-Meta handles
this as follows, given knowledge of MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE and IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS,
and most importantly the knowledge that (in)ability to

operate physically on an idea, in the source domain of
IDEAS AS PHYSICAL OBJECTS, maps to (in)ability
to operate mentally on the idea, in the target domain.
Assume that ATT-Meta’s mappings do not map the farreaches location within a space to anything, so that the
utterance transcends the system’s mappings in this respect. ATT-Meta can reason, using (mainly) commonsense knowledge about physical spaces and objects, that
Anne has only a very low ability to operate physically
on the idea that Kyle was having an affair. (This is because the far reaches of a physical region are very distant
from the main part of the region, and Anne, or rather her
conscious self, is taken to be in that main part.) Then, using the known mapping, ATT-Meta can infer that Anne
has only a very low ability to operate mentally on the
idea. This example is treated in much more detail in
Barnden & Lee (2001). A variety of other examples are
also treated in that report and in other reports cited in it.
ATT-Meta’s long-term domain knowledge and its
knowledge of metaphorical views is couched in terms of
IF-THEN rules. A given metaphorical mapping relationship takes the form of a rule, such as (roughly)
IF J is in reality an idea AND J is being viewed as
a physical object AND person X is being viewed as
being able to operate physically on J to at least degree D
THEN in reality X can operate mentally on J to degree at least D.
ATT-Meta’s reasoning is entirely query-directed. So,
for instance, in the Anne/Kyle example the reasoning
steps mentioned arise from a backwards-going process of
query construction, proceeding backwards through rules.
In particular, a query about the degree of ability of Anne
to operate mentally on the Kyle-affair idea in reality
leads to the creation also of a query about the degree of
ability of Anne to operate physically on the idea, under
the metaphorical view. Thus, the system exhibits T-to-S
transfer of queries.
The system’s metaphor-based reasoning is thoroughly
integrated into a general-purpose framework for qualitatively uncertain reasoning. Reasoning in source-domain
terms and in target-domain terms is generally uncertain. Rules and propositions are annotated with qualitative certainty levels, and there is a heuristic conflictresolution mechanism that attempts to adjudicate between conflicting arguments. As a result of conflictresolution, the certainty of one or more propositions is
downgraded. Reasoning leaves behind a record of dependency links between propositions, so certainty downgrade of a proposition leads to downgrading also of
propositions dependent on it. Now, for a given S→T
mapping relationship there is often a converse mapping
relationship, e.g. (to continue the above example),
IF J is in reality an idea AND J is being viewed as a
physical object AND in reality person X can operate
mentally on J to at least degree D

THEN X is being viewed as being able to operate
physically on J to degree at least D.
Consequently, ATT- Meta performs T→S transfer of certainty downgrades when suitable target-domain propositions are downgraded. Because of the extensive withinsource reasoning that ATT-Meta often performs, downgrade within the source domain can lead to other downgrades there by propagation along dependency links.
Because of the T→S mapping relationships, ATTMeta can metaphorize literally-stated information, and
such metaphorization steps are seamlessly mixed in with
other reasoning steps. However, only limited experimentation on this has been done so far using ATT-Meta.
As for asymmetry of metaphor, it is instructive to look
at the following situation that could hold in ATT-Meta.
Recall the T→S rule mentioned above for IDEAS AS
PHYSICAL OBJECTS. It can be reworded to have the
overall form:
IF J is in reality an idea AND J is being viewed as
a physical object AND ... THEN ... .
Now consider S→T rules for a view of PHYSICAL OBJECTS AS IDEAS. These will have the overall form:
IF O is in reality a physical object AND O is being
viewed as an idea AND ... THEN ... .
The rule-forms differ crucially in their first two conditions. Thus, T→S rules for A-as-B will be act very differently from S→T rules for B-as-A, even when the source
and target aspects mapped are the same or similar.

Conclusions
The main conclusions are that (a) target-to-source transfers of several distinctly different types are desirable in
metaphorical discourse understanding; (b) in particular,
metaphorization of within-target-domain utterances can
be desirable; and (c) the directions of mapping relationships are sometimes intuitively the wrong way round in
accounts of metaphor.
The ATT-Meta system is one that routinely allows
target-to-source transfers of the sorts mentioned above.
Blending theory (cited earlier) allows transfers into and
out of the blended space, including transfers from the
blended space back into a source domain. Also, the LISA
model for analogy (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997) allows
mapping to go from target to source, though the relationship to the considerations in the present paper is unclear. Thus, a small number of approaches are beginning
to allow effects such as those in this paper. However,
the topic appears to have seen little psychological experimentation or computational realization, and would be a
fertile ground for future empirical investigation.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by grant GR/M64208, Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council.

References
Barnden, J.A., Helmreich, S., Iverson, E., & Stein, G.C.
(1996). Artificial intelligence and metaphors of mind:
within-vehicle reasoning and its benefits. Metaphor
and Symbolic Activity, 11 (2), 101–123.
Barnden, J.A., & Lee, M.G. (1999).
An implemented context system that combines belief reasoning,
metaphor-based reasoning and uncertainty handling.
In P. Bouquet, P. Brezillon & L. Serafini (Eds), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, 1688.Springer.
Barnden, J.A., & Lee, M.G. (2001). Understanding usages of conceptual metaphors: An approach and artificial intelligence system. Tech. Rep. CSRP-01-05,
School of Computer Sci., Univ. of Birmingham, UK.
Black, M. (1979). More about metaphor. In A. Ortony
(Ed.), Metaphor and Thought. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K.D., & Gentner, D. (1989).
The Structure-Mapping Engine: algorithm and examples. Artificial Intelligence, 41 (1), 1–63.
Gross, L. (1994). Facing up to the dreadful dangers of
denial. Cosmopolitan, 216(3), USA ed.
Hobbs, J.R. (1990). Literature and cognition. CSLI Lecture Notes, No. 21, Stanford University.
Holyoak, K.J. & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13
(3), 295–355.
Hummel, J., & Holyoak, K. (1997). Distributed representation of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104 (3), 427–
466.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental models: towards
a cognitive science of language, inference and consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Lakoff, G. (1993).
The contemporary theory of
metaphor. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and Thought,
2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Markman, A.B. (1997). Constraints on analogical inference. Cognitive Science, 21 (4), 373–418.
Ortony, A. (1979). The role of similarity in similes
and metaphors. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and
Thought. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Turner, M., & Fauconnier, G. (1995). Conceptual integration and formal expression. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 10 (3), 183–204.
Waggoner, J.E. (1990). Interaction theories of metaphor:
psychological perspectives. Metaphor and Symbolic
Activity, 5 (2), 91–108.
Way, E.C. (1991). Knowledge representation and
metaphor. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

