UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ties That Bind: Reconciling Discrepancies Between Categorization and Naminf

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9hx831hn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Livingston, Kenneth R.
Andrews, Janet K.
Dwyer, Patrick

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ties That Bind: Reconciling Discrepancies Between Categorization and
Naming
Kenneth R. Livingston (livingst@vassar.edu)
Department of Psychology and Program in Cognitive Science
Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 479
Poughkeepsie, New York 12604

Janet K. Andrews (andrewsj@vassar.edu)
Department of Psychology and Program in Cognitive Science
Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 146
Poughkeepsie, New York 12604

Patrick Dwyer (padwyer@vassar.edu)
Department of Psychology
Vassar College, 124 Raymond Avenue, Box 3532
Poughkeepsie, New York 12604

Abstract
We present the results of a study designed to show
that dissociations between lexical and similaritybased boundary partitions for a set of items can be
produced in the laboratory. This is achieved by an
incremental process of learning to assign a category
label to items increasingly far removed (in similarity
space) from the center of that category and
approaching a different category. This process occurs
in parallel with a compression effect in psychological
similarity space such that increasingly distant items
labeled as members of category A nonetheless come
to be viewed as more similar to category B (the
category to which they are in fact closer in precategory learning similarity space) than they are by
people who have not learned the category distinction.

Introduction
Although patterns of similarity are related in a more
complex way to categorization and concept learning
than was once thought, the evidence is mounting that
such relationships are crucial to the partitioning of a set
of items into categories (Medin, 1989; Medin,
Goldstone, and Gentner, 1993; Goldstone, 1994a;
1994b). Among the most interesting recent findings is
the discovery that the psychological similarity space
usually assumed in the effort to measure relationships
among category members is not static, but may actually
undergo a change in its metric properties during the
process of category learning. Thus, for example,
Goldstone and his colleagues have found repeatedly that
people who have learned to categorize a set of items
make more reliable discriminations between pairs of
items that cross the category boundary than people who
have not learned to categorize them (Goldstone, 1994a;

1994b) This expansion or acquired distinctiveness
effect seems to involve a stretching of the psychological
similarity space in the region of the category boundary,
with the result that smaller changes along the category
relevant dimensions are sufficient to produce a just
noticeable difference (JND).
Category clusters might also be formed by a process
of compression in the region of similarity space that
contains a set of items, with the result that a larger
change is required to produce a JND. A number of
researchers have found evidence for this process as well
(Kurtz, 1996; Livingston, Andrews, and Harnad, 1998).
Either of these processes, expansion or compression of
the similarity space, is sufficient to produce a
categorical distinction between sets of items, and thus
looks promising as a general mechanism for concept
learning. On such an account, a concept is formed
when regions of psychological similarity space are
warped so as to create a relatively more compact
representational structure that can be more readily
manipulated as a unit.
This description of a general mechanism for category
learning is called into question, however, by recent
findings concerning the relationship of language labels
to category similarity structures.
Malt, Sloman,
Gennari, Shi, and Wang (1999) asked native speakers of
English, Spanish, and Chinese to name each member of
a set of sixty containers. They then asked these same
people to sort these sixty items into groups based on
their overall similarity. Perhaps not surprisingly,
language communities differ in their lexical partitioning
of the set of items. Chinese speakers partition the set
using five words, English speakers use 7, and Spanish
speakers use 15. The variation in grain is not the result
of simply forming a greater number of subcategories in,

say, Spanish, of the same larger category boundaries
found in Chinese; there is substantial non-shared
variance in these lexical groupings.
The real surprise comes when one examines the
clustering of items that occurs during the sorting task.
Malt, et al., found that the sorts were very similar
across language communities, in spite of the disparity
in lexical boundaries for the set. There seems to be a
dissociation of lexical boundaries from category
boundaries based on similarity, and this creates
something of a theoretical problem for the account of
category learning given above. Indeed, it constitutes a
puzzle for any theory of conceptual structure that
suggests that there is a central tendency in the
representation of the members of a category. The
widely held belief that terms derive their meanings
from their links to coherent concepts seems inconsistent
with this result.
Unfortunately, we have no information about the
kinds of judgments that people might have made of
Malt, et al.’s set of containers prior to learning to name
and categorize them. We therefore have no way of
knowing how this odd state of affairs came to pass, nor
whether it really constitutes a disconfirmation of the
claim that psychological similarity space warps in a
coherent fashion during category learning.
How might an item come to have a name other than
that of its nearest neighbors with whom it shares a
region in similarity space? One possibility discussed
by Malt, et al. (1999) is that a series of intermediate
cases could be introduced, one at a time, each inheriting
the name of its nearest neighbor, and each more remote
from the category to which the name was initially
attached. If the chain of items spans the boundary
between two categories, one could wind up with
instances that are labeled as members of category A, the
point of origin for the chain, even while having more in
common perceptually with the members of category B.
The dissociation of lexical and similarity groupings
occurs because the former is based on nearest exemplar
pairings introduced incrementally, while the latter is
based on the warping of similarity space described
above.
In order to test this hypothesis, we constructed a set
of stimuli whose distribution in similarity space
allowed for partitioning into two categories while
leaving a set of items in the space between these
groupings to allow the building of a naming chain from
one to the other. Success at building such a chain
would constitute an existence proof for this process,
and comparison of data from people who learned to
categorize the set with data from people without
category or name-learning experience would allow us to
determine whether this process alters the character of
any warping of the similarity space.

Method
Participants
Participants were seventy-eight Vassar College
undergraduates who were given course credit in an
introductory psychology course. Twenty people
participated in preliminary research to select an
appropriate stimulus set. The remaining fifty-eight
people participated in the experiment reported here,
twenty-two of them in a control group, and eighteen in
each of two experimental groups.

Stimuli
Ten members of the Nemipteridae family of fish
(threadfin breams) and ten members of the Labridae
family (wrasses) were selected for preliminary analysis
from Burgess, Axelrod, and Hunziker (1997). Each
stimulus was color photocopied, glued onto a blank
card (5.1 by 10.8 cm), laminated, and then randomly
assigned a number from 1 to 20, which was printed on
the back of the card. Following examination of the
two-dimensional solution to a multidimensional
scaling analysis (MDS) of the similarity judgments of
twenty people on all 190 possible pairs (see Procedure
below), the set was culled to remove outlying cases.
These were then replaced with items that occupied the
central region of the 2D space, which appeared to be
defined by the dimensions of degree of body striping,
and the ratio of body width to length.
These
replacement items were selected without regard to
membership in the two original categories.

Procedure
Participants were assigned either to a control condition
(N=22) or to one of two learning conditions (N=18
each group). Participants in the control condition were
asked to judge the degree of similarity between all
possible pairs of the twenty stimuli (190 pairs). The
participant was seated at a table upon which the stimuli
had been placed face up, and was allowed to inspect the
entire stimulus set for one minute. The stimuli were
then turned over, revealing the numbers on the back,
and the experimenter began naming pairs in a
previously determined random order. The participant
was instructed to turn over each corresponding pair,
look at the two items, and verbally rate the similarity
of the stimuli on a 9-point scale from 1 (most similar)
to 9 (most different). Ratings were provided to one
decimal place.
For control group participants, the similarity
judgment task was the only task required. All control
group participants were run through the procedure in a
block before work began with the experimental group.
This allowed us to complete an MDS analysis of the
data from this group to confirm the pattern of similarity
relationships in the set and the choice of stimuli for
building the chain between categories. As expected, the
MDS analysis of the control group data revealed that

stimuli clustered in two core groups consisting of eight
and seven items, respectively. The five remaining
stimuli were intermediate cases, four of which formed a
chain between the two larger groups. One intermediate
stimulus that was not part of the chain was treated as a
neutral stimulus, and did not appear in the training
task. It served as the means to a test for demand effects
in the data set (see Results, below).
This analysis of the pre-categorization similarity
space allowed us to design the stimulus sets for the
learning group. Learning participants were first taught
to categorize the core set of fifteen stimuli. Stimuli
were presented individually, in blocks of fifteen that
included all members of both categories.
The
participant was asked to label each picture as either
gracilia or aurora. The experimenter gave immediate
feedback, recorded the response, and then presented the
next picture. Order of presentation within each trial
block was random. Training continued until the
participant met the criterion of two consecutive errorless
trial blocks (30 stimuli), or a total of 20 trial blocks
had passed, whichever came first.
Once category training on the core stimuli was
complete, the first stimulus in the chain was introduced
into the subsequent trial block. Which stimulus this
was depended on the direction in which the chain was
being built. For half of the study participants, the
chain was built from gracilia to aurora (the G-root
group) and for half it was built in the opposite direction
(the A-root group). Assignment to these subgroups
was random. The first chaining stimulus introduced
was the one closest to the root category in the MDS
space derived from the control group data.
Once this new stimulus was introduced into the set,
training continued as before, except that trial blocks
now contained one additional stimulus. Order of
presentation was still random, except that the new
chaining stimulus was always presented immediately
after its nearest neighbor in the root category. Training
using this newly expanded set continued until the
participant met the criterion of two consecutive trial
blocks in which all chaining stimuli presented up to
that point had been correctly categorized, or a total of 5
trial blocks (after introduction of the new item),
whichever came first. Once the participant met criterion
for one chaining stimulus, the next stimulus in the
chain was introduced into the subsequent trial block.
The new chaining stimulus always followed the
previously learned one, which appeared randomly in the
trial block along with the 15 core stimuli and any other
chaining stimuli. Training was halted when the
participant met the training criterion after the
introduction of the fourth and final item in the chain.
Once training was completed, the participant
took a short break before completing the similarity
judgment task. Procedures for this task were exactly as
for the people in the control group, and are described
above.

Results
Six people in the learning group did not meet the
criterion for successful learning by the conclusion of
training. All six of these people were in the G-root
group. Data for those who failed to reach criterion were
excluded from all analyses. Mean similarity ratings
were calculated separately for the control and learning
groups, and, within group, mean similarities were
calculated for aurora-aurora (A-A) pairs, for auroragracilia (A-G) pairs, and for gracilia-gracilia (G-G)
pairs. Separate analyses were then performed for the
two different chaining groups, using the same control
group data for comparison in both cases.
In order to determine whether category learning
produced compression and/or expansion effects in the
A-root group, we performed a 2 (group: control vs.
learning) by 3 (pair type: A-A, A-G, G-G) analysis of
variance (ANOVA) on mean similarity ratings with
repeated measures on the second variable. The analysis
revealed a significant main effect of pair type, F(2,76) =
149.506, MSE = 63.152, p < .0001; and a significant
interaction effect, F(2,76) = 9.952, MSE = 4.202, p <
.001. (See Figure 1). For the G-root group, the same 2
(group: control vs. learning) by 3 (pair type: A-A, AG, G-G) ANOVA with repeated measures on the second
variable revealed significant main effects of group, F
(1,32) = 9.488, MSE = 22.437, p < .005, and pair
type, F(2,64) = 57.551, MSE = 20.376, p < .0001.
The interaction effect was not significant. (See Figure
2.)

8
7
6
5

A-root

4

CTRL

3
2
1
0

A/A

A/G

G/G

Pair Type

Figure 1. Comparison of the mean similarity ratings of
the control group and the group who learned a chain of
items rooted in the aurora category. Interaction of
group with pair-type is shown.

MDS Analysis

7
6
5
4

G-root

3

CTRL

2
1
0
A/A

A/G
Pair Type

G/G

Figure 2. Comparison of the mean similarity ratings of
the control group and the group who learned a chain of
items rooted in the gracilia category. Interaction of
group with pair-type is shown.
Thus, compression occurred in both learning groups,
i.e., item pairs were judged to be more similar relative
to control group ratings, particularly for the withincategory (A-A and G-G) pairs. No expansion occurred,
i.e., between-category pairs (A-G) were not judged to be
less similar by the learning groups than by the control
group.

Neutral Stimulus Analysis
Goldstone, Lippa, and Shiffrin (2001) have devised an
ingenious technique for detecting the presence of
demand effects in data of this kind. The analysis works
by comparing the pattern of changes in similarity
relationships among items in a learning set relative to a
neutral item not included in training. If the similarity
judgments of pairs including the neutral item change in
ways that are predictable from the compression or
expansion effects that occur for categorized items, this
must be due to actual changes in the underlying
similarity space and not demand effects, since the
neutral item was never categorized.
For our data set, the absolute difference for each
participant between all possible within-group and
between-group pairs of pairs involving the neutral
stimulus was calculated, averaging separately across
each group. Separate 2 (group: learning vs. control) by
2 (pair of pair type: within vs. between) ANOVAs with
repeated measures on the second variable were
conducted for both the A-root and the G-root groups.
The pattern of results was the same as that reported
above. There was thus no evidence that the observed
compression was due to a demand effect for either
group.

In order to better understand the nature of the changes
taking place in psychological similarity space we
performed a multi-dimensional scaling analysis of the
mean similarity ratings of all three groups (control, Aroot, and G-root). The full matrix of mean similarities
from each of the three groups was entered into an
INDSCAL analysis. The two-dimensional solution
provides a relatively good fit to the data (R-squared =
.872), and is plotted in Figure 3. The locations of all
twenty stimuli for each of the three groups (control, Aroot, and G-root) are depicted, and the pattern of
changes in similarity is shown by arrows connecting
three points. The point at the tail end of the arrow
represents the location in the space of the stimuli as
judged by the control group. The middle point shows
the locations of the twenty stimuli as judged by the Groot group, while the points at the tips of the arrow
heads show the locations of the twenty stimuli as
judged by the A-root group. The graph gives a sense of
the compression that occurs in the similarity space as
categories are learned. Note that the greater relative
proximity of items following compression of the
similarity space has the effect of making them a more
easily identified grouping, even though there is no
statistically significant increase in mean inter-item
differences across the category boundary.
Most
importantly, the graph shows how the chained items
move toward the central tendency of their nearest
neighbor cluster, even when the label training ties them
to the more remote cluster.

Figure 3. Shows the two-dimensional MDS analysis
(INDSCAL) of similarity relationships among the
twenty stimulus items for all three groups. The arrow
labeled R is for the neutral item (see text). The four
arrows linked by a shaded line are the chaining items.

The remaining points on the right side of the graph are
the core items in the aurora category, while those on
the left are the core items in the gracilia category. The
space of similarities for the control group is represented
by closed circles found at the tails of the arrows. The
circles at the tips of the arrow heads represent the space
of similarities for the experimental group that learned a
chain that begins in the aurora category and extends
toward the gracilia category. The filled circles found
roughly in the middle regions of the arrows represent
the space of similarities for the group that learned a
chain that begins in the gracilia category and extends
toward the aurora category.

Discussion
The domain of words must map in some predictable
way to the domain of concepts if there is to be anything
to the story that says words have meaning in virtue of
the concepts to which they are linked. This is why
Malt, et al.’s (1999) finding of an apparent dissociation
between lexical boundaries and category boundaries in
similarity space is so provocative. The experiment
reported here demonstrates one process by which names
might become attached to items that are remote in
similarity space from the core of the concept to which
the name typically refers. Note that although we did
not measure typicality in this study, one further
prediction would be that chained items should be seen
as atypical of the category they name.
More important than the demonstration of a
procedure for producing this dissociation are the data
showing how this effect is related to the warping of
similarity space previously shown to occur during
category learning. This effect was clear in comparisons
of the A-root group (people who learned a chain that
begins with an item well within the region of the
aurora group) with the control group. Analysis of
variance revealed the same pattern of within-category
compression found in previous research (e.g., see Kurtz,
1996; Livingston, et al., 1998). The effect is less clear
in the G-root group. Compression occurs in this case,
but it occurs for between category pairs as well as for
within-category pairs. Obviously, the direction in
which we tried to build chains made a difference, an
observation further confirmed by the fact that all of the
study participants who failed to reach our learning
criterion were in the G-root chaining group.
The
nature of the difference between our two experimental
groups, and its consequences for similarity judgments,
can be seen in Figure 3.
First, notice that the chains differ in how deeply
rooted they are in their originating categories. The
aurora-based chain begins with an item well inside the
region of similarity space that encompasses the
category, and it does not extend very deeply into the
region occupied by the gracilia category. Exactly the
opposite is true for the G-root chaining group. Thus,
even when people are learning to label the last two

items in the chain leading deeply into aurora territory
as gracilia, the region of space that they occupy is
being compressed still further around the central
tendency of the aurora category. It is therefore not
surprising that one sees evidence of what counts as
between-category compression for this group, because
those last two items in the chain are considered gracilia
for purposes of this analysis.
Looked at from this lexical perspective, the result
seems straightforward enough, but the effect is far more
interesting for what it tells us about how category
learning warps similarity space. Notice that the lexical
chaining effect seems to have relatively little effect on
the direction in which similarity space is compressed
during learning. The overall magnitude of the effect is
different in the two cases, an effect that is likely the
result of the fact that the task is more difficult and so
produces slower and less robust learning in the G-root
group, but the space warps in the same way in both
cases. This warping, based on the pattern of structure
and variation in the whole set of items, overrides local
tendencies associated with rogue items chained in from
elsewhere. As can be seen in Figure 3, the result is that
the chained items move in the direction of the nearest
region of compression, even while they are being
labeled as members of the more remote cluster. The
similarity-based warping of the representational space
occurs independently of labeling. Thus are lexical and
similarity-based category dissociations produced.
If this account is correct, several further predictions
follow. We have already mentioned the predictions for
typicality. Over long periods of time, we would also
expect chains that stretch far from their roots would
become unstable and break, with items at the ends of
those chains receiving new labels more in keeping with
those of their similarity-space neighbors. Linguistic
analysis of patterns of lexical evolution should reveal
such phenomena in the history of any language. We
would also expect this pattern to be most common for
artifact categories, where genuinely new instances are
introduced with some frequency, and the perceptual and
functional feature landscape is quite fluid. We are
currently conducting a replication and extension of the
study reported here using artifact categories and
additional control groups. Finally, these results have
deeper implications for the nature of the relationship
between systems for representing lexicons, at least and
systems for representing category information. These
two systems must remain in register to some extent,
but it is clear that each is sufficiently modular with
respect to the other to permit some rather remarkable
dissociations to develop in very short order.

Acknowledgments
Our thanks to the Undergraduate Research Summer
Institute at Vassar College, and to Maria Jalbrzikowski
and Paul Francaviglia for their assistance in the conduct
of this experiment.

References
Burgess, W.E., Axelrod, H.R., & Hunziker, R. (1997).
Dr. Burgess’s Mini-Atlas of Marine Aquarium Fishes
Mini-Edition. Neptune City, NJ: TFH Publications,
Inc.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994-a). Influences of categorization
on perceptual discrimination. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 123, 178-200.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994-b). The role of similarity in
categorization: Providing a groundwork. Cognition,
52, 125-157.
Goldstone, R. L., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. (2001).
Altering object representations through category
learning. Cognition, 78, 27-43.
Kurtz, K. J. (1996). Category-based similarity. In G.
W. Cottrell (Ed.) Proceedings of the Eighteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
290.
Livingston, K. R., Andrews, J. K., & Harnad, S.
(1998). Categorical perception effects induced by
category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24,
732-753.
Malt, B.C., Sloman, S.A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., &
Wang, Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming:
Similarity and the linguistic categorization of
artifacts. Journal of Memory and Language, 40,
230-262.
Medin, D.L. (1989). Concepts and conceptual structure.
American Psychologist, 44, 1469-1482.
Medin, D.L., Goldstone, R.L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100,
254-279.

