UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual Statistical Learning in Infants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6vp3w65s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Kirkham, Natasha Zoe
Slemmer, Jonathan Andrew
Johnson, Scott P.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual Statistical Learning in Infants
Natasha Zoe Kirkham (nzk2@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Jonathan Andrew Slemmer (jas234@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Scott P. Johnson (sj75@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Abstract
Statistical probability theory posits that we learn about
regularly-occurring events in the perceptual environment
by determining the likelihood of each event’s occurrence
(Aslin, Saffran, & Newport, 1998). The current study
investigates infants’ ability to extract properties of
repetitive visual events and represent predictable
combinations of visual elements. Using a noveltypreference paradigm, 2-, 5-, and 8-month-old infants
were habituated to a continuous stream of colored shapes
that were presented in a statistically predictable pattern,
and then tested alternatively on the same sequence and a
randomly-ordered sequence. The randomly-ordered
sequence differed from the originally presented sequence
only in between-shape transitional probabilities. At each
age, infants demonstrated a significant novelty
preference for the random sequence. In conjunction with
Marcus, Vijayan, Rao, and Vishton (1999) and Saffran,
Aslin, and Newport’s (1996) work looking at statistical
learning in language with 7- and 8-month-olds, these
results can be taken as preliminary evidence of a domain
general learning mechanism.

Introduction
One of the fundamental questions asked by
developmental psychologists concerns how infants
learn so much in so little time, with apparently very
little explicit instruction. Research suggests that, as
adults, we are remarkably good at implicit learning
(e.g., see Stadler & Frensch, 1998 for a review of the
implicit learning literature). Implicit learning can be
defined as non-conscious facilitation of task
performance due to information acquired during
previous exposure. Given the robust nature of implicit
learning skills in adults, it is perhaps a reasonable
assumption that these skills play some role in early
learning. The research on implicit learning in children
suggests that they too show implicit sequence learning
to the same degree as adults (Meulemans, Van der

Linden, & Perruchet, 1998; Thomas, 1998). In other
words, children showed increased reaction time in a
task that contained a predictable sequence, and, like
adults, did not have explicit knowledge of this
sequence. There were no reports in the literature,
however, with participants younger than 3 years of age
until recent studies of statistical learning, a form of
implicit learning based on statistical regularities in the
perceptual environment.
Saffran, Aslin, and Newport (1996) and Alsin,
Saffran, and Newport (1998) presented evidence that 8month-old infants determine the statistical probability
of neighboring speech sounds based on a 2-minute
exposure. Infants heard four three-syllable "words"
composed of 12 unique syllables (e.g., tupiro, golabu,
dapiku, and tilado), presented in a continuous stream in
random order (e.g., dapikutupirotiladogolabutupiro …).
Between-word spaces were removed, as were all other
cues to word boundaries (e.g., rhythm, intonation, and
stress). Thus, the only cues to word boundaries were
the transitional probabilities between syllable pairs. For
example, the transitional probability of tu-pi in this
corpus is 1.00, because pi always follows tu within the
word tupiro, whereas the probability of ro-go is .33,
because golabu is one of three words that can follow
tupiro.
After exposure, Saffran et al. (1996) presented
infants with both familiar words from the corpus and
"nonwords." Nonwords were created by combining the
last syllable of one word with the first two syllables of a
second word (e.g., rogola and butupi). Infants showed
greater interest in the nonwords than in the words. On
the logic that infants often exhibit a post-familiarization
novelty preference (Bornstein, 1985), these results
suggest that they detected the difference between words
and nonwords. This outcome is necessarily based on
learning of the transitional probabilities defining the
stimuli.

This finding is consistent with a powerful statistical
learning mechanism that supports language acquisition,
and gives rise to questions concerning the generality of
such mechanisms. It is possible, for example, that other
kinds of knowledge are gained during infancy by
learning statistical regularities in the environment.
Indeed, Saffran, Johnson, Aslin, and Newport (1999)
presented evidence that both adults and 8-month-old
infants can perform the same statistics when presented
with “words” consisting of non-linguistic tone
sequences. These data suggest that statistical learning
is not just a linguistic mechanism, allowing us to parse
words from noise. If this is the case, then perhaps
statistical learning is a mechanism that bolsters all sorts
of learning in many different domains. Perhaps
statistical learning is a domain general mechanism.
Following from this hypothesis the next logical step
is to look at statistical learning in a non-auditory
domain. The visual domain provides a lot of
opportunities for patterns to present themselves, and the
current study tested infants’ ability to pick out statistical
regularities in a stream of visual events. The data
present evidence that 2-, 5-, and 8-month-old infants are
able to extract properties of repetitive visual events in a
way that allows them to represent a predictable
combination of visual elements. Results from this
series of studies showed that at each age, infants
demonstrated a significant novelty preference for a
visual sequence that differed from the originally
presented sequence only in between-stimulus
transitional probabilities.

Method
Participants
A total of 48 infants participated in this study: 16
infants at 2 months of age (M = 1.95 months), 16
infants at 5 months of age (M = 5.10 months) and 16
infants at 8 months of age (M = 7.99 months). Infants
were recruited through a database of infants in the
Ithaca, NY area. Informed consent was obtained from
all parents, and the infants received a small toy or Tshirt as thanks for participation. All infants were full
term and healthy. In addition to the 48 infants included
in data analyses an additional 16 infants were tested but
were not useable. Eight of these infants were 2-montholds who either fell asleep during testing or were so
fussy that looking times could not be judged correctly.
In the 5- and 8-month-old group, data from one infant
was not included due to equipment failure; the
remaining seven infants were not included because they
were so fussy that testing had to be terminated prior to
the presentation of test trials.

Stimuli and Apparatus
Stimuli consisted of six looming colored-shapes (pink
diamond, red octagon, yellow circle, blue cross,

turquoise square, and green triangle) presented on a 53
cm computer monitor. The six colored-shapes were
vector shapes that loomed from 2.35˚ to 14.59˚ of
visual angle. Each stimulus loomed from 4 cm (2.35˚
visual angle) to 24 cm (14.59˚) in 1000 ms. There was
no pause between stimulus presentations. The stimuli
appeared in a continuous stream of randomly-ordered
pairs (e.g., Pair 1: turquoise square followed by blue
cross; Pair 2: yellow circle followed by pink diamond,
Pair 3: green triangle followed by red octagon), with
only transitional probabilities defining betweenstimulus boundaries (see Figure 1 for an example of
one shape sequence). The transitional probability
within pairs was 1.0 and between pairs was 0.33 (see
Figure 2 for an example of the transitions). In other
words, for an individual infant, the pairs were always
the same, but the order of the pairs within the sequence
was random (e.g., turquoise square, blue cross, yellow
circle, pink diamond, green triangle, red octagon,
yellow circle, pink diamond, green triangle, red
octagon, turquoise square, blue cross, turquoise square,
blue cross….)

Procedure
Infants were tested individually and sat on a parent’s
lap 93 cm from the television monitor. The parent was
instructed not to pay attention to their baby or to watch
the screen. Infants were first shown the original
stimulus sequence until looking declined according to a
preset habituation criterion, determined by a sliding
window algorithm that calculated over the course of a
block of four trials when the infant’s looking time had
decreased by 50% from baseline. After habituation, the
infants viewed six test displays alternating between
familiar sequences, composed of the same three colored
shape pairs, and novel sequences, produced by random
recombinations of the same colored-shapes. The only
difference, therefore, between the familiar and the
novel sequences was that in the familiar sequences the
first member of a colored shape pair predicted the
second member, whereas in the novel sequences the
colored shapes had no predictive value. There were six
test trials in total (three familiar, and three novel). Test
trials were counterbalanced across infants so that half
the infants saw a familiar trial first and half the infants
saw a novel trial first. The actual structure of the pairs
was randomized across infants, so that it was very
unlikely that any two infants saw the exact same pair
sequence.

few extremely long looking times); therefore, all data
were log-transformed prior to analysis. A 3 (age group:
2-, 5-, or 8-month-olds) x 2 (test display: habituated vs.
random sequence) ANOVA yielded a significant main
effect of age, F(2, 45) = 26.19, p < 001, the result of
longer looking overall by the youngest infants (see
Table 1). As was predicted, there was a reliable main
effect of test display, F(1, 45) = 17.89, p < .001, the
result of longer looking at the random test display (see
Table 1). Planned comparisons showed that at each age
infants looked longer at the random test display than at
the familiar test display (at 2 months of age, F(1, 45) =
5.47, p = .024; at 5 months of age, , F(1, 45) = 6.68, p =
.013; at 8 months of age, F(1, 45) = 5.77, p= .02; see
Figure 3).

Time

Table 1: Mean looking time in sec per test display
according to age group.
Figure 1: Example of a Shape Sequence (the actual
shapes had unique colors, not black and white patterns).

Age Group
2 months
5 months
8 months

Familiar Sequence
23.67
8.10
6.07

Novel Sequence
32.95
11.39
9.28

Familiar
Novel

40000
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
2 months
100%
33%

Figure 2: Example of the transitional probabilities
between shapes.

5 months

8 months

Age Group

Figure 3: Infants’ Looking Time to Familiar and Novel
Patterns

Discussion
Results
We hypothesized that infants would look longer at the
novel sequences, if they were able to extract the visual
statistical regularities available in the habituation
stimuli.
The dependent measure was looking time at the
familiar vs. the novel sequences. Looking time data in
some cells were positively skewed (i.e., there were a

These results reveal that even very young infants are
capable of picking up on statistical regularities in the
visual environment. Moreover, they are discriminating
between two visual sequences that differ only in these
statistical probabilities. The sequences offered no cues
as to the pairings: there were no pauses between
stimulus presentations, the presentations were the same
length, and the colored-shapes were not salient objects.
Yet, each age group showed significantly longer

looking time to the novel sequences. This evidence that
statistical learning is evident in young infants, in the
visual domain, lends support to the hypothesis that this
could be an early developing mechanism that supports
learning across domains.
It is, of course, worth noting that this is only the first
step in addressing the ways in which learning develops.
We have yet to determine exactly how infants are
encoding the information. Is it pure statistics? Are
babies taking note of co-occurrences of events and
stimuli, and judging the probabilities of those cooccurrences or are they abstracting these statistics into
higher-order rules? Research on language learning has
suggested that developmental constraints on learning
actually provide the necessary prerequisites for later
complex learning (Elman, 1993; Newport, 1988, 1990).
Our research offers the same suggestion; early learning
in the visual domain starts with the acquisition of the
simplest patterns, and over development more complex
patterns are acquired. This domain general learning
could provide the beginnings of domain specific
learning: as learning becomes more complex, the types
of learning differentiate according to domain
As adults, we are brilliant implicit learners, and this
learning has very little decay and requires very little
effort. As infants, all we do is look, listen and touch;
we absorb information from the environment and
quickly pick up on the causal relationships we
experience around us. For example, it does not take an
infant very long to figure out that crying creates a
desired effect, that of a parent’s presence, and that the
presence of a parent tends to predict food or comfort.
This type of associative learning seems natural and
adaptive. But, what if all initial learning is associative,
and not dependent on a conditioned reward/punishment
outcome. Note that the point here is to focus on initial
learning, not to suggest that all learning develops in the
same way. Perhaps the associations are all that is
needed to elicit a type of implicit learning. Admittedly,
the associations that are relevant and salient and do
produce pleasant or unpleasant end results might be
learned faster and remembered longer. We do not think
that the infants we tested are going to predict the arrival
of a turquoise square every time they see a yellow
circle, for example, but it is interesting to observe that
the associations were there at least long enough for the
babies to notice a difference when the turquoise square
did not predict a yellow circle. What is most interesting
about the statistical learning process is not that it may
be domain general but that it seems to work in
situations that do not have reward/punishment end
results, and therefore, seems capable of supporting a
great deal of initial knowledge acquisition.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the many parents and
infants for their participation, and all the members of
the Cornell Baby Lab for help with infant recruitment.

As well, we would like to thank Richard Aslin for many
helpful comments. The research was supported by NSF
grant BCS-9910779.

References
Aslin, R. N.; Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1998).
Computation of conditional probability statistics by
8-month-old infants. Psychological-Science, 9, 321324.
Bornstein, M. H. (1985). Habituation of attention as a
measure of visual information processing in human
infants: Summary, systematization, and synthesis. In
G. Gottlieb & N. A. Krasnegor (Eds.), Measurement
of audition and vision in the first year of postnatal
life: A methodological overview. Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Elman, J. L. (1993). Learning and development in
neural networks: The importance of starting small.
Cognition, 48, 71-99.
Marcus, G.F., Vijayan, S, Rao, S.B., & Vishton, P.M.
(1999). Rule learning by seven-month-old infants.
Science, 283(5398), 77-80.
Meulemans, T, Van der Linden, M., & Perrouchet, P.
(1998). Implicit learning in children. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 69(3), 199-221.
Newport, E. L. (1988). Constraints on learning and
their role in language acquisition: Studies of the
acquisition of American Sign Language. Language
Sciences, 10, 147-172.
Newport, E. L. (1990). Maturational constraints on
language learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 11-28.
Saffran. J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274, 1926-1928.
Saffran, J.R, Johnson, E. K., Aslin, R.N., & Newport,
E. L. (1999). Statistical learning of tone sequences
by human infants and adults. Cognition, 70(1), 27-52.
Spelke, E. S., & Van de Walle, G. (1993). Perceiving
and reasoning about objects: Insights from infants.
In N. Eilan, R. A. McCarthy, & B. Brewer (Eds.),
Spatial representation: Problems in philosophy and
psychology. Oxford: Blackwell.
Stadler, M.A., & Frensch, P.A. (Eds.) (1998).
Handbook of implicit learning. Thousand Oaks: Sage
Publications
Thomas, K.M. (1998).
Behavioral and
electrophysiologic measures of implicit learning in
children. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.

