UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What does he mean?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g1674x0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Wolters, Maria
Beaver, David

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What does he mean?
Maria Wolters
David Beaver
Rhetorical Systems Ltd.,
Department of Linguistics, Margaret Jacks Hall
4 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LX, Scotland Stanford University 94305 Stanford, CA, USA
maria@rhetoricalsystems.com
dib@stanford.edu

Abstract
Empirical results on the meaning of accented pronouns
often conflict. This is a problem for formal semantic
models. In this paper, we intend to broaden the empirical basis of two of these models. First, in a corpus study,
we checked whether properties of the antecedent influence whether a pronoun is be accented. We found that
pronouns with NP antecedents are more likely to be accented than those with pronominal antecedents. In a production experiment, we investigate whether accented pronouns signal topic shifts. Although this effect is present in
our data, it is very weak. We conclude that a comprehensive model of pronoun accentuation will need to account
for the fact that in most cases, that accent appears to be
optional. In fact, most instances of accented pronouns in
our data could be explained as signs of a rhetorical contrast.

Introduction
In order to interpret a personal pronoun, a listener needs
to determine which discourse entity or entities the pronoun specifies. Since pronouns themselves carry very little semantic information, the listener needs to tap into a
variety of information sources in order to find out which
discourse entity a given pronoun specify: lists of salient
discourse entities, grammatical conventions, discourse
structure, assumptions about the discourse model of the
speaker, and so on.
Formal work on pronoun interpretation has focussed
on written language. In this paper, we explore how the
insights gained so far can be translated to speech, where
phrasing and accentuation might provide important cues
to resolution algorithms. Most semanticists take accent
on pronouns to signal somewhat “unusual” resolution
strategies. In particular, accented pronouns are assumed
to signal topic shifts. But do the theories developed so
far describe successfully how accented pronouns actually
used in speech? This is the question we ask here.
Our paper is organised as follows: First, we sketch
the theoretical basis of our analyses, the work of
[Nakatani, 1997] and [Kameyama, 1997]. Then, we explore to what extent the patterns postulated by the theories can indeed be found in corpus data and experimental
data. Finally, we discuss the consequences of our results
for semantic and cognitive approaches to resolving accented pronouns.

Theoretical Claims
It is not clear what exactly speakers mean when they
accent a third person personal pronoun. Some people apparently accent a pronoun if the distance in
clauses between pronoun and antecedent is larger than
usual [Givón, 1983]. A number of sample discourses
that have been discussed extensively in the literature
[Kameyama, 1997, Beaver, 2000] show that when substituted for their unaccented counterpart in a given discourse, accented pronouns are frequently resolved to a
different discourse entity. In the following example,
most listeners would resolve the unaccented pronoun in
(2) to Ian, whereas the accented pronoun in (3) would be
resolved to James.
(1) Iani often meets James j for dinner.
(2) Hei prefers Italian restaurants.
(3) HE j prefers Italian restaurants.
We will now examine two theoretical analyses of accented pronouns.

Nakatani: Shifts in Attentional State
Christine Nakatani develops a model of stressed pronouns in terms of attentional state [Nakatani, 1997]. Her
framework is Centering Theory [Grosz et al., 1995]. The
goal of Centering is to develop a theory of local discourse
structure, i.e. to describe what makes a discourse segment coherent. From a psycholinguistic point of view,
Centering models how the attentional state of speaker
and hearer change during a discourse. Each attentional
state contains a set of discourse entities which are the
current “centers” of attention – hence the name “Centering”.
In the Centering model, each sentence is associated
with a list of the discourse entities which have been realised in that sentence. These discourse entities constitute the list of forward-looking centers. The forwardlooking centers are ranked according to their salience.
The most salient center on the list is called the preferred
forward-looking center C p . The most salient entity of
the previous utterance Un−1 that is realised in the current
utterance Un is the backward-looking center Cb . Each
sentence has at most one Cb . Transitions between sentences can be classified according to two criteria:
1. whether the backward-looking center of the current
sentence is the same as that of the previous sentence

(Cb (Un ) = Cb (Un−1 ))
2. whether the backward-looking center of the current utterance is also the most salient entity of that utterance,
i.e. the preferred forward-looking center (Cb (Un ) =
C p (Un ))
When the Cb is both maintained and C p (Un ), we get
a continue transition. When the Cb is no longer
C p (Un ), the transition is classified as a retain, and
when the Cb changes, we have a shift transition.
[Brennan et al., 1987] introduce two kinds of shifts: in
smooth shifts, the new Cb is also C p , in rough shifts, the
new Cb is not the most salient entity in the utterance.
In order to determine the connection between accented pronouns and attentional state, Nakatani analysed
a monologue by a gay male native speaker of American English in terms of local and global discourse structure. She found 25 accented subject pronouns; accented
object pronouns were even rarer. Of these, 7 occurred
when the transition was a smooth shift, and 9 co-occurred
with shifts to the backward-looking center of the preceding discourse segment. 6 of the 9 remaining cases
were contrastive, 3 required limited inference. Within
the Centering framework, accent on a subject pronoun
means that the speaker has shifted to a new Cb , to a new
“main center of attention”. Whether the Cb comes from
the same or the preceding segment appears to be irrelevant. The results of [Brennan, 1995] support this analysis. In her spontaneous monologues, pronouns tended to
be accented when the antecedent was not the backwardlooking center.

Kameyana: Competing Influences
In contrast to Nakatani, [Kameyama, 1997] presents
an integrated model of pronoun resolution that draws
on several sources. Her approach has the advantage that it sits well with current constraint-based
approaches to linguistics such as Optimality Theory
[Prince and Smolensky, 1993].
Centering Theory provides the backbone of
Kameyama’s work: the discourse entities of each
utterance are grouped into a partially ordered list, and
when a pronoun occurs, it is resolved to the most
salient discourse entity in the preceding utterance that
is mentioned again in the current utterance. Kameyama
calls this discourse entity the center. The salience of
the discourse entities in an utterance is determined by
several potentially conflicting factors. In Kameyama’s
algorithm for pronoun resolution, the first step is to filter
out all referents in the attentional state which violate
the highest ranked syntactic and semantic constraints.
An example for such a high-ranking syntactic constraint
is agreement: masculine personal pronouns in English
usually refer to male persons.1 Then, parallelism,
attentional structure (salience), and commonsense
inference conspire to yield a basic preference order on
1 Cases

in which that constraint is violated, e.g. females are
mistaken for males, are comparatively rare.

the remaining referents which are compatible with the
pronoun. The most highly ranked entity on that list
becomes center, the preferred antecedent for a pronoun
in the next sentence.
When the pronoun to be resolved is accented, this reverses the preference order imposed on the list of potential antecedents: the accented pronoun is then taken to
refer to the least prominent DR on that list. Note that the
order is only reversed after high-ranking syntactic and
semantic constraints have been considered, so that the
antecedents still in the list are indeed viable alternatives.
Kameyama thus predicts that accentuation will have no
effect when there is only one potential antecedent. She
also predicts that stressing the pronoun will not resolve
any ambiguity if all potential antecedents are equally
salient.
In her paper, Kameyama focusses on two factors that
affect salience: the form of the antecedent, which is captured by the exp order hierarchy, and the syntactic function of the antecedent, which is captured by the gr order
hierarchy. On the exp order scale, pronouns are more
salient than definite NPs, while on the gr order scale,
subjects are more salient than direct objects, which are
in turn more salient than indirect objects or adjuncts.
The most salient discourse entity in Un−1 is the most
likely antecedent for a pronoun in Un . For example,
Kameyama predicts that if a subject pronoun can be resolved to both the subject and the object of the preceding
sentence Un−1 , and if both subject and object are definite
NPs, then the pronoun in Un will be resolved to the subject of Un−1 if it is not accented, and to the object if it
is accented, because the subject is more salient than the
object.
Bender, Mayer, and Dogil tested that prediction for
German [Bender et al., 1996]. They synthesised various
short discourses consisting of two sentences. The first
sentences had SVO structure; in the second sentence, the
subject was pronominalised. In half of the discourses, the
second sentence also contained an object pronoun. The
subject pronoun was either unaccented or bore one of a
number of potential pitch accents. In a 60-minute experiment, listeners were presented with all possible combinations of discourses. For each discourse, they had to
indicate the correct interpretation by pointing to a picture. There were four alternatives per discourse. One
picture depicted the situation where the pronominal subject of Un was resolved to the subject of Un−1 , one the
situation where the pronoun was resolved to the object of
Un−1 . The other pictures were distractors. They found
that the listeners almost never resolved the pronoun to
the object NP, even if it was accented. The experiments
can be criticised on numerous counts. In particular, the
prominence relations between subject and object in the
target sentence may not have been realised appropriately [Mayer, 1997]. Still, the experiment demonstrates
that the influence of accentuation on pronoun resolution
might be more subtle than introspection and corpus studies suggest.

Conclusion: Which Evidence is Needed?
The evidence we have surveyed in the preceding paragraphs is conflicting. On one hand, the contexts in which
accented pronouns occur do differ markedly from those
in which unaccented ones occur. However, it is still not
clear what the main function of a pitch accent on a pronoun is. Nakatani’s and Brennan’s speakers consistently
used them to mark what we term “topic shifts”2 , and
Givón’s speaker uses accents to mark that the discourse
entity the pronoun co-specifies with was last mentioned
two or more clauses ago. On the other hand, the listeners of Bender, Dogil, and Mayer apparently did not care
whether a pronoun was accented or not, they just went
for the default interpretation.
In order to untangle this confusion, we first of all need
to supplement the published data with other analyses
from a variety of speakers with different socio-cultural
backgrounds. In this paper, we report results from two
main lines of attack, corpus analyses and production experiments. First, in an analysis of the speech of American radio news readers, we tested some hypotheses that
follow from Kameyama’s theory. Second, we conducted
a production experiment to check to what extent topic
shifts influence whether a pronoun will be accented or
not.

The Influence of gr order on accentuation
Goal of the Study
The goal of this corpus study is to determine some basic conditions under which subject pronouns can be accented. To this end, we examined three speakers from a
large corpus of read speech, the Boston University Radio News corpus [Ostendorf et al., 1995]. Since our data
comes from read speech, the results may be affected by
the speakers’ varying ability to read aloud—just as the
monologue data is affected by the idiosyncrasies that the
speakers exhibit in their speech.
The part of Kameyama’s theory that is worked out in
detail in [Kameyama, 1997] makes predictions about the
accentuation of subject pronouns in cases where the antecedent occurs in the preceding sentence. The main
problem with testing her hypotheses on corpus data is
that in our radio news texts, almost all potentially ambiguous pronouns are disambiguated semantically by the
sentence they occur in. Therefore, we can only examine
to what extent violations of the two constraints gr order
and exp order can predict whether a pronoun is accented.

Data
We chose the Boston Radio News Corpus because it is
widely available and widely used in the speech community. It provides ToBI-labelled samples of seven professional American newsreaders who worked for the
Boston, Mass., radio station WBUR at the time of the
recordings. From the corpus, we analysed the prosodically annotated radio stories from three speakers, f2b,
2 Following

[Beaver, 2000], we make a terminological shift
here and interpret Cb as the topic of a sentence.

Table 1: Overview of Radio News Texts
Speaker
f2b
m1b
No. of Texts
32
9
No. of Sequences Analysed
229
45
No. of 3rd Sg. Pron. Subj. in Un 122
22
% of These Accented
38.5% 32.8%

m2b
4
19
8
0

m1b and m2b. All speakers write their own copy. Table 1
provides summary statistics about the texts we used.
We look at sequences of two units, Un−1 and Un . Following [Kameyama, 1998], our units are tensed clauses,
with one exception: tensed relative clauses that modify NPs are assigned to the unit they occur in. We excluded all sequences of two units where the antecedent
of the subject did not occur within the analysis window. This ensures that our analyses is restricted to
just those contexts for which the theory we are testing can make any predictions. All sequences that conformed to our criteria were labelled according to four
features, grammatical function of the antecedent in Un−1
(subject, object, adjunct), form of the antecedent in
Un−1 (zero/pronoun/other), form of the subject of Un
(zero/pronoun/other), and accentuation of the subject of
Un (yes/no). 3 The annotations were performed by one
of the authors, a trained linguist, and cross-checked by
the other.
Since the brief reports we are dealing with here frequently present conflicting views and opinions on a certain topic, sentence topics are rarely maintained over several units. Secondly, many sentences are constructed according to the pattern “X said that Y”, where, strictly
speaking, “X said” and “Y” are separate clauses. The
reason for this is that the journalistic code of conduct
requires journalists to name the source of their information. f2b, who writes her own news copy and supplied
most of our data, is particularly conscientious in this respect. Therefore, when the current or previous clause is
of the form “X said”, we extend our window of analysis
to include Un−2 . Finally, in comparison to spontaneous
speech, these speakers “overaccent”. This is part and parcel of the distinctive, neutral speaking style is required of
news readers. Hence, our results are restricted to a specific communication situation.

Results
The results are summarised in Table 2. Speakers do
not tend to accent pronouns when their antecedent is
not the subject (Fisher’s exact test: p<0.6, df=1). Instead, the form of the antecedent, which is covered by
Kameyama’s exp order constraint, exerts a significant influence: whereas 40% of all subject pronouns with NP
antecedents are accented, only 18.5% of pronouns with
pronominal antecedents carry a pitch accent (Fisher’s exact test: p<0.05,df=1). This result is surprising, given
did not calculate κ for our annotations since the features are extremely straightforward.
3 We

Table 2: Accentuation of 3rd Pers. Sg. Subject Pronouns
subject
other
total
pronoun
58%
0.00% 18.5%
not pronoun
41% 22.73%
40%
total
37%
29%
36%
that most formal models operate heavily with salience
orderings based on grammatical roles.
A further analysis reveals that although most of these
accented pronouns cannot really be analysed as topic
shifts, most are involved in some sort of contrast. Take
for example text s14, read by f2b, which is about two
democratic contenders for the post of state attorney. It
has the highest number of stressed pronouns of all texts,
five. In four of these cases, the accented pronoun implies
a contrast between the two candidates. Only two of the
accented pronouns occur in explicit contrasts. In the two
other cases, the accent on the pronoun highlights a potential contrast between the two candidates, the exact nature
of which has to be inferred from the text.

Does Accent Signal a Topic Shift?
Kameyama predicts that a subject pronoun in an utterance Un should be accented if it co-specifies with the object of Un−1 only if a higher-ranking discourse entity in
Un−1 would also be a possible antecedent. If there is
only one possible antecedent, there should be no accent
on the subject pronoun, because it does not make sense
to re-order a list with only one element. On the other
hand, Nakatani’s data shows that speakers may accent
pronouns to mark a topic shift. So, if the main motivation
behind accent on pronouns is to signal topic shifts, we
would expect speakers to accent pronouns even if they
can be resolved unambiguously to the correct antecedent.
If accent is a cue to topic shifts in general, we would expect a similar effect when the new topic is expressed by
a definite NP.
We examined these questions in a small production experiment. The main hypothesis was that accent is a cue
to topic shifts in general: if the subject of Un co-specifies
with the object of Un−1 , it is accented, but not when it
co-specifies with the subject—even if subject and object
differ in gender. We also wanted to find out whether that
effect is stronger for pronouns than for full NPs, since
the presence of a full NP in subject position is in itself a
sufficient cue to a topic shift.

Design
In order to test our hypotheses, we created a set of foursentence discourses. The first sentence in each discourse,
S1, introduces a person P1 in subject position with a
proper name. In the second sentence, S2, P1 appears
again in subject position, and a second person, P2, is introduced in object position with a proper name. Both
persons differ in gender.
The third sentence, S3, is the key sentence. Its structure is varied according to the two variables SHIFT and

PRO :
SHIFT: The subject of S3 is either P1, i.e. the subject of S2 (+ SHIFT), or P2, i.e. the object of S2 (SHIFT )
PRO : The subject of S3 is either a pronoun (+ PRO )
or a semantically empty definite NP (- PRO), “the girl”
for female, “the guy” for male referents.

Combining these variables yields four experimental conditions: + SHIFT + PRO , + SHIFT- PRO , - SHIFT + PRO , and
- SHIFT- PRO
Apart from the subject, no other discourse entities
from S2 are mentioned in S3. This way, we avoid potential violations of Centering’s definition of Cb , which
states that the highest-ranked center of Un−1 that is realised in Un is the Cb of Un . The final sentence, S4,
maintains the subject of S3. The subjects of S2 and S4
are always pronouns. The key sentences S2 and S3 contained no left-dislocated arguments, and the subject in
sentences S2 and S3 is always an agent.
We kept the structure of the sentences as simple as possible so that the subjects had less trouble reading them
out loud. We also changed the content of S3 and S4 depending on the subject, so that the discourses were both
semantically and syntactically unambiguous. There are
four possible combinations of conditions, and for each
of these combinations, we created three discourses. A
sample set of discourses is given in Figure 1.

Method
We divided these discourses into four lists of six discourses each, so that each list contained each condition
at least once. Each of these lists was mixed with a list
of discourses for two other experiments on intonational
meaning and presented to five readers, yielding a total
of 20 subjects. We limited the number of discourses per
speaker because the experiment was interleaved with two
other production experiments and we aimed to keep the
total duration of the experiment below twenty minutes,
in order not to strain our subjects’ voices too much. Because of the small scale of our study, we unfortunately
cannot present data on subject-specific variation. All in
all, we collected 120 discourses, 30 per condition.
All of our subjects were undergraduates at Stanford
University who did not major in Linguistics. One or two
of the subjects had a slight cold. Although their mother
tongue was American English, they came from different
parts of country. They were paid for their participation
at a standard rate of $10 per hour. The discourses were
recorded in a sound-deadended room. Before the recording was started, the subjects were asked to read through
each dialogue. The list of discourses to be analysed
later was preceded by four practice discourses. Each discourse was printed in large type on a separate page. The
subjects were instructed to read each discourse silently
first, make sure they understood what was meant, and
then read it out aloud as if they were talking to a friend.

Figure 1: Sample set of four discourses with P1=Julia, P2=Nathan

+ PRO
- PRO

S3
S4
S3
S4

S1: JuliaP1 went to a bar last night.
S2: SheP1 chatted with NathanP2 for a while.
+ SHIFT
- SHIFT
SheP1 also spent some time at the bar.
HeP2 had been waiting for this chance for ages.
HeP2 had always thought that JuliaP1 was a nice girl.
Afterwards, sheP1 was really tired.
The girlP1 also spent some time at the bar. The guyP2 had been waiting for this chance for ages.
HeP2 had always thought that JuliaP1 was a nice girl.
Afterwards, sheP1 was really tired.

None of the subjects reported any difficulties in understanding any of the discourses.
Due to misreadings which were not caught at the time
of the recordings, five discourses had to be discarded,
which leaves us with a total of 115 discourses. We then
randomly discarded another seven discourses, in order to
achieve an equal number of samples in each condition.
This brings the total number of instances per condition
down to 27.
We analysed the discourses both acoustically and perceptually. On the acoustic level, we computed mean,
maximum, and range (= maximum F0 - minimum F0)
of the logarithm of F0 for all subjects of the third sentence of each discourse. This transformation yields an
approximately normal distribution of F0 values. F0 was
computed using the get f0 program of Entropic ESPS
Waves 4 We transformed mean, maximum and range to
z-scores based on the mean and standard deviation of a
speaker’s F0 during the current discourse. These z-scores
were then submitted to a statistical analysis. We assume
that accentuation will lead to a higher F0 maximum and
a higher mean F0. We did not compare durations, since
we did not find a satisfactory normalisation procedure.
On the perceptual level, we determined for all discourses whether the subject of S3 was accented, and
whether it had been reduced. The definite NPs count as
reduced if a speaker has shortened the nucleus of “guy”
or “girl”; the pronouns count as reduced if a speaker has
replaced the high front vowel of the citation form with
a central vowel. These criteria allow for a wide range
of dialectal and idiolectal variation in the realisation of
the vowels in the target nouns and pronouns. All judgements were made by a trained phonetician; the transcriptions were checked using sonagrams and pitch contours.
Table 3 summarises the frequency of accentuations and
reductions of each word. The nouns are almost always
accented, and rarely reduced. The pronoun “she” is reduced often, sometimes to just the alveopalatal fricative
/Ë/, and rarely accented.

Results
First, we examine the acoustic results. If our main hypothesis is correct, then both nouns and pronouns should
be more prosodically prominent when SHIFT is violated.
4 The target words were almost never spoken with creaky
voice, although the register occurs frequently in our data: almost all female speakers use it to mark the end of a sentence.

Table 3: Frequency of accentuation and reduction
girl
guy nouns
he
she pron.
total
25
29
54
23
31
54
% red.
24% 17%
20% 30% 64%
50%
% acc. 100% 97%
98% 26% 13%
18%

That is, mean and maximum F0 should be higher when
the constraint is violated. The raw means presented in
Table 4 support this hypothesis for pronouns, but not
for nouns. Although the average F0 on pronouns in
the + SHIFT-condition is about as high as the average F0
of nouns, this is not necessarily due to a pitch accent.
Rather, what we have in many of these cases is a high
onset, which is often used to mark paragraph boundaries.
For definite NPs, the effect appears to be reversed; here,
F0 is higher when the topic is maintained than when it
shifts.
However, the clear tendencies in Table 4 are not statistically significant. Since the data are not normally distributed, we used the Kruskal-Wallis test to determine
whether the presence of a shift significantly affects F0;
the number of degrees of freedom is always 1. The test
was computed over z-scores, not over absolute values,
because z-scores help factor out a large part of the interspeaker differences. For nouns, there is no effect of a
shift, both for the z-scores of mean F0 (Kruskal-Wallis
χ2 =0.0037,p<1) and for the z-scores of maximum F0
(K.-W. χ2 =2.01,p-value<0.2). We also do not see an effect for pronouns at the gradient level, neither for mean
F0 (K.-W. χ2 =1.77,p<0.2) nor for maximum F0 (K.-W.
χ2 =1.70,p<0.2). There is a slight effect on the categorical level: pronouns are more likely to be accented
in cases of topic shift (Fisher’s exact test, p<0.1, df=1,
power 0.84). In the + SHIFT condition, 30% of all pronouns were accented, in the - SHIFT condition, 8%. Although the percentages appear huge, note that the absolute numbers are small, which leads to the realistic level
of p<0.1.

Discussion
The patterns we found in the data suggest the hypothesis that speakers may signal topic shifts by accenting
pronouns—or at least by making them more prosodically
prominent. However, this cue is restricted to pronouns;
if a full NP occurs in the subject position, it need not be

Table 4: Effect of conditions on mean and maximum F0
(in Hz; mean standard deviation)
- SHIFT
+ SHIFT
mean F0
max F0
mean F0
max F0
- PRO 180 54 221 65 179 53 211 62
+ PRO 173 77 183 78 199 69 212 85

accented, because the switch from pronoun to full NP is
enough.
There are several reasons why these patterns did not
turn out to be significant. For one, we need to control the
potential emphatic or contrastive foci in S3 more stringently. For example, in the sentence “X had to explain all
the algorithms twice.” almost all of our subjects stressed
“all”, “algorithms”, and “twice”. But the main problem was that speaking styles vary considerably. Some
speakers produced very stereotypical, monotonous intonation contours, while others read the discourses almost
naturally. Therefore, we will switch to a design based
on spontaneous speech in follow-up experiments, which
will also incorporate a dedicated speaker factor. The
power of the statistical tests, which was between 0.3 and
0.4, will also need to be increased.

Conclusion
What does it mean to accent a pronoun? The data we
have examined, both in the corpus study and the production experiment, do not support either Nakatani’s or
Kameyama’s models of pronominal accent. Thus our
studies underline the need for further theoretical and empirical work in this area.
In our data, two trends can be discerned: Firstly, any
formal semantic theory of accented pronouns needs to
deal with the fact that in many cases, this accent may
be optional. To what extent speaking style influences
whether speakers will choose to accent a pronoun, and
to what extent accented pronouns aid comprehension,
needs to be investigated by future experiments. Secondly, most of the accented pronouns in our corpus data
could be interpreted as cues to some sort of contrast. Often, that contrast was not directly obvious from the context; Listeners need to construct a contrast based on their
interpretation of a text to accomodate the presence of the
accent on the pronoun. We are currently working on an
optimality theoretic account of stressed pronouns that incorporates this finding.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Amanda Wildner for help with
the measurements and Susan Brennan and an anonymous
reviewer for their comments. M.W. conducted most of
the work while still at the University of Bonn. D.B.
would like to thank the Stanford University Office of
Technology Licensing for funding.

References
[Beaver, 2000] Beaver, D. (2000). Centering in optimal
theory. Department of Linguistics, Stanford University.
[Bender et al., 1996] Bender, A., Dogil, G., and Mayer,
J. (1996). Prosodic disambiguation of anaphoric pronouns in german discourses. In UCREL Technical
Papers, Vol.8 – Special Issue: Approaches to Discourse Anaphora: Proceedings of DAARC-96, Lancaster, July 17-18, 1996, pages 28–39.
[Brennan, 1995] Brennan, S. E. (1995). Centering attention in discourse. Language and Cognitive Processes,
10(2):137–167.
[Brennan et al., 1987] Brennan, S. E., Friedman, M. W.,
and Pollard, C. J. (1987). A centering approach to
pronouns. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Stanford, CA, 6–9 July 1987, pages 155–162.
[Givón, 1983] Givón, T. (1983). Topic continuity in spoken english. In Givón, T., editor, Topic Continuity in
Discourse, pages 343–364, Amsterdam; Philadelphia,
PA. John Benjamins.
[Grosz et al., 1995] Grosz, B. J., Joshi, A. K., and Weinstein, S. (1995). Centering: A framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse. Computational
Linguistics, 21(2):203–225.
[Kameyama, 1997] Kameyama, M. (1997). Stressed
and unstressed pronouns: Complementary preferences. In Bosch, P. and van der Sandt, R., editors,
Focus: Linguistic, Cognitive and Computational Perspectives. Cambridge University Press.
[Kameyama, 1998] Kameyama, M. (1998). Intrasentential centering: A case study. In Walker, M. A., Joshi,
A. K., and Prince, E., editors, Centering Theory in
Discourse, pages 89–112. Oxford University Press.
[Mayer, 1997] Mayer, J. (1997).
Intonation und
Bedeutung.
Arbeitspapiere des Instituts für
maschinelle Sprachverabeitung, Stuttgart 4(3),
Institut fr Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, Universität Stuttgart.
[Nakatani, 1997] Nakatani, C. (1997). The Computational Processing of Intonational Prominence: A
Functional Prosody Perspective. PhD thesis, Harvard
University.
[Ostendorf et al., 1995] Ostendorf, M., Price, P., and
Shattuck-Hufnagel, S. (1995). The Boston University
radio news corpus. Technical report, Boston University.
[Prince and Smolensky, 1993] Prince, A. and Smolensky, P. (1993). Optimality theory: Constraint interaction in generative grammar. Technical Report 2, Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science RuCCS.

