UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Words and Shape Similiarity Guide 13-month-olds' Inferences about Nonobvious Object
Properties

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6768730b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Graham, Susan A.
Kilbreath, Cari S.
Welder, Andrea N.

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Words and Shape Similarity Guide 13-month-olds’ Inferences about Nonobvious
Object Properties
Susan A. Graham (grahams@ucalgary.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Calgary
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4 Canada

Cari S. Kilbreath (cskilbre@ucalgary.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Calgary
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4 Canada

Andrea N. Welder (anwelder@ucalgary.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Calgary
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4 Canada
Abstract
We examined the influence of shape similarity and object
labels on 13-month-old infants' inductive inferences. In two
experiments, infants were presented with novel target
objects with or without a nonobvious property, followed by
test objects that varied in shape similarity to the target.
When objects were not labeled, infants generalized the
nonobvious property to test objects that were highly similar
in shape (Expt. 1). When objects were labeled with novel
nouns, infants generalized the nonobvious property to both
high shape similarity and low shape similarity test objects
(Expt. 2). These findings indicate that infants as young as
13 months of age expect those objects which share the
same shape or the same label to possess the same
nonobvious property.

Introduction
Inductive reasoning involves invoking the premise that
things that are true for one member of a category (e.g., the
blue ball bounces) will hold true for other members of the
same category (e.g., therefore all balls bounce; Moore &
Parker, 1989). The ability to reason inductively is an
invaluable cognitive skill, allowing an individual to
generalize knowledge to new instances and new
situations. In recent years, a great deal of empirical
attention has been devoted to examining preschoolers'
inductive reasoning abilities, with particular focus on the
nature of the categories that guide their inferences. In a
typical inductive generalization task, preschoolers are
taught a fact about a target object and then are asked
whether that fact can be generalized to other test objects.
Using this methodology, studies have demonstrated that
by 2-1/2-years of age, children can reason inductively
about object properties in remarkably sophisticated ways
(e.g., Gelman, 1988; Gelman & Markman, 1986, 1987;
Kalish & Gelman, 1992). For example, Gelman and
Coley (1990) found that 2-1/2-year-olds will overlook
perceptual similarity and generalize properties on the
basis of shared underlying kind when the target and test
objects are given the same count noun label.

In recent years, researchers have begun to examine the
development of inductive capabilities during the infancy
period using the generalized imitation paradigm. In a
typical task, an experimenter will first model a specific
action on a target object. He or she will then hand infants
test objects and observe whether or not they imitate the
target action on the various objects. Studies using this
paradigm indicate that infants as young as 9 months of
age will draw inferences about nonobvious object
properties based on knowledge gained during the
experimental session (Baldwin, Markman, & Melartin,
1993). Furthermore, research suggests that both
perceptual similarity and conceptual knowledge may play
a role in guiding infants' inferences (Baldwin et al., 1993;
Mandler & McDonough, 1996, 1998). In a recent series of
studies (Welder & Graham, in press), we found that 18month-old infants will rely on shared shape similarity to
guide their inductive inferences about novel objects'
nonobvious sound properties when no other information
about category membership is available. More
importantly, however, when infants were provided with
information about conceptual category membership in the
form of shared object labels, shape similarity was either
attenuated in significance (in the case of novel labels) or
disregarded (in the case of familiar labels). These findings
indicate that 18-month-old infants can make inductive
inferences about object properties based on a conceptual
notion of object kind. Furthermore, these findings suggest
that infants as young as 18 months of age recognize the
conceptual information conveyed by object labels. That
is, they recognize that noun labels supply information
about underlying object kind and that members of the
same kind share nonobvious properties.
In the present studies, we pursued the investigation of
infants' inductive abilities, with specific focus on the
reasoning abilities of infants who are just beginning to
acquire productive language. First, we examined whether
13-month-olds, like 18-month-olds, will rely on shared
shape similarity to generalize nonobvious object
properties, in the absence of other information about

object kind (Experiment1). Second, we examined whether
13-month-olds will rely on shared object labels to direct
their inductive inferences (Experiment 2). In particular,
we examined whether infants will extend a nonobvious
property on the basis of a shared object label, even if the
objects differ in shape.
In both experiments, we employed a generalized
imitation paradigm to examine infants' inductive abilities
(see also Baldwin et al., 1993; Mandler & McDonough,
1996, 1998). We presented infants with novel target
objects that possessed nonobvious properties (e.g., a
cloth-covered object that squeaked when squeezed). The
experimenter demonstrated the nonobvious property using
a specific target action and then presented infants with
test objects which varied in their degree of perceptual
similarity to the target. We reasoned that if infants
considered test objects to be members of the same
category as the target, they would expect the test objects
to share the same nonobvious property as the target. That
is, infants’ imitation of a target action on test objects
would provide evidence of inductive reasoning.

Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment 1 was to examine the role of
shape similarity in guiding infants' generalization of
nonobvious object properties when they are presented
with novel object categories. Infants were presented with
object sets consisting of a target object followed by a high
similarity match, a low similarity match, and a dissimilar
object in three within-subjects conditions. The high and
low similarity matches within each set varied in shape and
color but shared similar textures. The dissimilar objects in
each set, however, differed from the target object in
texture, shape, and color. The dissimilar objects were
included to ensure that infants’ inductive generalizations
were specific to objects that they perceived as belonging
to the same category and to ensure that infants were not
merely imitating the experimenter’s actions on any object,
regardless of whether an expectation was generated.
We presented infants with target and test objects in
three within-subjects expectation conditions. In the
surprised condition, the target object possessed an
interesting sound property (e.g., squeaked when
squeezed), but the test objects were disabled so that they
could not exhibit the property (e.g., could not squeak
when squeezed). This condition was of particular interest,
as infants' performance would indicate whether they
expected test objects to possess the same nonobvious
property as the target. In the baseline condition, neither
the target nor the test objects possessed the interesting
property (e.g., neither produced a squeak sound). This
condition provided a baseline measure of infants’
exploratory actions. A comparison of infants’
performance in the baseline condition to the surprised
condition would indicate whether the target property of
the target object was, in fact, nonobvious upon visual
inspection. In the predicted condition, both the target and
test object possessed the property (e.g., both could

squeak). This condition was included to preclude the
development of the expectation that all test objects were
disabled (as all test objects in both the surprised and
baseline conditions were), leading infants to become
bored or frustrated with the stimuli.
We expected that infants would use shape similarity to
guide their generalizations of the nonobvious property as
object shape is easily perceived and is often an excellent
index of object kind (Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson, &
Boyes-Braem, 1976). More specifically, we predicted that
the greater the degree of shape similarity between a test
object and a target object, the higher the frequency of
target actions performed on that test object.

Method
Participants Participants were 20 infants ranging in age
from 12.07 months to 13.92 months (M = 12.73; SD =
.53). Ten infants were male and 10 were female.
Stimuli Four objects were used for the warm-up trials: a
garlic press, a roller ball, a clicking clock, and a
clothesline pulley. Three object sets (a “squeaking” set, a
“ringing” set, and a “rattling” set) were created for use in
the imitation task. There were four objects in each set: a
target object, and three test objects (a high similarity
object, a low similarity object, and a dissimilar object).
The high similarity test objects possessed the same shape
and texture as the target object but differed in color. The
low similarity objects shared the same texture as the
target object but differed in shape and color. The
dissimilar object shared no properties in common with the
target object. The dissimilar objects included a plastic
orange file (squeaking set), a small white strainer (ringing
set), and a plastic green hose splitter (rattling set). There
were two versions of each target and test object in each
set: a functional version that could produce the target
sound and a nonfunctional version that was disabled and
thus unable to produce the target sound. In the functional
squeaking object set, objects could produce a squeaking
noise when squeezed. In the functional ringing set, objects
could produce a ringing noise when tapped. In the
functional rattling set, objects could produce a rattling
noise when shaken.
To establish whether test objects could reliably be
categorized as high or low in shape similarity relative to
the target object, 15 adults rated the similarity of each test
object to its target. The adult ratings followed the
expected pattern. That is, the high and low similarity test
objects in each object set were perceived as significantly
different in shape from one another (all t-tests: p < .05), in
the direction intended.
Design For each infant, one of the three object sets was
presented in the surprised condition, one set was
presented in the baseline condition, and one set was
presented in the predicted condition. The specific object
set assigned to the surprised, baseline, and predicted
conditions was counterbalanced across infants.

The imitation task was comprised of three blocks of
three trials each: one trial in the surprised condition, one
trial in the predicted condition, and one trial in the
baseline condition. Each object set was presented once
within each block. That is, one of the test objects (e.g., a
high similarity object) from a given set was presented in
the first block, another (e.g., a low similarity object) was
presented in the second block, and a third (e.g., a
dissimilar object) was presented in the third block. The
order of presentation of test objects was randomized
within each block and order of presentation of expectation
condition within each trial block was counterbalanced
across infants.
Procedure Infants were seated in their parent’s lap at a
table in a testing room with the experimenter seated
across from them. Before testing began, the experimenter
instructed parents to interact with their infant as little as
possible and not to direct their infant’s attention to the
objects. Parents were also instructed to silently place
objects back on the table within the infant’s reach if
objects were dropped on the floor near the parent or if the
infant handed objects to the parent. All sessions were
videotaped for coding purposes.
During the warm-up phase, the experimenter
demonstrated a target property of each of the warm-up
objects to the infant and asked the parent to do the same.
After demonstrating the target property, parents silently
handed the object to their child for him/her to imitate the
actions observed.
During the test phase, the experimenter began each trial
by presenting infants with one of the target objects from a
given object set. She introduced the object (e.g., “Look at
this one!”) and demonstrated the nonobvious property of
the target object five times (e.g., shaking the rattle). Only
the properties of target objects in the surprised and
predicted conditions were demonstrated (as the target
objects in the baseline condition did not possess the
property). The experimenter handed the object to the
infant's parent who demonstrated the property of the
target object twice. The parent then passed the object to
the infant. After a period of 10 seconds, the experimenter
retrieved the object and placed it within the infant’s view,
but out of reach. The experimenter then presented the
infant with a test object and infants were allowed to
explore the test object for 20 seconds. This same
procedure was repeated for each of the other 8 trials. The
target object from each object set was reintroduced to
infants on each trial; however, parents only demonstrated
the property the first time a target object was introduced.
The experimenter continued to demonstrate the target
object’s property on each trial. If an object was dropped
off the table or passed/thrown out of the infants’ reach
during the session, the experimenter quickly placed the
object back within their reach. Time lost due to these
actions was not compensated for, as they were considered
to be intentional actions of frustration or disinterest (see
Oakes, Madole, & Cohen, 1991).

Coding Coders, blind to the hypotheses of the
experiment, recorded the frequency of actions performed
by the infants on the target and test objects. Only the
experimenter’s back was visible on the videotapes and all
sessions were coded with no volume. Thus, the coders
could not detect whether the experimenter had
demonstrated a target action on an object and could not
hear whether objects actually made sounds when actions
were performed by either the experimenter or the infants.
Thus, we were confident that the coders could not
distinguish the surprised, baseline, and predicted
conditions from one another.
A detailed coding scheme for each target action was
developed for each object set. The target action for the
squeaking set was defined by a squeezing motion, that is,
the infant gripped and then compressed his/her fingers
together on the object (not tapping the object, hitting the
object on the table, shaking the object, or gripping it to
look at it or passing/throwing it to the experimenter or
parent). The target action for the ringing set was defined
by a tapping, hitting, or patting motion (not squeezing the
object, hitting it on the table, shaking it, or gripping it to
look at it or pass/throw it to the experimenter or parent).
Finally, the target action for the rattling set was defined
by a shaking motion with the wrist and/or whole arm in a
back/forth or up/down motion (not tapping the object,
squeezing it, hitting the table or a body part with it, or
gripping it to look at it or pass/throw it to the
experimenter or parent). If the infant performed a fluid
shaking movement, then only one target action was
counted.
Results
The mean frequency of target actions performed on the
different test objects in the surprised and baseline
1
conditions are presented in Table 1 . We first examined
whether the target properties of the object stimuli were
indeed nonobvious to infants by comparing the number of
target actions infants performed on test objects after
having first seen a functional target object (in the
surprised condition) versus a nonfunctional target object
(in the baseline condition). We used one-tailed dependent
t-tests to compare the frequency of target actions in the
surprised condition to those in the baseline condition at
each level of shape similarity. (Note that we used onetailed tests as our predictions were directional). As

1

In all analyses, we chose not to include the data from the
predicted condition as it was difficult to interpret why infants
continued to perform target actions on test objects in this
condition. That is, it was impossible to distinguish those target
actions performed as a result of an expectation about an object’s
nonobvious property from those performed as a result of the
reinforcing nature of the sound property of the test objects
themselves (see Baldwin et al., 1993 for a discussion of this
issue).

Table 1:Frequency of Target Actions Performed on Test
Objects at Each Level of Shape Similarity within each
Expectation Condition (Expt. 1).

Condition

Shape Similarity to Target
High
Low
Dissimilar

Surprised
Baseline

2.1 (2.9)
0.4 (0.7)

0.6 (1.3)
0.6 (1.2)

0.2 (0.9)
0.0 (0.0)

expected, infants performed significantly more target
actions on the high similarity objects in the surprised
condition than in the baseline condition, t (19) = 2.39, p <
.03. In contrast, infants did not differ significantly in their
performance of target actions on the low similarity objects
or on the dissimilar objects in the surprised condition
versus the baseline condition, (t (19) = .00, p > .99; no
statistic was computed for the dissimilar object
comparison as no target actions were performed in the
baseline condition). These analyses indicated that the
appearances of the high similarity objects did not suggest
that the objects possessed the nonobvious properties.
Instead, infants performed target actions on test objects
only after they had been exposed to the properties of
particular functional target objects during the testing
session.
We next examined the influence of shape similarity on
infants’ generalization of nonobvious properties within
the surprised condition only. As predicted, infants
performed significantly more target actions on the high
similarity objects than on the low similarity objects (t (19)
= 2.55, p < .02), or the dissimilar objects (t (19) = 2.55, p
< .02). Furthermore, infants did not differ significantly in
their performance of target actions on the low similarity
objects and dissimilar objects, t (19) = 1.16, p > .25. The
results of these analyses indicate that infants expected
objects that shared a high degree of shape similarity to
share nonobvious properties, consistent with our
hypotheses.

Discussion
As expected, infants performed significantly more target
actions on the high similarity test objects in the surprised
condition than in the baseline condition. This finding
indicates that the appearance of the objects did not
suggest the nonobvious properties. Furthermore, in the
surprised condition, infants generalized the nonobvious
properties to the high similarity test objects but not to the
low similarity objects (which still shared textural
similarity with the target object), nor to the dissimilar test
objects (which differed from the target object in texture,
shape, and color). Infants' lack of performance of the
target actions on the low similarity objects and on the
dissimilar objects indicates that they were not simply
imitating any action that the experimenter did--they only
imitated the target action when they viewed the test object
as a member of the same category as the target object.

The results of this experiment thus indicate that 13month-old infants will form specific expectations about
the nonobvious properties of objects from knowledge
gained during the testing session. Furthermore, these
findings indicate that infants were relying solely on
shared shape similarity to index category membership, an
issue discussed further in the General Discussion.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we examined whether 13-month-old
infants would treat labels for novel objects as a
conceptual marker of object kind and expect those objects
that shared the same label to possess the same nonobvious
property. The design of Experiment 2 was similar to that
of Experiment 1 with one exception: The experimenter
labeled the target and test objects with novel count nouns
when she introduced them. We predicted that infants
would generalize the nonobvious property to objects that
shared the same label, even if they shared little shape
similarity with the target object.

Method
Participants Participants were 20 infants ranging in age
from 12.20 months to 13.85 months (M = 13.02; SD =
.54). Ten infants were male and 10 were female.
Stimuli Same as Experiment 1.
Design Same as Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure was similar to that of
Experiment 1, with one exception: The experimenter
introduced the target and test objects using novel count
nouns (e.g., “Look at this blint!”). Note that the same
count noun was used to label the target object and the test
objects in a given set (i.e., the target and the test object
from the rattling set were all labeled as blints).
Coding Identical to Experiment 1.

Results
The mean frequency of target actions performed on the
different test objects in the surprised and baseline
conditions are presented in Table 2. As in Experiment 1,
we first examined whether the target properties of the
object stimuli were nonobvious to infants by comparing
the number of target actions infants performed on test
objects after having first seen a functional target object
(the surprised condition) versus a nonfunctional target
object (the baseline condition). (Note we again used onetailed t-tests as our predictions were directional). As
expected, infants performed significantly more target
actions on the high similarity objects in the surprised
condition than in the baseline condition, t (19) = 2.76, p <
.005. Similarly, infants performed more target actions on
the low similarity objects in the surprised condition than
in the baseline condition, t (19) = 1.86, p < .05. In
contrast, infants did not differ significantly in their

Table 2:Frequency of Target Actions Performed on Test
Objects at Each Level of Shape Similarity within each
Expectation Condition (Expt. 2).

Condition

Shape Similarity to Target
High
Low
Dissimilar

Surprised
Baseline

2.7 (3.9)
0.3 (0.7)

2.2 (3.1)
0.7 (2.3)

0.5 (1.4)
0.0 (0.0)

performance of target actions on the dissimilar object in
the surprised condition versus the baseline condition (no
statistic was computed as no target actions were
performed on this object in the baseline condition). These
analyses indicated that the appearances of the high and
low similarity objects did not suggest that the objects
possessed the nonobvious properties.
We next examined the influence of labels on infants’
generalization of nonobvious properties within the
surprised condition only. In contrast to Experiment 1,
infants did not perform more target actions on the high
similarity objects than on the low similarity objects (t (19)
= 0.51, p > .60). However, infants performed significantly
more target actions on both the high similarity objects and
on the low similarity objects than on dissimilar objects, t
(19) = 2.31, p < .03 and t (19) = 3.31, p < .01,
respectively. The results of these analyses indicate that
infants expected objects that shared the same label to
share nonobvious properties, regardless of shape
similarity.

Discussion
In this experiment, infants performed as many target
actions on the low similarity objects as on the high
similarity objects. This finding indicates that infants relied
on shared labels, rather than shape similarity, to guide
their inferences about nonobvious object properties, an
issue discussed further in the General Discussion. It is
important to note, however, that the presence of labels,
however, did not lead infants to completely disregard
perceptual information. That is, labeling the dissimilar
object with the same count noun as the target object did
not lead infants to generalize nonobvious object
properties to that object. Recall that the dissimilar object
shared no perceptual properties in common with the target
object. Thus, it appears that some minimal perceptual
overlap is necessary for infants to generalize the
nonobvious properties.

General Discussion
The present studies were designed to examine the role of
object shape similarity and object labels in guiding 13month-old infants' inferences about nonobvious object
properties. The results of our studies yielded three major
insights into the nature of infants' inductive reasoning.
First, the results of both experiments provide evidence
that infants between 12 and 13 months of age will form

expectations about shared properties of novel objects after
only a ten second experience with a functional target
object. Furthermore, infants will extend a specific
nonobvious property from a target exemplar to other
objects perceived as members of the same category,
consistent with the results of previous studies (e.g.,
Baldwin et al., 1993; Mandler & McDonough, 1996,
1998; Welder & Graham, in press). Thus, our finding that
infants could rapidly and efficiently form expectations
about the nonobvious properties of novel objects provides
important evidence that infants possess well-developed
inductive reasoning abilities by the end of the first year of
life.
Second, our findings indicate that infants will rely on
shape similarity to generalize nonobvious object
properties, in the absence of other information about
object kind. In Experiment 1, infants were more likely to
generalize a nonobvious object property to objects that
were highly similar in shape than to objects that were less
similar in shape. These findings provide clear evidence
that infants expect that objects that share a high degree of
shape similarity will also share other “deeper”
characteristics. Furthermore, this result suggests that
infants appreciate that shared shape similarity is
predictive of category membership. That is, infants attend
to shape information because it serves as a perceptuallyavailable cue to the underlying structure of a category
(see Bloom, 2000; Gelman & Diesendruck, 1999 for a
discussion).
Finally, our findings demonstrate that when a novel
object is labeled with a novel count noun, infants will
overlook shape information and rely on the label to
generalize the nonobvious property. In Experiment 2,
infants performed as many target actions on low similarity
objects as on high similarity objects, when objects were
labeled with the same count noun. As discussed earlier,
labeling the objects did not lead infants to completely
disregard perceptual information as they did not
generalize the nonobvious object properties to the
dissimilar object (which shared no perceptual features
with the target object). Thus, when infants are provided
with information about category membership in the form
of shared object labels, perceptual information is
attenuated. This finding provides clear evidence that
young infants can form novel categories and make
inductive inferences about nonobvious properties based
on a conceptual notion of object kind (see also Mandler &
McDonough, 1996, 1998; Welder & Graham, in press).
Moreover, our findings indicate that infants as young as
13 months of age recognize the conceptual information
conveyed by object labels. That is, infants, like
preschoolers, appear to recognize that count noun labels
supply information about underlying object kind and
furthermore, that members of the same kind share
nonobvious properties. This finding is particularly
compelling given that the infants in our studies are only
just beginning to acquire productive language. Finally,
these findings add to a growing body of literature

indicating that naming can foster infants' formation of
object categories (e.g., Balaban & Waxman, 1997;
Graham, Baker, & Poulin-Dubois, 1998; Waxman, 1999;
Waxman & Hall, 1993; Waxman & Markow, 1995) and
moreover, these findings provide evidence that labels
enhance the inductive potential of categories for young
infants.
In summary, the results of these experiments have
advanced our understanding of infants' inductive abilities,
indicating that 13-month-old infants will use shape
similarity and count noun label information for making
inferences about nonobvious object properties. These
results also suggest a number of important directions for
future research. For example, it remains to be seen
whether infants who have not yet acquired productive
vocabulary (i.e., infants younger than 12 months of age)
can rely on object labels to guide their inferences about
object properties, and whether count noun labels (versus
words from other form classes or versus nonlinguistic
stimuli) are privileged in guiding infants' inferences.
Research into these issues is currently underway in our
lab and we expect that the results of these studies, in
conjunction with other recent empirical work, will lead to
a coherent account of the developmental processes
underlying inductive reasoning during infancy.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an operating grant
awarded to the first author from NSERC of Canada. The
third author was supported by graduate fellowships from
NSERC of Canada and the Alberta Heritage Foundation
for Medical Research. We thank the parents, children, and
adults who participated in the studies as well as the staff
at the following Calgary Regional Health Authority
clinics for their kind assistance in participant recruitment:
Thornhill, North Hill, Ranchlands, and Midnapore. We
also thank Kristinn Meagher and Kara Olineck for their
assistance with these studies.

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old
infants? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
64, 3-26.
Baldwin, D. A., Markman, E. M., & Melartin, E. M.
(1993). Infants’ ability to draw inferences about
nonobvious object properties: Evidence from
exploratory play. Child Development, 64, 711-728.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction
within natural kind and artifact categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 20, 65-95.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in
2-year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26,
796-804.

Gelman, S. A., & Diesendruck, G. (1999). What’s in a
concept? Context, variability, and psychological
essentialism. In I.E. Sigel (Ed.), Development of
mental representation theories and applications.
Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1987). Young
children’s inductions from natural kinds: The role of
categories and appearances. Child Development, 58,
1532-1541.
Graham, S. A., Baker, R. K., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (1998).
Infants' expectations about object label reference.
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 52,
103-112.
Kalish, C. W., & Gelman, S. A. (1992). On wooden
pillows: Multiple classification and children’s
category-based inductions. Child Development, 63,
1536-1557.
Mandler, J. M., & McDonough, L. (1996). Drinking and
driving don’t mix: Inductive generalization in
infancy. Cognition, 59, 307-335.
Mandler, J. M., & McDonough, L. (1998). Studies in
inductive inference in infancy. Cognitive Psychology,
37, 60-96.
Moore, B., & Parker, R. (1989). Critical thinking:
Evaluating claims and arguments in everyday life
(2nd ed.). Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
Oakes, L. M., Madole, K. L., & Cohen, L. B. (1991).
Infants’ object examining: Habituation and
categorization. Cognitive Development, 6, 377-392.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M., &
Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.
Waxman, S. R. (1999). The dubbing ceremony revisited:
Object naming and categorization in infancy and
early childhood. In D. L. Medin & S. Atran (Eds.),
Folkbiology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Waxman, S. R., & Hall, D. G. (1993). The development
of a linkage between count nouns and object
categories: Evidence from fifteen- to twenty-onemonth-old infants. Child Development, 64, 12241241.
Waxman, S. R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as
invitations to form categories: Evidence from 12- to
13-month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 257302.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (in press). The influence
of shape similarity and shared labels on infants’
inductive inferences about nonobvious object
properties. Child Development.

