UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Working-memory modularity in analogical reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/90r5n01r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 23(23)

Authors
Morrison, Robert G.
Holyoak, Keith J.
Troung, Bao

Publication Date
2001-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Working-memory modularity in analogical reasoning
Robert G. Morrison (morrison@psych.ucla.edu)
Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Bao Truong (bt@ucla.edu)
University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Psychology, BOX 951563
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563 USA

Abstract
We present several experiments using dual-task (DT)
methodology to explore use of working memory (WM)
during analogical reasoning. Participants solved verbal
and figural analogy problems alone or while performing
articulatory suppression (AS), spatial tapping (ST) or
verbal random generation (VRG). As in other studies of
relational reasoning we found that VRG disrupted both
verbal and figural analogy performance. In addition, we
found disruption of analogy performance by WM slave
system distractors (i.e., AS and ST) consistent with the
dominant modality of the analogy task. These findings
are discussed with respect to Baddeley’s model of WM
and other studies of WM involvement in relational
reasoning.

Introduction
Central to the ability to reason by analogy is the ability
to form and manipulate mental representations of
relations between objects and events. For instance, in a
verbal analogy such as:
BLACK:WHITE::NOISY:QUIET
the reasoner needs to form mental representations of the
relation between BLACK and WHITE (black is the
opposite of white) and map it to the second pair in order
to verify that the analogy is appropriate. Thus,
BLACK:WHITE is mapped to NOISY:QUIET and the
analogy is successfully solved. It has long been assumed
that this type of process requires the use of WM (cf.,
Baddeley & Hitch, 1974); however, until recently
relatively little attention has been given to how WM
limits affect analogical reasoning (Halford et al., 1994;
Hummel & Holyoak, 1992; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997;
Keane, Ledgeway, & Duff, 1994). In the present paper
we report experiments using dual-task (DT)
methodology (employed extensively by Baddeley, 1986)
to study the involvement of the various modules of WM
in analogical reasoning.
Baddeley’s (Baddeley, 1986; Baddeley & Hitch, 1974;
Baddeley & Logie, 1999) model of WM has dominated
cognitive accounts of short-term memory for nearly
three decades. The model consists of three components:

the Phonological Loop (PL), the Visuo-Spatial
Sketchpad (VSSP), and the Central Executive (CE). In
Baddeley’s model the PL and VSSP are modalityspecific slave systems that are responsible for
maintaining information over short periods of time.
Baddeley (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974) originally conceived
of the CE to account for functions of WM not performed
by the PL and VSSP; however, Baddeley (1986) later
embraced Norman and Shallice’s (Norman & Shallice,
1986) Supervisory Attentional System as a possible
model of the CE. Most recently, Baddeley (1996) has
segmented the CE in an attempt to study its component
processes. From this perspective the CE is responsible
for (1) the capacity to coordinate performance on 2
separate tasks, (2) the capacity to switch retrieval
strategies as reflected in random generation, (3) the
capacity to attend selectively to 1 stimulus and inhibit
the disrupting effect of others, and (4) the capacity to
hold and manipulate information in long-term memory,
as reflected in measures of WM span (Baddeley, 1996
p. 5). Baddeley suggests that the CE manages the work
of WM while the slave systems actually maintain the
information.
Also central to Baddeley’s model is the concept of
limited capacity. The slave systems and the CE share
this limited capacity, such that increasing CE functioning
would reduce the capacity of either the PL or VSSP to
maintain information; however, there is evidence that
each system may have its own limits as well (e.g., the PL
capacity is limited by the amount of information that can
be subvocally cycled in approximately two seconds).
Evidence for a multi-module WM system is copious,
coming from both the cognitive and neuropsychology
literatures. However, relatively little attention has been
paid to the implications of WM for relational
reasoning particularly analogical reasoning. Review of
the functions of the CE as outlined above suggests that
the CE should be critical for relational reasoning.
Experimental evidence has confirmed this hypothesis for
deductive reasoning, with random generation (e.g.,
Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; Gilhooly, Logie, Wetherick, &
Wynn, 1993; Klauer, Stegmaier, & Meiser, 1997) and
memory load (e.g., Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; Gilhooly et
al., 1993; Toms, Morris, & Ward, 1993) both interfering

with performance. Klauer et al. (1997) found that
random generation interfered with spatial reasoning
(transitive inference), and Waltz, Lau, Grewal, and
Holyoak (2000) found that performing VRG or
maintaining a concurrent memory load discouraged
participants from using relational mappings in a task that
can be solved via either featural or relational similarity
(see Markman & Gentner, 1993, for a task description).
What is not clear from these studies is what aspects of
the DTs actually cause the interference in relational
reasoning. At the very least, random generation involves
task switching, memory insertion and storage, and
relational binding of numbers with temporal location;
whereas maintaining a concurrent memory load involves
memory insertion and storage. Both tasks are very
demanding on WM resources.
It is also not clear to what extent the WM slave
systems are important for reasoning, particularly in
situations where all the information is available visually
to the reasoner. Gilhooly et al. (1993) and Toms et al.
(1993) found no effect of PL- or VSSP-based DTs on
propositional reasoning, while Klauer et al. (1997) found
a small effect of articulatory suppression (AS; a PL
secondary task) on reasoning latencies. It is important to
note that in each of these propositional reasoning tasks
all information necessary to complete the task was
perceptually available in the task. For example, a
propositional reasoning problem such as:

retrieved and relationally bound in order to perform a
reasoning problem will determine which WM slave
systems will be necessary.

Methods
To explore to what extent the various modules of WM
are recruited in analogical reasoning, participants
performed several relational reasoning tasks while
performing one of several DTs. Participants in the AS
condition were instructed to say the English non-word
zorn once each second. Another group in the ST
condition was instructed to tap four red dots in a clockwise pattern one dot each second. Participants in the
VRG condition were instructed to say a random digit
from 0 to 9 once each second. A fourth group of
participants served as controls, performing only the
primary reasoning tasks. 96 undergraduate students
from the University of California, Los Angeles
participated in the study in exchange for course credit.

Verbal Analogy

In the verbal analogy (VA) task participants verified
A:B::C:D analogies such as: BLACK:WHITE::
NOISY:QUIET (i.e., participants answered TRUE or
FALSE). Analogy problems were based on those
developed by Sternberg and Nigro (1980). A:B pairs
were related by one of five common relations (antonyms,
synonyms, category members, functions, or linear
ordering). In TRUE problems, C:D pairs shared the
same relation as the A:B pairs but were from a different
There is either a circle or a triangle.
domain than the A:B pair (e.g., color vs. sound). We
Therefore, there is no triangle.
created FALSE problems by substituting a D term that
was related to C in a different way (e.g., linear-ordered
requires only the information presented to answer the (noisy, noisier) instead of opposite-of (noisy, quiet)).
problem. In contrast, a transitive inference problem such
as:
Figural Analogy
The circle is to the right of the triangle.
The square is to the left of the triangle.
Therefore, the square is to the left of the circle.
requires the reasoner to generate a new proposition based
on the information presented (i.e., left-of (square,
circle)).
Similarly, Waltz et al. (2000) found that performing
AS while performing the Markman and Gentner
similarity task discouraged participants from using
relational correspondences just as VRG did. A recent
replication of this result in our lab showed that ST had
an effect similar in magnitude to AS. Like the transitive
inference task described previously, in order to make a
relational choice propositions not immediately obvious
from the stimuli must be generated. This characteristic is
a hallmark of analogical reasoning. Thus, it is not clear
at present to what extent the slave systems of WM are
necessary for relational reasoning. It is likely that the
modality and quantity of information that must be

In the figural analogy task (FA) participants verified
A:B::C:D analogies based on Sternberg’s (1977) People
Piece Analogy (PPA) task. In PPA each item was a
cartoon character that possessed one each of four binary
traits (male/female, black/white, tall/short and fat/thin).
TRUE analogies showed the same changes in traits
between the A:B pair and the C:D pair as well as
between the A:C pair and the B:D pair. Problems of
varying degrees of relational complexity (RC, cf.
(Halford, Wilson, & Phillips, 1998) were constructed
based on the number of traits that were manipulated.
RC=1 problems had only one trait manipulated across
either the A:B or A:C pair. Thus, RC=1 problems were
semi-degenerate, with only two repeated characters
making up the entire analogy (see Figure 1a). RC=2 and
RC=4 problems had either 1 or 2 traits manipulated
across both the A:B and A:C pairs (for a total of either 2
or 4 total relations). Thus, RC=2 and RC=4 problems
were non-degenerate, consisting of four unique
characters in each problem (see Figure 1b). We created
FALSE items by changing the Identity of one trait in the

final block the participant received instructions on the
next task in the testing battery. The order of tasks was
counterbalanced across participants.

Results
We predicted, as in past studies of both deductive
(Gilhooly et al., 1993; Klauer et al., 1997) and analogical
(Waltz et al., 2000) reasoning, that VRG would interfere
with reasoning in both analogy tasks. We also predicted,
as in a past study of transitive inference (Klauer et al.,
1997) and analogy (Waltz et al., 2000), that DTs that
interfered with WM slave systems corresponding to the
modality of the task would interfere with performance.
Thus, we expected that AS would interfere with VA
performance and that ST and possibly AS (because of a
verbal strategy frequently employed during PPA solving)
would interfere with FA performance.
We analyzed both reasoning and DT performance
from both the VA and FA tasks with between-subjects
analysis of variance (ANOVA). In addition, we
examined reasoning task performance by comparing
control group performance to each of the DT groups
using single DF planned comparisons.

Verbal Analogy

Figure 1: PPA figural analogy problems. a) semidegenerate, RC=1, b) non-degenerate, RC=4.
fourth character so that it was not analogous.

Procedure
Reasoning problems were presented on a computer
screen and participants indicated their response by
pressing either a left or right foot pedal. Prior to
beginning an experimental block, participants practiced
their DT alone, the reasoning problems alone, and then
practiced the two tasks together. Participants in the
control group practiced the same total number of
reasoning problems as participants in the DT groups.
Reasoning problems were presented in three one-minute
blocks. PPA problems were presented in blocks of
increasing RC. The computer recorded analogy RT and
accuracy as well as the frequency at which participants
performed their DT.
Each block began with the participant pressing the
right foot pedal. The participant was instructed to begin
their DT. After 5s the first analogy problem appeared on
the monitor. When the first problem appeared the
experimenter began to hit a key each time the participant
performed their DT. In this way the actual frequency
and spacing of DT performance was recorded. After 60s
a prerecorded voice told the participant to stop both
tasks. The next block began after a 30s delay. After the

VA task performance is summarized in Figure 2. A
between-subjects ANOVA revealed a reliable effect of
DT type on accuracy (d-prime); F (3,92) = 4.5, MSE =
.44, p = .005. Planned comparisons showed that AS and
VRG had reliable effects on VA accuracy; t (46) = 3.7, p
= .003 and t (46) = 2.8, p = .008, respectively. ST did not
have a reliable effect on VA performance, t (46) = 1.1,
ns. We conducted a similar analysis on RTs for the VA
results. An ANOVA revealed a nearly reliable effect of
DT type on VA RT; F (3,92) = 2.3, MSE = 979432, p =
.085. Planned comparisons showed that VRG had a
reliable effect on VA RT; t (46) = 2.3, p = .025. AS and
ST did not have a reliable effect on VA RT; t (46) = .35,
and t (46) = .96, respectively, both ns. DT data were
analyzed using two metrics. First, a measure of DT
frequency (mDT) was calculated for each subject (mean
time between repetitions in ms). Second, a standardized
measure of DT variance (vDT) was calculated for each
subject (SD of time between repetitions divided by
mDT). Participants performed AS (M =789 ms) and VS
(M = 612 ms) faster than VRG (M = 1165 ms); t (69) =
4.4, p < .001. A second planned comparison showed that
participants performing VRG were more variable in their
performance than those performing AS or ST, even
when the variance was corrected for the difference in
mDT (vDT); t (69) = 3.2, p = .01. Thus, results for the
VA task suggest that both the phonological loop (AS
DT) and central executive (VRG DT) are important for
performance of verbal analogies, with VRG producing a
greater effect.

Figural Analogy

Verbal Analogy
3.0

Response Accuracy ( d’ )

Response Accuracy ( d’ )

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

2.0

1.5

1.0
Control

AS

ST

Control

VRG

4500

4500

4000

4000

Response Time (ms)

Response Time (ms)

2.5

3500

3000

2500

AS

ST

VRG

ST

VRG

3500

3000

2500

2000

2000
Control

AS

ST

VRG

Figure 2: Accuracy and RT performance for verbal
analogy under different dual-task conditions. Error
bars reflect SEM.

Control

AS

Figure 3: Accuracy and RT performance for People
Pieces analogy under different dual-task conditions.
Error bars reflect SEM.

p = .02. Thus, results for the FA task suggest that both
the visuospatial sketchpad and central executive are
FA task performance is summarized in Figure 3. A important for performance of figural analogies, with the
between-subjects ANOVA revealed a reliable effect of phonological loop perhaps playing a more minor role.
DT type on accuracy (d-prime); F (3,92) = 3.1, MSE =
Discussion
.65, p = .032. Planned comparisons showed that ST and
VRG had reliable effects on FA accuracy; t (46) = 2.2, p In this study we have shown that WM slave systems can
= .036 and t (46) = 2.7, p = .01, respectively. AS had a be recruited in the service of analogical reasoning and
marginal affect on FA accuracy; t (46) = 1.9, p = .059. that the specific WM slave systems involved depend of
We conducted a similar analysis on RTs for the FA the dominant modality of the task. This result agrees
results. An ANOVA revealed a reliable effect of DT with a previous study of the affect of DTs on analogical
type; F (3,92) = 3.8, MSE = 748368, p = .013. Planned reasoning (Waltz et al., 2000) and also of a similar study
comparisons showed that VRG had a reliable effect on involving transitive inference (Klauer et al., 1997). All
RT for the FA task; t (46) = 2.5, p = .017. AS and ST of these tasks have in common the need to generate
did not have reliable effects; t (46) = 1.2 and t (46) = propositional structures based on the information present
.41, respectively, both ns. Participants performed AS in the problem.
(M =1030 ms) and VS (M = 849 ms) faster than VRG (M
In addition to the involvement of the WM slave
= 1626 ms); t (69) = 2.6, p = .01. A second planned systems we found robust effects of VRG on both verbal
comparison showed that participants performing VRG and figural analogies. This result is consistent with a
were more variable in their performance than those growing body of findings for both deductive and
performing AS or ST, even when the variance was inductive reasoning.
corrected for the difference in mDT (vDT); t (69) = 2.5,

Figural Analogy

Multimodal vs. Unimodal Working Memory
Discussion of WM has traditionally been divided into
two camps camps that are frequently divided by the
Atlantic Ocean. The multi-modal camp (centered to the
east of the Atlantic) has typically relied on DT
methodologies, and results from neuropsychology and
more recently neuroimaging. The uni-modal camp
(centered to the west of the Atlantic) favors WM-span
measures used as probes to investigate individual
differences in language and reasoning. The current
results, while not inconsistent with the capacity limits
that are central to the uni-modal models, require a multimodal model for a complete interpretation.
On first consideration, DTs such as AS or ST could
simply require less WM resources than tasks such as
VRG. Inductive reasoning tasks that require retrieval of
semantic information and/or generation of additional
propositions in WM may simply be more load
intensive than propositional reasoning tasks in which all
of the information necessary to solve the problem is
perceptually available. Thus, AS and ST interfere with
inductive reasoning and not propositional reasoning (at
least the simple propositional reasoning problems
typically used in DT studies). This account predicts that
slave system tasks should interfere with reasoning less
than VRG and also predicts no dissociation of PL or
VSSP DTs if AS and ST interference is simply load
dependent then the modality of the resource drain should
not matter. The results of Waltz et al. (2000) argue
against the weak form of this interpretation, in that AS
and VRG produced equal interference in the analogy
task. However, it is possible that the analogy measure
used in their task (which shows a robust individual
difference most likely not related to WM capacity) may
not have been sensitive enough to pick up the differences
in resource demand caused by AS and VRG. Also,
performance on the secondary tasks was not assessed in
that prior study.
The results reported here--showing a dissociation in
slave system DT interference across analogy tasks of
different modality--rule out this interpretation and argue
for a multi-modal WM system that requires separate
phonological and visuospatial systems. Specifically, the
finding of strong interference by AS in the VA task with
no corresponding ST interference argues that the PL is
necessary for verbal analogy, while the VSSP is not. In
contrast, the stronger interference of ST in the
predominantly visual FA task compared to PL shows the
opposite pattern of interference.
It is not clear from these results, however, what role
the slave systems play in analogy. One possibility is that
they are used to maintain relational information while it
is organized into the propositional structures necessary
for further relational processing. In this view, AS and ST
DTs interfere with activation of the semantic or visual

information necessary to solve the analogy task. This
interpretation is consistent with Baddeley’s view of the
slave systems if one considers the role of the PL and
VSSP to be maintenance of representations via continual
firing of their mental representations in long-term
memory (LTM), a conception proposed by Fuster
(1997).

The Role of the Central Executive in Reasoning
One criticism of the multi-modal WM model has been
the amorphous nature of the CE. However, a general
consensus among researchers is beginning to emerge: the
CE is viewed as important for task switching, inhibition
of internal representations or prepotent responses, and
the activation of information in LTM during an activity
that requires the active manipulation of material. All of
these functions appear to be critical for higher-level
cognition--particularly relational reasoning. What this
consensus fails to provide is a detailed account of how
the CE actually performs relational reasoning.
Hummel and Holyoak (1997) proposed a model of
how the CE may perform relational reasoning. This
model, LISA (Learning and Inference with Schemas and
Analogies), is an artificial neural-network model of
relational reasoning. LISA uses synchrony of firing to
bind distributed representations of relational roles (e.g.,
the roles of o p p o s i t e - o f (X, Y)) to distributed
representations of their fillers (e.g., black and white).
The process of "thinking about" a proposition, such as
opposite-of (black, white), entails keeping separate rolefiller bindings (e.g., those for black and those for white)
firing out of synchrony with one another. According to
LISA, WM is therefore necessarily capacity-limited: It is
only possible to keep a finite number of role-filler
bindings simultaneously active and out of synchrony
with one another. The synchronized (and desynchronized) patterns of activation representing
propositions in LISA serve as the basis for memory
retrieval, analogical mapping, analogical inference and
schema induction. That is, all the operations of WM
depend critically on the role-filler bindings in WM. As
such, an important component of the "job" of the CE is
to control which patterns enjoy the "privilege" of
remaining active and mutually desynchronized. This
process requires no homunculus to operate; rather, it is
governed simply by the way that relational information
is structured in LTM and the extent to which different
mental representations are relationally similar.
According to LISA, a second function of the CE is to
keep track of the correspondences between elements of
the source and elements of the target (see Hummel &
Holyoak, 1997). Algorithmically, LISA accomplishes
this function by monitoring which units in the source fire
in synchrony with which in the target. Hummel and
Holyoak assume that this "keeping track" is performed
by neurons in prefrontal cortex with rapidly-modifiable

syllogistic-reasoning tasks. Memory & Cognition, 21,
synapses (e.g.,Asaad, Rainer, & Miller, 1998; Fuster,
115-124.
1997), and thus needs no greater executive control.
If these are the roles of the CE in relational reasoning, Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., Guo, J., Gayler, R. W.,
Wiles, J., & Stewart, J. E. M. (1994). Connectionist
then why does VRG so potently interfere with
implications for processing capacity limitations in
reasoning? We argue that VRG requires exactly the
analogies. In K. J. Holyoak & J. A. Barnden (Eds.),
same operations as relational reasoning. To produce a
Advances in connectionist and neural computation
random stream of numbers it is important not only to
theory, Vol. 2: Analogical connections (pp. 363-415).
know what numbers one has recently said (e.g., 3,8,2),
Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
but also the order in which one said them (e.g.,
3,8,2,8,2,3 seems more "random" than 3,8,2,3,8,2; Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (1998).
Processing capacity defined by relational complexity:
Baddeley, 1966, noted that as VRG performance breaks
implications for comparative, developmental, and
down di- and tri-grams start to emerge in the number
cognitive psychology. Behavioral & Brain Sciences,
stream). That is, it is necessary to bind the numbers to
21, 803-864.
their serial position. According to LISA, VRG consumes
exactly the kind of binding resources as the binding and Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1992). Indirect
analogical mapping, Proceedings of the Fourteenth
mapping of relational information in WM. As a result,
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
VRG disrupts analogical reasoning and other forms of
(pp. 516 - 521). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
relational reasoning.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical
Acknowledgments
access and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427This project was supported by NSF grant SBR-9729023
466.
and NIH training grant MH-1992605. We thank Keane, M. T., Ledgeway, T., & Duff, S. (1994).
Michael Gardner for providing the verbal analogy
Constraints on analogical mapping: A comparison of
problems, Alex Antoniu, Arden Ash, Steven Pranoto,
three models. Cognitive Science, 18, 387-438.
Scott Rosnick, Maria Selah, Ji Son, Roshaun Stanisai Klauer, K. C., Stegmaier, R., & Meiser, T. (1997).
and Leah Swalley for excellent technical assistance and
Working memory involvement in propositional and
John Hummel, Dan Krawczyk and others in the
spatial reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 3, 9-47.
Symbolic Neural Computation group at UCLA Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
(www.sync.psych.ucla.edu) for helpful discussions.
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
References
Norman, D. A., & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to
action: willed and automatic control of behaviour. In
Asaad, W. F., Rainer, G., & Miller, E. K. (1998). Neural
G. E. Schwartz & D. Shapiro (Eds.), Consciousness
activity in the primate prefrontal cortex during
and self-regulation (Vol. 4). New York: Plenum Press.
associative learning. Neuron, 21, 1399-1407.
Baddeley, A. (1996). Exploring the central executive. Sternberg, R. J. (1977). Intelligence, information
processing, and analogical reasoning: The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology:
componential analysis of human abilities. Hillsdale,
Human Experimental Psychology, 49(1), 5-28.
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Baddeley, A. D. (1966). The capacity for generating
information by randomization. Quarterly Journal of Sternberg, R. J., & Nigro, G. (1980). Developmental
patterns in the solution of verbal analogies. Child
Experimental Psychology, 18, 119-129.
Development, 51, 27-38.
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford, UK:
Toms, M., Morris, N., & Ward, D. (1993). Working
Oxford University Press.
memory and conditional reasoning. Quarterly Journal
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working
of Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental
memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of
Psychology, 46, 679-699.
learning and motivation (Vol. 8). New York:
Waltz, J. A., Lau, A., Grewal, S. K., & Holyoak, K. J.
Academic Press.
(2000). The role of working memory in analogical
Baddeley, A. D., & Logie, R. H. (1999). Working
mapping. Memory & Cognition, 28, 1205-1212.
memory: The multiple component model. In A.
Miyake & P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory:
Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive
control (pp. 28-61). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Fuster, J. M. (1997). The prefrontal cortex: Anatomy,
physiology, and neuropsychology of the frontal lobe
(3rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven.
Gilhooly, K. J., Logie, R. H., Wetherick, N. E., & Wynn,
V. (1993). Working memory and strategies in

