A Computational Model of Mind Wandering
Laura M. Hiatt (laura.hiatt@nrl.navy.mil
Naval Research Laboratory
4555 Overlook Ave, SW
Washington, DC 20375 USA

J. Gregory Trafton (greg.trafton@nrl.navy.mil)
Naval Research Laboratory
4555 Overlook Ave, SW
Washington, DC 20375 USA
Abstract

by recording unprovoked thoughts during the day in a diary;
these measures, then, can be used in combination with other
metrics such as fMRI, task performance, or gaze tracking,
to help understand the phenomenon (Schooler et al., 2014).
Such evidence has revealed that a different set of regions
of the brain, collectively termed the default mode network
(DMN), is more active when people report mind wandering than when they report exhibiting task-directed thought
(Schooler et al., 2011). Further, its activation is typically associated with a decline in activation of areas associated with
task-oriented thought (e.g., areas associated with executive
control); this, and other data, have led many to hypothesize
that mind wandering is correlated with a failure of executive
control functions (Schooler et al., 2011; Mason et al., 2007).
The underlying details of this correlation, however, are still
open for debate: it is not always clear how mind wandering
begins when executive control functions are presumably in
use; and it is difficult to study mind wandering at this level
since it, by definition, is a subjective experience that participants cannot be directed or encouraged to perform as part of
their task. Furthermore, it is not generally well understood
how mind wandering content is produced (Schooler et al.,
2011). One experiment that investigated this successfully induced mind wandering in a repetitive, lexical SART task performed in a laboratory setting by embedding words relevant
to participants’ own personal goals and concerns in the task
(McVay & Kane, 2013). This experiment showed that mind
wandering is more likely to occur when subjects are subconsciously primed in this way, by their own real-life goals and
concerns, suggesting that environmental cues can affect how
and when one mind wanders.
We have developed a cognitive, computational model of
mind wandering that explores these issues at the process level.
Our model posits that mind wandering begins during natural
breaks in task-oriented thought; e.g., it begins when one is not
actively reasoning about one’s goal, even if one is working towards it. Our model also hypothesizes that mind wandering
begins only when there is a thought active enough in memory to be easily and quickly thought about; this activation is
heavily influenced by the contents of one’s working memory,
such as environmental cues. We compare our mind wandering data against the experimental data from (McVay & Kane,
2013), and show a strong match, accounting for their mind

We present a computational cognitive model of mind wandering, an important cognitive phenomenon whose mechanisms
are involved in insight, problem-solving, and creativity. The
model posits that mind wandering begins when one is not
engaged in goal-oriented cognition, whether when between
tasks or when in the middle of a task but not actively thinking
about one’s goal. At such times, the model thinks about other,
highly-activated thoughts in memory. This model sheds light
on both how task-oriented and more basic cognitive processes
interact, as well as how mind wandering content is generated;
both unresolved questions for mind wandering research. We
compare our model against data presented by McVay and Kane
(2013), who induced mind wandering in a laboratory setting by
embedding participants’ personal goals and concerns in a lexical SART task. Overall, our model matched the data’s mind
wandering rates very well. We discuss implications and future
work on the model.
Keywords: mind wandering; spreading activation; priming;
cognitive models

Introduction
Mind wandering is typically viewed as an undesirable phenomenon. A wandering mind means that one is not concentrating on the task at hand, and instead is using valuable
mental resources to engage in fanciful thought. It has been
shown to disrupt reading comprehension, negatively affect
one’s mood and affect, and is correlated with lower performance on general aptitude tasks (Mooneyham & Schooler,
2013; Schooler et al., 2014). On the other hand, however,
the processes of mind wandering may also be essential to key
mental phenomena such as insight, creative thought and planning for the future (Gabora, 2010; Baird et al., 2012; Stawarczyk, Majerus, Maj, der Linden, & D’Argembeau, 2011).
While mind wandering may sometimes compromise one’s
ability to perform one’s current work, then, its mechanisms
often appear to engage for the benefit of future tasks and performance. This makes mind wandering important not only
to psychological and behavioral researchers, seeking to understand how mind wandering affects task performance and
attention, but also to cognitive scientists and roboticists, who
may also see mind wandering processes as tools to implement
in cognitive systems in order to foster problem-solving, creativity, and innovation.
Mind wandering is typically measured indirectly or subjectively, with study participants self-reporting mind wandering either in response to probes during an experiment, or

914

wandering rates with R2 = 0.984. Overall, our model supports the idea that mind wandering arises when executive control functions fail, and proposes a mechanism through which
mind wandering content is generated, enabling those who are
interested in promoting creativity, problem-solving and innovation in cognitive systems to better understand mind wandering’s underlying mechanisms.

four word triplets appearing 9 times. In this experiment, the
type of triplet presented to the participants strictly alternated,
beginning with OG. One, three or five non-targets after each
triplet, whether OG or PG, there was a target, followed by a
thought probe.
In Experiment 3, 56 participants saw 1080 trials, with each
of the four word triplets appearing 12 times. The ordering
of triplet type presented varied (it did not strictly alternate as
in Experiment 1). One non-target stimulus after each triplet,
whether OG or PG, there was a target, followed by a thought
probe. The exact stimuli order for both experiments can be
found in (McVay & Kane, 2013).
The study measured both the rates of mind wandering associated with the thought probes following a word triplet,
as well as the accuracy rates of participant responses to the
targets immediately preceding the probes. For both experiments, mind wandering rates were significantly higher after
PG triplets as compared to after OG triplets: a 6.7% difference for Experiment 1, and a 5.9% difference for Experiment
3. These effects strongly suggest that cuing subjects with
their personal goals and concerns can, in fact, induce mind
wandering during an unrelated task.
There was also a significant difference in accuracy for both
experiments, but in different directions. In Experiment 1, target accuracy was significantly higher after OG triplets, with
an effect size of 5.6%. In contrast, in Experiment 3, target accuracy was significantly higher after PG triplets, with
a smaller effect size of 3.7%. Interestingly, combining the
data across experiments was inconclusive, suggesting no effect overall. The authors suggest that this means that the PG
triplets may not reliably derail participants’ train of thought
strongly enough to decrease accuracy. We take this into consideration when building our model, below.

Experiment
We evaluate our mind wandering model by comparing it
against the experimental data of two of the experiments from
(McVay & Kane, 2013). This study induced mind wandering in a series of experiments held in a laboratory setting
by embedding words associated with participants’ personal
goals and concerns within a lexical Sustained Attention to Response Task (SART, a go/no-go task (Robertson, Manley, Andrade, Baddeley, & Yiend, 1997)). In this task, participants
press the space bar if the stimulus is lower case (non-targets,
as most stimuli are), and withhold pressing a key if the current
stimuli is upper case (targets). Approximately 11% of stimuli
were targets. Each stimulus appeared for 300ms, and was followed by a 900ms mask. Occasionally during the experiment,
participants would be given a thought probe, where they reported the degree to which their thought was task-related or
not. All responses indicating off-task thought was considered
to indicate mind wandering.
To accomplish this, each experiment consisted of two sessions that the participants were led to believe were unrelated.
In the first session, participants filled out a set of surveys designed to collect information about their personal goals and
concerns. Then, two days later, participants returned to perform the SART task. The participants’ SARTs were then
personally customized: occasionally, triplets of words were
shown in sequence, as non-targets, that corresponded to participants’ personal goals and concerns (personal goal, or PG,
triplets), as reported on the surveys during the first session.
For example, if a participant had said he/she needed to give
his/her two dogs a bath, three sequential words in their SART
might have been “wash” – “two” – “pets.” The SART also
contained goal-related triplets that were unrelated to the participants’ individual goals, such as “close” – “wooden” –
“door” (other goal, or OG, triplets).
Each participant’s experiment included two triplets for
each type, for a total of four word triplets, that were presented at various times throughout the experiment. A poststudy questionnaire showed that participants generally did not
notice any overlap between the two sessions and did not, consciously, realize they were being primed by their own goals.
The original study performed four similar versions of this
experiment; we model two of them here, Experiment 1 and 3.
Note that we elected to model Experiment 3 instead of 2 because, although nearly identical, Experiment 2 was the only
experiment in this study that included thought probes unassociated with targets (and which the authors did not analyze). In
Experiment 1, 62 participants saw 810 trials, with each of the

Model
Our cognitive model of mind wandering has two different aspects: performing the SART task, and modeling mind wandering. We first describe the general principles of these two
components of the model. Then, we give further details of
how these components are realized within the computational
cognitive architecture we use, ACT-R/E, and discuss how our
model’s principles interact with the cognitive architecture to
make specific predictions about mind wandering.
Our model performs the SART task using an existing,
utility-learning based procedure that has been shown to successfully model human SART performance (Peebles & Bothell, 2004). It has two strategies for responding to stimuli:
either just “clicking” when a stimulus appears, without fully
processing whether the stimulus is upper or lower case, or
“checking,” where the stimulus is fully processed, and its case
evaluated, before a response decision is made. “Clicking” results in faster response times, but will result in errors on target
stimuli; “checking” takes longer, since it requires waiting for
the stimuli to be added to working memory before responding, but results in perfect performance. Initially, both strate-

915

gies have equal chance of being chosen and so are employed
with roughly equal frequencies; over time, however, the faster
response time of “clicking” leads it to surpass “checking” in
its expected usefulness, despite occasionally resulting in errors. In general, “checking” requires goal-driven control (the
model must perform place-keeping operations while, for example, it processes the case of the stimulus word), but “clicking” does not (it clicks in response to changes in its visual
field without further thought).
At the core of our model is the claim that mind wandering
occurs when the model is not actively thinking about its goal.
Such cases can happen when the model does not currently
have a goal; or, when it does have a goal, but is not explicitly
thinking about it (such as waiting for something goal-related
to occur, or waiting for a memory to be retrieved before it can
continue with its task). At such times, the model begins to
mind wander if there is a thought in memory that has a high
enough activation to be easily and quickly thought about (or,
if the model is already mind wandering at such times, it continues to mind wander). The model thus implies that, when
mind wandering, the model’s thought processes and perceptual processes are disconnected. A model can mind wander,
for example, while still seeing and reacting to the world, as
long as its vision and manipulative processes do not require
goal-oriented thought; this is supported by other, previous
work (Schooler et al., 2011).
Once the model requires explicitly thinking about its goal
in some way, such as if the model responds to a stimulus using the “check” strategy, mind wandering ends. This is accordance with the conclusions of the authors of the study, which
suggest that the PG triplets, while inducing mind wandering,
do not sufficiently divert one’s attention from the task to decrease accuracy.
The model includes two goals in memory that correspond
to the two PG triplets of the experiment. While in actuality the relationship between these goals and the words in the
corresponding PG triplets may be quite complex (e.g., connecting “dogs” to “pets”, relating “give a bath” to “wash”),
we avoid this complexity by simply creating explicit associations between the words in the triplet and the goal they collectively represent. These associations play a key role in our
model’s mind wandering predictions by boosting the probability of mind wandering while seeing a PG triplet, as we will
describe further below.

the model’s internal state (e.g., by updating its goal) or its
physical one (e.g., by pressing a key on a keyboard). To calculate production utilities, ACT-R uses an elaboration of the
Rescorla-Wagner learning rule and the temporal different algorithm (Fu & Anderson, 2006), which has been shown to be
related to animal and human learning theory. When a reward
is given (such as if the model successfully responds to a nontarget), it is propagated back in time through the rules that had
an impact on the reward being earned. This propagation process shifts utilities over time such that productions that more
often and more quickly lead to reward have a higher probability of firing. Random noise can also be added in during
execution to affect production selection.
Working memory contents take the forms of thoughts, or
memories. In addition to the symbolic information represented as part of these memories, memories have activation values that represent their relevance to the current situation. Activation has three components: activation strengthening, spreading activation, and activation noise. Activation
strengthening is learned over time and is a function of the
frequency and recency with which the memory has been in
working memory in the past. It is designed to represent the
activation of a memory over longer periods of time.
Spreading activation, or priming, is temporary and spreads
from the current contents of working memory, distributing
activation along associations between the thoughts in working memory and other memories (Hiatt & Trafton, 2013).
Activation also spreads, less strongly, from items that were
recently in working memory, even if they are not currently
being thought about (Thomson, Bennati, & Lebiere, 2014).
This allows spreading activation to capture correspondences
between memories that are expected to be relevant at roughly
the same time, as well as memories that are semantically related (such as the PG triplet words and the corresponding personal goal or concerns).
Noise is a random component that models the noise of the
human brain and is based on a logistic distribution with mean
of 0. It is a transient value that changes each time it is used.
Together, these activation values have been shown to be an
excellent predictor of human declarative memory (Anderson,
Bothell, Lebiere, & Matessa, 1998; Anderson, 1983; Schneider & Anderson, 2011).
ACT-R/E supports distinguishing between goal-oriented
cognition and non goal-oriented cognition via the interaction between working memory and productions. Recall that
productions have specific preconditions, which may or may
not refer to a goal in working memory. Therefore, for the
purposes of mind wandering, there are two types of productions in an ACT-R/E model. The first type of production,
such as that used by the “click” strategy, does not refer to
the goal, and so it can fire either when there is no goal in
working memory, or when there is but the production does
not refer it. The second type of production, used primarily by
the “check” strategy, explicitly refers to the goal currently in
working memory (i.e., modifies the goal, removes the current

Model Architecture
The model was developed within the cognitive architecture
ACT-R/E (Trafton et al., 2013). At a high level, ACT-R/E is
an integrated, production-based system (Anderson, 2007). At
its core are the contents of its working memory; they indicates, for example, what the model is looking at, what it is
thinking, and its current goal. At any given time, there is a
set of productions (if-then rules) that may fire because their
preconditions are satisfied by the current contents of working
memory. From this set, the production with the highest utility is selected to fire. The fired production can either change

916

goal, or adds a new goal).
Mind wandering accesses thoughts in this architecture very
similarly to how models access memories from long-term
memory. The time it takes to access a memory (i.e., the time
between when a memory is requested and when it is thought
about) is inversely related to its activation; thus, highly
activated thoughts will be accessed very quickly, whereas
thoughts with a lower activation take longer to think about.
Memory access also has an associated threshold, determining how easily and quickly a memory must be able to be
accessed in order to be thought about at all. In our model,
any time a production fires that does not refer to the goal, the
model attempts to begin to mind wander if a memory has a
high enough activation to be accessed (if the model is already
mind wandering, it simply continues to do so). If the production refers to the goal in working memory, mind wandering,
if it is currently occurring, ends, including canceling any ongoing attempts to access a memory.
ACT-R/E models interact with the world using ACT-R/E’s
built-in functionality for interacting with the world. Models
can view visual items on a simulated monitor; they can act
on the world by pushing keys on a simulated keyboard and
clicking a simulated mouse.

more errors in the PG condition than in the OG condition.
Because the PG and OG conditions are evenly interspersed
throughout Experiment 3, the model predicts the accuracies
of the PG and OG conditions will be equal, barring noise effects, in Experiment 3.

Model Results
The model performed Experiments 1 and 3 from (McVay &
Kane, 2013) 64 and 56 times, respectively, to correspond
to the number of participants in each original experiment.
Activation noise and utility noise caused variation between
model runs. In terms of parameters, activation noise was set
to 0.25, and utility noise was set to 0.1, both fairly modest
noise values. The utility learning rate was set to 0.2. The
activation strengthening (also called the base level learning)
decay parameter was set to 0.4 instead of its default of 0.5.
The mind wandering activation threshold parameter was set
to 0.7, which is higher than the standard memory activation
threshold of 0.0. All other parameters were set to their default
values.
The experiment and model results are shown in Figures 1
and 2. The model had an increased mind wandering rate of
3.8% for the PG condition vs. the OG condition for Experiment 1, and 4.3% for Experiment 3. It also had a decreased
accuracy rate of 4.1% for the PG condition vs. the OG condition for Experiment 1, and 0.4% for Experiment 3. Overall, the model matched the mind wandering data extremely
well, with an R2 of 0.984. Its R2 for accuracy rate was less
strong, at 0.612. This is, in large part, because we do not predict a meaningful difference in accuracy rates for Experiment
3, as described above. We are comfortable with this prediction despite its relatively poor match, as it seems to match the
data combined across the entire study, which, as we have discussed, showed no significant effect in accuracy between the
PG and OG conditions.

Model Explanations
While looking at a word during the SART, the word appears
in working memory, and so, as we described above, activation is spread from current and recent words to associated
thoughts in memory. Thus, by the time the model sees the
third word of a PG triplet, the first, second and third words
are each spreading activation to the associated goal in memory. Due to this priming, the model explains that it is more
likely to mind wander after seeing a PG triplet because it is
more likely that a thought in memory will have a high enough
activation to be easily and quickly thought about via mind
wandering.
The model also explains why mind wandering after a PG
triplet will be slightly higher for Experiment 3 than for Experiment 1. This is because there is are only two stimuli between the PG triplets and the probe for Experiment 3, instead
of the 2-6 for Experiment 1, resulting in a higher chance that
any mind wandering occurring after a PG triplet will be interrupted by goal-oriented thought. This explanation is additionally supported by a secondary analysis of the experiment,
which revealed that the main differential between the PG and
OG conditions for Experiment 1 occurred when the probe was
only 2 stimuli away from the PG or OG triplet.
With respect to accuracy, the model explains why the accuracy rate for the PG condition is lower than the accuracy
rate for the OG condition in Experiment 1. As we have
discussed, because of utility learning, the click strategy becomes more preferred than the check strategy as the experiment progresses. Because of the strict alternating of OG and
PG triplets in the first experiment, then, this means that PG
condition overall will slightly favor the click strategy compared to the OG condition. This in turn leads us to expect

Discussion
In this paper, we have described a computational, process
model of mind wandering that furthers our understanding of
mind wandering mechanisms and contents. In our model,
mind wandering begins during natural beaks in task-oriented
thought, and occurs only when there is a thought active
enough in memory to be easily and quickly thought about.
Thus, we claim that mind wandering can be heavily affected
by task structure (e.g., are there gaps in goal-oriented processing during the task?) and environmental cues (e.g., are there
any concepts highly primed by the environment or aspects of
the tasks?). This deeper understanding of mind wandering is
important to scientists who see mind wandering mechanisms
and processes as tools to implement in cognitive systems in
order to foster problem-solving, creativity, and innovation.
As we discussed in the beginning of this paper, a deeper
layer to this in the mind wandering literature is the notion of executive control, or purposefully keeping one’s train
of thought on-task even when mind wandering is possible.

917

0.8
0.7

●

●

●

0.2
0.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.5

0.6

●

●

0.4

Accuracy (%)

●

Other Goal
Personal Goal
Model

0.3

0.7

0.8

●

●

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

●

0.1

Mind Wandering (%)

●

Other Goal
Personal Goal
Model

Experiment 1

Experiment 3

Experiment 1

Experiment 3

Figure 1: Mind wandering results for Experiments 1 and 3
from (McVay & Kane, 2013). Reports the percentage of
thought probes to which participants responded they were
mind wandering. The dots are the results from our model;
the bar and errors bars show human participant results.

Figure 2: Accuracy results for Experiments 1 and 3 from
(McVay & Kane, 2013). Reports the percentage of target
stimuli that were correctly responded to. The dots are the
results from our model; the bar and errors bars show human
participant results.

While this work does not directly account for executive control, our model implicitly assumes that its executive control
“allows” mind wandering whenever possible, but successfully returns its thoughts to the task at hand as soon as required. It thus fits naturally with the theory that mind wandering arises from the failure of executive resources to control
one’s thoughts.

2013, 2015; Thomson, Pyke, Trafton, & Hiatt, 2015).
Our model also expands to make several other predictions
that are consistent with results generally found in mind wandering research. Another aspect of mind wandering that
some have explored “mind-popping,” where thoughts come
to the forefront of one’s mind without any conscious effort
(Kvavilashvili & Mandler, 2004). Our model has a natural explanation for why that happens – the activation of a thought
in memory becomes so high, through a combination of recency, frequency, priming and noise, that it pops into conscious thought regardless of whether one is currently involved
in task-oriented thought.
Additionally, our model predicts that minds will wander
more during low-demand tasks (McVay & Kane, 2010), and
that mind wandering will occur more when one is fatigued
(Smallwood et al., 2004; McVay & Kane, 2010). Fatigue, it
is believed, is associated with micro lapses in cognitive processing (Gunzelmann & Gluck, 2009), resulting in no goaloriented processing for very short periods of time. Our model
predicts that, during these micro lapses, as withduring lowdemand tasks that do not require much task-oriented thought,
mind wandering has many more opportunities to occur. We
look forward to exploring these issues in more detail in the
future.

Further, our model suggests that the executive control functions fail when an active enough memory competes for the
model attention. The model’s higher threshold for mind
wandering accessing a memory (compared to normal, taskoriented access of a memory) suggests that only memories
that are very recent, frequent, and/or highly related to the
task or environment will be strong enough to derail one’s
train of thought. It also thus provides an explanation for
how mind wandering content is generated, an issue which
is not currently well understood (Schooler et al., 2011) nor
present in other models of distraction and mind wandering
(Taatgen, Katidioti, Borst, & van Vugt, 2015; van Vugt, Taatgen, Sackur, & Bastian, 2015). In van Vugt et al. (2015),
for example, mind wandering is suggested to occur based on
competition between “attentive” and “distracted” task control
strategies, which does not extend to explain the results seen
here. In our model, in contrast, memories that are highly active in memory are likely to be mind wandered about; this
not only captures the results of the study we discuss here, but
also ties in closely to other recent work on priming and activation in memory affecting cognitive behavior (Hiatt & Trafton,

Acknowledgments
The views and conclusions contained in this paper do not represent the official policies of the U.S. Navy.

918

References

Schneider, D. W., & Anderson, J. R. (2011). A memorybased model of hick’s law. Cognitive Psychology, 62(3),
193–222.
Schooler, J. W., Mrazek, M. D., Franklin, M. S., Baird,
B., Mooneyham, B. W., Zedelius, C., & Broadway, J. M.
(2014). The middle way: Finding the balance between
mindfulness and mind-wandering. The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, 60, 1-33.
Schooler, J. W., Smallwood, J., Christoff, K., Handy, T. C.,
Reichle, E. D., & Sayette, M. A. (2011). Meta-awareness,
perceptual decoupling and the wandering mind. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 15(7), 319 - 326.
Smallwood, J., Davies, J. B., Heim, D., Finnigan, F., Sudberry, M. V., O’Connor, R. C., & Obonsawain, M. C.
(2004). Subjective experience and the attentional lapse:
task engagement and disengagement during sustained attention. Consciousness and Cognition, 4(657-690).
Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maj, M., der Linden, M. V., &
D’Argembeau, A. (2011). Mind-wandering: Phenomenology and function as assessed with a novel experience sampling method. Acta Psychologica, 136(3), 370-381.
Taatgen, N. A., Katidioti, I., Borst, J., & van Vugt, M. (2015).
A model of distraction using new architectural mechanisms
to manage multiple goals. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Cognitive Modeling (p. 264-269).
Thomson, R., Bennati, S., & Lebiere, C. (2014). Extending the influence of contextual information in ACT-R using
buffer decay. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Thomson, R., Pyke, A. A., Trafton, J. G., & Hiatt, L. M.
(2015). An account of associative learning in memory recall. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Trafton, J. G., Hiatt, L. M., Harrison, A. M., Tamborello, II,
F. P., Khemlani, S. S., & Schultz, A. C. (2013). ACTR/E: An embodied cognitive architecture for human-robot
interaction. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction, 2(1), 3055.
van Vugt, M. K., Taatgen, N. A., Sackur, J., & Bastian, M.
(2015). Modeling mind-wandering: a tool to better understand distraction. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling (p. 252-257).

Anderson, J. R. (1983). A spreading activation theory of
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
22(3), 261–295.
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in
the physical universe? Oxford University Press.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Lebiere, C., & Matessa, M.
(1998). An integrated theory of list memory. Journal of
Memory and Language, 38(4), 341–380.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M. D., Kam, J. W. Y.,
Franklin, M. S., & Schooler, J. W. (2012). Inspired by
distraction: Mind wandering facilitates creative incubation.
Psychological Science, 23(10), 1117-1122.
Fu, W., & Anderson, J. (2006). From recurrent choice to skill
learning: A model of reinforcement learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General.
Gabora, L. (2010). Revenge of the “neurds”: Characterizing
creative thought in terms of the structure and dynamics of
human memory. Creative Research Journal, 22, 1-13.
Gunzelmann, G., & Gluck, K. A. (2009). An integrative
approach to understanding and predicting the consequences
of fatigue on cognitive performance. Cognitive Technology,
14(1), 14-25.
Hiatt, L. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2013). The role of familiarity,
priming and perception in similarity judgments. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Hiatt, L. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2015). An activation-based
model of routine sequence errors. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Cognitive Modeling.
Kvavilashvili, L., & Mandler, G. (2004). Out of one’s mind:
A study of involuntary semantic memories. Cognitive Psychology, 48(1), 47-94.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Horn, J. D. V., Wegner, D. M.,
Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering minds:
The default network and stimulus-independent thought.
Science, 315(5810), 393-395.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2010). Does mind wandering
reflect executive function or executive failure? Comment
on Smallwood and Schooler (2006) and Watkins (2008).
Psychological Bulletin, 136(2), 188-207.
McVay, J. C., & Kane, M. J. (2013). Dispatching the wandering mind? toward a laboratory method for cuing “spontaneous” off-task thought. Frontiers in Psychology, 4(570).
Mooneyham, B. W., & Schooler, J. W. (2013). The costs and
benefits of mind-wandering: A review. Canadian Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 67(1), 11-18.
Peebles, D., & Bothell, D. (2004). Modelling performance in
the sustained attention to response task. In Proceedings of
the Sixth International Conference on Cognitive Modeling
(p. 231-236).
Robertson, I. H., Manley, T., Andrade, J., Baddeley, B. T.,
& Yiend, J. (1997). ‘Oops!’: Performance correlates of
everyday attentional failures in traumatic brain injured and
normal subjects. Neuropsychologia, 35(6), 747-758.

919

