A Dynamic Approach to Secondary Processes in Associative Recognition
Gregory E. Cox, Richard M. Shiffrin
(grcox, shiffrin)@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University
1101 E. Tenth St., Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

Malmberg, 2008) and is typically invoked to explain situations in which familiarity alone is presumed to be insufficient
to distinguish between studied and unstudied test items.
An important exemplar of such a case is associative recognition. In associative recognition, the study list is comprised
of sets of items, e.g., word pairs. Participants are subsequently tested on “intact” pairs consisting of two items that
had been studied as part of the same pair (denoted AB) as
well as “rearranged” pairs in which the two items had both
been studied, but not in the same pair (denoted AB’). Thus,
both items of a rearranged pair are “familiar” in that both had
been seen at study, so additional information is needed in order to distinguish rearranged from intact pairs. This information could be available via a secondary recall route if participants use one of the items (e.g., item A) to cue recall of the
item it had been studied with (B); if the recalled item matches
the other item at test, the pair is judged to have been studied,
but if the recalled item does not match, the pair is rejected
(Rotello & Heit, 2000; Malmberg, 2008). Alternatively, if
studying a pair results in storage not just of the individual elements of the pair, but of relational information representing
the compound of the two items, this would also provide the
necessary information to distinguish between intact and rearranged pairs: rather than comparing each item individually to
memory, a participant could compare the relational information in the pair to the relations stored in memory (Murdock,
1982; Dosher & Rosedale, 1989, 1997).
A wealth of research has attempted to distinguish between
these two views of associative recognition on the basis of
accuracy alone. The shape of receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curves has been argued to support the involvement of recall in associative recognition (Yonelinas, 1997),
but these data are equally consistent with a signal detection
process that combines two sources of evidence, as in a compound cue model (Wixted, 2007). Process-dissociation procedures (Jacoby, 1991) have also been used to argue in favor of a recall-like process in associative recognition. However, process-dissociation will produce high estimates of the
contribution of recollection even when the data are simulated
from a single-process model where it is known that recollection did not generate the data; and when a model with
recollection is used to generate the data, the process dissociation estimates of recollection’s contributions are incorrect
(Ratcliff, Van Zandt, & McKoon, 1995). Process-dissociation
also relies on the strong assumption that familiarity and recall
are stochastically independent of one another; when the assumption is violated, estimates obtained from this procedure
are uninterpretable (Curran & Hintzman, 1995; Hillstrom &

Associative recognition—the ability to discriminate between
studied and novel associations—has been attributed to the operation of a recall-like process that is not engaged during
recognition of single items. An alternative mechanism for associative recognition is the formation of a compound memory
cue that incorporates relational information between the two
elements of the association. These alternatives make different
predictions about the dynamics of associative recognition as
revealed by speed-accuracy trade-off (SAT) functions: if recall
were operating, SAT functions should approach asymptotic
performance at a faster rate for stronger associations, whereas
a compound cue mechanism predicts that only asymptotic performance, not rate, should be affected by strength. In a review
of the literature, we find that only asymptotic performance,
not rate, is affected by the strength of studied associations,
supporting the operation of a compound cue mechanism. We
present a formal model of this mechanism as a direct outgrowth
of a model of single-item recognition (Cox & Shiffrin, 2012)
and use it to predict observed SAT curves for both single-item
and associative recognition in a variety of experiments.
Keywords: Recognition memory; associative recognition;
episodic memory; memory models.

Introduction
Recognition is a critical function performed by the memory
system, and must therefore form part of the bedrock upon
which any theory of memory can be constructed. When
engaging in a recognition task, a participant must decide
whether a given test item was or was not present in a particular study context. Recognition judgments thus indicate the
ability of a participant to discriminate between experienced
and unexperienced events, where an “event” is defined by the
conjunction of an item and context. By characterizing the
situations in which studied items can be correctly detected
and unstudied items can be correctly rejected, we gain understanding of how memory is organized and how it is accessed.
Several theories posit that recognition can be accomplished
via two routes: The first route involves a comparison between
the test item and the contents of memory which produces
a value of “familiarity” or “memory strength”. An item is
called “old” if the familiarity it evokes is sufficiently high relative to a criterion value; this familiarity process has been
characterized by a variety of memory models (e.g., Murdock,
1982; Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984; Hintzman, 1988; Shiffrin
& Steyvers, 1997; McClelland & Chappell, 1998; Dennis
& Humphreys, 2001). A second route involves retrieving a
specific event from memory and directly comparing it to the
test item, responding “old” only if the test item and the retrieved memory match. This route, often termed “recall” or
“recollection”, forms a component of dual-process theories
of memory (e.g., Atkinson & Juola, 1974; Reder et al., 2000;

471

1.0

1.0

Logan, 1997). The assumption of independence is also inconsistent with positive correlations between the probability
of correct recall and that of correct recognition (Tulving &
Wiseman, 1975). Finally, even if the assumptions of the process dissociation procedure are satisfied, it is insufficient for
identifying the relevant processing components (Humphreys,
Dennis, Chalmers, & Finnigan, 2000).
Because accuracy data alone is insufficient, we believe
the most promising approach toward understanding the secondary processes involved in associative recognition is a dynamic approach. By this, we mean that we must examine not
just the final recognition decision, but the dynamics of the
mnemonic and decision processes that lead to that decision. If
associative recognition involves secondary processes beyond
those involved in single-item recognition, those processes
should have characteristic dynamics which affect not only
the final decision, but response time and the form of speedaccuracy trade-off (SAT). This kind of approach has yielded
insights into various aspects of single-item recognition, such
as the form of memory-evidence distributions (Starns & Ratcliff, 2014) and short-term memory decay (Donkin & Nosofsky, 2012). In this article, we examine evidence from a wide
variety of studies and argue that while the evidence demonstrates the operation of secondary processes in associative
recognition, such processes are not well-described by a recalllike process. Instead, the secondary process involved in associative recognition is best described as the formation of a
compound cue. We present a formal model of this process
and show that it provides excellent quantitative and qualitative fits to SAT data in both single and associative recognition,
with parameter values that provide additional insight into the
cognitive processes underlying recognition.

●

0.8

●

P("Old")

AB: Predicted
AB': Predicted
AX: Predicted
C: Predicted
X: Predicted
XY: Predicted

●

●

●

●

●

●

AB: Predicted
A, B: Predicted
AB': Predicted
C: Predicted
X: Predicted
XY: Predicted

●

●

0.4

0.4

●
● ●

AB: Observed
AB': Observed
AX: Observed
C: Observed
X: Observed
XY: Observed

●

0.6

0.6

●

P("Old")

0.8

●
●

●

●

●

AB: Observed
A, B: Observed
AB': Observed
C: Observed
X: Observed
XY: Observed

●

0.2

0.2

●
●

● ●
●

●
●

●
●

0.0

0.0

●

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

500

1000

●

1500

Lag + RT (ms)

2000

2500

Lag + RT (ms)

●

AB target : Observed
AB' foil : Observed
XY foil : Observed
●
●

●

P("Old")

0.6

●

AB target : Predicted
AB' foil : Predicted
XY foil : Predicted

0.8

1 target : Observed
2 target : Observed
4 target : Observed
6 target : Observed
1 foil : Observed
2 foil : Observed
4 foil : Observed
6 foil : Observed

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

0.4

●

0.4

0.6

●

●
●

●
●

0.2

●
●

●

●

●

0.2

P("Old")

0.8

1.0

1.2

1 target : Predicted
2 target : Predicted
4 target : Predicted
6 target : Predicted
1 foil : Predicted
2 foil : Predicted
4 foil : Predicted
6 foil : Predicted

1.0

(a) Gronlund and Ratcliff (1989, Exp. 1). (b) Gronlund and Ratcliff (1989, Exp. 2).

●

0.0

0.0

●

1

2

3

Lag + RT (s)

(c) Dosher (1984, Exp. 2).

4

500

1000

1500

2000

Signal lag (ms)

(d) Rotello and Heit (2000, Exp. 1).

Figure 1: Probability of responding “old” to a test word or pair over time, along with
predictions from our dynamic recognition model. Parameters used to generate these
predictions are given in Table 1; model details are given in the main text.

information (although participants were, again, also tested on
single-item recognition). Under the Experiment 2 exclusion
instructions, participants initially endorsed rearranged pairs
(AB’) before this tendency reversed at later signal lags. The
nonmonotonic false alarm curve to AB’ pairs under exclusion
instructions, also evident in Figures 1c and 1d, indicates the
involvement of a secondary process or source of information
that is not available early in associative recognition.
The critical difference between a recall and a compound
cue mechanism is the source of the new information that becomes available: For a recall-like process, new information
is retrieved from memory, so the rate at which this information becomes available should be related to the strength of
the memory from which it is being retrieved. Specifically,
as the target memory gets stronger—perhaps as a function
of increased study time or repetition—information should be
retrieved more quickly (e.g., Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981;
Anderson, 1983; Sederberg, Howard, & Kahana, 2008). In
terms of SAT, this would be reflected in faster rise to asymptotic performance and/or an earlier inflection point in the false
alarm curve to AB’ pairs. On the other hand, the formation
of a compound cue depends only the test pair, and is independent of the contents of memory, and thus predicts that there
should be no difference in the dynamics of associative recognition as a function of memory strength.
These predictions were directly tested by Dosher (1984),
who presented pairs for varying amounts of time at study and
tested participants on both intact pairs and rearranged pairs
formed by mixing the left and right members from pairs that
had been studied for equal amounts of time. The results,

Evidence for Secondary Processes in
Associative Recognition
In the speed-accuracy trade-off (SAT) paradigm, a test item is
presented on each trial for a varying length of time at which
point a response signal occurs instructing participants to respond immediately based on whatever information they had
acquired during the lag between stimulus onset and response
signal (Reed, 1973). The SAT procedure thus provides a
measure of the dynamics of processing and can, thereby, provide compelling evidence for the involvement of a secondary
process in associative recognition, as shown in Figure 1. In
Gronlund and Ratcliff (1989, Exp. 1), participants were instructed to endorse a test pair if both of its members had
been studied, regardless of whether they had been studied together (labeled AB and AB’, in contrast to novel pairs XY or
pairs with one novel member AX); this decision involves only
item-level information. In addition, participants were tested
on single items and had to distinguish between studied (C)
and unstudied (X) words, where associative information is
once again irrelevant. In Experiment 2, participants were told
to endorse a pair only if its two members had actually been
studied together (only AB); this decision requires associative

472

shown in Figure 1c, demonstrate a similar albeit less dramatic
nonmonotonic false alarm curve to rearranged pairs, but there
is no evidence that either the inflection point or rate of approach to asymptote changes as a function of study time. Instead, only asymptotic accuracy is affected. This mirrors the
findings of Nobel and Shiffrin (2001) and Wickelgren and
Corbett (1977), in which memory strength was manipulated
both by study time and by list length, yet had no effect on
the dynamics of associative recognition, only on asymptotic
accuracy. An additional test of a recall-based account of associative recognition was conducted by Gronlund and Ratcliff
(1989, Exp. 4), in which the first word of each test pair was
presented 200 ms before the second; if participants were using a recall-like strategy, they should use the first word to
cue recall of the second, allowing them to correctly reject a
rearranged pair much faster after the second word appeared
and, perhaps, without any nonmonotonic false alarm curve.
Instead, although participants could reject completely novel
foils (XY) more quickly when given a 200 ms head start,
the extra time conferred no advantage in rejecting AB foils.
When item information alone could enable participants to reject a foil (AB vs. XY), a single unstudied word is sufficient,
but when associative information is necessary (AB vs. AB’),
both members of the pair have to be present, as would be
expected if a compound cue were necessary for associative
recognition.
In sum, the dynamics of associative recognition do not resemble those that would be expected if recall were operating.
Instead, associative recognition seems to depend on a secondary cuing process, such as the formation of a compound
cue. We now present a formal model of this process and show
that it provides an excellent qualitative and quantitative account of associative recognition performance.

block and that they are persistent in the participant’s environment; therefore, all available NX context features are assumed
to be stored in the trace. Features are assumed to be binary
with each value having equal base-rate probabilities, such that
the probability that two different items will have matching
values for a particular feature is 12 . If a feature is stored, it is
stored correctly with probability c, otherwise a random value
(e.g., “0” or “1”) is stored instead.
Studying a pair results in the storage of two traces in memory, one for each of the two words. However, in addition to
the content and context features that would have been stored
had the words been presented in isolation, both traces contain
associative features. The values of these features are equal in
the two traces and represent emergent compound features that
arise from the joint encoding of the two words. As with content features, additional study time or repetition increases the
probability that an associative feature will get stored in each
of the two traces. We emphasize, however, that the “memory
system” treats content, associative, and context features identically and does not “know” whence these features of a trace
arose.

Single-item recognition
To make a recognition decision about a single word, a participant constructs a “memory probe”. As with a memory
trace, the probe consists of both content features and context
features. At the beginning of the trial, time t = 0, the probe
contains only context features, since these are presumed to be
persistent in the environment. At some later time t0 , content
features begin to enter the probe as the test word is processed.
On each time-step within the model, one of the NC available
content features is sampled uniformly at random. If the probe
does not contain a value for that feature, the sampled value
is stored; otherwise, whatever value was already in the probe
remains. Thus, over time, the probe will become saturated
when no new content features are available.

Model
The model for associative recognition that we present is a
direct outgrowth of the model for single-item recognition
proposed by Cox and Shiffrin (2012) and expanded in Cox
(2015). We first describe the assumed structure of long-term
episodic memory, then the model for single-item recognition,
and finally describe how it is extended to address pair and
associative recognition.

Likelihood On each time-step t, the current probe is compared in parallel to all traces in episodic memory. The probetrace comparison depends only on the features that are in both
the probe and the trace, and takes the form of a likelihood ratio reflecting the relative probability that the probe and trace
encode the same event versus the probability that they encode
different events (cf. Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997; McClelland
& Chappell, 1998). If the probe and trace encode the same
event, the probability that they will match on a particular feature is pM|S = c + (1 − c) 12 while the probability that they will
mismatch is pN|S = (1 − c) 12 . If the probe and trace encode
different events, the probability that they will either match or
mismatch is simply pM|D = pN|D = 12 , i.e., chance. We assume for simplicity that features are stored independent of
one another, such that the likelihood ratio is the product

Structure of long-term memory
Studying a single word leads to the formation in long-term
episodic memory of a “memory trace”. This trace is represented as a vector of feature values, which can derive from
two sources: The content of the study event, which includes semantic, phonological, and orthographic features of
the word; and the context of the event, which pertains to the
general study situation in which the word was encountered.
Additional study time or repetitions increase the probability
that a content feature will be stored in the trace; the probability of content feature storage is denoted u, and the total
number that may be stored is NC . We assume that the relevant
context features do not change over the course of a study-test

λi (t) = pM|S /pM|D
i

NMi (t)

pN|S /pN|D
i

= (1 + c)NM (t) (1 − c)NN (t) ,

473

NNi (t)
(1)

where λi (t) is the likelihood ratio between the probe and
i (t) and N i (t) denote the number
trace i at time t and NM
N
of matching and mismatching features, respectively, between
the probe and trace i at time t.

Ratcliff, 1988), we assume that participants continue to sample features into their memory probe until a response signal is
given, at which point they stop. Each model time-step is presumed to take a constant amount of time ρ. If the accumulated
changes x(t) at the time of the response signal are greater
than a threshold value θ, the participant responds “old”, otherwise they respond “new”. If a response signal occurs before
sampling begins at time t0 , the participant guesses “old” with
probability 1/ [1 + exp(−θ)]. We assume feature sampling
only occurs between t0 and the response signal, and that the
additional time required for a participant to make their response after the signal does not allow for additional processing of the test item(s). Although this is surely an oversimplification, response times are typically quite brief (200 ms), are
unrelated to the stimulus itself, and only vary at earlier lags.
These considerations, plus the good fits obtained, suggest this
simplification does not harm any conclusions reported here.

Memory evidence Recognition decisions depend on the
overall match between the probe and memory, however most
traces (e.g., those from years ago) will not match the probe
very well. Thus, we assume that only traces with likelihood
ratios greater than one contribute to the match. This match
value is the logarithm of the average likelihood ratio for those
traces whose likelihoods exceed this threshold value,
φ(t) = log hλi (t) : λi (t) > 1i ,

(2)

which may be considered a form of “log-odds”. At time t0 ,
when the probe contains only context features, φ(t0 ) reflects
the match between the test context and the contents of memory. As content features are sampled and join the probe, φ(t)
will evolve, governed by the order and timing with which features are sampled, as well as the properties of the traces stored
during study. Each new feature provides more statistical evidence about whether there is a trace in memory that encodes
the same event as the probe. The number of mismatching features (NNi (t)) between the probe and traces of different items
will tend to increase over time, thus decreasing their likelihood ratios. If there is a trace stored from the test word, its
likelihood ratio will tend to increase beyond the initial match
i (t));
to context as more matching features are sampled (NM
this single trace that matches well on both content and context will grow to dominate the average likelihood1 .
On average, then, φ(t) increases for targets and decreases
for foils. The change in familiarity over time is thus statistically diagnostic of whether an item had been studied or not,
and we presume this is the basis for a recognition decision.
The accumulated change is simply the difference between the
current value φ(t) and the value before any content features
had been sampled:

Pair and associative recognition
When a pair is presented at test, a participant processes each
item in its own parallel channel, using the same mechanisms
just described for single-item recognition (Figure 2). Participants only make an “old” response if the accumulated change
in familiarity for each item is sufficient to call both of them
“old”. In each channel, the probe begins at time t0 with NX
context features and there is available capacity for NC content
features. In associative recognition, a certain proportion of
the NC content features, denoted pA , are given over to representing the association between the two items; the remaining features are used to represent the content features of the
individual items. Due to constraints on short-term memory
capacity, it is possible that not all item-specific features can
be sampled into the two probes; we denote the proportion of
the maximum number of item features (of which there are
(1 − pA )NC ) that can be sampled in pair recognition by pS .
Associative recognition begins just like pair recognition,
but at some time tA after the start of processing, the pA NC
associative features become available for sampling. At that
point, both item and associative features can be sampled into
each probe. The only difference between item and associative features from the perspective of the retrieval process is
that the values of the associative features match between the
two probes. Just as in pair recognition, a participant only
responds “old” if both probes result in sufficiently high accumulated change in familiarity. This model is flexible enough
to allow us to explain both single- and multiple-item recognition within the same modeling framework, and enables one
to infer the degree to which associative information is used
(pA ), when it is available (tA ), and to what extent it interferes
with item-level processing (pS ).

t−1

x(t) =

∑ φ(τ + 1) − φ(τ) = φ(t) − φ(t0 ).

(3)

τ=t0

By making recognition dependent on the change in evidence
over time, rather than on its absolute level, one need not
assume differing criteria across experimental conditions or
stimulus classes which may differ in their absolute memory
strength (Cox & Shiffrin, 2012). One can also view x(t) as
conditionalizing φ(t) on an initial value determined by context, φ(t0 ). Because context features are persistent in the environment, rather than changing rapidly like content features,
they provide a natural baseline level against which to judge
new information.

Model Fits

Predicting SAT data Although more complex assumptions
are possible (cf. Meyer, Irwin, Osman, & Kounios, 1988;

We fit this model to the data from the first two experiments reported by Gronlund and Ratcliff (1989) and described above,
where Experiment 1 involved only pair recognition while Experiment 2 required associative information. These experi-

1 Traces formed in contexts before the experiment are also
present in memory, but in practice such traces contribute little and
so we do not model them here.

474

Table 1: Best-fitting parameters of the dynamic model for associative recognition to SAT datasets, as well as fit diagnostic R2 . In Dosher (1984, Exp. 2), multiple study times were
used, entailing multiple values of uP ; study times were 1, 2, 4, and 6 seconds per pair. In all models, NC = NX = 30.
Experiment
Gronlund and Ratcliff (1989, Exp. 1)
Gronlund and Ratcliff (1989, Exp. 2)
Rotello and Heit (2000, Exp. 1)
Dosher (1984, Exp. 2)

Item A
Channel

Item B
Channel

uS
0.316
0.414
—
—

uP
0.339
0.388
0.439
0.356, 0.420, 0.437, 0.463

θP

Item A
Channel

θP

θP

Item B’
Channel

θP

t
0

t0

Response
signal

(a) Intact (AB) pair.

t0

pA
0.017
0.170
0.162
0.190

tA
751.655
411.847
437.489
447.302

pS
0.937
0.869
—
—

θS
-0.118
0.245
—
—

θP
-0.891
0.048
1.097
-0.228

t0
89.047
94.477
82.982
187.346

ρ
5.880
4.096
7.899
9.639

R2
0.898
0.936
0.923
0.881

and Ratcliff (1989), participants could make use of item-level
information to reject certain (XY) foils. Predictions and data
are shown in Figure 1d. Finally, in Dosher (1984, Exp. 2),
item information is made irrelevant: participants studied pairs
for varying amounts of time (1, 2, 4, or 6 seconds per pair)
and foils were created by rearranging pairs within each level
of study time. As shown in Figure 1c, an increase in study
time does not affect the rate of approach to asymptotic performance. Our cue-formation model predicts this result both
quantitatively and qualitatively, in contrast to a recall-based
model which must predict a relationship between SAT dynamics and pair strength.
The estimated parameters are consistent with the task demands in each experiment. Where associative information is
not needed (Gronlund & Ratcliff, 1989, Exp. 1), the probe
is given over to mostly item features (low pA ); associative
features, to the extent that they are involved at all, are not
available until quite late (high tA ). When associative information is required, it becomes available at roughly the same
time (tA ) across all experiments—between 400 and 450 ms
after stimulus onset. Finally, when item information is not
at all informative (Dosher, 1984, Exp. 2), participants delay the onset of feature sampling (t0 ) by 100 ms and increase
the proportion of associative features used (high pA ). This
effectively reduces the influence of item features by diminishing the time between the onset of processing and the time
at which associative features become available.

t
0

tA

c
0.988
0.980
0.984
0.969

tA
Response
signal

(b) Rearranged (AB’) pair.

Figure 2: Schematic depiction of our model for associative recognition. Each member
of the pair is processed in parallel channels that each operate as single-item recognition
processes; sample paths for memory evidence x(t) are shown for each channel.

ments involved studying both pairs and single items, and thus
represent a strong test of the model’s ability to jointly fit data
from putatively different tasks. We fit a single encoding noise
parameter c, start time t0 , and time-step duration ρ across all
conditions in each experiment, but allowed the probability of
feature encoding to differ between single items (uS ) and pairs
(uP ). Even though participants did not need to use associative
information in Experiment 1, we fit values of pA , the proportion of content features used to represent associations, and
tA , the delay in availability of associative features, to verify
that the model is sensitive to the different task demands. Two
criterion parameters were also required, one for single-item
recognition θS and another that applied to both parallel channels in pair recognition θP . Model predictions are shown in
Figures 1a and 1b, showing that the model closely matches
the data, with the fitted parameter values in Table 1. Estimates
of uS and uP are similar to each other within each experiment,
consistent with the fact that participants were given twice as
long to study a pair as they were a single item. As expected,
pA is much lower in Experiment 1, where associative information is not required, although the fact that it is non-zero
suggests that some associative information is nonetheless encoded (this would account for the slight increase in asymptotic hit rate for AB pairs compared to AB’). It would also
appear the increase in pA in Experiment 2 is accompanied by
a decrease in pS , suggesting that a greater focus on associative
features entails a smaller capacity for item features.
We also fit our model to two experiments that only tested
pair recognition2 . In Rotello and Heit (2000, Exp. 1), participants had to distinguish between intact pairs (AB), rearranged
pairs (AB’), and novel pairs (XY), rejecting both novel and
rearranged pairs. Thus, as in the experiments from Gronlund

Discussion
We have extended a dynamic model for recognition of single
items to the recognition of pairs, showing how it can account
for single-item, pair, and associative recognition. Pair recognition results from the parallel operation of two single-item
recognition processes in which changes in familiarity are accumulated as features of each item are sampled. If the accumulated changes for both items are sufficiently large, the pair
is judged “old”, otherwise it is called “new”. In associative
recognition, an additional set of features becomes available
later in the processing of the two items; these features represent an associative binding between the two items. Our model
can thus be considered a form of compound cue formation
(Dosher & Rosedale, 1989, 1997).
The consistency of parameter estimates across experiments
is remarkable and, coupled with good quantitative fits, suggests that this model is capturing something important about
associative recognition. In particular, associative features,
regardless of other aspects of the experiment, are generally
available 400-500 ms after stimulus onset, which is intriguing because it lies on the border between the two temporal
regions supposed to reflect “familiarity” (typically 300-500

2 For these experiments, we set p = 1 since, without tests of both
S
single items and pairs, this parameter becomes unidentifiable.

475

ms) and “recollective” (typically 500-800 ms) processing in
event-related EEG (Rugg & Curran, 2007). If associative features become available 400-500 ms after stimulus onset, on
some trials they will be sampled quickly and fall into the early
“familiarity” bin, while on other trials they will be sampled
more slowly and affect the later “recollective” ERP components. This potential confusion is reflected in the ERP literature on associative recognition in which associative recognition performance is sometimes related only to late positive
ERPs (Donaldson & Rugg, 1998) and sometimes with both
early negative and late positive ERPs (Speer & Curran, 2007).
Difficulties in interpreting such data may result from the
a priori assumption that associative recognition must entail
qualitatively different familiarity and recollection processes.
Rather than assuming such a conclusion—as in behavioral
ROC and process-dissociation analyses—we believe more
progress may be made by developing explicit formal models of the processes involved in memory, as we have demonstrated here. Doing so allows for much more specific statements to be made about the mechanisms involved, and enables stronger tests of the predictions of various theories. For
this reason, we believe such an approach will be a boon to
the understanding not just of behavioral data, but of neural
measures like EEG. Conversely, the ability of EEG to probe
ongoing cognitive processes at a much finer level than behavioral paradigms could allow for more detailed theories to be
specified, enabling even deeper insights into the dynamics of
retrieval.
We hardly dispute the operation of at least two processes
in associative recognition, but we have shown that the secondary process is better characterized as compound cue formation, rather than recall/recollection. There are a variety of other memory tasks that may entail the operation of
secondary processes, such as rejecting highly-similar foils
(Hintzman & Curran, 1994), list discrimination (Hintzman,
Caulton, & Levitin, 1998), and source memory (Hintzman
& Caulton, 1997), which we have also explored within the
dynamic model framework outlined here (Cox, 2015). Although a full description would go beyond the scope of the
present article, we find that although secondary processes beyond those found in single-item recognition are necessary to
explain these phenomena, only in the case of source memory does this secondary process resemble a kind of recall. In
general, it would appear that memory retrieval can involve
a multitude of processes depending on the decision required
of the participant, but that only through rigorous quantitative
modeling can we begin to characterize these processes and
develop a deeper understanding of memory.

Curran, T., & Hintzman, D. L. (1995). Violations of the independence assumption in
process dissociation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning. Memory, and
Cognition, 21(3), 531–547.
Dennis, S., & Humphreys, M. S. (2001). A context noise model of episodic word
recognition. Psychological Review, 108(2), 452–478.
Donaldson, D. I., & Rugg, M. D. (1998). Recognition memory for new associations:
electrophysiological evidence for the role of recollection. Neuropsychologia, 36(5),
377–395.
Donkin, C., & Nosofsky, R. M. (2012). The structure of short-term memory scanning:
an investigation using response time distribution models. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 19, 363–394.
Dosher, B. A. (1984). Degree of learning and retrieval speed: Study time and multiple
exposures. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
10(4), 541–574.
Dosher, B. A., & Rosedale, G. (1989). Integrated retrieval cues as a mechanism for
priming in retrieval from memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
118(2), 191–211.
Dosher, B. A., & Rosedale, G. (1997). Configural processing in memory retrieval:
Multiple cues and ensemble representations. Cognitive Psychology, 33, 209–265.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and recall.
Psychological Review, 91(1), 1–67.
Gronlund, S. D., & Ratcliff, R. (1989). Time course of item and associative information: Implications for global memory models. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15(5), 846–858.
Hillstrom, A. P., & Logan, G. D. (1997). Process dissociation, cognitive architecture,
and response time: Comments on Lindsay and Jacoby (1994). Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 23(5), 1561–1578.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgements of frequency and recognition memory in a
multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review, 95(4), 528–551.
Hintzman, D. L., & Caulton, D. A. (1997). Recognition memory and modality judgments: A comparison of retrieval dynamics. Journal of Memory and Language, 37,
1–23.
Hintzman, D. L., Caulton, D. A., & Levitin, D. J. (1998). Retrieval dynamics in recognition and list discrimination: Further evidence of separate processes of familiarity
and recall. Memory & Cognition, 26(3), 449–462.
Hintzman, D. L., & Curran, T. (1994). Retrieval dynamics of recognition and frequency
judgments: Evidence for separate processes of familiarity and recall. Journal of
Memory and Language, 33, 1–18.
Humphreys, M. S., Dennis, S., Chalmers, K. A., & Finnigan, S. (2000). Dual processes in recognition: Does a focus on measurement operations provide a sufficient
foundation? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7(4), 593–603.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A process dissociation framework: Separating automatic from
intentional uses of memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 513–541.
Malmberg, K. J. (2008). Recognition memory: A review of the critical findings and an
integrated theory for relating them. Cognitive Psychology, 57, 335–384.
McClelland, J. L., & Chappell, M. (1998). Familiarity breeds differentiation: A
subjective-likelihood approach to the effects of experience in recognition memory.
Psychological Review, 105(4), 724–760.
Meyer, D. E., Irwin, D. E., Osman, A. M., & Kounios, J. (1988). The dynamics of cognition and action: Mental processes inferred from speed-accuracy decomposition.
Psychological Review, 95(2), 183–237.
Murdock, B. B. (1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval of item and associative
information. Psychological Review, 89(3), 609–626.
Nobel, P. A., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2001). Retrieval processes in recognition and cued
recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
27(2), 384–413.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of associative memory. Psychological Review, 88(2), 93–134.
Ratcliff, R. (1988). Continuous versus discrete information processing: Modeling
accumulation of partial information. Psychological Review, 95(2), 238–255.
Ratcliff, R., Van Zandt, T., & McKoon, G. (1995). Process dissociation, single-process
theories, and recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
124(4), 352–374.
Reder, L. M., Nhouyvanisvong, A., Schunn, C. D., Ayers, M. S., Angstadt, P., & Hiraki, K. (2000). A mechanistic account of the mirror effect for word frequency:
A computational model of remember-know judgments in a continuous recognition
paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
26(2), 294–320.
Reed, A. V. (1973). Speed-accuracy trade-off in recognition memory. Science,
181(4099), 574–576.
Rotello, C. M., & Heit, E. (2000). Associative recognition: A case of recall-to-reject
processing. Memory & Cognition, 28(6), 907–922.
Rugg, M. D., & Curran, T. (2007). Event-related potentials and recognition memory.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(6), 251–257.
Sederberg, P. B., Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2008). A context-based theory of
recency and contiguity in free recall. Psychological Review, 115(4), 893–912.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for recognition memory: REM—
retrieving effectively from memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4(2), 145–
166.
Speer, N. K., & Curran, T. (2007). ERP correlates of familiarity and recollection
processes in visual associative recognition. Brain Research, 1174, 97–109.
Starns, J. J., & Ratcliff, R. (2014). Validating the unequal-variance assumption in
recognition memory using response time distributions instead of ROC functions: A
diffusion model analysis. Journal of Memory and Language, 70, 36–52.
Tulving, E., & Wiseman, S. (1975). Relation between recognition and recognition
failure of recallable words. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 6(1), 79–82.
Wickelgren, W. A., & Corbett, A. T. (1977). Associative interference and retrieval
dynamics in yes-no recall and recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 3(2), 189–202.
Wixted, J. T. (2007). Dual-process theory and signal-detection theory of recognition
memory. Psychological Review, 114(1), 152–176.
Yonelinas, A. P. (1997). Recognition memory ROCs for item and associative information: The contribution of recollection and familiarity. Memory & Cognition, 25(6),
747–763.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1983). A spreading activation theory of memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22(3), 261–295.
Atkinson, R. C., & Juola, J. F. (1974). Search and decision processes in recognition
memory. In D. H. Krantz, R. C. Atkinson, R. D. Luce, & P. Suppes (Eds.), Contemporary developments in mathematical psychology: I. learning, memory and thinking.
Oxford, England: W. H. Freeman.
Cox, G. E. (2015). A dynamic approach to recognition memory (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). Indiana University.
Cox, G. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2012). Criterion setting and the dynamics of recognition
memory. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4(1), 135–150.

476

