A dynamic neural field model of self-regulated
eye movements during category learning
Jordan I. Barnes (jordanb@sfu.ca)
Mark R. Blair (mblair@sfu.ca)

Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6 Canada

Paul F. Tupper (pft3@sfu.ca)

Department of Mathematics, Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6 Canada

R. Calen Walshe (r.c.walshe@sms.ed.ac.uk)

Department of Psychology, The University of Edinburgh
7 George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ Scotland

Abstract

These approaches have been used in explanations for
phenomena such as: attentional blocking and highlighting
(Kruschke, Kappenman, & Hetrick, 2005), rapid attentional
shifting (Kruschke & Johansen, 1999), and cluster driven
attention (Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004). However, the
biological basis for these techniques has not always been
clear. What is becoming more clear, is that the brain is
using a complex set of systems to perform attentional
functions that may only look like those described by
attention weights at a trial-level (Gottlieb, 2012).
As a first step toward bridging the gap between attention
weights at a trial-level and the ongoing attentional decisions
made within a trial, a recent model called RLAttn, standing
for Reinforcement Learning of Attention (Barnes,
McColeman, Stepanova, Blair & Walshe, 2014), used
temporal difference error to learn transition probabilities
between micro-information states, which get traversed by
eye movements as part of arriving at a decision. This model
showed the possibility of using aggregated eye movements
to index attention in ways that correspond to classical
descriptions of learned attention in terms of bias to
particular feature dimensions. RLAttn is a first step, but it
must be admitted that the target of a saccade is not just a
function of the relative values of different information
states. The spatial arrangement (Lipinkski, Spencer &
Samuelson, 2010) and perceptual salience of visual
information (McColeman, & Blair, 2013) for instance,
affects these decisions as well. A more fundamental account
of these systems guided by advancements in neuroscience
is needed. For this reason, we have developed a new model
that couples together the dynamically operating cognitive
mechanisms needed to interface sensori-motor signals with
learned attention.

Computational models of category learning and attention have
historically focused on capturing trial and experiment level
interactions between attention and decision. However,
evidence has been accumulating that suggests that the
moment-to-moment attentional dynamics of an individual
affects both their immediate decision-making processes as
well as their overall learning performance. To extend the
scope of these formal theories requires a modeling approach
that can index fine-grained decision-making at millisecond
time scales. Here we implement a model of eye movements
during category learning using concepts from Dynamic
Neural Field Theory research. Our model uses a combination
of timing signals, spatial competition and Hebbian association
to simultaneously account for a number of foundational
attentional efficiency results from eye tracking and category
learning. We report the results of fitting this model to
accuracy, fixation probabilities, fixation counts and fixation
duration data in 42 subjects from a standard category learning
experiment.
Keywords: attention, eye-tracking, dynamic field theory,
cognitive modeling, category learning.

Introduction
Attention and learning are intrinsically related (Shepard,
Hovland & Jenkins, 1961; Kruschke, 2011). When we learn
a new skill, we learn to selectively attend to information
relevant to that skill. As research into the fundamental
neurophysiological principles of attention and learning
progresses however, the historical psychological methods
for studying attention and learning, and those implied by
modern approaches in computational neuroscience, have
thus far failed to converge. In the category learning
literature for instance, where some of the clearest
formalizations of the relationships between learning and
attention have been developed, ‘attention’ is simply a
weight on a feature dimension indicating the degree of
importance it is assigned when making category decisions.
Mathematical learning techniques that adjust these weights
trial-by-trial over the course of an experiment have worked
relatively well in fitting human data (Kruschke, 1992).

Decision timing
When the relationships between category decisions and
other measures like reaction time and ocular motor fixation
durations are looked at closely, it quickly becomes clear
that there is quite a bit happening beneath the level of the
category decision. For instance, Blair and Watson (2008)

148

show that category learning performance can be well
predicted from the duration of time that participants spent
looking at the stimulus during the feedback phase in just the
first 10 trials. Furthermore, individuals develop patterned
fixation orders, and fixation durations tend to decrease over
the course of the experiment, especially to relevant
information (Rehder & Hoffman, 2005; Meier & Blair,
2013; Chen, Meier, Blair, Watson & Wood, 2013).
What then are the determinants of these sub-decisions
regarding where and when to look, and how do they affect
the trajectory of learning? These are some of the core
questions we are trying to investigate with this model. Only
by having a model that evolves its behaviour through
learning can you begin to say how the factors influencing
these decisions relate to one another. In a review of the
cognitive and neural factors that influence decision timings
for instance, Wittman and Paulus (2008) argue that timings
are strongly related to attention and are influenced by a
number of specialized neural networks. Inspired by ideas
like these, we incorporate neurons for both decision
responses and for saccade initiation mechanisms, whose
activations grow with time and are reset when the relevant
task is performed. One can think of these units as
implementing a kind of impatience. Like Wittman and
Paulus who suggest that timing is highly individual
specific, Ghafurian and Reitter (2014) have implicated
impatience as being a distinct trait between individuals.
This work has shown that individuals maintain a constant
offset in timing decisions, above and beyond factors like
risk aversion, in tasks where individuals need to estimate
optimal response times in order to maximize reward.

1977). The general form of the 2-dimensional field
equation, like those used here, for a field u, is defined by:
!
where 𝜏 scales the time, x and y represent points in space, h
is a resting level, S is exogenous input, w specifies the
interaction kernel of the field and f is a sigmoidal
thresholding function. In this framework, any sufficiently
activated neuron will contribute excitatory or inhibitory
activation to the abstract field according to a distance along
a metric of representation governed by the receptive field of
the neuron.

Model
The model presented here is designed to work with similar
kinds of task constraints as human subjects given the same
experiment. A trial begins with the model looking at the
center of a screen in the same manner that a human begins a
trial with a central fixation cross. It then makes simulated
eye movements to stimulus features that compete for
attention. Each eye movement registers foveated
information in a kind of visual working memory. This
activates associated categories, which then affect the
decisions about where to look next and when to look at
feedback or end the trial. Experiment instructions specifying
a particular set of features and responses are similarly coded
into the model.
The model contains many dynamically interacting parts,
as shown in Figure 1. To begin with, the visual field (A) has
2 spatial dimensions defined in retinotopic coordinates with
the fovea always at the center. A 3rd dimension on this field
contains the feature values for a particular trial that serve as
input to a feature detection layer of neurons once a
particular location is foveated; a particular color is only
defined for one location for the whole experiment. Feature
neurons (D) tuned to these specific locations of the color
dimension of the input are connected to a layer of category
neurons through a synaptic weight matrix. As a feature
neuron is activated, it activates categories as a function of
the level of its activation and the weight (F) on the synapse.

Dynamic Neural Field Theory
Models that attempt to describe processes as they unfold in
time are naturally described in the language of differential
equations. There are many models of the temporal
characteristics of eye movements (see Nuthmann, Smith,
Engbert, & Henderson, 2010, for example) but only a few
are described purely in dynamic terms (see Perone &
Spencer, 2013, or Schneegans, Spencer, Schöner, Hwang &
Hollingworth, 2014). We opt for a modeling framework that
looks beyond just the timing of a decision however, to
incorporate a level of spatial dynamics that contributes to
the actual decisions made. One framework that does this is
called Dynamic Neural Field Theory (DNFT, or just DFT),
and is built on some of the known properties of neural
populations (Georgopoulos, Schwartz, & Kettner, 1986;
Erlhagen & Schöner, 2002). The elements of these neural
fields are defined by the entire population of neurons,
weighted by their individual tuning preferences for the
given element. These preferences are typically modeled by a
standard receptive field across the population which has a
locally excitatory and globally inhibitory difference of
Gaussians (also known as 'Mexican hat') approximation (see
Kopecz & Schöner, 1995, for an example of this kind of
lateral interaction in a similar context).
Abstract fields with these properties can develop selfsustaining peaks of activity even in the absence of
exogenous input, allowing for a kind of memory (Amari,

!
Figure 1: Schematic structure of the 3 sub-sections of the
model: spatial representation, category learning, saccade
initiation. Green shapes represent free parameters.
Dashed lines indicate inhibitory connections.

149

A small gain factor is also applied that attenuates category
activation according to the consistency of a feature with
particular categories. This is done because there is often
non-diagnostic information that is correlated across all
categories.
The mutually inhibitory category neurons (G) in the
model play a central role in the prioritization of attention
and timing of decisions. These category neurons feed into a
decision neuron (H) which, if activated strongly enough,
will make a category decision, either initiating a feedback
phase or, if very highly activated end the trial without
looking at feedback. This decision neuron is excited by
exponentially increasing input, whose rate of growth is set
by the trial-impatience free parameter (I). The larger this
number, the faster the model will tend to make a decision on
a particular trial. Toward the start of an experiment when
categories are not very strongly activated, the timing of
category decisions is largely determined by the impatience
of the model pushing the neuron over a threshold, but as
categories begin to get selectively activated over the course
of learning, category feedback pushes this neuron across
threshold faster and response times gradually decrease. The
same processes generalize to the feedback phase.
While this is happening, activity from the category
neurons recurrently feeds back through the synaptic weight
matrix and into a layer of feature expectation neurons (E).
As particular categories grow in activation over the course
of the trial, the outstanding features associated with that
category become activated. Gain is again applied for this
direction of the flow of activity, biasing the model to
saccade to highly relevant features. Inhibitory input from the
feature detection neurons simultaneously reduces the
expectation of already viewed information, acting as a kind
of inhibition of return on a time scale set by the memory for
items in working memory.
The feature expectation neurons do two things. First, they
magnify inputs along the 3rd dimension of the visual field.
This has the effect of acting as a kind of salience boost to
that information. Second, the feature expectation neurons
are connected to specific locations on the spatial attention
field (B). This divergence models the distinction between
salience driven attention and the relative weightings that
might be calculated there, and task level attention which
could much more strongly drive voluntary shifts in
attention.
The spatial attention field is modeled as a 2-dimensional
dynamic neural field which represents the elements of the
stimulus in spatiotopic, or world-centric, coordinates as
opposed to the retinotopic coordinates of the visual field.
The extant point of fixation receives an excitatory boost
from a fixation neuron (K), which plays a role akin to
neurons at the rostral pole of the superior colliculus. The
intermediate layers of this brain region are known to
topographically organize the selection of saccadic endpoints (Robinson, 1972). Here, neurons coding for
amplitude and direction of the eye movement compete in the
initiation of saccades (Munoz & Wurtz, 1993). A gaze

1

change neuron (L) acts as the target for the exponentially
increasing fixation-impatience parameter (N). This input
ensures that the model will make new fixations. This gaze
change neuron inhibits the fixation neuron, consequently
modifying the balance of competition on the attention field,
while also exciting the saccade motor field (C) and a 3rd and
final neuron, the saccade initiation neuron (M). When this
neuron crosses a threshold, the location of maximum
activation on the saccade motor field is selected as a
saccadic end-point and a saccade is initiated. This re-orients
the visual field, which is suppressed during the saccade and
resets the fixation impatience timer. Oscillatory fixation
dynamics can be generated a number of different ways, for
instance by treating the fixation neuron’s resting level as a
separate state variable sensitive to the changes in activation
of the fixation neuron (Perone & Spencer, 2013), but we
chose an impatience parameter as a way of separating the
contribution of an individual’s processing speed from their
gaze strategy, which may cause saccades prior to finishing
processing (Kiani, Hanks & Shadlen, 2008).
Learning occurs after the model has made a category
decision and a feedback phase is entered. When the model
looks at a particular location in space, where a feedback
“button” is located, additional input to the correct category
is provided. For every moment that the model spends in the
feedback phase, Hebbian co-activation type association
strengthens (J) the weights between the active features and
the correct category. This is modulated with every fixation,
in that the activation of a feature detecting neuron is boosted
by fixational input above and beyond the attractor defined
by the self-sustaining level of the feature detecting neurons,
effectively increasing its association with the category
active category in the feedback phase.

Method
Eye tracking and category learning data was obtained from
the publicly available Meier and Blair (2013) dataset1. Full
technical details can be found in the original paper. The
experiment required participants to sort images of fabricated
microorganisms defined by 3 organelle features (see Figure
2) into 1 of 4 categories (A1, A2, B1, B2) on each trial.
Feedback indicating the subject’s choice and the correct
category was provided after each decision. We use only
participants in the equal category base rate condition (as
opposed to a condition where some categories appear more
frequently) of this experiment, who had at least 70% of their
gaze collected, and who reached a criterion of 24 trials in
row correct (n=42). From these subjects, we only look at the
first 360 trials of this data for each subject.
The category structure, shown in Table 1, is defined such
that feature 1 is more informative than either feature 2 or
feature 3, in that its value determines which of feature 2 or
3 is relevant for a particular trial. Optimal attention then,
requires participants fixate feature 1 first.

http://summit.sfu.ca/item/12715

150

Feature 1
0
0
1
1

Feature 2
0
1
0/1
0/1

Feature 3
0/1
0/1
0
1

Category
A1
A2
B1
B2
!

Table 1. Feature 1 is relevant for all categories. Feature
2 is relevant only for the A categories, and Feature 3 is
relevant for only the B categories.
B

A

!
Figure 3: Accuracy learning curves. Grey bars indicate
population standard deviation. On left is the fit of the
model for the representative subject and on the right is
the average behaviour over all subjects and fits.

Accuracy

!
C

!

We considered the fit of the accuracy, that is the fraction of
the categories that were correctly guessed, as an important
benchmark. As seen in Figure 3, the model performed well
in fitting the learning performance data.

D

Probability of fixating irrelevant feature
!
!
Figure 2: A: Example stimulus from Meier and Blair
(2013). The three features of interest subtend
approximately 1.7° of visual angle each, and are spaced
roughly 10.6° apart. B: Three equidistant color features
presented to the model. C/D: The two feature options for
each location.

Here we report a measure of attentional optimization
characterized by the averaged binary probability of looking
at an irrelevant feature on a particular trial. As seen in
Figure 4, while the model captures the decreasing
probability of fixating irrelevant information well across the
whole experiment, the model always fixates all features at
the beginning, whereas human do not. There are several
non-exclusive possibilities that might explain this. The first
possibility we considered is that the eye tracker may be
losing track of the eyes at times during the experiment (due
to blinks, or head turns, for instance) possibly depressing
the initial probabilities of fixating irrelevant information.
Upon further investigation, controlling for gaze loss at the
individual level, this did not appear to account for the
reduce probabilities. Further, Rehder and Hoffman (2005)
report similar initial fixation probabilities for the features in
their experiment. It is possible that not looking at all the
features might be a strategic choice that human participants
make in order to test simple rules first (possibly due to the
assumption that the task itself could be quite simple). The
simple rule first hypothesis is common to category learning
models (e.g. Love, Medin & Guereckis, 2004; Nelson &
Cottrell, 2007) and occurs naturally in models like RLAttn,
where guessing the category may have as high an action
selection probability as fixations to features until incorrect
answers have a chance to punish this behaviour. Finally, it
may be the case that precise fixations are not totally
necessary in most category learning experiments (see Tatler,
Hayhoe, Land & Ballard, 2011 and Coren, 1986). In any
event, as currently constructed, the model presented here is
too fastidious to produce the human data on this score.

While the stimuli from this experiment are more complex
than can be currently processed by the model, we have
elsewhere employed the simple color stimuli suitable for
use with the model (Barnes & Blair, 2014).

Simulations
To find out how well the model could simulate the human
data we employed a grid search algorithm, varying our 3
free parameters (learning rate, trial impatience and fixation
impatience) in looking for the best fitting version of the
model for each individual. Model fits were judged based on
the difference in mean and slope of 4 aspects of the human
data (accuracy, trial fixation counts, probability of fixating
the irrelevant feature and fixation durations). A single
simulation of a single participant can take several hours,
consequently, the model was just run several times at each
level of a fairly coarse grid. Each subject's data was then fit
with the point on the grid that minimized the weighted least
squares error.
In what follows, we assess the quality of our fitted model
in two ways. For each measure we first look at how the
model performs on a representative individual in the
population. This representative individual is the one with the
median weighted squared error; so there are roughly equal
numbers of subjects that we fit better or worse than this
representative individual. We do this such that the reader
can get a sense of the variability of the model under a single
set of parameters. We next look at the distribution of the all
the subjects and the corresponding fitted models for all the
subjects.

Fixation Counts
Another common form of attentional optimization is to
reduce the overall number of fixations (to features) per trial
over the course of the experiment (McColeman et. al, 2014).
Figure 5 shows human and model data. The model captures
the overall trend of decreasing fixation count across the

151

!

!
Figure 4: The probability of fixating irrelevant feature
over the course of the experiment.

!

!

!
Figure 6: The mean fixation durations to all features,
irrespective of relevance, over the course of the
experiment.

thought of as being stored "in the world" as opposed to in
the head, reducing the representational demands on the
computational cognitive system.
While ours is a much different model, the decisions it
makes about where to look next are contingent on serially
accessed parts of the visual world. In general, the category
learning paradigm is well-suited for analysis at the
embodied time scale because moment-to-moment decisions
can reflect subtle manipulations in the category structure
(Meier & Blair, 2013). Ultimately, the mechanisms that
make gaze fixations relevant to overall learning are only just
starting to be understood. The model of just-in-time gaze
learning advances the idea that attentional optimization is a
natural consequence of quickly dropping fixationally bound
variables from working memory (Ballard, Hayhoe, Pook
and Rao, 1997). A recent DNFT model of infant gaze
behaviours (Perone & Spencer, 2013), with many
similarities to our model, showed how the durations of
individual fixations can work to modulate an infant’s welldocumented familiarity to novelty bias transition at around
8-10 weeks of age (Wetherford & Cohen, 1972): the idea
being that longer fixations leave a larger Hebbian
association in long term memory which combines with
inhibition from working memory to make parafoveal
information relatively more salient. Only models that allow
for moment-to-moment changes in attention could feasibly
model these kinds of emergent differences over the course
of learning.
We believe that this line of research has the potential to
show how complex behaviours can emerge from the
interactions of a simple set of parameters, in our case just
learning rate, fixation impatience and trial impatience, over
the course of learning. Not only does the model presented
here scale its learning through its overall gaze time but it
also scales what it looks at it by what it knows. To our
knowledge, no other model has attempted to simultaneously
fit such a wide array of behavioural measures. An important
future direction for these modeling efforts is to rigorously
test this approach on other kinds of category structures,
timing constraints and stimulus types. With the introduction
of this model, we hope to provoke efforts that seek to
explain many kinds of cognitive and sensori-motor
behaviours simultaneously.

!
Figure 5: The total fixation counts to all features over
the course of the experiment. The standard deviation for
the sample of model runs that best fit the representative
individual was very small.

course of the experiment, but once again overestimates the
number of fixations at the beginning of the experiment.

Fixation Durations
We believe that fixation durations are an important measure
for models to fit going forward as they reflect a number of
important cognitive processes such as scene perception
(Walshe & Nutthman, 2013), fixation type (Ballard,
Hayhoe, Pook & Rao, 1997), and information relevance
(Chen et. al, 2013) among others. Figure 6 shows the human
data and model simulations. On average the model fits
human data well. The model shows a modest but similar
decline in durations as the human subjects over the course
of the experiment, within a similar magnitude.

Discussion
Modeling eye movements during category learning is a
recent trend (Nelson & Cottrell, 2009; Barnes et al,. 2014).
There are disparate motivations for moving in this direction.
Recent work has shown that learning methods based on
error reduction alone are insufficient to explain human eye
movement data in category learning, pointing to a need for
new kinds of models that might learn with different methods
(Blair, Walshe, Barnes & Chen, 2011; McColeman et. al,
2014). Additionally, work by Ballard, Hayhoe, Pook and
Rao, (1997) on the relationship between working memory
and skill acquisition, emphasizes the importance of "just-intime" decision-making at an embodied time scale operating
at around 1/3 - 2 sec. The motivating intuition is that there
should be physical actions that line up with the time scales
of information processing required for variable binding. In
this view, instructions about where to look next can be

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the helpful
contributions made by the current and former members of

152

Kruschke, J. K. (2011). Models of Attentional Learning. In E.
M. Pothos & A. J. Wills (Eds.), Formal Approaches in
Categorization,(pp.120–152).
Kruschke, J. K., & Johansen, M. K. (1999). A model of
probabilistic category learning. J Exp Psychol Learn, 25(5),
1083–119.
Kruschke, J. K., Kappenman, E. S., & Hetrick, W. P. (2005).
Eye Gaze and Individual Differences Consistent With
Learned Attention in Associative Blocking and Highlighting.
J Exp Psychol Learn, 31(5), 830–845.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: a network model of category learning. Psychol
Rev, 111(2), 309–32.
McColeman, C. M., Barnes, J. I., Chen, L., Meier, K. M.,
Walshe, R. C., & Blair, M. R. (2014). Learning-Induced
Changes in Attentional Allocation during Categorization: A
Sizable Catalog of Attention Change as Measured by Eye
Movements. PLoS ONE, 9(1).
McColeman, C., & Blair, M. (2013). The Influence of Salient
Distractors over the Course of a Category Learning Task. J
Vision, 13(9), 506-506.
Meier, K. M., & Blair, M. R. (2013). Waiting and weighting:
Information sampling is a balance between efficiency and
error-reduction. Cognition, 126(2),319–25.
Munoz, D. P., & Wurtz, R. H. (1993). Fixation cells in monkey
superior colliculus. II. Reversible activation and
deactivation. J Neurophysiol, 70(2), 576–89.
Nelson, J. D., & Cottrell, G. W. (2007). A probabilistic model
of eye movements in concept formation. Neurocomputing,
70(13-15), 2256–2272.
Nuthmann, A., Smith, T. J., Engbert, R., & Henderson, J. M.
(2010). CRISP: a computational model of fixation durations
in scene viewing. Psychol Rev, 117(2), 382–405.
Perone, S., & Spencer, J. P. (2013). Autonomy in action:
linking the act of looking to memory formation in infancy
via dynamic neural fields. Cognitive Sc, 37(1), 1–60.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A. B. (2005). Eyetracking and
selective attention in category learning. Cognitive psychol,
51(1), 1–41.
Robinson, D. (1972). Eye movements evoked by collicular
stimulation in the alert monkey.Vision Res,12, 1795–1808.
Schneegans, S., Spencer, J. P., Schöner, G., Hwang, S., &
Hollingworth, A. (2014). Dynamic interactions between
visual working memory and saccade target selection. J
Vision, 14, 1–23.
Shepard, R. N., Hovland, C. I., & Jenkins, H. (1961). Learning
and memorization of classifications. Psychol Monogr-Gen A,
75(13),1-42.
Tatler, B. W., Hayhoe, M. M., Land, M. F., & Ballard, D. H.
(2011). Eye guidance in natural vision: reinterpreting
salience. J Vision, 11(5), 1–23.
Walshe, R.C., & Nuthmann, A. (2014). Asymmetrical control
of fixation durations in scene viewing. Vision Res, 100,
38-46.
Watson, M. R., & Blair, M. R. (2008). Attentional allocation
during feedback: Eyetracking adventures on the other side of
the response. In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 345-350).
Wetherford, M. J., & Cohen, L. B. (1973). Articles
Developmental Changes in Infant Visual Preferences for
Novelty and Familiarity. Child Dev, 44(3), 416–424.

the Cognitive Science Laboratory at Simon Fraser
University. Funding for this work comes from the National
Science and Engineering Research Council (NSERC). The
high performance computing resources needed for carrying
out the modeling simulations was provided by Westgrid, a
member of Compute Canada.

References
Amari, S.-I. (1977). Dynamics of pattern formation in lateralinhibition type neural fields. Biol Cybern, 27(2), 77–87.
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pook, P. K., & Rao, R. P.
(1997). Deictic codes for the embodiment of cognition.
Behav Brain Sci, 20(4), 723–42.
Barnes, J.I., & Blair, M.R. (2014). The Influence of Space and
Relevance on Eye Movement Distributions. Northwest
Conference on Cognition and Memory.
Barnes, J.I., McColeman, C.M., Stepanova, E., Blair, M.R. &
Walshe, R.C. (2014). RLAttn: An actor-critic model of eye
movements during category learning. In M. Knauff, M.
Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1892-1897).
Barnes, J.I., Walshe, R.C., Tupper, P.F., & Blair, M.R. (2013) A
dynamic neural field model of eye movements during
category learning tasks. Learning to Attend, Attending to
Learn: Neurological, Behavioural, and Computational
Perspectives. Retrieved from: http://cslab-sfu.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2013/11/AttnLearning-Workshop-Tempus-Poster.pdf
Blair, M.R., Walshe, C., Barnes, J.I., & Chen, L. (2011).
Rethinking the role of error in attentional learning.
In L.
Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1649-1655).
Chen, L., Meier, K. M., Blair, M. R., Watson, M. R., & Wood,
M. J. (2013). Temporal characteristics of overt attentional
behavior during category learning. Atten Percept Psycho,
75(2), 244–56.
Coren, S. (1986). An efferent component in the visual
perception of direction and extent. Psychol Rev, 93, 391–410.
Erlhagen, W., & Schöner, G. (2002). Dynamic Field Theory of
Movement Preparation. Psychol Rev, 109(3), 545-572.
Georgopoulos, A. P., Schwartz, A. B., Kettner, R. E. (1986).
Neural population coding of movement direction. Science,
233, 1416–1419.
Ghafurian, M., & Reitter, D. (2014). Impatience, Risk
Propensity and Rationality in Timing Games. In M. Knauff,
M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2841-2846).
Gottlieb, J. (2012). Attention, learning, and the value of
information. Neuron, 76(2), 281–95.
Hikosaka, O., Takikawa, Y., & Kawagoe, R. (2000). Role of the
basal ganglia in the control of purposive saccadic eye
movements. Physiol Rev, 80(3), 953–78.
Kiani, R., Hanks, T. D., & Shadlen, M. N. (2008). Bounded
integration in parietal cortex underlies decisions even when
viewing duration is dictated by the environment. J Neurosci,
28(12), 3017–29.
Kopecz, K., & Schöner, G. (1995). Saccadic motor planning by
integrating visual information and pre-information on neural
dynamic fields. Biol Cybern, 73, 49–60.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: an exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychol Rev,
99(1), 22–44.

153

