A Non-monotonic Extension of Universal Moral Grammar Theory
Gert-Jan Munneke (G.J.Munneke@UvA.nl)
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam
107 Science Park, Amsterdam, 1090 GE
The Netherlands

Jakub Szymanik (J.K.Szymanik@UvA.nl)
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam
107 Science Park, Amsterdam, 1090 GE
The Netherlands

Abstract
We extend universal moral grammar theory (UMGT) with nonmonotonic logic. Our experiment shows that such revision is
necessary as it allows to account for the effects of alleviations
and aggravations in moral reasoning. Our new theory updates
UMGT from classical to non-monotonic logic, which reflects
the incompleteness of information and uncertainty in actual
human reasoning. In addition, it provides an explanation of
the paradoxical findings in the moral dilemma of the Trolley
problem and the Knobe effect.
Keywords: moral psychology; defeasible reasoning; universal
moral grammar; non-monotonic logic

Introduction
Even though morality is such a fundamental feature of man
and of great importance for societal well-being, little is still
known about the moral mind. What are the principles that
govern moral cognition? And what are the origins of our
moral sense of right and wrong? Although these questions remain unanswered, a promising theoretical framework on how
to approach these problems has recently been offered by universal moral grammar theory (Mikhail, 2007).
In this paper, we extend universal moral grammar theory
with non-monotonic logic. This update from classical to
modern logic allows the modeling of incompleteness of information and uncertainty in actual human reasoning. Our
experiment shows that such revision is necessary as it allows
to account for the effects of alleviations and aggravations in
moral reasoning. Our new theoretical paradigm also offers an
explanation of the paradoxical findings in the moral dilemma
of the Trolley problem (Foot, 1967) and the Knobe effect
(Knobe, 2003).

Universal moral grammar theory (UMGT)
Universal moral grammar theory is a paradigm for studying
moral cognition that borrows concepts from Chomskian linguistics (Chomsky, 1969, 2002). It was proposed by Mikhail

(2007), who has developed UMGT from an analogy between
the study of morality and language that was put forward by
Rawls (1999).
This analogy, in short, states that our moral faculty, just
like our language faculty, allows for fast reflexive judgments
on either whether a sentence is grammatical or whether a
situation is deemed (im)moral. These systems mature relatively quickly in young children without the need for extensive training initiated by the social environment, which suggests that these faculties are, at least in part, an innate feature
of human nature Mikhail (2011).
Many methodological assumptions behind UMG could be
met with rightful skepticism but a full discussion is beyond
the scope of this paper. What matters for our purpose is the
modeling aspect of UMG which is aimed at capturing the different computational stages through which a person generates
a moral judgment.

A sequential model of moral judgment
We will explain Mikhail’s model of moral judgment with the
example that he himself uses to explain the paradigm, namely
the moral dilemma of the Trolley problem and a paradoxical
dissociation between the way people respond to two of its
variants (Thomson, 1985; Foot, 1967; Mikhail, 2007).
The trolley problem: Switch variant A train/trolley is
about to hit and kill five people that are standing on the tracks.
The only alternative is that a bystander pulls a switch which
diverts the train unto a side-track, thus saving the 5 people.
The caveat is that there is 1 person on that side-track that will
be hit and killed as a side-effect. Is it permissible to pull the
switch? Ninety percent of people say ”yes” (Mikhail, 2007).
The trolley problem: Fat man variant A train/trolley is
about to hit and kill five people that are standing on the tracks.
The only alternative is that a bystander on a footbridge over
the tracks shoves a fat man standing next to him off the bridge
and in front of the train. This man will be hit and killed, but

1667

will stop the train as well and thus result in saving the 5 men.
Is it permissible for the bystander to shove the fat man in front
of the train? Now 90 percent of the people say ”no” (Mikhail,
2011).
Why does this flip in the moral judgment occur? The outcome in both variants is the same so a straightforward utilitarian explanation is problematic.
According to Mikhail’s framework of UMGT, the reason
behind this moral dissociation lies in the sequence of consecutive stages in which a moral judgment is constructed
(Mikhail, 2011). The first stage exists in generating the temporal structure of the moral situation which states the order
in which the atomic events of the situation occur. From this
temporal structure a causal structure is obtained which specifies who/what does what to whom at which time-point with
what result. This causal structure is conversed into a moral
structure by determining which effects are considered good,
bad or neutral. This structure is expanded upon into an intentional structure which determines which effects are directly
intended and which are interpreted as foreseen but unwanted
side-effects. The final stage is the deontic structure which is
a logical derivation system that operates on classical logic,
including the material implication (Mikhail, 2007). This system receives the results from the intentional structure as an
input in the form of logical formulas and together with general world knowledge, this system allows the moral mind to
derive whether an action is morally permissible or not.
The moral dissociation between the trolley problem variants then lies, according to Mikhail (2007), primarily in the
difference in the intentional structure of the actions with bad
consequences, but also in the ”badness” of the initial action.
Pulling the switch is a neutral, causal and directly intended
means towards the good end of saving lives with the 1 death
being an unintended side-effect. In contrast, shoving a person
from a bridge involves the bad action of battery as a means towards a bad causal end of letting a person get killed by a train
which itself is a bad means to the eventually positive end of
saving lives.
The moral judgment of an action is formalized by Mikhail
(2011) in the form of a logical equivalence, which is defined
as classical material equivalence:

in the deontic structure as new information becomes available. We propose that the pragmatic context of a moral situation plays a key role in the logical form of the inference rules
as a whole. The way we update the system is by using default
logic (Reiter, 1980; Berzati, 2007; Brewka et al., 1997). A
classic example of an inference in default logic is: if Tweety
is a bird, then Tweety can fly (Reiter, 1980). This inference
is probably correct, unless Tweety turns out to be a penguin.
The casual reasoner will assume by default that Tweety is not
a penguin, or any other atypical bird that does not fly. The
absence of evidence for such an abnormal bird is considered
to be evidence of absence of such an abnormality.
These default inferences are also part of human reasoning
in general (Stenning & Van Lambalgen, 2008), and of moral
reasoning in particular (Horty, 1997). For example, if a person kills, then this action is forbidden. There are however exceptions to this rule, like self-defense. These circumstantial
factors can alter the moral judgment of the entire situation,
for the better but also for the worse. These excuses (alleviations) and aggravations are a key ingredient of moral reasoning. They are by default assumed to be absent, unless positive
evidence in favor of their existence is available (Horty, 1997).
Updating the inference rules from standard UMGT with this
default reasoning gives us the following formalization:
D(A) ↔ A(F1 , . . . , Fn ) ∧ ¬ab
In which we have added the negation of abnormality, ab,
which is required for action A to have deontic status D. More
specifically we state that:
Bad(A) ∧ ¬alleviation ↔ Impermissible(A)
Good(A) ∧ ¬aggravations ↔ Permissible(A)

D(A) ↔ A(F1 , . . . , Fn )
This formula states that an action A has deontic status D if
and only if action A has features F1 , . . . , Fn .The deontic status is a judgment like permissible or forbidden. The action
is further specified as [S’s V-ing at t (α) ]c which means that
a subject S performs a verb V at time-point t under circumstances c.

Non-monotonicity of deontic rules
Although the inference rules incorporate the possibility to
take circumstances into account, we witness that there is no
flexible way of incorporating contextual pragmatics detached
from the action, nor of a flexible adaptation of derived beliefs

This means that the moral judgment of an action does not
only depend on the goodness or badness of the action in and
of itself but also of the contextual factors that surround it. A
bad action can be excused and a good action can be nullified
if it was, for instance, performed for the wrong reasons or
with bad intentions. An interesting result is that new information on the existence of such abnormalities can invalidate
moral inferences that used to be valid at an earlier step in the
derivation when there was no evidence for such an abnormality.
For example, upon hearing that a burglar stole goods from
a local pharmacy, we tend to judge this action as immoral.
But when we later on learn that the man stole an expensive
medicine from a pharmaceutic company because it was the
only way for him to save the life of his wife, we tend to revise
our initial judgment and some would even state that this man
is now a hero (Kohlberg, 1981).
This new framework thus violates the property of monotonicity of classical logic under which standard UMGT operates and this new approach updates UMGT into a nonclassical and flexible non-monotonic logic which fits better

1668

with the actual dynamics and limitations of human reasoning (see Stenning & Van Lambalgen, 2008; Cummins, 1995;
Nyamsuren & Taatgen, 2014).
This extension can incorporate the explanation of Mikhail
for the moral dissociation in the Trolley problems by stating
that the lack of direct intention can be interpreted as an alleviation. More interestingly, this new framework can also
explain a finding in moral psychology that as of yet remained
paradoxical, which is the Knobe effect (Knobe, 2003).

on intentionality as ”obliquely intended” and thus their answer actually would be in line with the factual state of the
world, albeit in a non-straightforward interpretation of the
word intention. It remains unknown however how such an
account would explain the lack of the Knobe effect in case
of a positive side-effect.

The Knobe effect The Knobe effect is the tendency of people to assign intentionality to a protagonist that commits an
immoral act, even though the protagonist did strictly not intend the negative side-effect of his action. This tendency is
absent when the side-effect is positive. Here is the original
text from Knobe (2003):

2. Furthermore, there is evidence that religious people are
more prone to deem a morally questionable situation as impermissible (Shariff & Norenzayan, 2011). This increased
tendency to judge actions as immoral should, according to
our extension, increase the need to suppress any alleviations and thus lead to an increase in the assigned intentionality.

The vice-president of a company went to the chairman
of the board and said, We are thinking of starting a new
program. It will help us increase profits, but it will also
harm the environment. The chairman of the board answered, I dont care at all about harming the environment.
I just want to make as much profit as I can. Lets start
the new program. They started the new program. Sure
enough, the environment was harmed.
Explaining this effect has received much attention but finding a robust explanation of the reasons behind this anomalous finding has proved to be difficult (Nichols & Ulatowski,
2007).
Our non-monotonic extension of UMG provides a hypothetical explanation. People assign intentionality because the
lack of intentionality could be interpreted as an alleviation.
People however insist that the action is immoral and therefor
do not accept the lack of intention as a potential excuse, even
though their statement is strictly in conflict with the factual
state of the world. Moral cognition thus initiates the need
for subjectively framing the situation in terms of alleviations
and aggravations, even if it means that facts about the world
have to be suppressed. This would also explain why the effect is absent when the side-effect is positive because in that
case people do not need to protect there line of reasoning towards the moral judgment of ”forbidden” as the action is now
clearly permissible.
The standard and updated versions of UMGT give rise to
some potential differences in their hypothetical explanations
concerning the Knobe effect:
1. Standard UMG framework could explain the Knobe effect
by referring to one of it’s core principles, i.e. the principle of double effect (Quinn, 1989). This principle, from
Catholic theology (Aquinas & Hutchins, 1952), posits that
when a negative consequence of an action is a means to
an end or the end in itself it is said to be directly intended
by the agent, whereas an unwanted but foreseen side-effect
is deemed to be obliquely intended. As the negative consequence in the Knobe effect seems to be a negative sideeffect, people could be intuitively interpreting the question

In contrast, the non monotonic-extension can explain the
Knobe effect, as stated earlier, from the need to suppress
an alleviation.

From these hypotheses we derive the following predictions:
1. Our theory predicts that there is a correlation between the
assigned intentionality and the immorality rating assigned
to the action of the chairman because the need to assign
intentionality would rise in case a perpetrator would seek
an alleviation, which is when his action was bad in and of
itself. We also predict that when the negative side-effect is
a lesser evil, that the assigned intentionality would drop as
well.
2. If religious people are more likely to score the Knobe scenario as more immoral, then they should also assign more
intentionality to the protagonist.
These predictions have been tested in an experimental vignette study by varying the severity of the negative side-effect
(destroying one tree vs severely hurting the environment). As
an exploratory effort we also varied whether the kind of agent
(a loving father or a CEO) and whether the agent cared or not
about the negative side-effect. In the standard scenario, the
protagonist does ”not care at all” about the negative side effect, which could be seen as an aggravation.

Experiment
Methods
Participants Two-hundred and forty-one US-residents
with ages between 19 and 67 (M = 32, SD = 10), of which
144 males and 97 females; 73 were religious and 168 were
not religious. The participants were M-Turk workers with an
approval rating of 95% or higher.
Materials The stimuli consisted of a vignette in which the
protagonist of the story performed an action which had a positive main effect and a negative side effect. We varied whether
a) the action is deemed permissible due to the positive outcome outweighing the negative outcome, b) whether the protagonist was a CEO or a “loving father” and c) whether the
agent cared about the negative outcome or not. See table

1669

100
90
80
70
60
Assigned
50
intentionality 40
30
20
10
0

bad 100
90
80
70
60
Moral
50
judgment
40
30
20
10
good 0 0

The effect of type of harm and religiosity on assigned intentionality and moral judgment

*

*

*

1 tree

environment

religious

non−religious

religious

non−religious

100 bad
90
80
70
60
Moral
50
judgment
40
30
20
10
0 good

Scatter plot and least squares line, correlation between assigned intentions and moral judgment

10

20

30

40

50

60

Assigned intentionality

70

80

90

100

Figure 1: Main results. Stars depict statistical significant at α = .05.
1 for the resulting vignette structure.
The 3 dichotomous independent variables resulted in 8 different stories which were administered in a between-subjects
design.
Participants scored the degree to which the protagonist intended the negative side effect with a visual analogue scale
ranging from 0 (“no intention at all”) to 100 (“He fully intended the action”). Participants also indicated their moral
acceptance of the action with a visual analogue scale ranging from 0 (“Neutral”) to 100 (“Completely immoral, He is
like a murderer”). The extreme labels were chosen in order
to prevent ceiling effects and facilitate normally distributed
data.
Control questions asked in a multiple-choice fashion
whether the protagonist was a father or a CEO, whether harm
consisted in destroying a tree or hurting the environment, and
to simply answer ‘yes’ to a specific question.
An exit interview obtained information on country of residence, age, gender, religiosity (yes/no) and whether English
is the native language.
Procedure The entire questionnaire lasted 2 minutes for
which participants received $0.25.

Results and discussion
We excluded participants that did not pass the control questions (N = 12). The results are depicted in Figure 1.
There is an effect of type of harm on intentionality

(t(209) = −2.2, p = 0.03219, r = .15). The lesser amount of
harm (“destroying 1 tree”) lead to a lower intentionality rating
(M = 73, SD = 31), than the condition with a higher amount
of harm (“severely destroying the environment”) (M = 80,
SD = 22).
There is correlation between the immorality score and the
assigned intentionality (r = 0.28, p < 0.001, r2 = .078).
There is an effect of religiosity on the moral judgment
(t(133) = −2.1, p = 0.04224, r = .17). Religious people
have a higher immorality rating (M = 51, SD = 30), than nonreligious people (M = 42, SD = 31).
There is an effect of religiosity on intentionality (t(185) =
−3.4, p = 0.00082, r = .24). Religious people have a higher
intentionality rating (M = 84, SD = 20), than non-religious
people (M = 73, SD = 29).
Both predictions are confirmed. There is a relation between
the assignment of intentionality and the degree to which a
bad action is deemed immoral. Furthermore we see that the
stronger tendency to assign intentions in religious people is
related to an overall stronger tendency to find a bad action
immoral.
We did not observe any effect of the protagonist being a
CEO or a loving father, nor did we find an effect of whether
the protagonist cared or not about the negative side-effect of
his decision. Apparently these manipulations are not perceived as salient aggravating or alleviating factors.

1670

Protagonist
Loving father

CEO of a big corporation
The CEO of a big company

A loving father
receives news of a friend

receives news of a friend
that there is an

that there is an opportunity
to start a new program.

opportunity to
start a new program.

Kind of harm
Destroying 1 tree

Severely hurting the
environment
This program will make

This program will make

a lot of money but will also

a lot of money but will also

have a negative

have a negative side effect

side effect of

of destroying 1 tree.

severely hurting
the environment.

Care of the protagonist
Cared

Did not care

The [CEO/loving father]
cared about the damage
but went ahead
with the program.

The [CEO/loving father]
did not care about
the damage
and went ahead
with the program.

Table 1: Vignette structure of 8 variants on the Knobe scenario.

General discussion
We extended universal moral grammar theory (UMGT) with
non-monotonic logic. We did so by replacing the classical
material implication in the deontic rules with the implication
according to default logic. This non-monotonic logic allowed
us to model important contextual factors that influence moral
reasoning. Acknowledging these factors—aggravations and
alleviations—made it possible to re-frame Mikhail’s explanation of the moral dissociation in the trolley problem. It furthermore allowed us to explain the paradoxical finding of the
Knobe effect.
Our experiment on the Knobe effect showed that people indeed assign intentionality more strongly when there is a need
to counter a potential excuse/alleviation. When an action is
considered less deplorable, then the need for countering such
an alleviation diminishes and the Knobe effect is attenuated.
Furthermore we witnessed that religious people assign intentions more strongly; and as predicted, this was related to a
stronger moral dismissal of immoral acts. Although this extension can explain existing paradoxical findings and provide
novel predictions, some points do deserve some critical ex-

amination.
A non-theoretical issue concerns the validity of M-Turk
workers as a research tool. Although the US M-Turk workers are not completely representative of the general US public, as is evidenced by the relatively low proportion of religious people, M-Turk workers are more diverse than standard
laboratory samples (Buhrmester et al., 2011; Paolacci et al.,
2010; Krantz & Dalal, 2000). M-Turk workers yield similar responses than typical samples (Buhrmester et al., 2011).
Nonetheless, M-Turk workers can have a lack of attention
(Gosling et al., 2004), for which we corrected by excluding
workers that could not answer simple control questions.
A critical examination of the predictions that we derive
from the standard and extended UMGT paradigms could result in doubt on whether the predictions follow necessarily
and whether other predictions cannot be derived. Although it
is true that both paradigms are somewhat flexible in the range
of predictions that they allow for, it is still the case that aggravations and alleviations are a key feature of moral situations
and therefor require distinct machinery in cognitive models of
moral reasoning. Furthermore, the claim of these paradigms
is not to fully understand moral cognition ab initio but rather
to provide a paradigm in which the quest for this understanding can be pursued. Further research is therefor required in
order to discover the categories of aggravations and alleviations and under what circumstances these are deemed valid.
Our experiment showed for instance that it does not matter
whether the protagonist is framed as a “CEO of a big corporation” or a “loving father”, nor whether he cared about
the negative side-effects of his decisions. These potential aggravations are apparently not considered to be valid in the
Knobe scenario. Future studies have to determine whether
these framing effects would work under other conditions or
whether they should not be considered as valid alleviations in
general.
Our non-monotonic paradigm is furthermore not meant as
a replacement of UMGT but rather as an extension that updates the paradigm as to to be more in line with the dynamic
non-monotonic nature of human reasoning.
Future work should also explore other non-monotonic formalisms of moral reasoning. These can be realized with other
non-monotonic logics (Berzati, 2007). Non-monotonicity
could perhaps also be realized within the action tree’s of standard UMGT, with a Bayesian modeling approach, with mental models (Bucciarelli et al., 2008; Bucciarelli & JohnsonLaird, 2005) or with constraint-based models (Simon &
Holyoak, 2002). In addition to correspondence with empirical findings, models should also be efficient in terms of computational complexity as the brain has finite resources an has
evolved to be efficient. Although non-monotonic logics generally give rise to hard problems, under some circumstances
computational algorithms can be made tractable (Cadoli &
Schaerf, 1993).
Our investigation shows how an interdisciplinary effort of
combining insights from linguistics, experimental psychol-

1671

ogy, ethics and modern logic can further our understanding
of moral cognition.

Krantz, J. H., & Dalal, R. (2000). Validity of web-based

References

Mikhail, J. (2007). Universal moral grammar: Theory, evi-

psychological research.
dence and the future. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(4),

Aquinas, T., & Hutchins, R. M. (1952). The Summa Theolog-

143–152.

ica of Saint Thomas Aquinas. Encyclopedia Britannica.
Berzati, D. (2007). Nonmonotonic reasoning: a unifying

Mikhail, J. (2011). Elements of moral cognition: Rawls’
linguistic analogy and the cognitive science of moral and

framework. Nova Publishers.

legal judgment. Cambridge University Press.

Brewka, G., Dix, J., & Konolige, K. (1997). Nonmonotonic

Nichols, S., & Ulatowski, J. (2007). Intuitions and indi-

reasoning: an overview (Vol. 73). CSLI publications Stan-

vidual differences: The Knobe effect revisited. Mind &

ford.

Language, 22(4), 346–365.

Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2005). Naı̈ve deontics: A theory of meaning, representation, and reasoning.

Nyamsuren, E., & Taatgen, N. A. (2014). Human reasoning
module. Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, 8,

Cognitive Psychology, 50(2), 159–193.

1–18.

Bucciarelli, M., Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2008).
The psychology of moral reasoning. Judgment and Deci-

Paolacci, G., Chandler, J., & Ipeirotis, P. G. (2010). Running
experiments on amazon mechanical turk. Judgment and

sion making, 3(2), 121–139.

Decision making, 5(5), 411–419.

Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011). Ama-

Quinn, W. S. (1989). Actions, intentions, and consequences:

zon’s mechanical turk a new source of inexpensive, yet

The doctrine of double effect. Philosophy & Public Affairs,

high-quality, data? Perspectives on psychological science,

334–351.

6(1), 3–5.

Rawls, J. (1999). A theory of justice. Harvard university

Cadoli, M., & Schaerf, M. (1993). A survey of complexity

press.

results for non-monotonic logics. The Journal of Logic

Reiter, R. (1980). A logic for default reasoning. Artificial

Programming, 17(2), 127–160.

intelligence, 13(1), 81–132.

Chomsky, N. (1969). Aspects of the theory of syntax (Vol. 11).

Shariff, A. F., & Norenzayan, A. (2011). Mean gods make

MIT press.

good people: Different views of god predict cheating be-

Chomsky, N. (2002). Syntactic structures. Walter de Gruyter.

havior. The International Journal for the Psychology of

Cummins, D. D. (1995). Naive theories and causal deduction.

Religion, 21(2), 85–96.

Memory & Cognition, 23(5), 646–658.

Simon, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (2002). Structural dynamics

Foot, P. (1967). The problem of abortion and the doctrine of

of cognition: From consistency theories to constraint sat-

the double effect. Oxford Review, 5.

isfaction. Personality and social psychology review, 6(4),

Gosling, S. D., Vazire, S., Srivastava, S., & John, O. P. (2004).

283–294.

Should we trust web-based studies? a comparative analysis
of six preconceptions about internet questionnaires. Amer-

Stenning, K., & Van Lambalgen, M. (2008). Human reasoning and cognitive science. MIT Press.

ican Psychologist, 59(2), 93.
Horty, J. F. (1997). Nonmonotonic foundations for deontic

Thomson, J. J. (1985). The trolley problem. Yale Law Journal, 94, 1395–1415.

logic. In Defeasible deontic logic (pp. 17–44). Springer.
Knobe, J. (2003). Intentional action and side effects in ordinary language. Analysis, 63(279), 190–194.
Kohlberg, L. (1981). Essays on moral development. vol. 1,
the philosophy of moral development: moral stages and the
idea of justice. Harper & Row.

1672

