Addressee Backchannels Can Bias Third-Party Memory and Judgment
Jackson Tolins (jtolins@ucsc.edu)
Jean E. Fox Tree (foxtree@ucsc.edu)
Psychology Department, University of California Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA
Abstract
Information about audiences influence how speakers produce
messages, biasing speakers’ own later recall (Higgins & Rholes,
1978), contingent on the creation of a shared reality between
interlocutors (Echterhoff, Higgins, & Rholes, 2005). We tested for
a similar effect within third party dialogue comprehension, in
which overheard addressees displayed evaluative backchannel
responses. Participants observed an interaction containing valenceambiguous personal information, and were later asked to recall the
information and make related judgments. Addressees either
responded positively or negatively to the speaker’s description.
Across three experiments, we found that addressee responses
biased recall when the responses were cues to a shared perspective,
either due to the collaborative construction of the talk or prior
shared knowledge between speaker and addressee. Addressee
responses as cues to the addressee’s stance alone did not bias
overhearer recall. These findings support the argument that
perception of a shared reality is a central component of dialogue
comprehension.
Keywords: Dialogue; Comprehension;
Overhearers; Audience Tuning; Memory

Backchannels;

Introduction
Picture being an audience member at a political debate.
The candidates present arguments in favor of particular
positions while deriding their opponents’ positions in a
strict, turn-by-turn fashion with a set amount of time to
speak. When not speaking, however, the other candidates
are not simply passive or invisible, but instead may act as
addressees, actively responding to the current speaker’s talk.
They would likely display their own stance, either positive
responses such as smiles and nods, or negative responses
such as frowns, side-to-side head shaking, and grabbing
podiums in shock. The audience of the debate not only hears
the candidates’ arguments but also takes on the role of
overhearers of a dialogue, taking in both the current
speaker’s talk and any backchannel responses by the other
active participants present in the interaction.
A variety of research within the collaborative paradigm,
in which meanings are achieved through joint negotiation
(Brennan, Galati, & Kuhlen, 2010; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986), has shown that addressee backchannels are critical in
the production and development of dialogue. Numerous
studies have demonstrated how speakers adjust their talk in
relation to the informational and evaluative stance of their
audience (Bell, 1984; Clark & Murphy, 1982; Clark &
Schaefer, 1989). In spontaneously produced dialogue,
speakers systematically incorporate backchannels into their
talk (Norrick, 2010; Tolins & Fox Tree, 2014). Addressees
use backchannels to actively ground the joint activity of the

dialogue, and the degree to which the addressee displays
understanding and acceptance influences how the speaker’s
subsequent talk is produced (Bangerter & Clark, 2003;
Bavelas, Coates, & Johnson, 2000; Beukeboom, 2009;
Tolins & Fox Tree, 2014).
Speakers’ talk is also influenced by other factors, such as
knowledge of addressees’ attitudes. When told to describe
someone to an addressee who feels favorable or unfavorable
towards the descriptee, speakers will adjust their talk
depending on what they believe their audiences’ attitudes
are. This adjustment affects speakers’ later recall such that
they are more likely to recall addressee-congruent
information, but only when they’ve actually produced their
description rather than merely possessed knowledge of their
addressee’s stance (hence the phenomenon’s label, the
saying-is-believing effect; Higgins & Rholes, 1978). The
memory effect is also only present when there is a shared
reality between the speaker and audience (Higgins, 1992)
When the audience is a member of an out-group, or when
speakers are lead to distrust their audience’s perspectives,
speakers still produce messages tuned to their addressees,
but they do not display later memory biases in the direction
of their previously produced messages (Echterhoff, Higgins,
& Groll, 2005).
The importance of shared reality has been demonstrated
with written messages that were intended as messages
between a speaker and an addressee. Is shared reality also
important for people listening in on an interaction between
others? Does the existence of a shared reality between
interlocutors influence the recall of people watching the two
people interact, and if so, to what degree is this driven by
addressee backchannels?

Backchannels and Third-Party Comprehension
In addition to their role in the co-construction of
conversation, backchannels may also affect third-party
comprehension. We will refer to people listening in on or
watching others’ interactions without actively participating
in the interaction overhearers. Earlier studies have shown
that overhearers have some access to the common ground
created between interlocutors. Overhearers comprehend talk
better when they begin listening earlier in the development
of the conversation rather than later, when the entrained
expressions have already been established (Schober &
Clark, 1989). Similarly, speakers produce talk directed
towards former overhearers differently depending on their
prior participation status, suggesting that interlocutors are
also sensitive to overhearers’ ability to understand the

2410

development of common ground in the observed interaction
(Wilkes-Gibbs & Clark, 1992).
Previous work on third party dialogue comprehension has
demonstrated that overhearers do have expectations about
how speakers will continue after different types of addressee
responses (Tolins & Fox Tree, 2014). Overhearers were
asked to read dialogue transcripts up to either a context
generic backchannel, such as mhm or uh huh, or a context
specific backchannel, such as oh or really. After specific
backchannels, overhearers, or overreaders in this paradigm,
were more likely to contribute a discourse elaboration,
providing additional information about the same event, in
their next speaker turn. After generic backchannels they
were more likely to contribute discourse continuations,
moving on to some next event. Importantly, sensitivity to
this predictive relation across interlocutor contributions was
visible not only when overhearers took on the role of
speaker and suggested what would likely be said next
(production; Tolins & Fox Tree, 2014), but also when
overhearers listened to narratives (comprehension; Tolins &
Fox Tree, in press). These findings support a view of
dialogue comprehension as a task involving the
comprehension of the interaction as a coordinated whole,
capitalizing on predictive relations across interlocutors.
In the current studies, we investigated how assessment
backchannels affect judgments and recall of a descriptee’s
behavior and personality. Assessment backchannels display
the producer’s evaluative stance towards the content of the
talk. To return to the opening example, the audience of a
political debate can be seen as engaged in the task of
dialogue comprehension (albeit highly institutionalized)
while taking into account both the current speaker as well as
any responses, positive or negative, from the other
candidates acting as active addressees. The audience
members may be influenced by the other candidates’
concurrent responses, changing how they interpret the
current speaker’s political stance.

The Current Investigation
Given that the expression of memories in dialogic activity
influences subsequent memory for both listeners and
speakers (Cuc, Koppel, & Hirst, 2007; Pasupathi et al.,
1998, Hirst & Echterhoff, 2008; 2012), and that
interlocutors actively steer narrative retellings in systematic
directions through audience tuning (on the part of speakers)
and the production of backchannels and expressive behavior
(on the part of listeners; Bavelas et al., 2001; Beukeboom,
2009; Higgins & Rholes, 1978; Tolins & Fox Tree, 2014),
the current study explores the role addressee responses play
in shaping overhearers’ memory and judgment of talk
produced in dialogue. Do addressee backchannel displays
influence overhearers’ later memory for the content of the
dialogue?
We propose two possible hypotheses, with two differing
outcomes. The simple cueing hypothesis is that
backchannels are cues that bias overhearer comprehension
in the direction of their affective content. Positive

backchannels encourage overhearers to recall positive
information, and negative backchannels encourage
overhearers to recall negative information. The
contextualized cueing hypothesis is that backchannels bias
overhearer comprehension in the direction of affective
content, but only when a contextualized picture can be
constructed of a shared reality between speakers and
addressees. As in earlier studies where the saying-isbelieving effect is only present when there is a shared
reality, and where biased memory only occurs when there is
a shared reality, we predict that overhearers’ biased memory
will only manifest when the addressee backchannels are
indicative of a shared reality.
To distinguish these hypotheses, we manipulated video
recordings of a dialogue in order to present the same
speaker talk with distinct addressee behaviors. The
addressee behaviors were backchannels displaying either
positive or negative assessments. Across experiments, we
varied the degree to which the two overheard interlocutors
were viewed as establishing a shared perspective, either
through active collaboration or previously developed
common knowledge. In Experiment 1 addressee responses
included both nonverbal and verbal responses, which were
responded to with simple speaker uptake (next turn initial
yeahs). As such, the overheard conversation involved active
collaboration in the creation of a shared perspective.
Experiment 2 removed the active coordination of stance
across speakers. Only nonverbal backchannels were
displayed and the observed interaction was designed such
that no speaker uptake was possible. Instead, participants
were told that the addressee had prior knowledge of the
topic of the speaker’s talk. Experiment 3 replicated the noninteractive format of Experiment 2, with the epistemic status
of the addressee reduced to that of an unknowledgeable
stranger. Across experiments, participants were sensitive to
the stance displayed by the addressee responses. These
responses only influenced later memory of the talk when
they were taken to be indicative of a shared perspective,
(Experiments 1 and 2), but did not bias later memory when
they were taken to display just the addressee’s stance
(Experiment 3). Together, these studies demonstrate both
that addressees influence third party comprehension and that
when listening to talk spoken in a dialogic context,
overhearers integrate information across the active
participants.

Experiment 1
We tested overhearer recall and judgment of the content of a
speaker’s talk following the third party observation of a
collaborative interaction.

Method
Participants. Sixty students from the University of
California, Santa Cruz, participated in exchange for course
credit.
Materials. The construction of the speaker’s script was
based on the communication game (Higgins & Rholes,

2411

1978). The script consisted of a description of the speaker’s
friend, Katie, along eight distinct personality traits. These
traits included dimensions such as stingy/thrifty,
stubborn/persistent, and witty/sarcastic. Each trait
description contained valence-ambiguous information; that
is, each description could be interpreted either negatively or
positively. The script as a whole and each individual trait
description have been pretested in prior experiments to
ensure that the descriptions evoke positive and negative
impressions with approximately equal likelihood (Higgins
& Rholes, 1978; Echterhoff et al., 2008; Sedikides, 1990;
Todorov, 2002). In contrast to the typical format of the
communication game paradigm, in which the description is
presented as a written essay, for the present experiment a
confederate speaker memorized the script and was then
recorded reciting the script as though describing a friend in
a naturalistic conversation. This recording was done alone
so as to not impose any influence of addressee responses on
the speaker during the creation of the stimulus. The speaker
sat in front of a computer and wore headphones while
reciting the description.
The addressee response videos were created through the
use of a confederate who filmed himself responding the
speaker’s description in a similar format. This allowed for
the same speaker talk to be used across both addressee
response conditions. In the positive affective response
condition, the confederate addressee provided positive
nonverbal backchannel responses including smiles and nods
in response to the descriptions. He similarly responded to
the presentation of each individual trait with verbal
responses. This included non-evaluative responses to the
more negative portions of the descriptions, and evaluative
backchannels such as really and oh wow with positivelyvalenced prosody to the positive portions. In the negative
affective response condition, the addressee responded to the
speaker’s talk with frowns, furrowed brows, and eye rolls
(see Beukeboom, 2009 for a similar contrast in confederate
responses). The verbal backchannels were reversed from the
positive condition, such that non-evaluative responses were
provided to the positive portions of the description, and
negative verbal assessments, this time with negativelyvalenced prosody and words, were provided following the
negative descriptions. Piloting of the study revealed that
when told they were observing a spontaneously produced
interaction, overhearers found the interaction highly
unnatural in the absence of speaker uptake of the verbal
backchannels, and so the speaker script was adjusted to
include turn-initial uptake, in the form of yeah after both
evaluative and non-evaluative backchannels.
These recordings were then combined in a split screen
format with each video stream presented against a black
background (Figure 1). This resulted in two videos in which
the speaker was exactly the same while the addressee
responses varied in the presentation of affective nonverbal
responsive behaviors, as well as the presentation and
location of verbal backchannels, including especially
evaluative responses.

a.

b.
Figure 1: Screenshots demonstrating the format of the
observed conversation. Screenshot a. illustrates a positive
addressee response, while b. illustrates negative addressee
response displays. The same speaker video was used across
addressee conditions.
Procedure. Participants were told that they were
participating in a study in how language is used to describe
personality. They were informed they would be listening in
to a conversation collected during a previous experiment run
in the lab, in which prior participants were asked to describe
friends to each other. After watching the interaction,
participants were asked to rate their perception of how wellliked the target person being described is by both the
speaker and hearer, as well as their own liking of the target,
along 7-point Likert scales. After answering these questions,
participants engaged in a unrelated, 10-15 minute filler task,
before being asked to recall the overheard description of the
target person. The recall prompt asked participants to be as
accurate and detailed as possible in remembering the
description of the target. After the free recall, the
participants were asked to fill out an 8-question
questionnaire, which provided each of the 8 traits in the
description individually. Each trait was presented on a 7point Likert scale with 1 representing the negative
interpretation of the trait (e.g. stingy, sarcastic, or stubborn)
and 7 the positive interpretation of the trait (e.g. thrifty,
witty, or persistent). The scores from these eight questions
were combined into a single, composite judgment score.
Both memory bias and judgment bias were tested because
previous work on audience tuning effects suggested that the
two mechanisms may be dissociable, with judgment biases
being more easily corrected when participants were made
aware of the bias (Todorov, 2002). Results indicating an
effect of addressee responses on both memory and judgment
would suggest that overhearers do not vigilantly correct
against addressee influence.
Coding. Two judges, blind to experimental condition as
well as the experimental paradigm in general, separately
scored the participants’ recall of the description of Katie on
an eleven-point scale ranging from -5 (extremely negative
description) to +5 (extremely positive description). The
correlation between their scoring was lower than in prior

2412

studies, r = 0.59, p < .001, and so the judges were asked to
resolve differences in scores through discussion to jointly
produce a final coding for each recalled description.

Results
Liking Ratings. Participants rated the addressee as liking
the target more in the positive condition, M = 4.45, SD =
1.29, than in the negative condition, M = 2.72, SD = 1.03,
MDiff = 1.73, t(58) = 5.71, p < .001, 95% CI [1.12, 2.33].
Participants also rated the speaker as liking the target more
in the positive condition, M = 5.10, SD = 1.45, than in the
negative condition, M = 4.21, SD = 1.29, MDiff = .89, t(58)
= 52.65 p = .02, 95% CI [.18, 1.6]. The participants’ own
liking did not differ significantly across conditions, p = .34.
Judgment and Recall. Participants in the positive
condition judged the target as having a more positive
personality, as measured by the composite personality
judgment score, M = 33.0, SD = 6.4, compared to
participants in the negative condition, M = 29.0, SD = 6.5,
MDiff = 4.0, t(58) = 2.39, p = .02, 95% CI [.66, 7.34].
Recalled descriptions were judged as being significantly
more positive when the participants had observed the
positive addressee response condition, M = 1.16, SD = 2.04,
than the negative addressee response condition, M = .10, SD
= 2.04, MDiff = 1.06, t(58) = 2.29, p = .025, 95% CI [.13,
1.98].

Discussion
The manipulation of addressee responses successfully lead
overhearers to believe that the addressee liked the target
being described less in the negative response condition than
in the positive response condition, indicating that
overhearers were aware of and sensitive to the addressee’s
verbal and nonverbal displays of stance throughout the
speaker’s talk. Addressee responses also influenced
overhearers’ ratings of the speaker’s opinion about the
friend she was describing, despite the same video being
used across conditions. This suggests that backchannels
were not simply cues for how to interpret a speaker’s talk,
but instead provided evidence of a shared perspective. The
current stimuli included speaker uptake of addressee
responses, in the form of turn initial yeahs, and so mimicked
speaker uptake of addressee talk present in collaborative
dialogue (Norrick, 2010; Tolins & Fox Tree, 2014).
Participants’ later recall of the content of the talk
produced in the observed dialogue was biased in the
direction of the addressee responses – that is, biased in the
direction of the perceived joint stance of the speaker and
addressee. These effects are the first to demonstrate that
addressee affective/evaluative backchannels in an overheard
dialogue influence overhearer comprehension and memory
of the content of the speaker’s talk.
It is possible that overhearers were not making use of the
addressee responses as cues to a shared perspective, but
were rather interpreting the speaker uptake as indications of
the speaker’s stance, making the speaker’s opinion of Katie
less ambiguous than the words of the script suggested. The

experimental stimuli also leave open the possibility that it is
not necessarily a shared perspective that matters for
overhearer bias but simply that both speaker and addressee
were demonstrating a stance in the same direction towards
the target being described. To address this, we ran an
additional experiment in which speaker uptake was
removed.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, participants attributed the positive or
negative evaluation of the target to both the addressee and
the speaker, despite the same speaker video being used
across the two conditions. This suggests that overhearers
view dialogue as an activity involving the coordination and
alignment of perspective across participants. In order to
further test the role of a shared perspective in dialogue
comprehension, we conducted a second experiment in
which the format of the dialogue prevented the speaker from
perceiving or acknowledging the addressee responses. We
maintained high epistemic status of the addressee by
providing information suggesting that the speaker and the
addressee both had prior knowledge of the target individual
being described. If the bias effect on memory and judgment
in the first experiment were driven by explicit interpretation
of the speaker uptake as indicating stance, rather than on
any mechanism involving the perception of a shared reality
between the two interlocutors, then the bias should not be
present when uptake is prevented. If it is indeed the shared
perspective that drives the effect, then information about
previously established shared knowledge between speaker
and addressee should be enough to allow overhearers to
perceive a shared reality, resulting in a similar bias as found
previously.

Method
Participants. Seventy students from UC, Santa Cruz
participated in exchange for course credit.
Materials. The same valence-ambiguous script from
Experiment 1 was used here, without the addition of the turn
initial acknowledgment tokens. The confederate speaker and
addressee were also the same as in Experiment 1. The
addressee was filmed providing only nonverbal responses to
the speaker’s talk. In the positive condition this included
smiles, nods, raised eyebrows, and an open body position.
In the negative condition responses included frowns, head
shakes, eye rolls, and crossed arms.
Design. The design was the same as Experiment 1.
Procedure. The same procedure as in Experiment 1 was
used. In order to explain the lack of uptake from the
speaker, participants were informed that the listener’s
microphone and camera had been disconnected to keep the
listener from being able to influence the speaker’s
description. Participants believed they were participating in
a study on how people describe the same person to friends
or strangers, and that in the current conversation used for the
stimuli in this experiment the speaker believed the other
individual was a stranger, but the participants were made

2413

aware that this listener actually knew the target being
described.
Coding. Coding the bias of the recalled descriptions was
conducted in the same manner as in Experiment 1. Coders’
independent judgments, r(70) = .59, p < .001, were resolved
jointly.

Results
Ratings. Participants believed that the addressee liked the
target more in the positive addressee response condition, M
= 4.83, SD = 1.29, than in the negative condition, M = 2.89,
SD = 1.55, MDiff = 1.94, t(68) = 5.70, p < .001, 95% CI
[1.26, 2.62]. The same pattern was found in the participants’
judgment of the speaker’s liking of the target, with
participants rating the speaker as liking the target more in
the positive addressee response condition, M = 5.43, SD =
1.20, than in the negative condition, M = 4.80, SD = 1.26,
MDiff = .63, t(68) = 2.15, p = .036, 95% CI [.04, 1.21].
Participants’ own rating was not quite more positive in the
positive addressee response condition, M = 4.46, SD = 1.40,
than in the negative condition, M = 3.89, SD = .96, MDiff =
.57, t(60.28) = 1.99, p = .051 (df adjusted for non-equal
variance, Levene’s F = 8.54, p = .005).
Judgment and Recall. Participants in the positive
condition judged the target as having a more positive
personality, as measured by the composite personality
judgment score, M = 34.9, SD = 5.5, compared to
participants in the negative condition, M = 30.1, SD = 6.6,
MDiff = 4.8, t(68) = 3.27, p = .002, 95% CI [1.9, 7.6].
Participants’ recalled descriptions were judged as being
more positive in the positive addressee response condition,
M = 1.08, SD = 1.8, than in the negative addressee response
condition, M = .06, SD = 2.4, MDiff = 1.02, t(68) = 2.02, p
= .047, 95% CI [.01, 2.04].

Discussion
Participants’ later memory of the content of the speaker’s
talk was biased in the direction of the addressee’s nonverbal
responses. Similarly, their judgment of the personality of the
target was biased to align with the stance displayed by the
addressee in the observed dialogue.
Addressee nonverbal backchannels alone, without the
possibility of speaker uptake, were enough to perceive the
addressee’s particular stance towards the target description.
As with Experiment 1, they also attributed differing stance
to the speaker across condition, with the speaker in the
negative addressee response condition viewed as having a
less favorable view of the person she was describing. Thus,
the current experiment replicated all of the effects of the
first, despite the reduction of the interactivity. This suggests
that the assumption of shared knowledge between addressee
and speaker can serve as the basis for a perceived shared
reality, and as such bias overhearer comprehension.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 2, while participants were aware that the
speaker could not see or hear the addressee, and so no
shared stance could be created through the interaction, they
were provided with information suggesting that both the
speaker and the addressee had shared knowledge: each
knew the target person being described. In Experiment 3,
speakers and addressees shared nothing. The speaker and
addressee could not establish a shared perspective through
the interaction (Experiment 1), nor could they be thought to
have shared prior knowledge (Experiment 2).

Method
Participants. 72 students from UC, Santa Cruz
participated in exchange for course credit.
Materials. The same stimuli from Experiment 2 were
used.
Design. The design was the same as for the prior
experiments.
Procedure. The same procedure as in Experiment 2 was
used. However, unlike Experiment 2, here participants were
informed that the addressee was a stranger, and that the
previous experiment from which the video stimuli were
collected required that the addressee not be able to influence
the speaker’s talk, and so their microphone and camera were
turned off.
Coding. Coding the bias of the recalled descriptions was
conducted in the same manner as in Experiment 1. Coders’
independent judgments, r(72) = .57, p < .001 , were
resolved jointly.

Results
Ratings. Participants believed that the addressee liked the
target more in the positive addressee response condition, M
= 4.30, SD = 1.08, than in the negative condition, M = 2.09,
SD = 1.20, MDiff = 2.12, t(70) = 8.25, p < .001, 95% CI
[1.68, 2.75]. Participants’ judgment of the speaker’s liking
of the target did not significantly differ across the positive
addressee response condition, M = 5.38, SD = 1.28, and the
negative condition, M = 5.0, SD = 1.43, MDiff = .38, t(70) =
1.18, p = .24. Participants own rating did not significantly
differ across the positive addressee response condition, M =
3.94, SD = 1.53, and the negative condition, M = 4.16, SD
= 1.38, MDiff = -.22, t(70) = -.64, p = .53.
Judgment and Recall. Composite personality judgment
scores for participants in the positive addressee response
condition, M = 30.8, SD = 7.1, were similar to those in the
negative addressee response condition, M = 30.4, SD = 6.5,
MDiff = .4, t(70) = .24, p = .81.
Participants’ recalled descriptions were judged as being
slightly more positive in the positive addressee response
condition, M = .76, SD = 3.0, than in the negative response
condition, M = .54, SD = 3.7, but this difference was not
statistically significant, MDiff = .22, t(70) = .27, p = .79.

2414

Discussion
Participants perceived the addressee’s nonverbal responses
as demonstrating his stance towards the content of the
speaker’s talk. Despite perceiving the backchannels as
indicative of the addressee’s opinion of the person being
described, there was no later bias in the recall and judgment
measures.
In contrast to Experiments 1 and 2, participants did not
rate the speaker as liking the friend she was describing
differently across conditions. The status of the addressee in
the present experiment is one of an unknowledgeable sideparticipant. The addressee in the observed dialogue was a
stranger, and so did not did not have knowledge equivalent
to that of the speaker, and the backchannel responses were
not available to the speaker, and so did not play a role in the
collaborative production of the talk.

General Discussion
We found evidence that listeners’ specific backchannels
affected how overhearers comprehended talk produced in
dialogue. By constraining the interactivity and the shared
knowledge between speaker and addressee, we showed that
backchannels do not simply act as cues for overhearer
comprehension. The pattern of findings suggests that third
party dialogue comprehension involves the detection of a
shared stance between the two overheard conversational
partners, with the addressee backchannels’ influencing later
memory only when there was evidence of a shared stance.
Future studies will be needed to further test the theory of
dialogue comprehension as listening to a shared perspective.
Other extensions would be an overhearing paradigm in
which active collaboration is present, but in which the two
interlocutors have contrasting perspectives and motivation
to maintain them, as in the case of an argument or
disagreement. In such a context, the backchannel responses
of one interlocutor clearly would not be indicative of a
shared perspective, and so would likely not influence how
the speaker’s talk is remembered. In addition, the effect may
work differently when overhears have their own opinions
about the topic under discussion. While the overhears in the
current experiments have no reason to have an opinion
about the speaker’s friend Katie, they may have an opinion
about the topic of a political debate and these opinions may
affect the phenomenon.

References
Bangerter, A., & Clark, H. H. (2003). Navigating joint
projects with dialogue. Cog. Sci., 27, 195-225.
Bavelas, J. B., Coates, L., & Johnson, T. (2000). Listeners
as co-narrators. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 79, 941-952.
Bell, A. (1984). Language style as audience design.
Language in Society, 13, 145-204.
Beukeboom, C. (2009). When words feel right: How
affective expressions of listeners change a speaker’s
language use. European J. of Soc. Psych., 39, 747-756.

Brennan, S. E., Galati, A., & Kuhlen, A. K. (2010). Two
minds, one dialog: Coordinating speaking and
understanding. Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
53, 301- 337.
Clark, H. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1982). Audience design in
meaning and reference. In: J. F. Leny & W. Kintch
(Eds.), Language and comprehension (pp. 287-299).
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. (1989). Contributing to
discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 229-259.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Cuc, A., Koppel, J., & Hirst, W. (2007). Silence is not
golden: A case for socially shared retrieval-induced
forgetting. Psychological Science, 18, 727-737.
Echterhoff, G., Higgins, E. T., & Groll, S. (2005).
Audience-tuning effects on memory: The role of shared
reality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
89, 257-276.
Higgins, E. T. (1992). Achieving “shared reality” in
communication game: A social action that creates
meaning. Journal of Language and Social Psychology,
11, 107-131.
Higgins, E. T., & Rholes, W. W. (1978). “Saying is
believing”: Effects of message modification on memory
and liking for the person described. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 14, 363-378.
Hirst, W., & Echterhoff, G. (2008). Creating shared
memories in conversation: Toward a psychology of
collective memory. Social Research, 75, 78-91.
Hirst, W., & Echterhoff, G. (2012). Remembering in
conversation: The social sharing and reshaping of
memories. Annual Review of Psychology, 63, 55-79.
Norrick, N. (2010). Incorporating listener evaluation into
stories. Narrative Inquiry, 20, 183-204.
Pasupathi, M., Stallworth, L. M., & Murdoch, K. (1998).
How what we tell becomes what we know: listener
effects on speakers’ long-term memory for events.
Discourse Processes, 26, 1-25.
Schober, M. F., & Clark, H. H., (1989). Understanding by
addressees and overhearers. Cognitive Psychology, 21,
211-232.
Sedikides, C. (1990). Effects of fortuitously activated
constructs versus activated communication goals on
person impressions. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 58, 397-408.
Todorov, A. (2002). Communication effects on memory and
judgment. European J. of Soc. Psych., 32, 531-546.
Tolins, J. & Fox Tree. J. E. (2014). Addressee Backchannels
Steer Narrative Development. Journal of Pragmatics,
70, 152-164.
Tolins, J. & Fox Tree, J. E. (in press). Overhearers use
addressee backchannels in dialogue comprehension.
Cognitive Science.
Wilkes-Gibbs, D., & Clark, H. H. (1992). Coordinating
beliefs in conversation. Journal of Memory and
Language, 31, 183-194.

2415

