Adults Track Multiple Hypotheses Simultaneously during Word Learning
Suzanne Aussems (s.aussems@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
University Road, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom

Paul Vogt (p.a.vogt@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University
P.O. Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, the Netherlands
Abstract

meanings could be inferred from cross-situational information. Based on their results, however, they argue that people
quickly propose one random hypothesis as to what the meaning of a target word is, and stick to this hypothesis as long
as possible. If in a new situation the hypothesized meaning
is no longer present, they propose another random hypothesis without any recollection of potential referents from previous situations, and this process is then repeated. Therefore,
Trueswell et al. (2013) refer to this propose-but-verify strategy as a fast mapping procedure rather than a gradual statistical one. As such, their study contradicts earlier studies that
pointed toward a XSL account for word learning.
We argue that a flaw in the experimental paradigm by
Trueswell and colleagues may have induced the propose-butverify strategy. In their experiments, as well as in many other
word learning experiments (e.g., Smith et al., 2011), participants are subjected to a forced-choice paradigm in which
they are instructed to click on the referent they think corresponds to a target word. As a consequence, participants have
to propose a word-referent mapping on first exposures to target words. However, under natural circumstances, humans
are not forced to decide on the meaning of a novel word on
its first encounter; they may consider multiple hypotheses until they have obtained sufficient information across situations
to make a decision. A possible solution for this problem is
to use a look-and-listen paradigm in which the participants’
gaze behavior provides an indication of their preference for
an object, or multiple objects, when they hear a target word
during the word learning procedure. Trueswell et al. (2013)
also measured the eye movements of adult learners, but we
suspect that the forced-choice paradigm they used on top
of the eye-tracking paradigm might have biased their learning behavior. A follow-up study by Koehne, Trueswell, and
Gleitman (2013) confirms our suspicion that a forced-choice
paradigm might affect the learning strategies people use, but
it remains unclear whether learners use a propose-but-verify
strategy or XSL. In order to further investigate this, we use
only a look-and-listen paradigm, which allows participants to
consider multiple hypotheses during the word learning procedure without making a forced choice.
Trueswell et al. (2013) argue that multiple-hypothesis
tracking may only occur under greatly simplified conditions
in which learners are exposed to long consecutive sequences
of learning instances for target words. However, Smith
et al. (2011) found that when learning instances for target

Cross-situational learning is a basic mechanism that enables
people to infer the correct referent for a novel word by tracking multiple hypotheses simultaneously across exposures. Previous research has shown that adults are capable of exploiting cross-situational information, but recently this gradual statistical learning mechanism has been put under debate by researchers who argue that people learn via a fast mapping procedure. We compared the performance of adult participants on
a word learning task in which information was manipulated
cross-situationally with the performance of simulated learning strategies. Experimental evidence indicates that adults use
cross-situational learning, which appears to be a robust mechanism that facilitates word learning even under cognitively demanding circumstances.
Keywords: Cross-situational learning; artificial word
learning; propose-but-verify strategy; fast mapping.

Introduction
When learning the meaning of novel words, a learner has to
deal with the indeterminacy of word meaning. Quine (1960)
introduced the example of the word gavagai uttered by a native speaker of Arunta upon seeing a rabbit. If an anthropologist wants to know the meaning of the word, he has to hypothesize about the correct referent for the word. It could mean
rabbit, furry, rabbit tail, or even something utterly different
than that. Quine (1960) noted that, for any given example,
there will be many hypotheses consistent with the meaning of
the word. The following question then arises: How do we infer the correct hypothesis about the meaning of a novel word?
Presumably, we could consider all possible mappings, examine multiple situations, and accept only those mappings consistent with all, or at least most, of the different situations encountered. This basic mechanism is called “cross-situational
learning” (Siskind, 1996).
Over the past few decades, researchers have shown that
adults can and, indeed, do learn novel words using crosssituational information (Gillette, Gleitman, Gleitman, & Lederer, 1999; Yu & Smith, 2007; Piccin & Waxman, 2007;
Smith, Smith, & Blythe, 2009, 2011). A cross-situational
learner collects information across exposures to infer the correct referent for a target word from multiple hypotheses simultaneously. Recently, cross-situational learning (henceforth XSL) has been put under debate by researchers who
believe that humans learn novel words using a propose-butverify strategy (Trueswell, Medina, Hafri, & Gleitman, 2013).
Trueswell et al. (2013) conducted an experiment in which
participants were repeatedly exposed to target words, whose

118

words were interleaved with learning instances for other target words, this only moderately affected learning success and
learning speed, suggesting that human learners were able to
use XSL even under these cognitively demanding circumstances. Taking into account these contrasting claims with
regard to the influence of cognitive load on word learning
strategies, we include a consecutive and interleaved condition
in our experiment.
We present adult participants with a limited number of
learning instances for each word to accentuate the differences
between the performances of the two learning strategies under consideration. As a limited number of learning instances
should lead to less successful learning with the propose-butverify strategy as opposed to XSL, this allows us to investigate the extent to which the word learning performance
of adult participants can be attributed to either one of these
strategies. At the same time, the learning task becomes more
difficult with a limited number of learning instances, especially with an interleaved presentation, which allows us to
say something about learning under cognitively demanding
circumstances. Using computer simulations, we set baseline measurements for different degrees of XSL and compare
these with the word learning performance of adult participants. We expect that learners use XSL, regardless of whether
they are presented with consecutive learning instances for
target words, or learning instances that are interleaved with
learning instances for other target words. Before presenting
our study, we provide some more background on the considered learning strategies.

Situation 1

Situation 2

Situation 3

Situation 4

Figure 1: Four situations that display novel objects for the
word timilo. Only the upper left object in Situation 1 is consistent across all situations. Stimuli are developed by Smith
et al. (2011).

Propose-But-Verify Learning
In the propose-but-verify strategy (Trueswell et al., 2013), the
learner will, in Situation 1, select one object at random as the
proposed referent. If this object is still present in Situation 2,
he will select it again. If not, he will propose another object
that is present in Situation 2. Trueswell et al. (2013) argue
that the learner does so without keeping track of previous exposures, so this alternative object is selected at random and
could well be the newly introduced object. This same procedure continues until the experiment stops. So, although after
four exposures a perfect cross-situational learner will have
inferred the correct mapping, the propose-but-very strategy
does not guarantee successful learning; not even after many
more exposures. However, the probability that the correct
mapping is learned increases with the number of exposures if
the target referent is consistently present in all situations.

Learning Strategies
Cross-Situational Learning
Figure 1 aids in explaining a XSL procedure. Suppose a
learner encounters the the word timilo for the first time. When
the utterance is accompanied by the objects in Situation 1, a
learner can hypothesize that each of these referents could refer to timilo. When the learner encounters the utterance again
in Situation 2, he can verify or falsify his previously proposed
hypotheses based on a change in the set of objects. One object
from Situation 1 does not occur in Situation 2, which he can
eliminate from the set of likely candidates for the target wordreferent mapping. Moreover, one of the objects in Situation
2 was not present in Situation 1, which he can perceive as
an unlikely candidate. When timilo is uttered in Situation 3,
the learner can observe that again one object from the previous two situations can be eliminated, which was replaced by a
new object that is unlikely to refer to the utterance since it was
not present before. Finally, the learner can repeat this process
in Situation 4 and eliminate the object that occurred in all previous situations, but not in this one. At this point, only the upper left object is consistent across all situations, making it the
only possible referent for the word timilo. Thus, the learner
can infer the correct word-referent mapping through a careful
process of simultaneously proposing and verifying multiple
hypotheses by eliminating referents across situations.

Baseline Measurements
Smith et al. (2009) suggest that in order to test if word learners do indeed use XSL, their performance should be compared with the performance of the best possible non-crosssituational learner. A baseline performance at chance-level,
which was used in the study by Yu and Smith (2007), would
not suffice because this baseline can be outperformed by another non-cross-situational learner; a learner that uses a single
one of the training exposures to reduce the set of potential referents on test trials. This so-called one-exposure learner does
not integrate information from multiple situations. In order
to demonstrate that humans use cross-situational information

119

for word learning, it must be demonstrated that they outperform the one-exposure learner.
With regard to more recent developments presented by
Trueswell et al. (2013), we argue that testing against a oneexposure learning baseline does not conclusively demonstrate
XSL, as Smith et al. (2009) proposed. Comparing the performance of participants with the performance of the oneexposure learner indeed demonstrates that participants integrate information across exposures, but not necessarily that
they track multiple hypotheses simultaneously to infer wordmeaning mappings, which is also a key characteristic of XSL.
To demonstrate that participants truly use XSL, we must also
show that they outperform the propose-but-verify learner by
Trueswell et al. (2013). As a single hypothesis-based strategy, the propose-but-verify strategy does not qualify as a
fully developed XSL strategy. Thus, comparing the learning performance of our participants with the performance of
a propose-but-verify learner provides a second baseline measurement for XSL performance; if this baseline is exceeded,
then participants must be tracking multiple hypotheses simultaneously to infer word-meaning mappings.

To create a visual stimuli set for the word learning procedure, nine sets of eight stimuli were randomly taken from the
set of 120 pictures of nonsense objects developed by Smith et
al. (2011). There was no overlap between sets to prevent participants from using mutual exclusivity (Markman & Wachtel, 1988). One target object was retrieved from each set and
labeled with one of the generated nonsense words. The remaining 63 stimuli served as distractor objects.
Five learning instances were created for each word. Crosssituational information was manipulated by replacing one of
the distractor objects systematically with on of the other distractor objects on each learning instance. This allowed for the
verification and falsification of potential word-referent mappings across learning instances.
In the consecutive block, full sets of five learning instances
for the target words were randomly displayed. In the interleaved block, all first learning instances for the four words
were randomly displayed, followed by all second, third,
fourth, and fifth learning instances. At the end of each block,
test trials were randomly displayed. During these test trials,
participants were presented with the unique set of eight potential referents for each word on a 2x4 display.

Method

Apparatus

Design

A SMI Vision RED 250 remote eye tracking system was used
for stimuli presentation and data collection. Stimuli were presented on a 22” computer screen via SMI Experiment Center
3.3 and simultaneously eye gaze data from the eye tracker
were collected via SMI iView X. Bright lights on both sides
of the computer screen provided optimal calibration.

We adapted the experiment of Smith et al. (2011) by reducing the number of training trials for each word from 12 to 5
and by monitoring performance using an eye-tracker instead
of a forced-choice paradigm. The experiment used a withinsubjects design in which the order of learning instances (consecutive versus interleaved) was counterbalanced across participants.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a soundproof booth
in the lab. The distance between the participants and the
computer screen was approximately 70 cm. The eye-tracker
was calibrated for each participant using a 9-point calibration. The experimenter validated if the estimation of the eye
position was indeed close to the known calibration points.
If errors occurred, the calibration session was repeated. After the experimenter left the booth, participants put on headphones and started the experiment. They were instructed via
the screen to try and map a target word to its correct referent,
with the hint that the correct referent was always displayed in
the context of the utterance. Note that participants were not
explicitly instructed to use a particular learning strategy.
Each participant completed a training and test phase for
one practice word, and subsequently, for a consecutive and
interleaved block of four words each. Participants either completed the consecutive block or the interleaved block first.
During training, participants were exposed to four objects for
5000 ms whilst they heard the utterance of a target word. Test
procedures for the consecutive and interleaved block followed
when training within a block finished. During testing, participants were presented with the unique set of objects for 8000
ms and they were specifically instructed to look at the object
that they thought corresponded to the uttered target word.

Participants
We collected data from 92 Dutch native speakers (47 females), all students in the Tilburg School of Humanities. Participants received course credit for participation. Ten participants were excluded from the analysis, because the eye
tracker did not record their eye movements properly. The final sample consisted of 82 participants (45 females) between
the age of 18 and 30 years old (M = 22.46, SD = 2.72).

Materials
In order to control for the potential role of sound symbolism,
syllables containing rounded and unrounded vowels following Dutch phonotactical rules were randomly concatenated
into nonsense words. This resulted in the following linguistic stimuli: toekie, boezie, noebee, voolee, wootie, nieloo,
wiepoe, veegoo, reezoo, which were randomly assigned to the
practice procedure, consecutive block, or interleaved block.
Audio samples of the words were generated using a Dutch
online text-to-speech generator1 . The length of the words was
controlled for by keeping the number of letters and syllables
the same.
1 http://www.fluency.nl/international.htm

120

Data Analysis

Our computer simulations were configured in the most
optimal manner: with perfect memory. The learning instances of the word learning procedure were manipulated
such that information could be integrated cross-situationally
to infer correct word-meaning mappings. Thus, simulating
XSL would lead to a perfect performance.

Eye movements of the participants were analyzed using an
Areas of Interest (AOI) approach. Equally-sized AOIs were
drawn around all objects on training and test trials by a human
coder. Participants’ calibrations were corrected manually using the software and procedure by Cozijn (2006).
Looking times for each object were normalized by calculating the percentage for the amount of time a participant
spent looking at each object on each trial. Learning speed
was monitored by measuring the time participants spent looking at target objects during training. Learning performance
was scored as the maximum number of words a participant
learned during the test procedures of the consecutive block
(range 0 to 4) and interleaved block (range 0 to 4). The object to which participants looked longer than 50% during each
test trial was accepted as the chosen referent.2 If this chosen
object indeed corresponded with the target word the wordreferent mapping was considered learned. The participants
were scored one point for each learned word. If the chosen
referent did not correspond with the played target word, or if
none of the looking times met the > 50% threshold, participants received zero points.

Results
Experimental Findings
Table 1 shows the frequency distributions for the number of
words learned in the consecutive and interleaved block of
learning instances, showing that the majority of participants
learned four words in the consecutive condition and three or
four words in the interleaved condition.
Table 1: Frequency distributions of the number of words participants learned in the consecutive and interleaved block of
the word learning procedure.
No. of words
0
1
2
3
4
Total

Simulations
We simulated distributions of 82 performance scores for each
discussed learning strategy; a number that corresponds to the
number of participants we included in our analyses.
First, the one-exposure learner by Smith et al. (2009) was
simulated by implementing the following algorithm:

Consecutive
1
1
10
22
48
82

No. of participants
%
Interleaved
1.2
1
1.2
13
12.2
22
26.8
22
58.6
24
100.0 82

%
1.2
15.9
26.8
26.8
29.3
100.0

A paired-samples t-test showed that participants learned
significantly more words in the consecutive block (M =
3.40, SD = 0.84) than in the interleaved block (M =
2.67, SD = 0.12), t(81) = 5.58, p < .001, r2 = .28.
An independent t-test showed that participants who were
presented with consecutive learning instances followed by interleaved learning instances (M = 6.18, SD = 1.63) did not
perform significantly better than participants who received a
reversed order of presentation modes (M = 6.00, SD = 1.53),
t(80) = 0.51, p = .618, r2 = .06.
Looking times for target objects during training were submitted to a 2 (presentation mode) x 4 (word) x 5 (learning instance) analysis of variance with a repeated-measures design.
Mauchly’s test showed that the assumption of sphericity had
been violated for the main effect of learning instance, χ2 (9) =
114.84, p < .001, and the interaction between presentation
mode and learning instance, χ2 (9) = 41.49, p < .001.3
Figure 2 shows the average amount of time participants
spent looking at target objects on sets of five learning instances in each condition. The ANOVA revealed a main effect of presentation mode on the amount of time participants
spent looking at target objects during training, F(1, 75) =
20.05, p < .001, η2p = .21. Participants spent more time
looking at target objects in the consecutive condition (M =

1. For each word, choose one of the training trials at random
and store the objects of these trials in memory.
2. Use the stored information on the testing trial by randomly
selecting a referent from the set of objects that appeared on
the stored training trial.
Second, the propose-but-verify account by Trueswell et al.
(2013) was modeled using a simple algorithm that can be described as follows:
1. For each word, start by choosing the referent at random
from the displayed context.
2. On any additional exposure to a word, remember the previous guess.
3. If the remembered guess is present in the current context
select the referent; otherwise select a referent at random
from the objects at display.
4. Select referents chosen on final training trials on test trials.
2 The

threshold of > 50% of the time spent looking at the object
of preference was chosen, because this percentage indicates that participants could not have spent more time looking at any of the other
objects. 13 out of 656 data points were corrected (1.98%).

3 Huynh-Feldt corrections resulted in the exact same F-ratio’s,
p-values, and explained variances. We reported the uncorrected degrees of freedom for the sake of convenience.

121

Table 2: Learning performance of the one-exposure learner
(Smith et al., 2009), propose-but-verify learner (Trueswell et
al., 2013), adult participants, and perfect XSL (Smith et al.,
2011).

Looking times in percentages (%)

70

60
Block
50

Consecutive
Interleaved

40

Consecutive Interleaved
M
SE
M
SE
One-exposure
0.93 .056 0.93 .056
Prose-but-verify 2.11 .097 2.11 .097
Participants
3.40 .093 2.67 .122
Perfect XSL
4.00
4.00
Note. N = 82 for participants and simulations.

30

1

2

3

4

one-exposure learner, t(133) = 22.73, p < .001, r2 = .79 and
the propose-but-verify learner, t(161) = 9.63, p < .001, r2 =
.36. A one-sample t-test showed that the participants performed significantly worse than a perfect cross-situational
learner, t(81) = −6.41, p < .001, d = 1.42.
When the learning performance on the interleaved condition was entered separately in the model, Levene’s test
showed that the assumption of homogeneity of variances had
been violated, F(2, 243) = 28.024, p < .001. Welch’s test
results showed a statistically significant main effect of the
type of strategy used on word learning performance with interleaved exposures, F(2, 154) = 220.63, p < .001, ω2 = .48.
Planned contrasts revealed that participants performed significantly better in the interleaved condition of the word learning
procedure than the one-exposure learner, t(138) = 13.02, p <
.001, r2 = .76 and the propose-but-verify learner, t(161) =
13.02, p < .001, r2 = .29. A one-sample t-test showed that
the participants performed significantly worse than a perfect
cross-situational learner, t(81) = −10.97, p < .001, d = 2.44.

5

Learning instance

Figure 2: Looking times for target objects on learning instances in the consecutive and interleaved conditions. Shade
represents standard error of the mean.
43.08, SE = .92) than in the interleaved condition (M =
37.71, SE = 1.03). The results also indicated a significant
interaction between presentation mode and learning instance,
on the amount of time participants spent looking at target objects on training trials, F(4, 300) = 30.37, p < .001, η2p = .29.
When learning instances were entered separately in
the model for each condition, the ANOVA revealed
no significant difference between first learning instances
(F(1, 78) = 2.48, p = .119, η2p = .03), second learning instances (F(1, 80) = 0.91, p = .343, η2p = .01) and third learning instances (F(1, 81) = 0.10, p = .753, η2p = .00). However,
there was a significant difference between fourth learning instances (F(1, 78) = 30.01, p < .001, η2p = .29) and fifth learning instances (F(1, 79) = 56.70, p < .001, η2p = .42), which
indicated that participants looked longer at target objects in
the consecutive condition than in the interleaved condition
during these learning instances.

Discussion
In this paper, we explore cross-situational word learning under different cognitive loads without using a forced-choice
paradigm. To this aim, we designed an experiment in which
we tracked participants’ eye movements – a method that has
proven adequate for studying this kind of learning behavior
(Yu & Smith, 2011). To obtain insights into the strategies
people use for word learning, we compared the experimental
results with simulations in which various learning strategies
were modeled.
In order to prove that our participants were collecting information from multiple exposures, we needed to show that
they outperform the one-exposure learning strategy proposed
by Smith et al. (2009). We confirm that our participants significantly outperformed the one-exposure learner, suggesting that they integrated information about potential wordreferent mappings cross-situationally. This outcome is in line
with Smith et al. (2009). In order to show that our participants were tracking multiple hypotheses simultaneously, we
needed to demonstrate that they outperform the propose-butverify learning strategy by Trueswell et al. (2013). Our par-

Comparisons with Simulations
Table 2 displays the simulated performances of the learning
strategies under consideration and the performance of adults
participants. Levene’s test indicated that the assumption of
homogeneity of variance had been violated for these data,
F(2, 243) = 8.032, p < .001. Therefore, we used Welch’s
adjusted F-ratio provided in the one-way ANOVA output
to test for differences between groups. There was a statistically significant main effect of the type of strategy used
on word learning performance with consecutive exposures,
F(2, 151) = 268.44, p < .001, ω2 = .68. Planned contrasts revealed that participants performed significantly better in the
consecutive condition of the word learning procedure than the

122

ticipants indeed learned significantly more words than the
propose-but-verify simulation. This finding is inconsistent
with Trueswell et al. (2013), who found that their participants learned target words using a propose-but-verify strategy in which they tracked only one hypothesis at a time. The
fact that our participants outperformed the propose-but-verify
learner indicates that participants integrated more information across situations than just information about one possible word-meaning mapping at a time. This result corresponds
with studies which show that adult learners do indeed infer
and track multiple hypotheses across situations (Gillette et
al., 1999; Piccin & Waxman, 2007; Yu & Smith, 2007; Smith
et al., 2009, 2011). Consistent with previous research, our
participants did not reach the performance level of a perfect
XSL account (Smith et al., 2011), suggesting that information
loss occurs across exposures. The fact that learning instances
were sometimes presented consecutively or interleaved with
learning instances for other words did not prevent participants from using XSL. Contrasting with what Trueswell et
al. (2013) suggest, XSL seems to be at play even when participants are presented with a limited number of learning instances that are interleaved with learning instances for other
words. However, participants learned slower and less effective in the interleaved condition than in the consecutive condition, presumably due to memory constraints.

gies (cf. Smith et al., 2011), but did not rule out the possibility
that some participants used a propose-but-verify strategy.
To conclude, our experiment demonstrates that adults track
multiple hypotheses simultaneously when they are not forced
to choose referents during word learning. They do so even
under cognitively demanding circumstances, but they learn
faster and more effectively when learning instances for target
words are displayed consecutively than when they are interleaved with learning instances for other words.

Acknowledgments
Our gratitude goes to Kenny Smith, Andrew Smith, and
Richard Blythe for making their stimuli set available to us
and to Rein Cozijn for his invaluable advice on this study.

References
Cozijn, R. (2006). Het gebruik van oogbewegingen in leesonderzoek. Tijdschrift voor taalbeheersing, 28(3), 220-232.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, L., Gleitman, H., & Lederer, A. (1999).
Human simulations of vocabulary learning. Cognition,
73(2), 135-176.
Koehne, J., Trueswell, J., & Gleitman, L. (2013). Multiple Proposal Memory in Observational Word Learning. In
M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (p. 805-810). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Markman, E., & Wachtel, G. (1988). Children’s use of mutual
exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words. Cognitive
Psychology, 20(2), 121-157.
Piccin, T., & Waxman, S. (2007). Why nouns trump verbs in
word learning: New evidence from children and adults in
the human simulation paradigm. Language Learning and
Development, 3(4), 295-323.
Quine, W. (1960). Word and object. The MIT Press.
Siskind, J. (1996). A computational study of cross-situational
techniques for learning word-to-meaning mappings. Cognition, 61(1-2), 39-1.
Smith, K., Smith, A., & Blythe, R. (2009). Reconsidering
human cross-situational learning capacities: A revision to
Yu & Smith’s (2007) experimental paradigm. In N. Taatgen
& H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 2711-2716).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Smith, K., Smith, A., & Blythe, R. (2011). Cross-situational
learning: an experimental study of word-learning mechanisms. Cognitive Science, 35(3), 480-498.
Trueswell, J., Medina, T., Hafri, A., & Gleitman, L. (2013).
Propose but verify: Fast mapping meets cross-situational
word learning. Cognitive Psychology, 66(1), 126-156.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. (2007). Rapid word learning under uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological Science, 18(5), 414-420.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. (2011). What you learn is what you see:
using eye movements to study infant cross-situational word
learning. Developmental Science, 14(2), 165-180.

Whereas Trueswell et al. (2013) and Smith et al. (2011)
used a forced-choice paradigm (i.e. participants were told to
click on one of the referents on each exposure), learners usually also have the option not to select a referent on first exposures to target words. Participants were required to propose
a potential word-meaning mapping in situations where they
would not naturally select a referent due to high uncertainty.
We believe that this paradigm might have biased the learning
behavior of Trueswell et al.’s participants, and consequently
may have induced a propose-but-verify strategy. In our lookand-listen paradigm, the preference for a referent, or multiple
referents, was measured indirectly through gaze behavior, relieving participants of making a decision on first exposures to
target words. The findings demonstrate that -on average- our
participants reached a performance that suggests they track
multiple hypotheses simultaneously.
Koehne et al. (2013) reported that their participants memorized more than one potential meaning for a target word, unlike a strict propose-but-verify theory would predict. As participants mostly memorized objects they had proposed during
training, they interpret their findings in the light of a multipleproposal account for word learning. However, in half of
the conditions participants selected objects that occurred frequently from early on in the experiment above chance-level
on test trials, which we believe is consistent with a XSL account for word learning. In order to distinct between (weakened forms of) XSL and propose-but-verify, a deeper analysis of gaze behavior during the word learning procedure is
required. Preliminary results of such an analysis suggest that
the majority of our participants used a variety of XSL strate-

123

