Analogical comparison aids false belief understanding in preschoolers
Christian Hoyos (choyos@u.northwestern.edu)
William S. Horton (whorton@northwestern.edu
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

desires, beliefs, emotions) suggests that false belief
understanding is part of a stable developmental trajectory of
increasingly sophisticated reasoning about mental states
(Wellman & Liu, 2004). Thus, it appears that children’s
performance on false belief tasks is a good indication of a
conceptual understanding of others’ mental states.

Abstract
Analogical comparison has been found to promote learning
across many conceptual domains. Here, we ask whether this
mechanism can facilitate children’s understanding of others’
mental states. In Experiment 1, children carried out
comparisons between characters’ thoughts and reality and
between characters with true beliefs vs. those with false
beliefs. Children given this training improved from pre- to
post-test. In Experiment 2, we used a more minimal
comparison technique. Children saw a series of three stories
involving true or false beliefs. There were two betweensubjects conditions that either facilitated (High Alignability)
or impeded (Low Alignability) comparison across stories. We
found that children made more gains from pre- to post-test in
the High Alignability condition than in the Low Alignability
condition. We also found effects of production of mental state
verbs, as assessed in an Elicitation Task. These results
provide evidence for the role of analogical comparison in
theory of mind development.

Approaches to ToM Development
What happens between 3 and 5 years of age that allows
children to understand others’ mental states? Several
answers to this question have been proposed. One proposal
emphasizes the link between ToM and executive function
(Perner & Lang, 1999). Another proposal (“theory-theory”)
emphasizes changes in children’s theories, while a third
proposal emphasizes the role of language. Here, we focus
on the latter two approaches to ToM development.
Under the theory-theory approach, children undergo a
revision of their folk psychological theories between 3 and 5
years of age that allows them to consider false beliefs
(Gopnik & Wellman, 1994). Here, theory refers to
interconnected concepts in the child’s mind that can be used
to form predictions or expectations about the environment.
When children are confronted with evidence that contradicts
or cannot be explained by their current theory, they resolve
the conflict by revising these theories to account for the new
evidence. Theory-change is thus an experience-dependent
process.
Research on the influence of language on ToM has
examined several aspects of linguistic knowledge and
experience, including acquiring sentential complement
syntax (de Villiers & Pyers, 2002), acquiring mental state
verbs, and exposure to discourse (Lohmann & Tomasello,
2003). Lohmann and Tomasello (2003) developed a training
study in which they found that discourse and sentential
complement syntax on their own improved false belief
understanding. However, the greatest gains in performance
occurred in a condition that provided children with a
combination of discourse, sentential complement syntax,
and mental state verbs. A meta-analysis also indicated that
multiple elements of language contribute to false belief
understanding (Milligan, Astington, & Dack, 2007). On this
evidence, language provides an important set of tools
through which children can consider others’ perspectives.
In sum, theory-theory emphasizes the importance of
learning from experiences, but does not explain how
children arrive at meaningful insights from those

Keywords: analogy; comparison; theory of mind; false
belief; cognitive development; social cognition

Background
Theory of mind (ToM) refers to the ability to reason about
the mental states of others and oneself, including desires,
beliefs, emotions, intentions, and knowledge. Understanding
how children arrive at this ability has been a central topic
within cognitive science for decades. The aim of this paper
is to elucidate the cognitive processes that contribute to this
development. Specifically, we propose that analogical
comparison processes contribute to ToM development. We
describe two experiments that provide evidence for this
claim.
In our research, we test children on a set of standard ToM
tasks, then expose them to comparison-based training, and
then test them on new versions of the ToM tasks. We chose
a set of false belief tasks as the pre- and post-tests because
false belief understanding is considered the litmus test for
measuring children’s ToM. The ability to pass false belief
tasks is taken as an indication that children are acquiring a
representational understanding of mind (Perner, 1991).
Although some recent research suggests that some aspects
of false belief understanding emerge very early (Leslie,
1987; see Baillargeon, Scott, & He, 2010 for a review),
there is considerable evidence that substantial gains in ToM
occur between 3 and 5 years of age (Wellman, Cross, &
Watson, 2001). Further, a comparison of different ToM
tasks tapping into different types of mental states (e.g.,

944

experiences. And while the language account is also
compelling, it does not specify how children combine
language with their experiences in the world to produce
false belief understanding. We propose that analogical
comparison processes can help fill in these gaps. In the
experiments reported here, we designed specific training
experiences designed to facilitate key analogical
comparisons and thereby provide children with a stronger
grasp of mental states.
Analogical comparison has been shown to be a powerful
learning process that can reveal similarities and differences
between entities, give rise to new inferences, and uncover
deep relational structure (Christie & Gentner, 2010; Doumas
& Hummel, 2013; Gentner, 1983, 2010; Gentner &
Markman, 1997; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989). One reason to
think that analogical processes can promote ToM is that
false belief understanding depends on understanding key
similarities and distinctions between representations. For
instance, children must acknowledge that one’s mental
contents may differ from reality, and that two people may
hold different mental states concerning the same experience.
Beyond identifying important commonalities and
differences, engaging in analogical comparison may give
rise to abstract relational structures that provide the child
with a more general understanding of beliefs.
The proposal that analogical processes can aid in ToM
development has been made before (Baldwin & Saylor,
2005; San Juan & Astington, 2012; Bach, 2014; Pham,
Bonawitz, & Gopnik, 2012). However, empirical evidence
on these claims is lacking. Our goal here is to test whether
analogical processes can foster children’s ToM
understanding.

had nothing to do with mental states. If mental comparisons
provide children with relational knowledge about mental
states, children should make gains solely in the Compare
Thoughts condition.
Wellman and Liu (2004) reported that the average age of
children failing the false belief task was about 4 years 6
months and the average age of children passing this task
was about 4 years 11 months. We thus focused on the 4;6to-5;0 age range since it is an age at which children may be
especially ready to gain insight about mental states. In
addition, given previous work showing possible gender
differences in ToM tasks (Charman, Ruffman, & Clements,
2002), we will also compare performance between males
and females.

Methods
Participants One hundred ten 4.5- to 5-year-olds from the
greater Evanston/Chicago area participated. The racial and
economic composition of the sample reflected those of the
local population, with the majority coming from European
American, middle- and upper-middle-class families.
Children received small gift for their participation.
Nine children were excluded for not finishing the
experiment, lack of engagement during experiment, or not
understanding English. Another eighteen children (18%)
were excluded for ceiling performance in the Pretest. A total
of eighty-three children were included in the subsequent
analyses (40 females, mean age 4 years 8 months).
Materials The false belief tests were displayed on a laptop.
Simplified images of characters and events were displayed
in semi-animated fashion using PowerPoint.
Procedure The experiment was run at Northwestern
University or at the child’s preschool. Children first
completed the diverse desires task (Wellman & Woolley,
1990; Repacholi & Gopnik, 1997)—an easy task for 4-yearolds. Then children completed the Pretest, comprised of
three different false-belief tasks. These included the change
of location task (Wimmer & Perner, 1983; Baron-Cohen,
Leslie, & Frith, 1985), the unexpected contents task (Perner
et al., 1987), and a verbal false belief task (Wellman &
Bartsch, 1989; Siegal & Beattie, 1991). In all tasks, children
had to answer both a target and memory question correctly
in order to pass each task. For instance, in the change of
location task, children were asked where the character will
look for a given object, and where the object actually is.
Following the Pretest, children were given brief training
on thought bubbles, adapted from Wellman, Hollander, and
Schult (1996). All children received thought-bubbles
training, regardless of condition; however, only children in
the experimental condition (Compare Thoughts) saw
thought bubbles during subsequent training. No thought
bubbles were used in the Pretest and Posttest.
After the thought bubbles training, children were
randomly assigned to one of three training conditions:
Compare Thoughts, Compare Items, or Baseline. In the
Compare Thoughts condition, children saw two boxes and
two characters involved in an unexpected contents situation.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we developed a training procedure using
comparative questioning to examine whether analogical
comparison may aid children’s understanding of false
beliefs. During this training procedure, we modified the
unexpected contents task (Perner, Leekam, & Wimmer,
1987) to allow for a comparison between characters who
held true and false beliefs. Characters’ thoughts were
displayed in thought bubbles so as to facilitate children’s
comparisons across entities. Our hypothesis is that with this
type of explicit comparative questioning, differences
between characters’ mental states and between mental states
and reality will become more apparent, allowing children to
then generalize from these instances to other situations.
Because this was a novel training approach, whether
children could make gains in false belief tasks in a single
session was unclear. Thus, as a first pass, we developed a
very strong intervention, as described below. There were
three conditions: the key Compare Thoughts condition and
two control conditions. In the Baseline condition, children
received no intervening training between pretest and
posttest. In the second control condition (the Compare
Items condition), children answered comparative questions
(as in the key experimental condition), but these questions

945

In the classic version of the task, children are shown a box
that appears to contain one thing but contains something
different. After the child is shown the box’s true contents,
they are introduced to a character who has never seen inside
the box, and asked what the character thinks is inside the
box. Young children often incorrectly answer that the
character will already know what the box contains. In our
version, thought bubbles displayed what the character
thought was inside the box. This allowed us to ask children
to compare mental states as well as states of the world.
Children initially saw two cereal boxes, which opened to
reveal that one contained cereal and the other did not. Then
the boxes were closed and two characters were introduced.
Thought bubbles showed that each character thought his box
contained cereal (see Figure 1). The child was asked to
directly compare the characters’ mental states: “Are Jay and
Luke thinking the same or different?” Then they were asked
to contrast the actual contents of the boxes: “Do the boxes
contain the same or different things?” Next, the contents of
the boxes were revealed to the characters. For each
character, we asked: “Was he thinking the same or different
than what was inside the box?” This question was intended
to prompt the child to compare mental states with reality—
revealing either a true belief or a false belief. Nearly all
children answered these questions correctly.
After this, children were presented with a new unexpected
contents scenario, parallel to the first scenario but with new
boxes, contents and characters. The same sequence of
questions was repeated for this scenario. After this second
scenario was completed, the two scenes—each with its own
boxes and its own characters—were shown simultaneously,
and children were asked to identify what was the same
between the two stories: “Remember these two stories? Can
you tell me what’s the same between these two stories?”
The goal was to promote structural alignment between the
situations and thereby foster noticing the common relations.
The Compare Items condition was designed to test
whether any gains in the experimental condition could be
due to comparison itself. In this condition, for example,
children were shown two characters, each of whom had
brought various items to a picnic. The child was asked to
make comparisons between the items. This training
procedure had a similar number of comparison questions to
the Compare Thoughts condition.
The Baseline condition had no intervening task between
the Pretest and Posttest; children went directly from the
thought-bubbles training procedure to the Posttest.
We predicted that children who made comparisons
between mental states and reality and between characters’
mental states in the Compare Thoughts condition would
make more gains from Pretest to Posttest than children in
either the Compare Items or Baseline conditions.

children with perfect Pretest scores were excluded, the
difference scores could theoretically range from -2 to 3;
however, the actual range of scores was from -1 to 3.
An ANOVA with difference score as the dependent
variable and condition and gender as between-subjects
factors showed a significant main effect of condition,
F(2,77) = 5.30, p < .01, η2 = .10. Planned comparisons
indicated that children in the Compare Thoughts condition
(M = .75, SD = 1.00) made more gains in false belief
understanding than children in either the Compare Items
condition (M = .19, SD = .68, p < .01) or the Baseline
condition (M = .25, SD = .70, p < .01). We then compared
these means to zero. We found that the mean gain in the
Compare Thoughts condition was significantly greater than
zero, t(27) = 3.95, p = .001, whereas the gains in the
Compare Items and Baseline were not reliably greater than
zero, t(26) = 1.41, n.s., t(27) = 1.89, n.s.
Interestingly, there was also a significant main effect of
gender, F(1,77) = 11.13, p = .001, η2 = .11. Across
condition, females (M = .675, SD = 1.00) made more gains
from Pretest to Posttest than males (M = .14, SD = .56, p =
.001). There was also a marginal interaction between
condition and gender, F(2,77) = 2.93, p = .06, η2 = .06.
Bonferroni post hoc tests showed that females made more
gains in the Compare Thoughts condition (M = 1.31, SD =
1.11) than in the Compare Items condition (M = .46, SD =
.78, p < .05) and the Baseline condition (M = .29, SD = .83,
p < .01). Males did not differ in their performance across the
three conditions; surprisingly, they showed no significant
gains in performance in any condition, all n.s.
Children made significant gains from Pretest to Posttest
after making mental state comparisons. These results
provide evidence that comparison between and among
thoughts and states of the world can help children
understand others’ mental states.

Experiment 2
Although the results of Experiment 1 provide support for
the hypothesis that analogical comparison can facilitate
false belief understanding, it left some open questions. First,
the Compare Thoughts condition was extremely rich.
Children compared mental states to states of the world,
mental states to other mental states, and whole situations
involving true and false mental states to each other. Clearly,
this level of intensive comparisons is not likely to happen in
real life. In Experiment 2, we aimed for a more naturalistic
experience. We showed children one true/false belief story

Results and Discussion
A difference score was calculated for each child, subtracting
the number of tasks the child passed in the Pretest from the
number of tasks they passed in the Posttest. Because

946

at a time, but varied how easy they were to compare. The
prediction is that children will gain insight when
comparison across the stories is easy. This approach better
matches real life experience, in which children can and do
spontaneously compare across similar instances if they are
not too distant in time.
Another concern is that children in the Compare Thoughts
training received more exposure to mental states than those
in the other conditions. In Experiment 2, we equated
exposure to thought-bubbles and mental state depictions.
We varied only the ease with which children could compare
across instances. If we see more gains when comparison
across instances is facilitated, this will provide evidence that
comparison can support false belief understanding.
Finally, to test the possibility that gains in this task could
also be related to children’s command of mental state
language, we included a story-telling task in which we
measured children’s production of mental state verbs. We
predicted that children who produced mental state verbs
would benefit more from training than those who did not.
In Experiment 2, we again used a Pretest-TrainingPosttest structure. The training was again focused on the
unexpected contents task. Our goal was to increase
children’s sensitivity to the match (or nonmatch) between
mental expectations and reality. To do so, we adapted
Loewenstein and Heath’s (2009) repetition-break pattern, in
which two parallel (and readily alignable) situations are
presented sequentially, followed by another (alignable)
situation that differs in an important way. The idea is that
the alignment between the first two situations renders their
common structure salient, so that the learner readily notices
the change in the last scenario.
In our procedure, children saw a series of three stories. In
each story, a character looked at a box—for example, a
crayon box—and a thought bubble appeared with the
character’s belief about its contents (e.g., crayons). Then the
contents of the box were revealed. In the first two stories,
the character’s guess was correct (True Belief; TB). In the
third story, the character’s belief was shown to be incorrect
(False Belief; FB). If children can align the first two stories,
the contrast between TB and FB should stand out.
There were two conditions that varied the predicted ease
of alignment across the stories. In the High Alignability
(HA) condition, the three stories were similar in characters
and objects; this should facilitate aligning the two stories
and noting their common structure. The Low Alignability
(LA) condition showed the same sequence (two TB and then
a FB story), but the characters and objects differed across
the stories, making it harder for children to align the stories.
Thus, we predicted that children in the HA condition would
show more gains than those in the LA condition.
In addition to equating exposure to mental states, this
simpler method was intended to reduce demands on
attention. For each scenario, children attended to a single
character and container, and there were fewer questions.
Because the procedure was less demanding, we extended the
age range to the whole 4-5 period.

Methods
Participants A total of 137 4- to 5-year-olds were recruited
from the greater Evanston/Chicago area. The demographic
make-up was similar to that of Experiment 1.
Seven children were excluded for bringing a distracting
toy into the testing area, not answering questions during the
study, or experimenter error. Another 50 children were
excluded for ceiling performance in the Pretest (38%). A
total of 80 children were included in the subsequent
analyses (38 females, mean age 4 years 6 months).
Materials The false belief Pretest and Posttest were
identical to those of Experiment 1, except that we included
an extra task: a story-telling task in which two brothers
engaged in deception. This was used to measure children’s
production of mental state words.
Procedure The overall procedure was similar to that of
Experiment 1. After completing the diverse desires warmup
task, children completed the story-telling task. Their
utterances were transcribed and we coded whether children
used mental state verbs to describe the scenes.
Following the story-telling task, all children completed
the Pretest, followed by the thought bubbles training
procedure. Then children were randomly assigned to either
the HA or the LA condition. In both conditions, children
saw three stories presented sequentially: two TB stories
followed by a FB story. Specifically, the first two stories
showed ‘expected contents’ situations; the third showed the
classic ‘unexpected contents’ situation.
In each of the three stories, children saw a box with
obvious contents (such as crayons) and a character who had
not yet seen inside the box. A thought bubble appeared,
depicting the character’s belief about the contents of the
box. Then we revealed the contents of the box. The child
was then asked “Was she right?”—that is, did the
character’s thought bubble match reality. The child’s answer
was confirmed by the experimenter, and then they moved
onto the next story. The idea was to elicit a comparison
between the character’s mental belief and the true contents
of the box. The first two stories depicted TB, the characters’
predictions were right. The third story depicted an FB: the
character’s prediction was wrong. The idea was that if the
child had successfully aligned the first two TB scenarios,
then the contrast with the FB scenario in the third story
should be highly salient.
We manipulated the alignability of the stories in two
ways: (1) the characters and objects were highly similar in
the HA condition and much less similar in the LA condition;
(2) the same mental verb “think” was used to describe each
story in the HA condition; in the LA condition, “think” was
used in stories 1 and 3 and “believe” was used in story 2.
These dissimilarities were predicted to make alignment
more difficult in the LA condition. Thus we predicted that
the HA group would be more likely to align the first two
stories and extract their common relational structure, and
therefore to notice the difference between TB and FB.

947

was easy (HA condition), children made more gains in false
belief understanding than when it was difficult (LA). These
large difference in gains is noteworthy, given that the two
groups received the same kinds of stores in the same order,
varying only in the similarity of characters and objects.
Interestingly, children who produced mental state verbs in
the story task made gains in both conditions, whereas those
who did not made gains only when comparison was easy
(HA). This suggests that greater knowledge of mental states
(as indexed, and, possibly, abetted by production of mental
state language) may facilitate analogical comparison across
mental state scenarios. Such an effect would be consistent
with previous findings. Evidence suggests that less
sophisticated learners (in this case, children who did not
produce mental state language) require closely aligned
situations in order to benefit from comparison; but with
increasing domain knowledge (here, producing mental state
language) learners can align relationally similar situations
even when the situations lack concrete similarity (Gentner,
2010; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). Thus, children who
grasp these verbs may be in a better position to notice
relational similarities across instances and extract
underlying regularities about beliefs.
The findings also suggest possible effects of gender in the
ability to gain from these experiences. In Experiment 1,
only females showed specific gains from the Compare
Thoughts training. In Experiment 2, there was a suggestion
that females gained from both high- and low-alignability
comparison, while males required high-alignability
comparisons. Gender differences in mental state
understanding have been reported in prior work (Charman et
al., 2002). Future work should clarify the nature and extent
of these differences.
How might these kinds of analogical processes influence
children’s ToM development in everyday life? We believe
that the training in Experiment 2 simulated events that
children are likely to encounter. Children spontaneously
compare between similar situations in their everyday
experience. We suspect that this is particularly likely when
similar language is used across them. Evidence suggests that
common language invites comparison (Gentner & Namy,
1999). For instance, when children hear the same mental
state verb used across different situations, they may seek
commonalities across those situations (Baldwin & Saylor,
2005). Children from the age of 2 are capable of producing
contrastive statements that explicitly compare mental states
(Bartsch & Wellman, 1995), such as “You like it, but I don’t
like it.”—suggesting that children compare at least some
aspects of mental states even at an early age.
Of course, thought bubbles do not exist in the real world.
Nonetheless, children can infer some aspects of mental
states through the language and affective reactions of the
people around them. And as children learn mental state
verbs, they should make gains in the ability to track and
compare other’s mental states.
In sum, we propose that analogical comparison processes
operating over social experiences are instrumental in

Results & Discussion
A difference score (gain) was calculated for each child,
subtracting the number of FB tasks passed in the Pretest
from the number of FB tasks passed in the Posttest. These
scores ranged from -2 to 3. For the story-telling task, we
measured whether children produced a single mental state
verb (want, believe, or know).
An ANOVA with gain as the dependent variable and
condition, gender, and mental state language as betweensubjects factors revealed a main effect of condition, F(1,72)
= 3.50, p = .03, η2 = .05. Bonferroni post-hoc tests indicated
that children in the HA condition (M = .75, SD = .84) made
more gains from Pretest to Posttest than children in the LA
condition (M = .29, SD = .93). We also compared these
means to zero. We found that the gains in both the HA and
LA conditions were significantly above zero, t(39) = 5.65, p
< .001, t(40) = 2.02, p = .05, respectively.
We did not find a significant difference in gains between
children who produced mental state language and those that
didn’t, F(1,72) = 2.31, p = .13, η2 = .03, nor was there a
significant interaction between condition and mental state
language, F(1,72) = 1.68, p = .20, η2 = .02. However, when
we compared these means to zero, we found an effect in the
LA condition: only children who produced mental state
language made significant gains (M = .60, SD = .68), t(19) =
3.94, p = .001. Children in the LA condition who did not
produce mental state language did not make gains (M = 0,
SD = 1.05), t(20) = 0.00, p = 1.00. This difference did not
hold for the HA condition, who showed significant gains
whether they produced (M = .77, SD = .90) or did not
produce (M = .73, SD = .83) mental state language.
Controlling for language, we found a marginal interaction
between gender and condition, F(1,72) = 2.13, p = .09, η2 =
.03. Bonferroni post hoc tests revealed that while females
made similar gains in both the HA and LA conditions,
males made more gains from the HA condition than the LA
condition (p < .01).
As predicted, we found that children made more gains
from the HA condition than the LA condition. It appears
that sequential comparison of alignable situations can
increase children’s insight into mental states.

General Discussion
Theories of ToM development have not typically considered
analogical processes as important to children’s developing
understanding of others’ minds. Here we provide evidence
that these processes can be a route to understanding mental
states. In Experiment 1, asking children to explicitly
compare across mental states and between mental states and
states of the world allowed them to see what was similar or
different between these elements across different characters.
Children who received this training showed gains on false
belief tasks. In Experiment 2, we used a more naturalistic
procedure. Both groups of children received three stories
depicting mental states (TB, TB, and FB). But we varied
how easy it was for children to compare across instances by
varying their alignability. When comparison across stories

948

children’s understanding of mental states and their relation
to the factual world.

Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Leslie, A.M. (1987). Pretense and representation: Origins of
“theory of mind.” Psychological Review, 94, 412-426.
Loewenstein, J., & Heath, C. (2009). The Repetition-Break
plot structure: A cognitive influence on selection in the
marketplace of ideas. Cognitive Science, 33, 1-19.
Lohmann, H., & Tomasello, M. (2003). The role of
language in the development of false belief
understanding. Child Development, 74(4), 1130 – 1144.
Milligan, K., Astington, J. W., & Dack, L. A. (2007).
Language and theory of mind: Meta-analysis of the
relation between language ability and false-belief
understanding. Child Development, 78(2), 622 – 646.
Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Perner, J., & Lang, B. (1999). Development of theory of
mind and executive control. TiCS, 3(9), 337 – 344.
Perner, J., Leekam, S. R., & Wimmer, H. (1987). Threeyear-olds’ difficulty with false belief: The case for a
conceptual deficit. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 5(2), 125 – 137.
Pham, K., Bonawitz, E., & Gopnik, A. (2012). Seeing who
sees: Contrastive access helps children reason about other
minds. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2180 – 2185). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early reasoning
about desires: Evidence from 14- and 18-montholds. Developmental Psychology, 33, 12–21.
San Juan, V., & Astington, J. W. (2012). Bridging the gap
between implicit and explicit understanding: How
language development promotes the processing and
representation of false belief. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 30, 105 – 122.
Siegal, M., & Beattie, K. (1991). Where to look first for
children’s knowledge of false beliefs. Cognition, 38,1-12.
Wellman, H. M., & Bartsch, K. (1989). 3-year-olds
understand belief. Cognition, 33, 321–326.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). A metaanalysis of theory of mind development: The truth about
false belief. Child Development, 72, 655 – 684.
Wellman, H. M., Hollander, M., & Schult, C. A. (1996).
Young children’s understanding of thought-bubbles and
of thoughts. Child Development, 67, 768-788.
Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2004). Scaling of theory of
mind tasks. Child Development, 75, 523 – 541.
Wellman, H. M., & Woolley, J. D. (1990). From simple
desires to ordinary beliefs: The early development of
everyday psychology. Cognition, 35, 245–275.
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children’s understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13, 103 – 128.

Acknowledgments
We thank the children, families, and preschools who
participated, and the Cognitive Modeling Group and the
Cognition and Language Lab for comments on this work.
This research was supported by an NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship DGE-0824162 to C. Hoyos, and an ONR
N00014-08-1-0 grant to D. Gentner.

References
Bach, T. (2014). A unified account of general learning
mechanisms and theory of mind development. Mind and
Language, 29(3), 351 – 381.
Baldwin, D. A., & Saylor, M. (2005). Language promotes
structural alignment in the acquisition of mentalistic
concepts. In J. Astington & J. Baird (Eds.) Why language
matters for theory of mind (pp. 123-143). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A.M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the
autistic child have a ‘theory of mind’? Cognition, 21, 3746.
Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. M. (1995). Children talk about
the mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., & He, Z. (2010). False-belief
understanding in infants. TiCS, 14(3), 110 – 118.
Charman, T., Ruffman, T., & Clements, W. (2002). Is there
a gender difference in false belief development? Social
Development, 11(1), 1 – 10.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural alignment.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11(3), 356-373.
de Villiers, J. G., & Pyers, J. E. (2002). Complements to
cognition: A longitudinal study of the relationship
between complex syntax and false-belief understanding.
Cognitive Development, 17, 1037 – 1060.
Doumas, L. A. A., & Hummel, J. E. (2013). Comparison
and mapping facilitate relation discovery and predication.
PLOS One, 8(6), e63889.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155 – 170.
Gentner, D. (2010). Boostrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34(5),
752 – 775.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. (1994). The theory theory. In L.
Hirschfeld & S. Gelman (Eds.), Domain specificity in
culture and cognition. NY: Cambridge University Press.
Holyoak, K., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13(3), 295-355.

949

