Behavioral Dynamics of a Collision Avoidance Task:
How Asymmetry Stabilizes Performance
Brian A. Eiler (eilerbn@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Rachel W. Kallen (rachel.kallen@ uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Steven J. Harrison (steven.j.harrison@gmail.com)
School of Health, Physical Education and Recreation, University of Nebraska Omaha, NE, USA

Elliot Saltzman (esaltz@bu.edu)
Department of Physical Therapy and Athletic Training, Sargent College of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences,
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
Haskins Laboratories, 300 George St., New Haven CT, 06511 USA.

Richard C. Schmidt (rschmidt@holycross.edu)
Department of Psychology, College of the Holy Cross, Worchester, MA, USA.

Michael J. Richardson (richamo@ucmail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA
Abstract

which co-actors are able to develop shared task goals and
intentions (e.g. Coey, Varlet & Richardson, 2012; Marsh,
Richardson & Schmidt, 2009). Furthermore, the stability of
motor coordination influences rapport and social
cooperation (Hove & Risen, 2009), perceived group
differences (Miles, Griffiths, Richardson & Macrae, 2011),
and is also related to the social cognitive deficits associated
with autism (Fitzpatrick, Diorio, Richardson & Schmidt,
2013).
Given the importance of understanding the dynamics of
social motor coordination, it is perhaps surprising that the
majority of the existing research has only investigated the
presence of these dynamic processes in tasks that involve
co-actors coordinating stereotyped or non-functionally
directed oscillatory limb or body movements such as
finger/forearm oscillations, pendulum swinging, and
rocking chairs (e.g., Richardson, Marsh, Isenhower,
Goodman & Schmidt, 2007; Schmidt & O’Brien, 1997).
The significance of this research is that it demonstrates that
the rhythmic movements of informationally coupled
individuals are constrained to inphase (a stable 0° relative
phase relation) and antiphase (a stable 180° relative phase
relation) patterns of behavioral synchrony, and can be
understood and modeled using the same coupled oscillator
dynamic known to underlie intrapersonal interlimb
coordination (Schmidt & Richardson, 2008 for a review).
Yet, joint actions often require that individuals take on
different action roles, with the spatiotemporal patterning of

The current project examined how changes to task constraints
impacted the behavioral dynamics of an interpersonal
collision avoidance task previously examined and modeled by
Richardson and colleagues (2015). Overall, the results
demonstrate that decreasing the cost associated with colliding
influences the stability and symmetry of the movement
dynamics observed between co-actors in a manner consistent
with those predicted by the Richardson et al. (2015), collision
avoidance model. The current study therefore provides
evidence that the behavioral dynamics that shape
interpersonal or joint-action behavior are not only defined by
the physical and informational properties of a task, but also by
the strength and importance of the shared task goal.
Keywords: interpersonal dynamics; collision-avoidance;
joint action; behavioral dynamics; behavioral symmetry

Introduction
Much research has been directed towards understanding the
neural and cognitive mechanisms that support joint action,
or the actions that individuals perform with others every day
(e.g. Graf, Schütz-Bosbach, & Prinz, 2009; Vesper,
Butterfill, Knoblich, & Sebanz, 2010). However, it is
equally important to understand the dynamical processes
that constrain such behaviors (Schmidt, Fitzpatrick, Caron
& Mergeche, 2011; van der Wel, Knoblich, & Sebanz,
2011; Vesper, van der Wel, Knoblich, & Sebanz, 2013).
Indeed, there is now strong evidence that the dynamics of
social motor coordination provides the embodied context by

632

co-actors’ behavioral movements being less symmetric and
more complementary (Sebanz & Knolich, 2009).
Motivated by a need to investigate the dynamics of more
complex joint action tasks, Richardson and colleagues
(2015) designed a continuous repetitive targeting task in
which pairs of participants were instructed to move a
computer stimulus between different sets of targets without
colliding into each other (Richardson, Harrison, Kallen,
Walton, Eiler, Saltzman & Schmidt, 2015). Pairs of
participants stood back-to-back while each faced a 50”
computer monitor and moved a small dot between target
squares in the corners of the monitor (see Figure 1 top).
Participants controlled their stimulus with a motion-tracking
sensor, which allowed the participants to move the stimulus
between the bottom-left and top-right targets, or between the
bottom-right and top-left targets. The experiment was
designed as a game, such that, a point was earned for each
successful trial (40 seconds of movement without colliding)
and the experiment ended after successfully completing 15
trials. If a pair collided, the trial simply ended.
It is important to appreciate that unlike other previously
investigated social motor coordination tasks, which involve
or require canonical inphase or antiphase movement
synchronization, the collision avoidance task was chosen by
Richardson et al., precisely because moving in a straight
line between targets in an inphase or antiphase manner
would result in task failure. Indeed, this led participant pairs
to be faced with a conflict between the natural tendency to
synchronize straight-line movement trajectories between the
targets in an inphase or antiphase manner, and the fact that
such synchronization would result in task failure.
The results revealed that pairs quickly converged onto a
solution that involved complementary task roles, with one
participant adopting a more straight-line trajectory between
targets and the other participant adopting a more elliptical
trajectory between targets. In addition, the participant who
adopted the more elliptical trajectory consistently lagged the
participant who adopted the more straight-line trajectory by
an average of approximately -30°. This asymmetric and
complementary pattern of behavior was consistent across
pairs and reflected a highly stable and robust pattern of
behavior that enabled participants to synchronize their
movements while simultaneously avoiding a collision.
Dynamical Modeling. Richardson and colleagues (2015)
hypothesized that the complementary behavioral dynamics
observed in the above described collision-avoidance task
were the result of a functional symmetry break in the
repulsive coupling that prevented participants from crashing
into each other. To test this hypothesis, they formulated a
task dynamic model of the behavioral dynamics observed
using the following system of equations:

Here, each participant’s behavior was modeled as an
oscillating point-mass (end-effector) within a twodimensional task space (i.e., a task space plane). The twodimensional task space projected within the body space
coordinates of the behavioral goal are illustrated in the
middle panels of Figure 1. In this task space, the x-axis
corresponds to the instructed axis of oscillation with a van
der Pol oscillator employed to generate a self-sustained
oscillation of the point-mass along this between target axis.
The y-axis corresponds to deviations away from the
oscillatory motion axis and thus, a simple damped massspring equation was used for y to minimize deviations away
from the primary motion axis. Accordingly, in the above
equation
and ,
and ,
and
correspond to the
position, velocity, and acceleration of participant 1’s end
effector within task space, and , and ,
and ,
and
correspond to the position, velocity, and acceleration of
participant 2’s end effector with task space. The parameters
kj and bj are stiffness and damping coefficients, respectively,
and the
expressions are the van der Pol (limit cycle
oscillator) escapement functions (for a much more detailed
overview of this model see Richardson et al., 2015).
In terms of inter-agent coupling,
and
are dissipative coupling functions that operate
to minimize the difference between each participant’s
primary oscillation axes (i.e., the between target axes
and
) with a strength defined by . Consistent with the large
body of research on interpersonal rhythmic coordination,
these attractor coupling functions essentially capture the
natural tendency of co-acting individuals to synchronize
their rhythmic movements inphase with one another (Kelso,
1995; Schmidt & Richardson, 2008).
Finally, the far right expressions in each equation are
repeller functions that act to push the two participants’ endeffectors away from each other, at a strength determined by
an exponential function of distance and γi. It is these latter
repeller functions and the corresponding strength parameters
γ1 and γ2 that are most important for our current discussion,
in that scaling γ1 and γ2 reveals how the complementary
roles that contributed to the task success of pairs (i.e.,
asymmetry in path ellipticality and deviations from 0°
relative phase) was the result of a functional interparticipant asymmetry in the strength of these repeller
dynamics. This is best revealed by detailing the three ways
in which scaling γ1 and γ2 can influence the movement
trajectories produced by the above system of equations:
1). If γ1 = γ2 = 0, then no motion is created along y1 or y2
(i.e.
=
= 0). Synchronized straight-line movement
trajectories are therefore produced along the primary,
oscillatory axes of motion, x1 and x2, which is equated with
unsuccessful task performance as such trajectories would
result in a collision (see Figure 1. bottom left).

633

Figure 1. (top) Representations of the experimental setup and task display. (left middle) Abstract representation of the 2-dimensional task
space embedded at a 45° angle within a shoulder-centered, body-space coordinate system. (right middle) Abstract representation of the
joint-action task system, in which xi corresponds to the between target axis of oscillation for a participant, defined by a limit cycle
oscillator. yi corresponds to orthogonal deviations away from a principal between target movement axis and is defined by a simple damped
mass-spring. ξxi and ξyi correspond to the horizontal (frontal) and vertical (sagittal) dimensions of the task movements with respect to
shoulder-centered body-space. (bottom) Examples of how modulating the strength of the repulsive coupling parameters γ1 and γ2 can
produce different movement trajectories. The simulated time series were generated using the parameter settings b1 = 1, b2 = 2, k 1 = k2 = 2π,
c1 = c2 = .5 and α1 = α2 = .5. (bottom left), γ1 = γ2 = 0. (bottom middle) γ1 = γ2 =15. (bottom right) and γ1 =20, γy2 = 2. A small amount of
Gaussian noise was also added at each time-step (taken from a normal distribution with a mean of 0 and an SD of 5). Solid lines denote
movement trajectories; grey dots denote relative movement positions (i.e., relative phase) at an exemplar time step.

2). If γ1 = γ2 > 0, then equivalent motion patterns are
created along y1 and y2 resulting in elliptical trajectories that
are symmetric and synchronized with zero phase lag (see
Figure 1. bottom middle). Note that this situation actually
results in a stable collision avoidance solution, especially
for γx1 >> 0. The solution is symmetric, though, both in
terms of the movement trajectories produced and state
topology—the solution is invariant to the permutation of (x1,
y1) and (x2, y2)—and does not include a phase lag. In others
words, this solution does not entail the functional
asymmetry (complementary roles).

can generate a range of movement trajectory patterns that
match the range of coordinated movement patterns
exhibited by participants in Richardson et al., (2015).
Current Project. The current project was designed to
further explore the behavioral dynamics of the Richardson
et al., (2015) joint-action collision avoidance task. More
specifically, the current study was designed to test whether
individuals would converge on the symmetric task solution
predicted by the model described above (i.e., when γ1 = γ2 >
0, as in [2] above), such that each individual in a pair would
produce more symmetric elliptical movement trajectories
with little or no phase lag. Two modifications to the original
task procedure were employed to facilitate this possibility.
First, in contrast to the relatively high cost of collision in the
original study (i.e. a collision ended a trial and participants
were forced to perform additional trials until they reached a
score of 15), a collision in the current study simply resulted
in an auditory alarm (loud beep sound) and higher score, but

3). However, if γ1 ≠ γ2, an asymmetry in the movement
trajectory emerges, as well as a phase lag between the moreelliptical and the more-straight-line trajectory (see Figure 1.
bottom right). This asymmetry and phase lag is qualitatively
similar to that observed by Richardson et al., (2015). In fact,
by modulating the differential magnitudes of γ1 and γ2 one

634

did not end the trial. Second, although participants were
instructed to avoid colliding into each other and attempt to
get the lowest score possible (i.e., lowest number of
collisions), they were only required to complete 4 twominute trials independent of the number of collisions. Note
that in addition to the expectation that the lower relative cost
of colliding would reduce the degree of movement
asymmetry between co-acting individuals, it was also
expected that the magnitude of movement ellipticity would
also be reduced. In other words, pairs would produce similar
and straighter movement trajectories.

degree to which participants adopted elliptical trajectories.
Second, we calculated the distribution of relative phase
angles (DRP) that occurred between the two participant’s
principal x/y-axis of movement across eighteen 20◦ regions
of relative phase between -180◦ and +180◦ using the Hilbert
transform to determine if an asymmetry existed in the
movement trajectories. In-phase coordination is indicated by
a concentration of relative phase angles around 0◦. Finally,
we calculated the normalized circular variance of the
relative phase that occurred between the principal x/ymovements of co-participants. This measure quantifies the
stability of the coordination on a scale from 0 = no
coordination to 1 = strong or perfect coordination, and was
used to test if a relationship existed between the
coordination strength and the number of collisions (hits).

Method
Participants
Sixteen right-handed subject pairs (N = 32) participated for
partial course credit at the University of Cincinnati.

Procedure
The procedure utilized a modified paradigm from
Richardson et al. (2015). Participant pairs were instructed to
perform the same repetitive targeting task in which they
each moved a small (5 cm diameter) red dot between two
square targets (20 cm) positioned in each of the four corners
of a 50 inch computer monitor. Participants stood back-toback each facing their own monitor. (See Figure 1 top).
Each participant moved their stimulus dot such that one
participant moved their stimulus between the bottom-left
and top-right target while the other participant moved their
stimulus between the bottom-right and top-left target. A
Polhemus FASTRACK magnetic motion tracking system
was used record the movement of each participant’s right
hand and to control participant stimuli in real time.
Upon arrival participants were informed that they would
be participating in an experiment investigating joint action
and would be playing a game in which they were required to
move a dot back and forth between two targets. The exact
instructions of the game were: “the goal of this task is to
move your stimulus back and forth between your target
locations continuously and at a comfortable speed so that
your stimuli do not collide, hit, or bump into each other”.
They were informed that they would complete four, twominute trials, and the goal of the game was to score as few
hits as possible. Participants were also informed that if they
did hit or collide into each other that an audible alarm beep
would be played.

Figure 2. Representative movement trajectories.

Principal Components Analysis (PCA)
PCA was used to quantify the normalized width (δ) of
each participant’s motion about the primary axis of
movement. δ is equal to the ratio of eigenvalues (λ) obtained
from the covariance matrix between a participant’s x
(frontal) and y (sagittal) movement data. Thus, δ is a
measure of spread relative to the angular motion direction
that is established by a ratio of deviations orthogonal to the
principal axis of motion. For the current data, a greater
value of δ indicates a larger divergence from a straight-line
trajectory—a more circular movement.
As can be seen from an inspection of Figure 2, which
includes a representative sample of the movement timeseries trajectories observed as a function of trial, one or both
of the participants tended to adopt a more elliptical
trajectory across trials. A one-way repeated measures
ANOVA comparing the average δ exhibited by pairs across
trials 1 through 4 was significant, F(3,27) = 3.077, p = .03,
confirming this observation. Planned within subjects

Results
All participant pairs were able to complete the
experiment. Two trials were excluded, one trial from two
different pairs, due to equipment malfunction. Prior to
analysis, position time series were low-pass filtered using a
10 Hz Butterworth filter. Three data analysis techniques
were used to characterize the movement and coordination
that emerged during the collision avoidance task. First, we
used principal components analysis (PCA) to quantify the

635

contrasts confirmed that differences between the first and
last trial were driving this effect, F(1, 27) = 3.89, p = .059.
Although this result is consistent with the findings of
Richardson et al. (2015), it is important to note that the
overall degree of elipticality was much less pronounced in
the current study. It should be noted that although some
participant pairs did still adopt complementary roles, the
overall degree of this asymmetry was much less pronounced
than that observed by Richardson et al.

Figure 3. Distribution of Relative Phase.

Relative Phase Analysis
The mean DRP averaged across pairs is shown in Figure 3
as a function of trial number. Recall, that canonical inphase
coordination is depicted by a peak around 00. As expected,
participants did appear to coordinate in an in-phase manner,
with the majority of phase angles occurring in the -30º to
+30º range, with an overall average relative phase angle of 4.91°. Note that in the Richardson et al. study, there was a
significant phase-lag between participants in each pair, with
the overall average relative phase angle equally
approximately -30º. This suggests that in the current study
the strength of the repulsive coupling between participants
in a pair was not only more equal, but was also weaker due
to the reduced costs of collision.
Table 1: Synchronization Index and Collisions
Trial 1

Trial 2

Trial 3

Trial 4

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

ρ

0.63

0.34

0.68

0.26

0.67

0.35

0.71

0.31

Hits

2.56

3.97

1.81

2.26

0.75

1.48

0.57

0.85

Circular Variance and Collisions
The number of collisions that occurred between pairs ranged
from zero to fifteen and the normalized circular variance
ranged from 0.02 to 0.97. Descriptive statistics for both of
these measures are summarized Table 1 above. As can be
seen from an inspection of Figure 4, there was a moderately
negative association between number of collisions and the
strength of the coordination observed, r = -.302, p = .017,
such that the number of collisions increased as the stability
of the coordination decreased. This indicates that more
stable coordination resulted in better task success (i.e., fewer
collisions)

636

Hove, M. J., & Risen, J. L. (2009). It’s all in the timing:
Interpersonal synchrony increases affiliation. Social
Cognition, 27, 949-961.
Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic patterns. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Marsh, K. L., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt, R. C. (2009).
Social connection through joint action and interpersonal
coordination. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 320-339.
Miles, L.K., Griffiths, J.L., Richardson, M.J., & Macrae,
C.N. (2010). Too late to coordinate: Contextual influences
on behavioral synchrony. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 40, 52-60.
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., Isenhower, R., Goodman,
J., & Schmidt, R. C. (2007). Rocking Together: Dynamics
of
Intentional
and
Unintentional
Interpersonal
Coordination. Human Movement Science, 26, 867-891.
Richardson, M.J., Harrison, S.J., Kallen, R.W., Walton, A.,
Eiler, B.A., Saltzman, E. & Schmidt, R.C. (2015). Selforganized complementary joint action: Behavioral
dynamics of an interpersonal collision-avoidance task.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance. Advance Online Publication. DOI:
10.1037/xhp0000041
Riley, M. A., Richardson, M. J., Shockley, K. &
Ramenzoni, V. C. (2011). Interpersonal synergies.
Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 1-7.
Saltzman, E., & Kelso, J. A. S. (1987). Skilled actions: A
task dynamic approach. Psychological Review, 94, 84106.
Schmidt, R. C., Fitzpatrick, P., Caron, R., & Mergeche, J.
(2011). Understanding social motor coordination. Human
Movement Science, 30, 834-845.
Schmidt, R.C. & O’Brien, B. (1997). Evaluating the
dynamics of unintended interpersonal coordination.
Ecological Psychology, 9(3), 189-206.
Schmidt, R. C., & Richardson, M. J. (2008). Dynamics of
interpersonal coordination. In A. Fuchs & V. Jirsa (Eds.).
Coordination: Neural, Behavioral and Social Dynamics.
(pp. 281-308). Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Sebanz, N., & Knoblich G. (2009). Prediction in Joint
action: What, when, and where. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 1, 353-367.
van der Wel, R. P., Knoblich, G, Sebanz, N. (2011). Let the
force be with us: Dyads exploit haptic coupling for
coordination. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 37, 1420-31.
Vesper, C., Butterfill, S., Knoblich, G., & Sebanz, N. (2010)
A minimal architecture for joint action. Neural Networks,
23, 998-1003.
Vesper, C., van der Wel, R. P., Knoblich G, & Sebanz, N.
(2013) Are you ready to jump? Predictive mechanisms in
interpersonal coordination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 39, 4861.
Warren, W.H. (2006) The dynamics of perception and
action. Psychological Review, 113, 358-389.

Figure 4: Relationship between collisions and ρ

Conclusion
The aim of the current project was to further explore the
behavioral dynamics of the joint-action collision avoidance
task previous investigated and modeled by Richardson et al.,
(2015). In particular, we tested whether decreasing the cost
of failure would weaken the repulsive coupling between
participants and that this weakening would impact the
movement and coordination patterns observed, such that
pairs would produce a more symmetrical pattern of elliptical
inphase coordination. Consistent with this expectation and
model prediction 2 above, both participants in a pair tended
to exhibit less elliptical and less asymmetric movement
trajectories than observed by Richardson et al., (2015).
Moreover, participants produced more canonical inphase
coordination in comparison to participants in the Richardson
et al. study. The results of the current study therefore further
validate the collision-avoidance model proposed by
Richardson et al. (2015) and provides evidence that the
behavioral dynamics that shape interpersonal or joint-action
behavior are not only defined by the physical and
information properties of the task, but also by the strength
and importance of the shared task goal.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported by the
National Institutes of Health (R01GM105045).

References
Coey, C., Varlet, M., & Richardson, M. J. (2012).
Coordination dynamics in a socially situated nervous
system. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 6, 164 (1-12).
Fitzpatrick, P., Diorio, R., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt, R.
C. (2013). Dynamical methods for evaluating the timedependent unfolding of social coordination in children
with Autism. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 7.
Graf, M., Schütz-Bosbach, S., & Prinz, W. (2009) Motor
Involvement in Action and Object Perception Similarity
and Complementarity. In G. Semin, & G. Echterhov
(Eds), Grounding sociality: Neurons, minds, and culture.
NY: Psychology Press.

637

