Beliefs about desires: Children’s understanding of how knowledge and preference
influence choice.
Julian Jara-Ettinger, Emily Lydic, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, & Laura E. Schulz
(jjara, emilydic, jbt, lschulz @ mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract

et al., 2009, 2011; Jara-Ettinger, Baker, & Tenenbaum,
2012).
All of these accounts treat beliefs and desires as
independent variables, and characterize beliefs as
representing content about the world. However, in addition
to having beliefs about the world, agents have beliefs about
what will fulfill their desires. Consider again the simple case
of watching Sally get a cookie from the jar. We might infer
that Sally likes cookies and that she would get a cookie
again if she found herself in the same situation. However,
this inference assumes that Sally not only knew there were
cookies in the jar, but also knew that she liked cookies. If
we knew that Sally had never tried a cookie before, we
might not be so fast to assume that Sally will eat cookies in
the future.
Cookies, of course, are almost universally familiar and
universally liked, but in novel contexts, inferences that
depend on an agent’s beliefs about her desires are both
commonplace and critical for social cognition. Imagine for
instance, that you are watching your friend buy food at a
market. Usually, her choices reveal what she likes.
However, if she’s in a foreign country and has never tasted
the food before, her choices only reveal her best guess; they
may not tell us anything about her stable, long-term
preferences. For us to know what someone likes, she has to
know it herself first. We can draw comparable inferences in
reverse. If you see your friend try a chocolate from her box
and then change her mind and choose a different one, you
might infer that she was initially naïve, unsure, or wrong,
about what was inside the chocolate. In these cases, the
instability of the agent’s preferences is indicative of the
initial uncertainty of her beliefs about her utilities.
Despite extensive past work on the development of theory
of mind, to our knowledge no work has examined children’s
understanding of how uncertainty about one’s own desires
influences behavior or at their ability to infer knowledge or
ignorance about utilities using information about agents’
actions. To the degree that researchers have looked at
children’s inferences regarding how agents change their
mind with evidence, they have focused primarily on issues
related to epistemic access: canonically, whether the agent
does or does see where a desired object has been placed
(e.g., Wimmer & Perner, 1983). However, an agent may
also be aware or unaware of the value of a putatively desired
object. Thus, the degree to which the agent’s initial
estimates are stable depends on how much the agent knows
initially.

Knowledgeable agents always choose what they like best,
thus revealing their preferences. But naïve agents only choose
what they believe they like best, and may end up disliking
their choice. As such, sensitivity to an agent’s prior
experience is critical for interpreting their behavior. Here we
show that four- and five-year-olds expect knowledgeable
agents, as compared to naïve agents, to have stable choices
that lead to higher rewards (Experiments 1 and 2).
Additionally, we show that four- and five-year-olds can infer
which of two agents is naïve given information about the
rewards they obtained and the stability of their choices
(Experiments 3 and 4). These results show that young
children understand that beliefs and desires are interconnected
and that, in addition to having uncertainty about the world,
agents can also be uncertain about their own desires.
Keywords: Social Cognition; Theory of Mind.

Introduction
Humans have strikingly sophisticated social skills
(Herrmann, Call, Hernández-Lloreda, Hare, & Tomasello,
2007). We understand that behind other people’s actions lies
a rich mental life. Although we cannot directly observe
others’ mental states, we have an intuitive theory that
enables us to infer them. This understanding emerges early
in life (Luo, 2011; Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005; Woodward,
Sommerville, Guajardo, 2001) and enables us to make rich
and powerful inferences in adulthood (Baker, Saxe, &
Tenenbaum, 2009, 2011; Jara-Ettinger, Baker, &
Tenenbaum, 2012).
This intuitive theory, called a Theory of Mind (ToM),
connects information about people’s desires and beliefs with
their actions (e.g., Dennett, 1989; Wellman, 1990; Gopnik
& Meltzoff, 1997). If Sally wants a cookie and believes
there are cookies inside the cookie jar, we can predict that
Sally will walk toward the cookie jar and take a cookie out.
Having this causal theory also enables us to infer Sally’s
beliefs and desires from information about her actions. If
Sally takes a cookie from the cookie jar and eats it, we can
infer that she wanted a cookie and that she (correctly)
believed that she would find one in the cookie jar. If instead,
Sally walks away empty handed after peeking into the
cookie jar, we may infer she had a false belief about the
cookie jar’s contents, and thus failed to fulfill her desire.
Recent computational work formalizing the ways that
beliefs and desires jointly determine an agent’s actions can
predict human judgments with quantitative precision (Baker

968

Methods

In these studies we investigate children’s understanding
of how agents’ uncertainty about their desires relates to the
expected outcome of their goals, and to the stability of their
behavior. Figure 1 shows a graphical display of the
experiments. In Experiment 1 we ask whether children
understand that knowledgeable agents are more likely than
naïve agents to take actions that lead to a high reward. In
Experiment 2, we ask whether children understand that
knowledgeable agents are more likely than naïve agents to
make decisions that are stable over time. Experiments 3 and
4 examine the inverse questions: In Experiment 3, we ask if
children believe that agents who obtain a high reward are
more likely to have been knowledgeable, and in Experiment
4, we ask if children believe that agents who make more
stable choices are more likely to have been more
knowledgeable. The current study goes beyond merely
representing agents’ beliefs; instead children must
understand that different agents might perform the same
actions with the same beliefs about the world and yet
interpret the experience differently. Because children’s
ability to reason explicitly about agents’ mistaken beliefs
emerges between ages four and five (Wellman, Cross, &
Watson, 2001) here, we focus on four- and five-year-olds.

?
Experiment
1
Yuck!

?

P

Experiment
3

Experiment
2

P
Experiment
4

Yum!

Figure 1: In Experiments 1 and 2 children saw a knowledgeable
and a naïve agent make the same choice. Children were asked to
infer which puppet said “yum” and which puppet said “yuck”
(Experiment 1), or which puppet changed their mind (Experiment
2). Experiments 3 and 4 tested inferences in the reverse direction.

Participants 16 participants (mean age (SD): 5.09 years
(195 days), range 4.13-5.89 years) were recruited at an
urban children’s museum. One additional participant was
recruited but not included in the study because he failed to
respond the inclusion question correctly (See Procedure).
Stimuli The stimuli consisted of two pairs of gendermatched puppets, and picture cutouts of two fruits:
Rambutans, and African cucumbers.
Procedure Participants were tested individually in a quiet
room in a children’s museum. The child and the
experimenter sat on opposite sides of a small table. The
experimenter first introduced the cutout pictures of the
rambutans and the African cucumbers and placed four
pictures of each fruit on the table with each kind of fruit in
its own pile. Next, the experimenter introduced the two
puppets by name (“Anne” and “Sally”, or “Arnold” and
“Bob”, depending on the participant’s gender. The puppets
were matched with the participant’s gender to ensure gender
biases did not influence our task). The experimenter then
explained that “Sally has never seen these fruits before and
she doesn’t know what they taste like” while “Anne knows
all about these fruits. She knows what they taste like.”
(Knowledgeable puppet and introduction order were
counterbalanced). Next, the experimenter told the
participant “Earlier today, we told our friends they had to
pick one fruit to each, and both of our friends picked a
rambutan.” (Actual fruit counterbalanced). Next, the
experimenter placed a picture of a rambutan in front of each
puppet and explained, “Both of our friends took a bite of
their fruit and one of them said ‘Yum!’ and one of them said
‘Yuck’!” Participants were then asked an inclusion question
to ensure the child remembered the critical information:
“Can you tell me, which of our friends has not tasted the
fruits before? And which one of our friends has not tasted
these fruits before?” Finally, participants were asked which
puppet said “Yum!” and which puppet said “Yuck!”

Results and Discussion

Experiment 1

Children who failed to respond correctly to the inclusion
question were excluded from analysis and replaced (n = 1).
Results were coded for adherence to the script by a coder
blind to the child’s response to the test question (no
participants were dropped due to experimenter error).
Videotapes were then coded to record the child’s response
to the test question. Children were coded as answering
correctly if they indicated that the knowledgeable puppet
had said “Yum.” Of the sixteen children who responded to
the inclusion question correctly, 100% responded correctly
to the test question (95% CI: 82.93%-100%. See Figure 2).1

In Experiment 1 we test if children understand that agents’
choices are affected by their estimate of the expected
rewards of their actions, and thus that knowledgeable agents
are more likely than naïve agents to accrue high actual
rewards. Children were introduced to two puppets who had
been given a choice between two types of fruits. One puppet
was knowledgeable and had tasted both fruits before; one
puppet was naïve and had not. Both puppets chose the same
fruit. One puppet tasted it and said “Yum!” and one puppet
tasted it and said “Yuck!” We looked at whether children
inferred that the knowledgeable puppet was more likely to
say “Yum!”

1
Due to conceptual issues with Null hypothesis significance
testing (e.g., Cohen, 1994), and a recent proposal to move the field
towards better standards for analyzing data (Cumming, 2013), we
present confidence intervals as our main method of analysis.

969

Note that if children believe that an agent’s choices
always reflect her preferences then children should have
expected both puppets to say “Yum!” That is, if children
recovered agents’ desires only from information about the
agents’ actions and beliefs about the state of the world, then
children should have responded at chance in this context.
Both agents knew they had a choice of the two fruits and
both agents made the same choice. Children instead
recognized that the knowledgeable agent would be more
likely to like the chosen fruit, which suggests that children
understand that agents choose the options with the highest
expected rewards and that a naive agent’s choices may be
governed by an inaccurate estimate of the actual reward.

Participants 16 participants (mean age (SD): 5.16 years
(241 days), range 4.01-5.96 years) were recruited at an
urban children’s museum. One additional participant was
recruited but excluded from the study and replaced because
he declined to complete the task.
Stimuli The stimuli were identical to those used in
Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure was identical to the procedure in
Experiment 1 except as follows: Neither puppet said
“Yum!” or “Yuck!” Instead, after the puppets had tasted the
fruits, the experimenter said, “Both of our friends took a bite
from their fruit and one of them changed her mind and
decided she wanted to eat a different fruit”. For the test
question, participants were asked, “Which one of our friends
changed his/her mind?”

100

Results and Discussion
As in Experiment 1, children who failed to respond to the
inclusion question were excluded from the study. (No
participants were dropped on these grounds.) Videos were
first coded for adherence to script by a coder blind to the
child’s test response (no participants were dropped due to
experimenter error), and later to record the child’s answer to
the test question. Children were coded as responding
correctly if they indicated that the naïve agent was the one
who had changed her mind. Fifteen of the 16 children
responded correctly to the test question (93.75%; 95% CI:
73.60%-100%. See Figure 2).
Note that in contrast to Experiment 1, participants in
Experiment 2 never obtained any information about the
outcome of each puppet’s choice. Thus, it was possible that
either or both puppets had liked or disliked their chosen
fruit. Nevertheless, children were able to infer that naïve
agents are more likely to make unstable choices.
Furthermore, in this experiment we used a neutral dependent
measure, thus ensuring that participants couldn’t succeed by
grouping together two features with a positive valence (such
as knowledge and “yumminess” in Experiment 1). Together
with Experiment 1, these results suggest that four and five
year-olds understand that relative to knowledgeable agents,
naïve agents are more likely to make choices that lead to
low rewards, and thus that their choices are less likely to be
stable over time.
Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that children have different
expectations about the rewards that knowledgeable and
naïve agents obtain and about the stability of their actions.
In Experiments 3 and 4 we ask if children can reverse these
inferences, and infer an agent’s prior knowledge based on
whether the agent succeeds in obtaining high rewards
(Experiment 3), and whether the agent’s choices are stable
(Experiment 4).

Percentage

75

50

25

Outcome
Fail
Success

00
Exp. 1

Exp. 2

Exp. 3

Exp. 3
Replication

Exp. 4

Figure 2: Results from all experiments. The x-axis shows each
experiment and the y-axis shows the distribution of children’s
choices (color coded). The dashed horizontal line represents
expected chance performance and the vertical solid lines show
95% confidence intervals.

Experiment 2
The results from Experiment 1 suggest that four and fiveyear-olds understand that, relative to knowledgeable agents,
naïve agents are more likely to make unrewarding choices.
When this happens, naïve agents will most likely reconsider
their choices. However, naïve agents may reconsider their
choice even when they obtain a positive reward, especially
if the reward is lower than they expected. Thus, in general,
naïve agents are more likely to have unstable choices, when
compared to knowledgeable agents. In Experiment 2 we test
if, in the absence of knowledge about the rewards, children
have expectations about the stability of the choices of
knowledgeable and naïve agents.

Experiment 3

Methods

In Experiment 3 we invert the question asked in
Experiment 1. Here we ask if children believe that agents

970

who make choices that result in low rewards are more likely
to have been naïve prior to making their choice. Children
watched two puppets pick the same fruit to eat. After
learning that one puppet said “Yum!” and the other puppet
said “Yuck!” children were asked to decide which puppet
had not tasted the fruits before.

estimate of the expected rewards. However, four children
answered incorrectly and two were excluded from analysis
and replaced for failing to answer the test question. Thus, to
ensure the validity of our interpretation we replicated the
experiment. Out of the 16 participants who made a choice in
the replication, 75% (n=12) responded correctly (95% CI:
51.56%-100%). Together, these experiments suggests that
children can in fact use knowledge about subjective rewards
to infer knowledge, and it provides some suggestive
evidence that children may find it easier to use information
about agent’s knowledge to predict their subjective rewards
than to use information about agent’s rewards to recover
information about their unobservable mental states.

Methods
Participants 32 participants (mean age (SD): 5.12 years
(194 days), range 4.12-5.98 years) were recruited at an
urban children’s museum. Sixteen participants were
recruited for the original experiment, and sixteen additional
participants were recruited to conduct a replication (see
Results). Four additional participants were recruited in the
original experiment but excluded from analysis and replaced
for failing the inclusion question (n = 1), declining to
complete the experiment (n = 1), and declining to answer
the test question (n =2). One additional participant was
recruited in the replication experiment but excluded from
analysis because he declined to answer the test question. See
Results.
Stimuli The stimuli were identical to those used in
Experiment 1.
Procedure Participants were tested individually in a quiet
room. As in Experiment 1, the experimenter introduced the
two puppets and the fruits and explained that each puppet
chose a fruit to eat. The section from Experiment 1 in which
where the experimenter explained that one puppet was more
knowledgeable than the other was omitted. After both
puppets chose a fruit, the experimenter said “Anne and Sally
(or Arnold and Bob) both took a bite from their rambutans
(or African cucumbers). Anne said ‘Yum!’ Sally said
‘Yuck!’” Next, the experimenter said, “But guess what?
One of our friends didn’t know what rambutans tasted like
until today.” Children were then asked to remember which
puppet had said “Yum!” and which puppet had said “Yuck!”
For the test question, the experimenter asked, “Can you tell
me, which one of our friends didn’t know what rambutans
tasted like until today?” (Actual fruits counterbalanced
throughout.) The replication experiment had the same
procedure as the original experiment with the exception that
the inclusion question was asked immediately after the
puppets tasted the fruit, thus making the last part of the
experiment more fluent.

Experiment 4
In Experiment 4 we invert the question asked in Experiment
2. Here we see if children can infer which of two agents is
more likely to be naive when one shows stable preferences
and one does not.

Methods
Participants 16 participants (mean age (SD): 5.64 years
(244 days), range 4.04-5.93 years) were recruited at an
urban children’s museum. Four additional children were
tested but excluded from the study because they failed to
respond to the inclusion question correctly. See Results.
Stimuli The stimuli were identical to those used in
Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 3
except as follows: First, children were never given any
information about whether the puppets said “Yum!” or
“Yuck!” after tasting the fruits. Instead, after taking a bite
from their fruit, the experimenter said, “Anne kept eating
the rambutan. Sally changed her mind and said she wanted
an African cucumber instead.” As in Experiment 3, at test
children were asked, “Can you tell me, which one of our
friends didn’t know what rambutans tasted like until today?”
(Actual fruits counterbalanced throughout.)

Results and Discussion
All results were coded in the same way as Experiments 1-3.
Four children failed to respond to the inclusion question
correctly and were therefore excluded from analysis and
replaced. Children’s responses were coded as responding
correctly if they indicated that the puppet who changed her
mind was the one who had never tasted the fruits before. Of
the 16 participants who made a choice, 81.25% (n = 13)
responded correctly (95% CI: 58.34-100%).
Together with Experiment 2, these results suggest children
understand that relative to naïve agents, knowledgeable
agents are more likely to stick to their choices. Moreover,
children can infer which agents are more likely to be
knowledgeable based on the stability of these choices.

Results and Discussion
Results were coded as in Experiments 1 and 2. Participants
were coded as responding correctly if they indicated that the
puppet who said “Yuck!” was the one who had not tasted
the fruits before today. Of the 16 participants who made a
choice in the original experiment, 75.00% (n = 12)
responded correctly (95% CI: 51.56%-100%). These results
suggest that children can use knowledge about the actual
subjective rewards that different agents obtain to infer
which agent is more likely to have been naïve in her

971

General Discussion

she had not accurately estimated the commitment involved.
Recent work suggests that young children are sensitive to
the cost of action when reasoning about an agent’s
preferences or motivation (Jara-Ettinger, Gweon,
Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2015; Jara-Ettinger, Tenenbaum, &
Schulz, 2015). Future work might investigate whether four
and five-year-olds also have strong intuitions about how
agents’ knowledge about the costs of action influences their
preferences and choices.
The current results suggest the importance of a more
nuanced approach to both empirical and computational work
on theory of mind. Past research has focused on learners’
ability to draw inferences connecting agents’ beliefs,
desires, and actions (e.g., Wimmer & Perner, 1983; Baker,
Saxe, & Tenenbaum, 2011). Almost universally however,
beliefs and desires have been treated as independent, noninteracting variables, and the content of beliefs has been
restricted to information about the world. The current study
suggests that children understand that agents have beliefs
not only about the world, but also about their own
preferences. Children understand that as agents gain
knowledge about the world, their preferences can change as
well. As scientists, we can use this understanding to
develop more sophisticated approaches to understanding
theory of mind.

Across four experiments, we studied children’s
understanding of the relationship between agents’
knowledge of their desires and the outcome of these agents’
actions. Our results suggest that four and five-year-olds
understand that, relative to naïve agents, knowledgeable
agents are more likely to obtain high rewards (Experiment
1) and more likely to make stable choices (Experiment 2).
Similarly, children believe that agents who obtain high
rewards and agents who make stable choices are more likely
to be knowledgeable (Experiments 3 and 4 respectively).
Collectively, these results suggest that children understand
that an agent’s choices are not always aligned with the
highest utility, but rather with the highest expected utility.
As such, agents who have more uncertainty about the value
of a target are more likely to obtain a low reward, and more
likely to explore different alternatives.
Children’s responses in our task could have been driven by
their expectations about knowledgeable agents, naïve
agents, or both. Future research might see which of these
expectations underlies children’s reasoning. Additionally,
we have emphasized the possibility that children should
infer that naïve agents are more likely than knowledgeable
agents to make unrewarding choices, and this interpretation
is consistent with the results of Experiments 1 and 3.
However, children may also believe that, relative to
knowledgeable agents, naïve agents are more likely to find
exploration rewarding; this kind of reasoning could
contribute to the results of Experiments 2 and 4
Computationally, children’s intuitions may stem from a
categorical distinction between knowledgeable and naïve
agents, or from a continuous representation of how the
amount of knowledge an agent has influences the quality of
their choices. Although these two accounts make similar
predictions in our task, the latter theory is more powerful, as
it enables observers to reason about intermediate stages of
knowledge. Further work is needed to establish exactly how
children represent an agent’s uncertainty. Furthermore, it is
an open question how children represent a goal’s reward.
For instance, children might assume that each goal has a
fixed reward value, which the agent may not know.
Alternatively, children may understand that the same
outcome can have variable rewards over time (an agent may
find apples very rewarding when she’s hungry and less so
when she’s full). Future research might investigate the
precise representations underlying children’s calculations of
agents’ utilities.
In these studies, we focused on agents’ estimates of the
expected reward of their actions. However, the same logic
applies to agents’ understanding of the cost of actions. For
example, Sally might be eager (or reluctant) to run a
marathon. However, if you know she does not understand
the costs involved, you might not be confident that her
current actions will be informative about her future ones.
The converse inferences also hold. If you see Sally sign up
for a committee and then fail to attend, you might infer that

Acknowledgments
We thank the Boston Children’s Museum and the families
who volunteered to participate. We thank Eileen Rivera and
Allison Kaslow for help with recruitment, data collection,
and video coding. We are grateful to three anonymous
reviewers and to Rachel Magid for useful comments. This
material is based upon work supported by the Center for
Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM), funded by NSFSTC award CCF-1231216, and by the Simons Center for the
Social Brain.

References
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Action
understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113(3),
329-349.
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R. R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2011).
Bayesian theory of mind: Modeling joint belief-desire
attribution. In Proceedings of the thirty-second annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 24692474).
Cohen, J. (1994). The earth is round (p<.05). American
psychologist, 49(12), 997.
Cumming, G. (2013). The new statistics why and
how. Psychological science, 0956797613504966.
Dennett, D. C. (1989). The intentional stance. MIT press.
Gopnik, A., & Slaughter, V. (1991). Young children's
understanding of changes in their mental states. Child
development, 62(1), 98-110.

972

Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, thoughts, and
theories. The MIT Press.
Herrmann, E., Call, J., Hernández-Lloreda, M. V., Hare, B.,
& Tomasello, M. (2007). Humans have evolved
specialized skills of social cognition: the cultural
intelligence hypothesis. Science, 317(5843), 1360-1366.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Baker, C. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2012).
Learning what is where from social observations.
In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 515-520).
Jara-Ettinger, J., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E. (2015)
Not so innocent: Toddlers’ inferences about costs and
culpability. Psychological Science.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz,
L. E. (2015) Children’s understanding of the costs and
rewards underlying rational action. Cognition.
Luo, Y. (2011). Do 10-month-old infants understand others’
false beliefs? Cognition, 121(3), 289-298.
Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old
infants understand false beliefs?. Science, 308(5719),
255-258.
Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early reasoning
about desires: evidence from 14-and 18-montholds. Developmental psychology, 33(1), 12.
Wellman, H. M. (1990). The child's theory of mind (Vol.
37). Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta‐
analysis of theory‐of‐mind development: the truth about
false belief. Child development, 72(3), 655-684.
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in
young
children's
understanding
of
deception. Cognition, 13(1), 103-128.
Woodward, A. L., Sommerville, J. A., & Guajardo, J. J.
(2001). How infants make sense of intentional
action. Intentions and intentionality: Foundations of
social cognition, 149-169.

973

