1

Building the mental timeline: Spatial representations of time in preschoolers
Katharine A. Tillman (katillman@ucsd.edu),
Nestor Tulagan (ntulagan2@gmail.com),
& David Barner (barner@ucsd.edu)
University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Abstract
When reasoning about sequences of events, English-speaking
adults often invoke a “mental timeline,” stretching from left
(past) to right (future). Although the direction of the timeline
varies across cultures, linear representations of time are
argued to be ubiquitous and primitive. On this hypothesis, we
might predict that children should spontaneously invoke a
timeline when reasoning about time. However, little is known
about how the mental timeline develops. Here, we use a
sticker placement task to test whether 3- to 6-year-olds
spontaneously produce linear, spatial representations of time.
We find that, while English-speakers under age five rarely
adopt such representations spontaneously, a spatial prime
increases the percentage of 4-year-olds producing linear,
ordered representations from 36% to 76%, indicating that by
this age, children can readily align the domains of space and
time. Nevertheless, these representations often do not take on
the conventionalized left-to-right orientation until age 5 or 6.
Keywords: time; space; metaphor; word learning; spatial
representation

Introduction
What is the role of spatial metaphor in the formation of
abstract concepts, like time? Understanding the nature of
mental representations for time is one of the most
historically challenging problems in western philosophy,
and is now a contentious area of debate in modern cognitive
psychology (e.g., Bottini & Casasanto, 2013). Most adults
display strong a linear, spatial component in their
conceptual understanding of time, often referred to as a
“mental timeline” (for a review, Bonato et al., 2012). While
some have argued that spatial representations of time are
universal, the specifics of these associations vary
considerably across cultures. This variability indicates that
the formation of the mature mental timeline relies at least in
part on learning and cultural transmission. However, the
extent to which spatial representations of time are malleable
– and the precise effects that cultural practices and spatial
artifacts play in shaping them – is difficult to pin down in
adult populations. For this reason, we sought here to test
how children initially use space to represent time, before
they have extensive exposure to cultural practices linking
space and time in conventionalized ways. To do so, we ask
3- and 6-year-old children to perform a simple spatial task
in which they graphically represent the temporal relations
among familiar events (meals) and abstract temporal
concepts (yesterday, today, and tomorrow).

In adult speakers of languages that are written from leftto-right, there is a strong association between leftward space
and earlier or past events and between rightward space and
later or future events, which has been taken as evidence for
a “representation [of time] that is spatial in nature” (Bonato
et al., 2012). However, the direction in which time is
thought to “flow” varies across cultures, depending on the
ways in which time and space are conveyed in language
particular space-time metaphors, and on reading and writing
direction (e.g., Bergen & Chan Lau, 2012; Boroditsky &
Gaby, 2010). Furthermore, more variability in space-time
mappings is seen along individuals who are illiterate or
have less exposure to spatial artifacts for time (Bergen &
Chan Lau, 2012). All of these findings indicate that learning
temporal language, to read and write, and to use calendars
have important effects on our spatial representations of time.
However, despite the cross-cultural variability in the
direction of adults’ space-time mappings, other features of
the mental timeline seem to be pervasive, leading some
researchers to posit that they may be innate. In particular,
linearity is argued to be both ubiquitous. While some
cultures have multiple spatial models of time, including,
e.g., both linear and circular ones, it is extremely rare for
any culture to lack any linear metaphor, and the few attested
examples remain controversial (e.g., Sinha et al., 2011).
Furthermore, infant studies suggest that at least one feature
of the mental timeline – an association between spatial
length and temporal duration – is present pre-linguistically
(e.g., Casasanto et al, 2010; Srinivasan & Carey, 2010).
Current theoretical accounts of the relation between time
and space have struggled to account for all of these findings
(Winter et al., 2015). Particularly, it is unclear how and
when more complex linear models of sequential and deictic
(past/future) temporal relations emerge. Despite the crosscultural variation, some have claimed that a single
representational system accounts for both the infant lengthduration association and the adult mapping of temporal
sequence to spatial location, suggesting that linear
representations of temporal structure may also be available
from infancy (Bueti & Walsh, 2008). However, the
evidence for a length-duration association does not alone
prove that children have a spatial model of temporal
sequence or deictic time. Strikingly little is known about the
development of spatial representations for time between
infancy and adulthood – the precise period over which most
of the cultural tools posited to shape space-time
representations are acquired by most English-speakers.

2398

2

Here, we ask, first, if linear representations of temporal
structure are present in early childhood, particularly in the
years before children receive extensive exposure to cultural
practices linking time and space in conventionalized ways,
If so, we next ask whether those representations are like
those of adults (e.g., left-to-right) and what role learning the
formal calendar system plays in the acquisition of and
developmental change in those representations.
The development of temporal cognition in early
childhood is complex and prolonged (for a review, see
McCormack, 2014). If, at one extreme, all reasoning about
time automatically invokes a spatial model of temporal
structure, we might expect to see evidence of spontaneous
linear associations between temporal events and spatial
locations in all children who can represent and recall
sequences of events or differentiate events in the past or
future. These abilities arise long before children enter
school, whereas, skills like reading and writing, knowledge
of formal time-related language, and the ability to use
calendars are acquired arduously over many years. Thus, if
formation of the mental timeline depends entirely upon
these latter factors, we may not expect to observe it in
children until much later, likely after they enter school.
It is possible that children possess spatial representations
of time that differ from those of adults. In adults, linear
models of temporal structure are detailed, culture-specific,
and spontaneously deployed. One hypothesis is that children
initially possess a spatial model of time that is linear but
does not yet have a specific, culture-dependent
directionality. In this case, we might expect to see more
variability and malleability in the spatial representations
adopted by younger children than in those of older children
and adults. A further possibility is that, even if children are
able to make mappings between time and space early in
development, they may not do so spontaneously, instead
requiring external prompting to do so, until relevant cultural
conventions are internalized.
While prior studies have investigated children’s
associations between space and time, each line of work is
limited in its ability to resolve these questions. For example,
children demonstrate a rudimentary ability to differentiate
the times of past autobiographical events on an external,
adult-specified spatial timeline around the age of 3 (Busby
Grant & Suddendorf, 2009). The ability to differentiate
future events spatially emerges later, but can still be
observed in children as young as 4. Children’s early
competence with such tasks suggests that, at a minimum,
their representations of time and space are readily aligned.
Critically, however, while success on such tasks shows that,
with adequate instruction, children can map time to space, it
does not indicate that they do so by default. Furthermore,
because the timelines are provided to children, these tasks
do not allow assessment of variability in their spatial
representations.
The most convincing demonstration that children may
spontaneously represent time linearly, in the same direction
in which their language is read and written, comes from a

study by Barbara Tversky and colleagues (1991). The task
was simple, and did not require children to interpret any
preexisting spatial timeline or scale. Children simply placed
stickers on paper to represent the relative positions of three
temporal events. For example, the experimenter placed a
sticker in the center of the page to represent “lunch,” and the
child placed two other stickers to represent “breakfast” and
“dinner.” Critically, children could place the stickers
anywhere they chose: no spatial template was given and
they were not told that the stickers should be arranged in an
ordered line. Yet, remarkably, over 80% of kindergarteners,
the youngest group in the study, placed the stickers in an
ordered line. Beyond this, 70% of English-speakers between
kindergarten and grade 5 placed the stickers in order from
left-to-right, while only 30% of Hebrew-speakers (who read
from right to left) did so.
While the study by Tversky et al. (1991) provides the
strongest evidence thus far for the existence of a stable,
conventionalized mental timeline in children, it has several
limitations. First, because the youngest children in the study
were already producing linear representations at a high rate,
the questions of when and how this tendency develops, and
particularly whether it depends on formal schooling and
fluency with the calendar system, are left open. Secondly,
although overt instructions on the task were not given,
children always performed a spatial “warm-up” task with
physical objects prior to the temporal tasks, which may have
primed them to adopt horizontal spatial representations of
time they might not have otherwise used. Finally, because
all the items in this task were highly familiar daily events, it
is unclear whether children’s ability produce spatial
representations of temporal relationships also extends to
deictic time and/or to more abstract temporal concepts.
To investigate these questions, we conducted two
experiments. In Experiment 1, we employed the Tversky et
al. (1991) sticker task with a few variations. We tested a
younger sample of children, beginning at age 3, both with
and without a spatial “warm-up.” Further, to test whether
children can use space to represent the relationships among
more abstract temporal concepts, we asked children to
perform a version of the sticker task using deictic time
words – yesterday, today, and tomorrow. Finally, to explore
whether adopting adult-like left-to-right (LTR) spatial
representations is related to overt knowledge of cultural
conventions for timekeeping, we asked non-spatial
questions to assess children’s fluency with the calendar
system, and, in Experiment 2, compared performance on the
open-ended sticker task with one in which a calendar-like
template was provided.

Methods
Participants
For Experiment 1, 181 children from the San Diego area
were recruited, including 50 3-year-olds, 53 4-year-olds, 54
5-year-olds, and 24 6-year olds. In Experiment 2, 92
children have participated, including 27 3-year-olds, 25 4year-olds, 24 5-year-olds, and 12 6-year-olds. Data
collection is ongoing. An additional 12 children participated

2399

3

but were excluded from analysis due to failure to complete
the task (7), being outside the age range of interest (3),
experimenter error (1), and not speaking English as a
primary language (1). Testing was conducted in local
daycares, preschools, and museums. Consent was obtained
from parents, and children received a small gift.
Procedure, Experiment 1
Calendar pre-test. Before the sticker task, all children
answered several questions to assess their level of fluency
with the calendar system: “This day is today, does
[yesterday/tomorrow] come before today or after today?”;
“Do you know the days of the week? Can you say them for
me?”;
“What
day
of
the
week
is/was
[today/tomorrow/yesterday]?” If children failed to list more
than 3 days of the week, they were prompted, “The first day
is Monday, do you know what comes next?” and so on, until
failing to produce two consecutive days. If the child did not
correctly name today’s day of the week, they were told the
the correct answer before being asked about tomorrow and
yesterday. The order of each pair of yesterday and tomorrow
questions was counterbalanced.
Sticker tasks. The sticker tasks used here were modeled
on the task designed by Tversky et al. (1991). Half the
children were assigned to a No prime condition and half to
the Prime condition. First, a blank white (7x5 in) index card
was placed in front of the child (C). In the No-prime
condition, the experimenter (E) recited the following
vignette: “Let’s start! I want you to think about the times of
the day we eat meals: breakfast, lunch, and dinner. I’m
going to put a sticker down for lunch time, and I want you
to put stickers down for dinner time and breakfast time.
Here’s where I’m putting the sticker for lunch time.” E
placed a red star sticker in the middle of the card. “Now you
put a sticker down for dinner time…” E handed C a green
sticker and paused while C placed it on the card. “…and
another sticker down for breakfast time..” E handed C a
blue sticker. After C placed the second sticker, E took the
completed card and replaced it with a new blank card. For
the second task, E began, “Great job! Now, I want you to
think about the times when different days happen:
yesterday, today, and tomorrow,” and the task proceeded
identically to the first, but used different colored stickers.
Prior to the first temporal task, children in the Prime
condition also completed a spatial task, in which E placed
three toy blocks – red, green, and yellow – in a horizontal
line parallel to the top edge of the index card. E pointed to
each block and asked: “What color is this?”, C responded,
and E proceeded to say “Good job! I’m going to put down a
sticker down on the paper in the place of the green block,
then I want you to put stickers down in the places of the red
and yellow blocks,” The task proceeded in the same manner
as the others. The blocks were removed after the priming
task was completed, and the next task began. The three tasks
were always completed in the same order: Prime (if
present), Meals, Days. The order in which the two stimuli
were prompted in each task was counterbalanced.

Disorganized

Ordered

Linear

Yesterday
Today
Tomorrow

Left-to-right

Figure 1. Example sticker arrangements from Experiment 1.
See text for complete coding criteria. Protractors, not present
during testing, show the angle, 140 deg, that must be
exceeded for a child’s sticker arrangement to qualify as
“linear.” Only one example per coding designation is shown,
but many are possible under every designation but LTR.

Coding, Experiment 1.
During testing, the experimenter drew a small arrow on
the back of each index card to indicate its orientation.
Offline, the children’s sticker arrangements were coded in
three ways. The stickers were coded as Linear if the largest
angle that they created that was under 180 deg. was at least
140 deg. (see Fig. 1). Stickers were coded as Ordered if, in
addition to being linear, the child’s two stickers were on
opposite sides of the central (Experimenter’s) sticker,
creating a logical temporal sequence along any axis.
Stickers were coded as LTR if, in addition to being linear
and ordered, the axis of increase was left to right.
Arrangements not reaching criteria for linearity were
considered Disorganized. To index performance on the
temporal tasks, children were awarded 0 points for
Disorganized, 1 point for Linear, 2 points for Ordered, and 3
points for LTR arrangements, totaling 6 points across tasks.
Using responses to interview questions, we calculated an
index of calendar knowledge for each child, in which she
received 1 point for each correctly answered “What day is..”
question and 1 point for each day of the week named in the
correct sequence, for a total of 10 possible points.

Procedure, Experiment 2
Children in Experiment 2 answered a similar set of
calendar questions as those in Experiment 1, but placed
stickers on a pre-made, calendar-like template. The first
questions were: “This day is today. Which day comes
[before/after] today: tomorrow or yesterday?” The child was
asked to recite the days of the week, then E placed a piece

2400

4

Results
Experiment 1: Sticker arrangements, with and without
spatial priming
To determine how frequently children adopted adult-like
spatial representations of time, we calculated the proportion
of children in each age group who arranged the stickers in
accordance with criteria for Disorganized, Linear, Ordered,
or Left-to-Right (LTR) arrangements (see Methods for
criteria). A mixed-effects ANOVA of overall sticker task
performance, including age group as the between-subjects
variable and condition (prime vs. no prime) and item type
(meals vs. days) as within-subjects variables, revealed main
effects of age group and condition (F’s>10, p’s <0.001), and
interactions between age and condition and between age and
item type (F’s > 3, p’s < 0.05). Surprisingly, no main effect
of item type (meals vs. days) was found. Here, except where
noted, we report the results for days (yesterday, today,
tomorrow). Proportions of children whose arrangements fell
under each criterion are shown in Figure 2. Adult-like
behavior increased dramatically over this time period, with a
4-fold change in the proportion of children producing LTR
arrangements in the no-prime condition between age 3
(17%) and age 6 (73%).
To assess the impact of the spatial prime, we examined
the interaction between age group and condition. Follow-up
analyses on each age group in the days task revealed no
effect of condition on the proportion of responses that were
linear, ordered, or LTR in the 3-, 5-, or 6-year-olds.
However, the prime dramatically increased the percentage
of 4-year-old children who produced arrangements that were
linear, from 56% to 95%; ordered, from 36% to 76%; and
LTR, from 12% to 43% (t’s>2.4, all p’s < 0.05).
In order to assess the variability of children’s spatial
representations of time, we next analyzed the directionality

No Prime

Prime

100%

Percent. children

of paper with a horizontal sequence of 7 squares printed on
it in front of the child. E said, “Look, these boxes are for the
days of the week.” E pointed to each box and said the
associated day, following C’s ordering (Sun-Sat or MonSun). E then had C name each box, correcting if necessary.
Next, E asked what day today was, and, after correcting C if
necessary, asked her to point to “the box for today.” If C
was incorrect, E said “Nope, that box is for [day C picked].
Today is [correct day]. Can you find the box for [correct
day]?” Regardless of whether C was correct, E then said
“Look, I’m going to put a sticker in the box for today!” and
placed a blue star in the correct box. C was then asked to put
stickers in the boxes for tomorrow and yesterday. Finally,
she was asked what day of the week each day was. The
order of each pair of yesterday and tomorrow questions was
counterbalanced. To the extent possible, testing was
conducted on Tuesday-Friday, to avoid situations where
“today” fell on the first or last box in the sequence.
Coding, Experiment 2. All arrangements in Exp. 2 were
necessarily linear, but for the purposes of comparison to
Exp. 1, were coded as Ordered for right-to-left orderings
and LTR for left-to-right orderings.

90%

Disorg.

80%

Lin.

70%

Ord.

60%

L-R

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

3

4

5

Age (years)

6

3

4

5

6

Age (years)

Figure 2. Sticker arrangements for days. Percentage of
children in the prime and no prime conditions of Exp. 1 who
arranged stickers representing “yesterday,” “today”, and
“tomorrow” according to each criterion. Disorg.=
disorganized, Lin.= linear, Ord. = ordered, L-R = left-to-right.

of children’s ordered responses in the no-prime condition.
Due to the small number of ordered arrangements by 3-yearolds, we combined the 3- and 4-year-old groups.
Interestingly, without a prime, this younger group of
children was equally likely to produce right-to-left (RTL) as
LTR arrangements (47% each). In contrast, among children
who produced ordered arrangements, 5-year-olds produced
LTR arrangements 67% of the time, as compared with 27%
RTL, and the 6-year-olds produced LTR arrangements 80%
of the time, with 20% RTL. Notably, use of the vertical axis
was extremely rare in all age groups.
Experiment 1: Calendar knowledge questions.
As shown in Figure 3, we calculated the proportion of
children in each age group who correctly answered the
questions “What day is today/yesterday/tomorrow]?” and
the proportion of children who listed all seven days of the
week in order (with or without prompting). As expected, on
each question, a significant improvement in performance
with increasing age was observed. It is interesting to note,
however, that only 65% of 6-year-olds correctly identified
the current day of the week.
Finally, we found that indices of overall sticker-task
performance and calendar knowledge (see Methods) were
moderately correlated, R=0.32. After centering and scaling
each index, and also including condition and interactions in
models of sticker task performance for each age group,
linear regression analyses revealed no effect of calendar
knowledge (t’s<1.3, p’s>0.07).
Experiment 2, sticker task with calendar template. In
Experiment 2, children performed the yesterday/tomorrow
sticker task on an adult-designated linear calendar template.
To assess the effectiveness of this template, we calculated
the proportion of children who adopted Ordered and Leftto-right arrangements for yesterday, today, and tomorrow
(Fig. 4). Again, we observed a significant effect of age on

2401

5

1

1
3 YO

4 YO

5 YO

6 YO

0.9

Proportion LTR

Proportion correct

0.8

0.6

0.4

No Prime (Exp 1)

0.8

Prime (Exp 1)

0.7

Calendar (Exp 2)

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.2

0.2
0.1

0
Days of the
week?

Today?

0

Tomorrow? Yesterday?

3YO

performance. Next, we compared the performance of
children in Exp. 2 with those in Exp. 1 (see Fig 4). As in
Exp. 1, we saw no effect in the 3-year-old group, who were
unlikely to produce ordered arrangements, or the 6-year-old
group, who usually made adult-like LTR arrangements in
every case, all t’s<1, p’s>0.3. The 4-year-old group
performed significantly better with the calendar prime than
those without a prime in Exp. 1, t(38)=2.2, p=0.03, but no
differently from those who received the block prime in Exp.
1, t(42)=-0.2, p=0.8. 5-year-olds, however, performed
significantly better with the calendar prime in Exp. 2 than
with the block prime in Exp. 1 (t(33)=4.0, p<0.001.

Discussion

5YO

6YO

Age

Question
Figure 3. Calendar knowledge. Proportion of children who
correctly named: all 7 days of the week in order, today’s day
of the week, tomorrow’s and yesterday’s days of the week
(given today’s).

The purpose of this study was to investigate children’s
initial spatial representations of time. We focused this
investigation on several questions. First, are linear
representations of time produced spontaneously by children,
in the years before they have extensive exposure to cultural
practices linking space and time in conventionalized ways?
Second, if linear representations are of time are produced
by children, are they like those of adults (e.g., left-to-right
for English-speakers)? Lastly, what role does knowledge of
the formal calendar system play in guiding adult-like spatial
representations of time?
In Experiment 1, 3- to 6-year-old children placed
stickers representing mealtimes (breakfast, lunch, dinner)
and days (yesterday, today, tomorrow) on blank index cards.
We found that, without any instruction on what type of
spatial arrangement they should use and no spatial priming,
only 26% of English-speaking 3-year-olds and 36% of 4year-olds produced ordered, linear representations of time.
In contrast, a much higher proportion of 5-year-olds, 70%,

4YO

Figure 4. Proportion of children who arranged stickers
representing ‘yesterday’, ‘today’, and ‘tomorrow’ in an
ordered line from left to right. In the Prime condition, prior to
completing the temporal items, children first used stickers to
represent the spatial positions of physical objects. In the
Calendar condition (Exp 2), children placed their stickers on
linear template representing the days of the week.

spontaneously represented temporal order linearly, and 83%
of six-year-olds did so. These findings suggest that
“automatic” activation of a linear schema for time does not
arise in most children until at least age 5.
Experiment 1 also revealed that inducing younger
children to adopt spatial representations of time can be
remarkably simple, indicating that many children can
readily make mappings between these domains before they
begin to do so spontaneously. Prior to completing the
temporal representation tasks, children in a spatial priming
condition also used stickers to represent the spatial positions
of three physical objects arranged in a horizontal line. After
experiencing this spatial prime, the number of 4-year-olds
who produced linear, ordered, and left-to-right
representations of time increased dramatically, with 76%
adopting ordered arrangements. However, despite the
remarkable efficacy of spatial priming in 4-year-olds, this
type of priming was of no benefit to children who were
younger or older. Three-year-olds rarely produced linear
representations of time in either condition, and, though such
representations became increasingly common in 5- and 6year-olds, these children were just as likely to produce them
without a prime, also indicating that it is around this point in
development that children begin to internalize spatial
models of temporal sequence.
These findings confirm and extend previous work
showing that kindergarteners produce spatial representations
of time that are consistent with their reading and writing
direction (Tversky et al., 1991). While, in that study,
participants always performed a spatial “warm-up” task

2402

6

directly prior to the temporal tasks, here we show that, in
their age group, the ability to spatialize sequential time does
not depend on spatial priming. Furthermore, by expanding
this line of work to include preschoolers, we were able to
better characterize the developmental trajectory of this
phenomenon, showing that children who have no yet
entered school are much less likely to produce conventional
spatial representations of time. While Tversky and
colleagues examined only children’s ability to depict the
relations among highly familiar events, we show that
children are also able to spatially represent the relations
among abstract deictic time words. Surprisingly, despite
other evidence that preschoolers’ use of terms like yesterday
and tomorrow is often inaccurate (Grant & Suddendorf,
2011), we found no evidence that children’s ability to
represent the relations between these concepts spatially is
less developed than their ability to do so with events. This
suggests that knowledge of the relative ordering of deictic
time words may precede acquisition of their fully adult-like
meanings – a pattern that has also been observed for
duration words (Tillman & Barner, 2015).
Beyond the age-related increase in the frequency of
children’s linear representations of time, we also observed
developmental changes in the types of linear representations
children produced. Unlike older children, the majority of
whom produced adult-like left-to-right arrangements,
younger children were no more likely to depict time as
proceeding from left-to-right as from right-to-left. This early
variability aligns with the results of cross-cultural studies of
adults showing that illiteracy and lack of exposure to spatial
artifacts for timekeeping are associated with higher
variability in space-time associations. Moreover, the
presence of linear and logical but writing-directioninconsistent time-space mappings in children is consistent
with the hypothesis that a more generalized spatial model of
time may be in place before children have fully internalized
cultural conventions. Notably, however, even the youngest
children used the horizontal axis nearly exclusively. The
extent of children’s bias toward arranging items horizontally
is being examined in more detail in ongoing studies
attempting to prime children to use the vertical axis instead.
When the effect of age was controlled for, children who
displayed higher semantic knowledge of the calendar system
outside a spatial context (e.g., those who could recite the
days of the week without error) were no more likely to
produce adult-like spatial representations of time. However,
when children were provided an explicit calendar-like
template on which to perform the sticker task in Experiment
2, we saw a large increase in adult-like behavior among 5year-olds. This suggests that the use of such spatial artifacts
may play a role in solidifying left-to-right representations
among children of this age. This structural scaffolding
conferred no particular benefit outside of this developmental
window, however. It had no impact on the low performance
of 3-year-olds or on the high performance of 6-year-olds,
and it was no more effective than simple spatial priming for
4-year-olds. Though rote knowledge of the calendar system

alone does not lead to conventionalized space-time
mappings, a baseline level of semantic knowledge is likely
required to render spatial artifacts like calendars
comprehensible to children.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that, while
preschoolers do not often spontaneously produce linear
representations of time, many are able to map temporal
sequence to linear space, and can be easily primed to do so
as early as age 4. The refinement and conventionalization
of children’s spatial representations of time, however,
continues into the school years.

Acknowledgements
We thank the participating families and the daycares,
preschools, and museums where testing was conducted,
particularly the Reuben H. Fleet Science Center.

References
Bergen, B. K., & Lau, T. T. C. (2012). Writing direction affects
how people map space onto time. Frontiers in psychology, 3.
Bonato, M., Zorzi, M., & Umiltà, C. (2012). When time is space:
evidence for a mental time line. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 36(10), 2257-2273.
Boroditsky, L., & Gaby, A. (2010). Remembrances of times east
absolute spatial representations of time in an Australian
aboriginal community. Psychological Science, 21(11), 16351639.
Bottini, R., & Casasanto, D. (2013). Space and time in the child's
mind: metaphoric or ATOMic?. Frontiers in psychology, 4.
Bueti, D., & Walsh, V. (2009). The parietal cortex and the
representation of time, space, number and other
magnitudes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B: Biological Sciences, 364(1525), 1831-1840.
Busby Grant, J., & Suddendorf, T. (2011). Production of temporal
terms by 3-, 4-, and 5-year-old children. Early Childhood
Research Quarterly, 26(1), 87-95.
Casasanto, D., Fotakopoulou, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Space
and time in the child’s mind: Evidence for a cross‐dimensional
asymmetry. Cognitive Science, 34(3), 387-405.
McCormack, T. (2014). The development of temporal cognition. In
R. Lerner, L. Liber, U. Mueller (Eds.), Handbook of Child
Psychology and Developmental Science, Volume Two, Cognitive
Processes, 7th Edition
Sinha, C., Silva Sinha, V., Zinken, J., & Sampaio, W. (2011).
When time is not space: the social and linguistic construction
of time intervals and temporal event relations in an Amazonian
culture. Language and Cognition, 3, 137e169.
Srinivasan, M., & Carey, S. (2010). The long and the short of it: on
the nature and origin of functional overlap between
representations of space and time. Cognition, 116(2), 217-241.
Tillman, K. A. & Barner, D (2015). Learning the language of time:
Children’s acquisition of duration words. Cognitive Psychology,
78, 57-77.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991). Cross-cultural
and developmental trends in graphic productions. Cognitive
Psychology, 23(4), 515-557.
Winter, B., Marghetis, T., & Matlock, T. (2015). Of magnitudes
and metaphors: Explaining cognitive interactions between
space, time, and number. Cortex, 64, 209-224.

2403

