Can experience with different types of writing system modulate holistic processing
in speech perception?
Tianyin Liu (kanalty@hku.hk)
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
627 Jockey Club Tower, Centennial Campus, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR
Abstract
Holistic processing (HP) is an expertise marker in visual
perception; nevertheless, it can be modulated by writing
experience (Tso, Au, & Hsiao, 2014). We have recently
found that HP also indicates expertise in Cantonese speech
perception (Liu & Hsiao, 2014). Nevertheless, Cantonese has
a logographic writing system where one syllable corresponds
to one character, whereas in alphabetic languages, each
syllable can be decomposed into phonemes that correspond to
letters. This distinction between logographic and alphabetic
languages may also modulate HP effects in speech perception.
Here we tested HP effects through the composite paradigm
with Korean syllables. In contrast to Cantonese speech
perception, native Korean speakers were less holistic than
novices in Korean syllable perception. Thus, experience with
an alphabetic language may promote analytic processing of
its spoken syllables. Similar to visual perception, our results
suggest that HP as an expertise marker in speech perception
depends on the listeners’ learning experience.
Keywords: holistic processing, speech perception, isolated
Korean syllable processing.

Introduction
In vision research, holistic processing (HP), i.e., combining
features together and process them as a whole, has been
consistently found as a behavioral expertise marker for face
processing across numerous studies through the composite
paradigm (for review, see Richler & Gauthier, 2014). In a
composite face task, participants are shown pairs of
composite faces and asked to do same/different judgments
about the top halves of the faces and ignore the irrelevant
bottom halves; participants are likely to report identical top
halves to look different when they are aligned with different
bottom halves. This phenomenon is termed the composite
illusion, and it disappears when the top and bottom halves
are misaligned. The amount of interference they get from
the irrelevant parts in the aligned condition, measured by
either a decrease in accuracy or sensitivity, or an increase in
response time as compared with the performance in the
misaligned conditions, reflected the degree of holistic
processing. In expert face processing, HP binds the two
halves of the faces together so that experts’ flexibility to
access the information of individual parts is attenuated
(Maurer, LeGrand, & Mondloch, 2002). The same paradigm
has been used to examine other fields of visual expertise,
including the recognition of cars, birds (Gauthier,
Skudlarski, Gore & Anderson, 2000), and fingerprints

(Busey & Vanderkolk, 2005), and HP has been consistently
found as an expertise marker.
More recent research suggests that, although HP has been
found as an expertise marker for face/object recognition, it
can be modulated by experts’ sensorimotor experience. For
example, it was shown that in Chinese character recognition,
as compared with novices, expert readers with limited
writing experience showed increased HP whereas readers
who were expert in both reading and writing showed
reduced HP (Tso, Au & Hsiao, 2014). Similarly, Zhou,
Cheng, Zhang, and Wong (2012) showed that face drawing
artists had reduced holistic face processing as compared
with non-drawers. Through computational modeling,
Galmar and Hsiao (2013) showed that the reduced HP in
face artists might be due to engagement of local attention
required in drawing faces. These results suggest that HP as
an expertise marker in visual recognition can be modulated
by experts’ learning experience.
Auditory processing expertise in speech perception refers
to one’s ability to rapidly and accurately identify and
discriminate individual sounds within a particular language
(Chartrand, Peretz & Belin, 2008). In contrast to the
research on visual perception, where different types of
expertise have been studied extensively, expertise studies in
speech processing has been largely neglected. A recent
study adopting the composite paradigm to examine the
processing of Cantonese syllables in experts and novices
suggested that HP might also be an expertise marker in the
auditory domain (Liu & Hsiao, 2014). It was found that
experts’ perception of Cantonese syllable parts were more
influenced by neighboring segments, especially in the
perception of syllable initials. This result is consistent with
the literature on visual perception, suggesting that HP may
also be an expertise marker in speech perception.
Nevertheless, Cantonese has a logographic writing system
(Chinese) that uses individual characters to represent
meaning, and components of the characters do not map to
components of the pronunciation. In addition, in Hong Kong,
where Hsiao & Liu’s (2014) participants were recruited
from, students learn to read characters in a “look and say”
method, and no phonics instruction is given to aid in reading
(McBride-Chang et al., 2005). Consequently, the language
experience in Hong Kong Cantonese speakers may prompt
them to process each syllable as a whole as compared with
novices. In contrast, in learning to read alphabetic languages,
children are explicitly taught with grapheme-phoneme
(letter-sound) correspondences (Ellis, et al., 2004), and the

1398

awareness of smaller sound units within a syllable is a
critical predictor of children’s reading development
(Goswami & Mead, 1992). Thus, children with an
alphabetic language background may learn to break down a
syllable into smaller parts, in contrast to Hong Kong
Cantonese speaking children.
In visual recognition, experts’ learning (i.e., sensorimotor)
experience can modulate HP effects (e.g., Tso et al., 2014).
Similarly, in auditory processing, the differences between
the nature of logographic and alphabetic languages may also
modulate HP effects in speech perception. Learning to read
in an alphabetic language may involve engagement of local
attention to components of the syllables, leading to reduced
HP effects. Thus, here we aimed to examine whether HP is
also an expertise marker in the processing of isolated
syllables of an alphabetic language. Here we chose Korean
as our research focus for two reasons. Firstly, Korean is a
less popular alphabetic language than English, and thus is
novel to the majority of people in Hong Kong, whereas
English is an official language in Hong Kong. Secondly,
although Korean is an alphabetic language, written Korean
characters consist of letters (Hangul) arranged in a similar
square shape as Chinese characters. Each character
corresponds to one syllable, and is composed of Hangul
letters. Hangul is an alphabet in which one letter maps onto
one phoneme, and arranged from left-to-right and top-tobottom to form a character, as illustrated in Figure 1
(Perfetti & Liu, 2005). Korean syllables have four types: V,
VC, CV, and CVC, with the latter two being more dominant
types (Kim, 2001). In South Korea, Hangul is a compulsory
part of the official literary education from as early as
kindergarten, so by the time they graduate from primary
schools, they are already proficient in decoding skills (Cho
& McBride-Chang, 2005). We hypothesize that since native
Koreans learn to read Korean characters with extensive
practice in decomposing characters, they may engage more
local attention to individual units within a syllable than
novices. Thus, expert Korean speakers may be more
analytic than novices in the processing of Korean syllables.

time students at the University of Hong Kong. All
Cantonese speakers were born and grew up in Hong Kong
and had no formal education about Korean language except
for watching Korean dramas (on average less than one hour
per week). The two groups were matched in age (novice:
mean = 25.00, S.E = .93; expert: mean = 24.58, S.E = 1.38,
t(46) = .25, p = .80 ) and years of education (novice: mean =
16.41, S.E = .64; expert: mean = 15.56, S.E = .65, t(46)
= .86., p = .39). Note that the official language for
instruction at University of Hong Kong is English, so both
experts and novices of Korean were bilinguals in their
mother tongue and English.

Materials
Baseline Auditory Processing We adopted the birdsong
discrimination task developed by Liu and Hsiao (2014) to
tap on participants’ baseline auditory processing abilities.
All birdsongs used were downloaded from New Zealand
bird songs and calls corpus (Te Papa Atawhai, 2013) and
trimmed to 1.5s each from the beginning of the articulation.
Holistic Processing of Korean Syllables To examine
holistic processing of Korean syllables, the complete
composite paradigm (Gauthier & Bukach, 2007) commonly
used in vision research and modified in Liu and Hsiao (2014)
to examine holistic processing in speech perception was
adopted. In each trial, participants were presented with a
pair of Korean syllables sequentially, and told to attend only
to either the initial or the final segment, and judge whether
they were the same or different. In congruent trials, the
attended and irrelevant segments led to the same response,
i.e., both were “same” or both were “different” (see Table 1
for examples), whereas in incongruent trials, they led to
different responses (i.e., there was interference from
irrelevant segments). Holistic processing was assessed by
the performance difference between the congruent and the
incongruent trials.
Table 1: Examples of the Korean syllable stimuli.
Congruent
Incongruent

Figure 1: Examples of Korean syllables arranged into four
different structures

Methods
Participants
Twenty-four native Korean speakers and 24 native
Cantonese speakers who were novices of Korean were
recruited from the University of Hong Kong. A
questionnaire was designed to collect information about
their language background and exposure. All expert
participants were native Korean who were exchange or full-

Attend to Initial

Attend to Final

Same

[k]oo – [k]oo

l[ah] – l[ah]

Different

[n]eu – [g]eh

p[yi] – n[oo]

Same

[k]yi – [k]eh

p[ah] – s[ah]

Different

[n]eo – [g]eo

j[yi] – j[oo]

In order to apply the composite paradigm, only CV and
CVC structured Korean syllables were used for the current
study. Similar to Liu and Hsiao (2014)’s study, we created
three types of stimuli, namely original, separated, and
disconnected Korean syllables. The original Korean
syllables were recorded from a native female Korean
speaker at the Phonetic laboratory, University of Hong
Kong, using Praat with 44100 Hz sampling rate and 16-bit
resolution, mono channel. They were in total 160 pairs of
original syllables, and equally divided into four trial types:
same congruent, different congruent, same incongruent, and

1399

different incongruent. Due to co-articulation phenomenon
where the same initial may sound a bit different when paired
up with different final segments (i.e., the segments in an
original syllable are already integrated to form a holistic
representation), we created separated Korean syllables by
concatenating isolated initials and finals recorded by the
same female speaker corresponding to the original syllables
with no time delay (Figure 2b) to eliminate the coarticulation effect. In addition, we created disconnected
syllables (Figure 2c) by adding a 0.5s gap between the
initial and the final of the separated syllables. This
disconnected condition is analogous to the misaligned
condition in the composite paradigm used in vision research.
The original and separated stimuli were about 1s long,
whereas the disconnected stimuli were about 1.5s long.

They then heard two birdsongs sequentially, each of which
lasted for 1.5s, with a 1s interval between the two stimuli.
They were asked to judge whether the two birdsongs were
the same or different with a response box. Half of the trials
were “same” trials, and the other half were “different” trials.
All birdsongs were drawn from the 60 birdsong clips; the
presentation of a birdsong in a “same” or “different” trial
was counterbalanced across participants.
Holistic Processing of Korean Syllables There were 160
trials of original syllables, 160 trials of corresponding
separated syllables, and 160 trials of corresponding
disconnected Korean syllables. In each stimulus condition,
there were four blocks, two for syllable initial
discrimination and two for final discrimination; each block
contained 40 trials. The sequence of presenting the initial
and final discrimination blocks was counterbalanced across
participants. In each trial, after a 0.5s central fixation, they
listened to two sequentially presented Korean syllables with
a 1s interval in between, and then judged whether the initials
(or the finals in the final discrimination blocks) of the two
syllables were the same or different with a serial response
box compatible with E-Prime (Figure 3). They performed a
practice session with 24 trials consisting of all three types of
stimuli (8 trials respectively for each type shown in Figure 2,
4 initial and 4 final discrimination trials) not used in the
materials before the experiment.

Figure 2: Examples of a) original Korean syllables, b)
separated and c) disconnected syllables.
Design
The design had one between-subject variable: group (expert
vs. novice); and three within-subject variables: congruency
(congruent vs. incongruent), stimulus type (original vs.
separated vs. disconnected), and attended syllable segment
(initial vs. final). The dependent variable was discrimination
sensitivity measured by A’, which is a bias-free
nonparametric measure of sensitivity1. The degree of
holistic processing was indicated by the performance
difference between congruent and incongruent trials.

Results

Procedure
Baseline Auditory Processing 30 birdsong discrimination
trials were carried out before the holistic processing tasks.
In each trial, participants first saw a fixation cross for 500
ms at the center of the screen to signal the start of the trial.

1

Figure 3: Procedure of the holistic processing task

, where H and F
present hit rate and false alarm rate respectively. Better
performance is indicated by a higher A’. Here we used A’ instead
of D’ because it can be calculated when the hit rate or the false
alarm rate is 1 or 0, which was present in the data we collected.

Bird Song
Both expert and novice groups had high and similar
performance in the birdsong discrimination task, they did
not differ in accuracy (experts, mean = .94, S.E = .02;
novices, mean = .94, S.E = .02, t(46) = ..16, p = .87), nor
response time (experts, mean = 1.60s, S.E = .13s; novices,
mean = 1.50s, S.E = .14s, t(46) = .61, p = .61), suggesting
both groups had no impairment in the baseline auditory
temporal processing.

Holistic Processing
Repeated measures ANOVA in A’ revealed significant main
effects of stimulus type (F(2, 92) = 43.11, p < .001, ηp2

1400

= .48), congruency (F(1, 46) = 71.16, p < .001, ηp2 = .61),
and attended syllable segment (F(1, 46) = 85.57, p < .001,
ηp2 = .65). Participants performed the worst in perceiving
original Korean syllables (planned paired-sample t-test,
original vs. separated: t(47) = 4.89, p < .001; original vs.
disconnected, t(47) = 4.88, p < .01), and had similar
performance in the separated and disconnected conditions
(t(47) = 0.19, p = .85). They were better in congruent than
incongruent trials (t(47) = 6.68, p < .001), and in processing
finals than initials (t(47) = 7.63, p < .001).
There was also a significant four-way interaction between
stimulus type, congruency, attended segment, and group
(F(2, 92) = 11.23, p < .01, ηp2 = .20), a three-way interaction
between stimulus type, congruency and attended segment
(F(2, 92) = 29.00, p < .001, ηp2 = .39), and a two-way
interaction between stimulus type and congruency (F(2, 92)
= 98.79, p < .001, ηp2 = .69). The above results indicated
that the level of holistic processing in the perception of the
syllable initials and finals differed between the two groups.
To further investigate the effect, we examined the data in
the syllable initial and syllable final discrimination tasks
separately2.
Syllable Initials Repeated measure ANOVA in A’ revealed
significant main effects of congruency (F(1, 46) = 98.63, p
< .001, ηp2 = .69) and stimulus type (F(1, 46) = 45.55, p
< .001, ηp2 = .49): participants showed a congruency effect
in syllable initial perception in general, and they performed
better as we separated and disconnected the initials from
finals. A significant three-way interaction between stimulus
type, congruency, and group (F(2, 92) = 42.18, p < .01, ηp2
= .47), and a two-way interaction between stimulus type and
congruency, (F(2, 92) = 97.62, p < .001, ηp2 = .68) were also
found. The interaction effects indicated that the level of
holistic processing differed across different types of stimuli
and participant groups.
When we split the data by group, we found that among
experts, there was a significant interaction between
congruency and stimulus type (F(2, 46) = 27.15, p < .01, ηp2
= .54), and this interaction was also found in novices (F(2,
46) = 74.95, p < .001, ηp2 = .77). When we split the data by
stimulus type, in processing original syllables, there was a
main effect of congruency (F(1, 46) = 110.98, p < .001, ηp2
= .73), and a significant interaction between group and
congruency (F(1, 46) = 51.19, p < .001, ηp2 = .53): novices
showed a stronger congruency effect, i.e., were more
holistic than experts in processing authentic Korean syllable
initials. When we separated the initials from the finals, the
effect of congruency became marginal (F(1, 46) = 3.30, p
= .08), and there was no interaction between group and
congruency (F(1, 46) = 1.09, p = .30, n.s.). The analysis
with disconnected syllables yielded similar results to the
separated condition: a marginal congruency effect (F(1, 46)
2
In the response time data analysis, only significant main
effects of congruency and attended segment, and a marginal main
effect of congruency were found. No significant interaction effects
were observed.

= 3.20, p =.08), and no interaction between congruency and
group (F(1, 46) = .81, p = .37, n.s.). As shown in Figure 4,
in general, both groups showed strong holistic processing in
the original condition, and separating/disconnecting
segments reduced the congruency effect.

Figure 4: Performance of experts and novices of Korean in
the HP task with Korean syllable initials (*p < 0.05; ***p <
0.001)
Syllable Finals There were significant main effects of
congruency (F(1, 46) = 36.41, p < .01, ηp2 = .44) and
stimulus type (F(1, 46) = 27.69, p < .01, ηp2 = .38), a twoway interaction between stimulus type and congruency (F(2,
92) = 40.17, p < .01, ηp2 = .47), and a significant three-way
interaction between stimulus type, congruency, and group
(F(2, 92) = 20.13, p < .01, ηp2 = .30) in A’. Similar to the
results in the perception of syllable initials, the interaction
effects indicated that the level of holistic processing differed
across different types of stimuli and participant groups.
When we examined the data separately by group, novices
exhibited a significant interaction between congruency and
stimulus type (F(2, 46) = 34.23, p < .001, ηp2 = .60), as well
as among experts (F(2, 46) = 6.13, p < .05, ηp2 = .21). When
we separated the data by stimulus type, in the original
syllable condition, there was a significant main effect of
congruency (F(1, 46) = 44.71, p < .001, ηp2 = .49), and a
significant interaction between congruency and group (F(1,
46) = 17.86, p < .01, ηp2 = .28). Novices of Korean were in
general more holistic than experts in the original syllable
condition. In the separated condition, no significant
congruency effect (F(1, 46) = 1.36, p = .25, n.s.) or
interaction between congruency and group (F(1, 46) = .19, p
= .67, n.s.) was found. Similarly in the disconnected
condition, there was no main effect of congruency (F (1, 46)
= 2.38, p = .13, n.s.) or interaction effect (F(1, 46) = 1.09, p
=.30, n.s.; Figure 5). These results were in general
consistent with the results with syllable initials, suggesting
that experts exhibited reduced holistic processing effect as
compared with novices; as shown in Figure 5, in general
separation/disconnection of the segments reduced the
congruency effect in both groups.

1401

Figure 5: Performance of experts and novices of Korean in
the HP task with Korean syllable finals (**p < 0.01)

Discussion
To examine whether experience with languages that have
different types of writing systems (i.e., logographic vs.
alphabetic) can influence holistic processing (HP) in speech
perception, here we extended our research on HP in
Cantonese to the processing of Korean, an alphabetic
language. We adopted a modified composite paradigm to
examine the perception of Korean syllables in native Korean
speakers and novices whose first language is Cantonese.
Firstly, in contrast to the findings in Cantonese syllable
processing (Liu & Hsiao, 2014), we found that Korean
experts were more analytic than novices in Korean syllable
perception. In perceiving Korean syllable initials and finals,
both experts and novices showed decreased HP when the
segments were separated or disconnected from each other,
reflecting the baseline behavior in which sound segments
were less likely to be perceived as a whole when they were
separate or disconnected. The main difference in their
perception of syllable initials and finals lay in the original
syllable condition. Similar to how novices of Cantonese
perceived Cantonese syllable initials, novices of Korean
were very holistic when perceiving Korean syllable initials.
These effects suggest that the default mode of human
perception of syllable initials in a novel language may be
holistic. However, comparing with novices of Korean,
native Korean speakers were relatively less holistic in the
processing of syllable initials, presumably due to their
experience with Korean language. In contrast, in the
perception of Cantonese syllable initials, expert Cantonese
speakers were even more holistic than novices, and their
perception was still affected by syllable finals even when
the finals were separated or disconnected from the initials.
This contrast of how expertise in Korean and Cantonese
manifest through the HP paradigm may reflect the
modulation of the writing system on speech perception. In
learning an alphabetic language such as Korean, children
learn to read words through identifying sounds for spelling
using grapheme-phoneme (letter-sound) correspondences.

This learning process may require engagement of local
attention to graphemes and phonemes, making them more
and more proficient in identifying individual sound units
within one syllable. In contrast, children learning to read a
logographic language such as Chinese do not need to
decompose a character pronunciation into phonemes since
they do not map to components in the character. Thus, it is
possible to learn to read Chinese through “look and say”,
pairing one character with one syllable (such as children in
Hong Kong). This learning experience may blur the
boundaries between syllable initials and finals, resulting in a
more holistic way of processing Cantonese syllables. These
effects converge with some recent findings in visual
perception. For example, face artists who are expert in
drawing faces demonstrate reduced HP in face perception
(Zhou et al., 2012); a recent computational modeling study
suggests that this effect may be due to engagement of local
attention in face artists when drawing faces (Galmar &
Hsiao, 2013). Similarly, in Chinese character processing,
learning only to read but write Chinese lead to increased HP
among expert readers as compared to novices, whereas
learning to both read and write Chinese resulted in reduced
HP (Tso et al., 2014). Together these results suggest that in
perceptual expertise development, HP effects can be
modulated by different learning experiences. Using the
same paradigm in both visual and auditory processing
allows us to compare and examine expertise effects that may
be universal across different modalities.
Although in general Korean speech expertise
demonstrated different HP effects from Cantonese expertise,
here we replicated one finding from Cantonese syllable
processing (Liu & Hsiao, 2014): both participant groups
processed syllable initials more holistically than syllable
finals. This effect may be attributed to the typical lengths of
syllable initials and finals, and the differences in the
acoustic properties of consonants and vowels.
In the literature of speech processing, the term “holistic
processing” has often been defined as processing at the level
of syllable or a global unit of speech (Charles-Luce & Luce,
1990), which is considered as a less efficient and immature
form of speech processing. On the contrary, analytic
processing, i.e., processing a word as a combination of
individual sounds from the beginning to the end, emerges
with more exposure to the language and accelerates with
explicit teaching of the internal structure of the words, and
marks the maturation of phonological encoding and
expertise in the language (Byrd, Conture, & Ohde, 2007).
Note that although we also found native Korean speakers
are less holistic than novices in processing Korean syllables,
the definition of HP used here is different from the one in
the auditory processing literature. The HP measured by the
composite paradigm refers to voluntary combination of
features and inability to selectively attend to parts. Thus, our
results suggest that, not only can experts of an alphabetic
language process words or syllables phoneme by phoneme,
but also can they selectively attend to part of the syllables
without being interfered by other segments. Readers of

1402

logographic languages such as Chinese are also shown to
have better phonological awareness as they progress to
become better readers (Shu, Peng, & McBride-Chang, 2008);
nevertheless, Hsiao and Liu’s (2014) results suggest that
they may still process syllables holistically due to their
learning experience. It remains unclear whether explicit
instructions
on
the
phonemic
structures
of
Chinese/Cantonese syllables through a phonetic system are
able to enhance analytic syllable processing and reading
development. Research on visual expertise has suggested
that both holistic and analytic skills maybe required for
mastering a recognition skill. For example, in Tso et al’s
(2014) study, the best readers were those who were
proficient in both reading and writing. Similarly, Galmar,
Chung, and Hsiao (2014) showed that face drawing experts,
who showed reduced HP in face processing, performed
better than non-drawers in face identification. These results
suggest that the development of analytic skills may also be
beneficial for speech processing.
In conclusion, here we show that experts demonstrated
weaker HP than novices in Korean syllable perception as
assessed by the composite paradigm, in contrast to Liu and
Hsiao’s (2014) finding that Cantonese experts showed
stronger HP than novices. This result suggests that
experience with different writing systems may modulate HP
effects in speech perception. Similar to the literature on
visual expertise, HP as an expertise marker in speech
perception depends on the listeners’ learning experience.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (project code: HKU 758412H and HKU 745210H to
J.H. Hsiao), and the help from our native Korean research
assistants Hyun Kyung Lee and Sunny Lee.

References
Busey, T. A. & Vanderkolk, J. R. (2005). Behavioral and
electrophysiological evidence for configural processing in
fingerprint experts. Vision Res., 45, 431-448.
Byrd, C. T., Conture, E. G., & Ohde, R. N. (2007).
Phonological Priming in Young Children Who Stutter:
Holistic Versus Incremental Processing. Am. J. of SpeechLang. Pat., 16, 43-53.
Charles-Luce, J., & Luce, P. A. (1990). Similarity
neighborhoods of words in young children’s lexicon. J.
Child Lang., 17, 205 - 215.
Chartrand, J. P., Peretz, I., & Belin, P. (2008). Auditory
recognition expertise and domain specificity. Brain Res.,
1220, 191 - 198.
Cho, J.-R., & McBride-Chang, C. (2005). Correlates of
Korean Hangul Acquisition among Kindergartners and
Second Grades. Sci. Stud. Read., 9 (1), 3-16.
Ellis, N. C., Natsume, M., Stavropoulou, K., Hoxhallari, L.,
van Daal, V. H. P., Polyzoe, N., Tsipa, M.-L., & Petalas,
M. (2004). The effects of orthographic depth on learning
to read alphabetic, syllabic, and logographic scripts. Read.
Res. Quart., 39 (4), 438-468.

Galmar, G., Chung, H., & Hsiao, J. (2014). Face drawing
experience is associated with better face recognition
performance and reduced left-side bias in face perception.
The 14 Annual Meeting of Vision Sciences Society (VSS),
St. Pete Beach, Florida.
Gauthier, I., & Bukach, C. (2007). Should we reject the
expertise hypothesis? Cognition, 103, 322-330.
Gauthier, I., Skudlarski, P., Gore, J. C., & Anderson, A. W.
(2000). Nat. Neurosci., 3, 191 - 197.
Goswami, U., & Mead, F. (1992). Onset and rime
awareness and analogies in reading. Read. Res. Quart., 27
(2), 153-162.
Kim, J.-H. (2001). Unowa moonwha [Language and
Culture]. Seoul, Korea: Youkrack Publishing.
Liu, T., & Hsiao, J. H. (2014). Holistic processing in speech
perception: Experts' and novices' processing of isolated
Cantonese syllables. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane,
& B. Scassellati, Proceeding of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 869-874).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Maurer, D., Le Grand, R., & Mondloch, C. J. (2002). The
many faces of configural processing. Trends Cogn. Sci., 6,
255–260.
McBride-Chang, C., Cho, J. R., Liu, H., Wagner, R. K., Shu,
H., Zhou, A., ... Muse, A. (2005). Changing models across
cultures: associations of phonological awareness and
morphological structure awareness with vocabulary and
word recognition in second graders from Beijing, Hong
Kong, Korea, and the United States. J. Exp. Child
Psychol., 92 (2), 140 - 160.
Perfetti, C. A., & Liu, Y. (2005). Orthography to Phonology
and Meaning: Comparisons across and within Writing
Systems. Read. Writ., 18 (3), 193 - 210.
Richler, J. J., & Gauthier, I. (2014). A meta-analysis and
review of holistic face processing. Psychol. Bull., 140 (5),
1281 - 1302.
Shu, H., Peng, H. & McBride-Chang (2008). Phonological
awareness in young Chinese children. Dev Sci, 11(1),
171–181.
Te Papa Atawhai. (2013). New Zealand bird songs and calls.
Retrieved
on
February
27th,
2013
from
http://www.doc.govt.nz/conservation/nativeanimals/birds/new-zealand-bird-songs-and-calls/.
Zhou, G., Cheng, Z., Zhang, X., & Wong, A. C. (2012).
Smaller holistic processing of faces associated with face
drawing experience. Psychon Bull Rew, 19 (2), 157-162.

1403

