Can Children Balance the Size of a Majority with the Quality of their Information?
Jane Hu* (janehu@uw.edu)
Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, Portage Bay Building
Seattle, WA 98195 USA

Andrew Whalen* (aczw@st-andrews.ac.uk)
School of Biology, Harold Mitchel Building
St. Andrews, Scotland KY16 9TJ UK

Daphna Buchsbaum (buchsbaum@psych.utoronto.ca)
Department of Psychology, Sidney Smith Hall.
Toronto, ON M5S 3G3 Canada

Tom Griffiths and Fei Xu ([tom_griffiths] and [fei_xu]@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract*

whose opinions received support from others (Fusaro &
Harris, 2008), and endorse object labels given by a majority
(Corriveau, Fusaro, & Harris, 2009).
However, groups can also provide unreliable information.
To learn accurately, children should consider not just the
number of informants, but also the quality of each person’s
information. In a series of three studies, we explore how
children extend trust to informants based on the quality of
their knowledge source, and how they weigh this
information against majority or minority opinions. We
compare children’s responses to the performance of adults
on these same tasks, and to a computational model of
learning preferences from testimony. This model was
created to provide a normative baseline showing how a
rational learner would balance the opinion of a majority
against the quality of each informant’s information.
Comparing the model’s predictions with children’s
responses can illuminate the extent to which their behavior
is rational, and under which conditions it is not.

We investigate how children balance the quality of
informants’ knowledge with the number of endorsements
when deciding which of two boxes contains the better option.
When group numbers are equal, children choose boxes
endorsed by informants with visual access over informants
with hearsay (Experiment 1), but are at chance when group
size conflicts with quality of knowledge (Experiments 2 and
3). This suggests that children tend to conform to a majority
opinion, compared to adults (Experiment 4) and a normative
computational model. These studies suggest that preschoolers
consider the testimony of multiple informants and evaluate
their knowledge sources, but may assume that informants are
more individually informative than they are.

Introduction
Social learning is the cornerstone of human society. It has
been proposed that our propensity for learning from others,
rather than our intelligence or ingenuity, is responsible for
our success as a species (Boyd & Richerson, 1985; Boyd,
Richerson, & Henrich, 2011). However, not all information
from others is equally dependable. A large body of literature
about children’s epistemic trust has found that children
selectively trust informants, and prefer those with a past
history of accuracy (e.g., Koenig & Harris, 2005; Pasquini
et al., 2007), those with expertise in a topic (e.g., Aguiar,
Stoess, & Taylor, 2012; Boseovski & Thurman, 2014;
Kushnir, Vredenburgh & Schneider, 2013; Einav, 2014),
and those who have first hand knowledge (e.g., Sodian &
Wimmer, 1987; O’Neill, Astington, & Flavell, 1992; but see
Palmquist & Jaswal, 2012).
In many cases, information on an informant’s previous
accuracy or expertise may not be available. In this case,
Corriveau, Fusaro, and Harris (2009) argue that children
could instead evaluate consensus among different
informants. They found that preschoolers prefer informants
*

Experiment 1: Direct knowledge vs. hearsay
In Experiment 1, participants watched as informants gave
opinions about which of two boxes contained the better
option. Equal numbers of informants endorsed each box, but
one box was endorsed by informants who had looked in the
boxes and had direct knowledge of what was inside,
whereas the other box was endorsed by only one informant
with direct knowledge while the other three received
hearsay about which box was better.

Methods
Participants Participants were 22 preschoolers (mean age =
4 years 1 month; range = 43 – 66 months). An additional
child was excluded due to fussiness.
Materials Materials included two black boxes, each of
which contained a toy (a plastic cement truck or stuffed
leopard) or a snack (Goldfish cracker or Froot Loop™).

Both authors contributed equally to this work.

956

Table 1. Children’s and Adults’ choices in Experiments 1-3 compared. * indicates a significant result, p<.05
Children’s average score for choosing
Adults’ average score for choosing
direct group, out of 2 (standard error)
direct group, out of 2 (standard error)
Experiment 1
1.45* (0.14)
1.69* (0.06)
Experiment 2
0.83 (0.18)
1.70* (0.08)
Experiment 3
1.10 (0.14)
1.71* (0.08)
Informants were eight 7” tall paper dolls (four male, four
female), glued to a wood block base.
Procedure Children participated in two trials: a snack trial
and a toy trial. Trial order was counterbalanced across
participants. To begin the first trial, the experimenter
showed the participant the two boxes and explained that
each box contained a [toy/snack], but that she did not know
what was inside. Then, the child watched as dolls gave
opinions about which box contained the better option.
A group of four dolls endorsed one box and a second
group of four endorsed the other. In the direct group, all four
dolls received direct (visual) knowledge before giving their
opinions. One at a time, each doll walked over to each box
and looked inside, then stood beside the same box and said,
“I think this [toy/snack] is better!”.
In the indirect group, only the first doll in the group
received direct knowledge of the box’s contents. The first
doll looked inside both of the boxes, then stood next to the
box not endorsed by the direct group and said, “I think this
[toy/snack] is better!” This doll then crossed paths with a
second doll, and the experimenter made indiscriminate
whispering sounds to convey that the two dolls were
conversing. The second doll gave their opinion, saying,
“[S]he said this [toy/snack] was better, so I think this
[toy/snack] is better,” and passed on their hearsay to a third
doll, who stated his or her opinion, and then passed the
hearsay on to the fourth doll. Each group included equal
numbers of male and female dolls, and group order (direct
or indirect first) was counterbalanced. The side of the box
endorsed by the direct group was also counterbalanced.
After all dolls gave opinions, the experimenter brought all
eight dolls back on stage and placed them in front of the box
they endorsed, and reminded children that the dolls were all
standing in front of the box they had said was better. The
experimenter then asked the child to choose the box they
wanted to try. Once children selected a box, they were
presented with the object inside. They were not shown the
contents of the unchosen box. The experimenter cleared all
materials from the table, and proceeded to the second trial.
The procedure of the second trial was identical to the first.

responses for the two trial types (snack vs toy), p = .31
(odds ratio = 0.39).
When choosing between two boxes, each endorsed by
four informants, children prefer the box endorsed by
informants with direct knowledge of the boxes’ contents.
This suggests that children monitor individual informants’
knowledge quality and not just group size. Additionally, this
suggests that they understand that visual access is a more
reliable source of information than hearsay, even when
learning about non-factual domains like preferences.

Experiments 2 and 3: Source versus consensus
In Experiment 1, children chose the box endorsed by the
group of informants with direct knowledge of the box’s
contents. Given that both the indirect and direct groups had
the same number of informants, Experiment 1 leaves open
the question of how children reconcile source knowledge
with consensus information. Previous studies have found
that children are sensitive to majority opinions, and often
conform to endorsements made by a consensus, so it is
possible that consensus endorsements could override
children’s assessment of informants’ source knowledge. In
Experiments 2 and 3, children are faced with a decision
between a minority of informants who all have higher
quality (direct) knowledge, versus a majority of informants
who give opinions based on indirect knowledge.

Methods
Participants Participants in Experiment 2 were 24
preschoolers (mean age = 4 years 3 months; range = 42 to
61 months). Three additional children were tested but were
excluded due to experimenter error. Participants in
Experiment 3 were 31 preschoolers (mean age = 4 years 6
months; range = 44 to 62 months; 18 female, 13 male). Two
additional children were tested but excluded due to
experimenter error.
Materials were the same as in Experiment 1, except for the
addition of two dolls in Experiment 2.
Procedure The procedure of Experiment 2 was identical to
Experiment 1, except that there were four informants in the
direct group and six in the indirect group. The procedure for
Experiment 3 was identical to Experiment 2, but with three
informants in the direct group and five in the indirect group.

Results and Discussion
Results for Experiment 1 are summarized in Table 1.
Children were scored on the number of trials (0-2) in which
they picked the box endorsed by informants with direct
knowledge. Children were significantly more likely to
choose the direct box over the indirect box, t(21) = 3.18, p <
.01, d = 0.67. There was no significant difference in

Results and Discussion
Results for Experiments 2 and 3 are summarized in Table 1.
Children were scored on the number of trials (0-2) in which

957

they picked the box endorsed by informants with direct
knowledge.
Experiment 2 Children were at chance in choosing between
the box endorsed by the direct group and the box endorsed
by the indirect group, t(23) = -0.94, p = .36, d = -0.19.
Children chose the box endorsed by the direct group
significantly less than in Experiment 1, t(44) = -2.7, p < .01,
d = -.80. The majority of children consistently chose either
the direct group (7/24) or the indirect group (11/24) on both
trials. There was no significant difference in responses for
the two trial types, p = .77 (odds ratio = 0.71).
One possible explanation for children’s at-chance
responses in Experiment 2 is the higher number of dolls
used in the study compared with Experiment 1 which may
place additional demands on the child’s memory leading to
at-chance performance. To control for the total number of
demonstrators, Experiment 3 replicates Experiment 2, but
with the same overall number of dolls used in Experiment 1.
Experiment 3 Results are summarized in Table 1. Children
were scored on the number of trials (0-2) in which they
picked the box endorsed by the informants with direct
knowledge. Children were at chance in choosing between
the box endorsed by the direct group and the box endorsed
by the indirect group, t(30) = 0.68, p = .50, d = 0.12. These
responses were not significantly different from those of
Experiment 2, t(53) = -1.17, p = .25, d = 0.32, but were
marginally different from those of Experiment 1, t(51) =
1.73, p = .09, d = -0.49. There was no significant difference
in responses for the two trial types, p = .07 (odds ratio =
0.36). The majority of children consistently chose either the
box endorsed by the direct group (8/31) or the indirect
group (11/31) on both trials
Unlike children’s responses in Experiment 1, these two
studies found that children were at chance when choosing
between the boxes endorsed by the direct and indirect
groups. When a majority of informants with indirect
knowledge is contrasted with a minority with direct
knowledge, children’s preference for the box endorsed by
the direct informants decreases. These results suggest that a
consensus has the power to diminish children’s preferences
for sources with higher quality knowledge, but does not
shift children’s judgments entirely—they do not simply
endorse the majority’s choice. There were also no
significant differences between Experiments 2 and 3,
suggesting that children’s at-chance performance in
Experiment 2 was not driven by cognitive load issues (i.e.,
being overwhelmed by the large number of informants).

the indirect group provides some information, a larger group
of indirect informants could provide more evidence than a
smaller group of direct informants. To assess whether
children have a conformity bias, analyze how a rational
learner might learn preferences from multiple demonstrators
with varying levels of knowledge.
We build a computational model following from previous
Bayesian models of learning from testimony by modeling
the problem that learners face as an inference problem (e.g.,
Shafto et al., 2012). Learners then use Bayes’ rule to
perform inference and select a behavior. Bayes’ rule
indicates that the probability that a hypothesis, h, is true,
given some data, such as informant testimony t, is
proportional to the probability of the testimony given the
hypothesis times the prior probability of the hypothesis, or
ℎ| ∝
|ℎ ℎ .
(1)
p(h|t) is the posterior probability and p(t|h) is the likelihood.
Normally, hypotheses represent claims about the world,
and the data represents observations. In this case, the
hypotheses represent beliefs about which item is in which
box, and the data are the testimonies given by the
informants. Unlike previous models of learning from
testimony, here the informants make claims about their
preferences rather than factual claims. To capture differing
preferences, we assume that a proportion λ of the population
prefers one item, while the rest prefer the other. We call the
item preferred by the proportion λ the target item.
Under this setup, the learner evaluates two hypotheses, hd,
that the target item is in the box endorsed by the direct
group, and hi, that the target item is in the box endorsed by
the indirect group. The probability of each hypothesis can
be calculated via Bayes rule, giving the posterior probability
|ℎ
|ℎ
ℎ| ,
∝
ℎ
(2)
where
=
,…,
refers to the testimony of the
indirect group, and
=
,…,
refers to the
testimony of the direct group. We assume that the prior
probability of the preferred item being in either box is equal.
The likelihood term—the probability of observing a
particular set of testimony given a hypothesis—depends
critically on how the learner assumes informants generate
their testimony. We assume a simple generative process,
outlined below, for informants who have access to direct
evidence, and for those who must rely on indirect evidence.
Finally, we assume that the learner, like the informants,
also has a preference, preferring the target item with
probability λ. To choose a box, learners first infer the
probability that each box holds the target item, and then use
their preference to determine which box they select. The
probability that the learner chooses the box endorsed by the
direct informants is just the probability that the box contains
the learner’s preferred item given the testimony.

Modeling Direct and Indirect Testimony
Given that Experiment 1 suggests that children are sensitive
to the quality of informants’ knowledge, the results of
Experiments 2 and 3 are striking, and may suggest that
children have a bias to conform to the majority. Intuitively
this behavior seems irrational. However, such behavior
could be rational; although indirect informants provide less
information than direct informants, they may still provide
some information. Theoretically, as long as each member of

Direct Evidence
We assume that informants who receive direct evidence
make decisions based on a two-step process. First, they
observe the items in each box (with a small error probability
ε of incorrectly observing the object, accounting for visual

958

indirect informants getting their information from the first
informant in the chain (who has direct knowledge),
| , ,ℎ =
| , , ℎ ∙ ∏ $%
| , , , ℎ (4)
is the first informant’s observation of the box
where ,
contents, which he whispers to the next individual in the
chain. The first informant’s observation corresponds to what
is actually inside each box with probability 1-ε (due to
visual error). If the first informant says that the target item is
in the box they endorsed, the probability that the next
informant agrees with the first informant is,
& = ' , , , ℎ () = 1 − ε λ + ε 1 − λ ,
(5)
where the first term accounts for the case where informant j
infers that the target item is in the box where the first
informant indicated, and prefers the target item, and the
second term accounts for the case where the informant
infers the target item is not where the first informant
indicated, but does not prefer the target item. The case
where the first informant whispers that the target item is not
in the box they endorsed can be computed similarly.
Object passing represents the other extreme from
preference passing—this is the most informative case for a
chain of indirect informants. Since we assume that
information is accurately transmitted between individuals,
the difference between direct testimony and testimony
accumulated indirectly through object passing stems from
the initial errors in observation. In the case of learning from
multiple direct informants, perceptual error is uncorrelated,
so that agreement between the informants provides stronger
evidence. However, in the case of learning from a string of
indirect learners, a single error in the beginning of the chain
may propagate errors along the chain.

error), and then they express a preference for the box that
contains the object they prefer. For simplicity, we assume
that all informants report their preferences accurately. This
means that the probability that an informant with direct
evidence endorses the box containing the target item given
their observation is
,ℎ = 1 − λ + 1 − λ ,
(3)
where htj refers to the hypothesis that the target item is in the
box endorsed by informant j’s testimony, tj, and ,
is the
informant’s observation of the box contents (where they
think they saw the target item). In Equation 3, the first term
represents the probability that the informant observed the
contents accurately and prefers the target item. The second
term represents the probability they incorrectly observed the
contents and do not prefer the target item. The probability of
endorsing the box not containing the target item can be
computed similarly. Since the direct informants do not hear
any other information, their testimony is not based on the
|ℎ is just the
testimony of others, which means that
product of the probability of the individual testimonies.
,

Indirect Evidence
In the case where informants receive indirect evidence, their
testimony is based solely on the information provided by
other informants. In these experiments, the information each
indirect informant receives from the previous informant is in
the form of “whispers.” However, what is whispered is not
clear. We consider two cases: one where only the preference
was passed (each informant whispers only which box they
prefer) the other where the contents of each box were passed
(each informant whispers what they believe is in each of the
two boxes). As in the direct case, all informants give
testimony about their preference to the learner, and we
assume that informants report their preferences accurately.
Preference Passing In the case where informants whisper
their preferences, future informants must use that
information to first infer which item is in which box, and
then endorse a box according to their own preference.
However, if the learner is also told each informant’s
preference, they are already aware of all the information that
each indirect informant had to make their decision, so that
subsequent informants provide no new information. The
learner should therefore disregard all but the first informant
in the chain. This is the case in Experiments 1, 2, and 3; the
learner observes the testimony of the first informant, who
has direct evidence, and so subsequent informants who
receive only indirect evidence can be disregarded.
Object Passing Individuals may whisper more than just
their preference; they may whisper which objects they
believe are in the boxes. Unlike the previous case where
indirect informants provided no new insight, in this case,
each indirect informant has knowledge about the boxes’
contents that is hidden from the learner. We assume each
informant treats the informant whispering to them as having
direct knowledge of the box contents, and that informants
whisper their beliefs accurately. This is equivalent to all

Results
Both models have two parameters, an error rate ε and a
preference parameter λ. We fixed the error rate to ε= 0.01,
and fit the preference parameter to children’s performance
in Experiment 1. We fit λ by maximizing the log-likelihood
of the participants’ responses in Experiment 1 under the
model, producing a best-fitting value of λ = .75 in the
preference passing model, and a value of λ = .78 in the
object passing model. Experiment 1 was used to fit the
model alone because it provided a baseline where both the
indirect and direct groups had the same number of
informants, allowing the model to be sensitive to the relative
weighting of direct and indirect testimony, without the
potential confound of a conformity bias. This model fit was
used to create predictions for Experiments 2 and 3.
Model results are shown in Figure 1. In Experiment 1,
both models provide a good fit to the data. The objectpassing model provides a better fit to Experiment 3 than the
preference-passing model, suggesting children may believe
that informants’ whispers carry additional (unheard)
information, so that five indirect informants are almost as
informative as three direct informants.
Critically, in Experiment 2, we found that both models
predicted that normative learners should endorse the
majority response substantially more than was found

959

(2)

version of Experiment 2), and 58 participants to a three
direct/five indirect condition (a version of Experiment 3).
Materials The experiment was an online survey
administered using Qualtrics survey software, with custom
animations inserted using Javascript. The informants were a
set of 10 distinct cartoon clip art characters (5 male, 5
female). There were also two pairs of cartoon boxes that
differed only in color: a red and blue pair, which
participants were told contained games, and a green and
yellow pair, which participants were told contained snacks.
Procedure The procedure closely matched that used with
children in Experiments 1-3, with the clip art characters
replacing the dolls that children saw. Like children, adults
each participated in two trials, a snack trial and a game trial,
with the order of trials counterbalanced.
Adults saw two boxes on opposite sides of the screen. For
the direct group, each member of the group was shown one
at a time. A character appeared on the screen, then moved to
each box while the cartoon text “*Looks inside box*”
flashed above the character’s head. Then, the character
stood by one box and said, “I think this [game/snack] is
better!” For the indirect group, the first member was shown
looking inside the boxes, declaring his or her opinion, and
moving to stand next to another indirect group member who
appeared on screen. The cartoon text “*whisper*” appeared
above both their heads. The second doll then moved to stand
by one box, and gave their opinion, “[S]he said this
[game/snack] was better, so I think this [game/snack] is
better”. This process repeated for the remaining characters.
After all characters gave opinions, participants were
shown an image with each group of characters placed under
the box they endorsed, with a reminder that this was the box
each character thought was better. Participants were then
asked to “Please select the box with the [game/snack] that
you would like to try”. Group order and side/color of box
endorsed by the direct group were counterbalanced. In game
trials, the red box always appeared on the left, and in snack
trials the green box always appeared on the left. For each
participant, characters’ group assignments were randomized.

Figure 1. Model predictions and children’s and adults’
choices for Experiments 1, 2, and 3. The model was fit to
child performance in Experiment 1.
experimentally. In the object-passing model, we find that
the model predicts that learners in Experiment 2 will choose
the direct informant’s box more than in Experiment 3: the
additional direct informant provides substantially more
evidence than the additional indirect informant.
Although these model predictions were fit to the data
from Experiment 1, both models predict that learners should
choose the direct group’s box in each experiment for a wide
range of parameter values. No matter the values for ε and λ,
the preference passing model predicts that individuals’
performance in Experiment 1 and 2 should be identical;
under the preference passing model indirect informants
provide no information and so the two additional indirect
informants in Experiment 2 should not change the learner’s
behavior. Changing the parameter values in the object
passing model leads to more variation in predictions, but the
qualitative results remained the same: in all experiments a
rational learner should go with the direct group.
Since the object-passing model represents the maximally
informative case, this means that differences in how
children interpret the knowledge indirect informants
transmit cannot account for their performance. This
confirms that, when the quality of informants’ knowledge
source is in conflict with the majority endorsement, children
conform to the majority more than predicted by a range of
normative models, suggesting that they believe individual
informants provide more evidence than they actually do.

Results and Discussion
Results are shown in Table 1. Overall, in all three
conditions, adults chose the box endorsed by the direct
group significantly more than chance (t ≥ 8.66, p < .001 in
all cases). A one-way ANOVA showed no significant
differences in performance between the three adult
conditions F(2,177) = 0.02, p = .98. In comparing adult and
child performance, a 2 (age group: adults or children) x 3
(Experiment: 1, 2, and 3) ANOVA revealed a main effect
for age group; adults’ and children’s responses differed
significantly, F(1,251) = 43.72, p < .01. There was also an
interaction effect between age group and experiment,
F(2,251) = 3.75, p < .05. Planned comparisons between age
groups in each experiment condition suggest that this
interaction was driven largely by differences in Experiments
2 and 3. Adults and children provided significantly different
responses in Experiment 2, t(83) = -5.21, p < .001, and in

Experiment 4: Adults
Given that children appear to be overconforming to the
testimony of the majority when compared to our normative
model, a natural question is whether adults also
overconform. We explore this by examining how adults
make decisions in tasks similar to Experiments 1, 2, and 3.

Methods
Participants Participants were 177 adult US residents,
recruited through Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) and
paid $0.50 for their time. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of three conditions: 61 participants to a four
direct/four indirect condition (a version of Experiment 1),
61 participants to a four direct/six indirect condition (a

960

incorrectly estimating the independence of demonstrators
would lead to systematic changes in the adoption and
maintenance of cultural traits through a population. Though
the results from this study do not directly address the
transmission of social norms based on informant reliability,
future work can explore this issue. Additionally, follow-up
studies could explore the developmental trajectory of
identifying higher quality knowledge sources.
In sum, these experiments shed light on how children
learn from others. Four- and five-year-old children
demonstrate an emerging ability to consider and integrate
several types of information—directness of knowledge and
consensus—when assessing the reliability of testimony.

Experiment 3, t(87) = 4.01, p < .001, but there was only a
marginal difference in Experiment 1, p = .09.
These results indicate that adults, unlike children, balance
the number of informants and the quality of their knowledge
source in a manner qualitatively consistent with our model.

General Discussion
These studies provide the first empirical evidence that
preschoolers weigh multiple informants’ opinions using the
quality of their knowledge source to assess the reliability of
their testimony. We find that with equal numbers of
informant endorsements, children favored a box
recommended by informants who received knowledge
directly (visual access) over informants who had received
knowledge indirectly (hearsay from other informants).
This complements previous work that suggests children
understand that not all testimony is equal. To succeed in this
task, children had to evaluate opinions from multiple
informants at once, and to consider each informant’s source
knowledge. Furthermore, while previous studies asked
children to make factual judgments (e.g., what’s in a box)
from testimony, children in this study were asked to make a
preferential choice based on others’ opinions. This suggests
that children look to others for social information to inform
their preferences, as well as facts.
However, when the box endorsed by a consensus of
informants and the box endorsed by informants with a
higher quality knowledge source were pitted against one
another, children were at chance in choosing between the
boxes. From a knowledge-acquisition perspective,
additional informants in the indirect group provide limited
new information; model predictions indicate that across
conditions a rational learner should choose the box endorsed
by the informants with the better knowledge source, not the
majority. Adults behaved in accordance with model
predictions, but the fact that children did not could indicate
that children overestimate the usefulness of informants’
opinions by assuming that each informant’s testimony
provides more independent evidence than is statistically the
case. Children may assume that each informant has
additional information that would make them more accurate
than simply receiving the previous informant’s testimony.
This is consistent with previous work suggesting that
children are biased to interpret adults as knowledgeable,
helpful teachers (Bonawitz et al., 2011).
The presence of a conformity bias in children may have
striking implications for the development of human culture.
Many cultural traits, including language and societal norms,
are learned at an early age. Formal models suggest that a
conformity bias may lead to the stability of such traits over
time (Boyd & Richerson 1985; Henrich & Boyd, 1998). If
children demonstrate a conformity bias at an early age, it
may allow them to quickly learn in-group norms, but may
allow neutrally beneficial or even detrimental behaviors to
persist in the population. Given that a behavior learned from
a majority in childhood may persist through adulthood, a
bias towards conformity in children that stems from

Acknowledgements. This research was supported by John Templeton
Foundation Grant #40128, ESRC Grant [ES/K009540/1] awarded to DB
and a NSF GRFP awarded to JH.

References
Aguiar, N. R., Stoess, C. J., & Taylor, M. (2012). The development of
children’s ability to fill the gaps in their knowledge by consulting
experts. Child Development, 83(4), 1368-1381.
Bonawitz, E. B., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N., Spelke, E., &
Schulz, L. E. (2011). The double-edged sword of pedagogy: Teaching
limits children’s spontaneous exploration and discovery. Cognition,
120(3), 322-330.
Boseovski, J. J., & Thurman, S. L. (2014). Evaluating and approaching a
strange animal: Children’s trust in informant testimony. Child
Development, 85(2), 824-834.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the Evolutionary Process.
University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL.
Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J., & Henrich, J. (2011). The cultural niche: Why
social learning is essential for human adaptation. Proceedings of the
National
Academy
of
Sciences,
108,
10918–10925.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1100290108
Corriveau, K. H., Fusaro, M., & Harris, P. L. (2009). Going With the Flow:
Preschoolers Prefer Nondissenters as Informants. Psychological Science,
20(3), 372–377.
Einav, S. (2014). Does the majority always know best? Young children’s
flexible trust in majority opinion. PLOS ONE, 9(8): e104585.
doi:10.1371/journal/pone.0104585.
Fusaro, M., & Harris, P. L. (2008). Children assess informant reliability
using bystanders’ non-verbal cues. Developmental Science, 11(5), 771–
777.
Henrich, J., & Boyd, R. (1998). The evolution of conformist transmission
and the emergence of between-group differences. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 19(4), 215-241.
Koenig, M. A., & Harris, P. L. (2005). Preschoolers Mistrust Ignorant and
Inaccurate Speakers. Child Development, 76(6), 1261–1277.
Kushnir, T., Vredenburgh, C., & Schneider, L. A. (2013). “Who can help
me fix this toy?” The distinction between causal knowledge and word
knowledge guides preschoolers’ selective requests for information.
Developmental Psychology, 49(3), 446-453.
O’Neill, D. K., Astington, J. W., & Flavell, J. H. (1992). Young Children's
Understanding of the Role That Sensory Experiences Play in Knowledge
Acquisition. Child Development, 63(2), 474–490.
Palmquist, C. M. & Jaswal, V. K. (2012). Preschoolers Expect Pointers
(Even Ignorant Ones) to Be Knowledgeable. Psychological Science,
23(3), 230-231.
Pasquini, E. S., Corriveau, K. H., Koenig, M., & Harris, P. L. (2007).
Preschoolers monitor the relative accuracy of informants.
Developmental Psychology, 43(5), 1216–1226.
Sodian, B., & Wimmer, H. (1987). Children's Understanding of Inference
as a Source of Knowledge. Child Development, 58(2), 424–433.
Shafto, P., Eaves, B., Navarro, D. J., & Perfors, A. (2012). Epistemic trust:
Modeling children’s reasoning about others’ knowledge and intent.
Developmental Science, 15(3), 436-447.

961

