Can Modern Neuroscience Change Our Idea of the Human?
Boris Kotchoubey (boris.kotchoubey@uni-tuebingen.de)
Department of Medical Psychology, University of Tübingen, Silcherstr. 5,
Tübingen, 72076 Germany

Abstract
The paper briefly reviews the contribution of recent
neuroscience findings to our understanding of our human
nature – more exactly, to the understanding of the three
properties that we conceive of as highly-specifically human:
consciousness, freedom, and language. The analysis yields
rather surprising results. Self-consciousness is possibly not
the highpoint of our sophisticated cognitive functions, but
rather the basic pre-reflective self-other distinction intimately
related to body control and affective states, within whose
limits cognitive processes become possible. Freedom is not a
violation of natural (biological) laws, but, in contrast, a
necessary attribute of complex behavior; it roots in the
fundamental biomechanical
freedom of
biological
movements. Language comprehension is neither an instinct
nor a set of complex inferences, but a behavior based on
learnt hierarchy of predictive, anticipatory processes. Thus the
answer to the question formulated in the title is positive: yes,
it can change. From the author’s viewpoint, these changes
emphasize embodied, enacted nature of the specifically
human functions.
Keywords: consciousness; freedom; language; neuroscience;
specificum humanum

Our most general ideas about what it is to be a human
being were traditionally shaped by humanitarians such as
philosophers, anthropologists, and theologians. Only
recently, natural scientists and particularly neuroscientists
have raised a claim to participate in this process or even to
play the leading role in it. As might be expected, this claim
elicited a protest in the camp of humanities, whose
representatives maintained that biological facts cannot
directly contribute to such cultural entities as our idea of the
human. Leaving this much too general discussion aside, I’ll
concentrate here on particular features that we commonly
regard as specifically human: we think about ourselves as
self-conscious beings, whose actions possess a considerable
amount of freedom, and who uniquely use a symbolic
language in their communication and thinking. I neither
claim that these three features are the complete list of
presumably specific properties of humans, nor that they are
independent of each other. I merely ask whether facts of
neuroscience can shed light at our basic conceptions of
consciousness, freedom, and language.

Self-Consciousness
We are still very far away from the discovery of the
sufficient biological conditions of consciousness. We are
even unable to disprove a radical humanitarian critique
which maintains that such sufficient conditions will never

be found. However, in the last years we learned a lot about
necessary neurobiological conditions of consciousness, and
this knowledge, albeit moderate, is not negligible. If we
attempt to summarize the main findings about the
neurobiological underpinnings of consciousness, they are
the following:
First, consciousness is the matter of the whole brain. It is
not localizable, even though the role of different brain
structures can be very different. Information processed in
various, spatially remote cortical and subcortical networks
has to be integrated in order to reach consciousness (Tononi,
2008). Local information processing, however complex and
“high-level” this information might be, does not necessarily
involve consciousness (van Gaal & Lamme, 2012;
Kotchoubey et al., 2013). We can put complex goals, strictly
follow these goals in our behavior (e.g., Kiefer & Brendel,
2006; Kiefer & Martens, 2010), understand semantics and
syntax, and distinguish truth from lie (Kotchoubey et al.,
2014) – as long as all these processes remain local and
highly specialized, they do not require conscious awareness.
Second, self-consciousness is closely related to the
activity of midline structures of the brain that are also
connected to basic processes of body control (FernandezEspejo et al., 2012; Herbert, Herbert & Pauli, 2011; for
review, see Northoff, 2013). Brain areas activated during
processing of self-related information are not those activated
by highly complicated and difficult cognitive tasks, but
rather, they overlap with the components of the Default
Mode Network, which is maximally active in rest (Northoff
et al., 2006).
Third, neurophysiological data indicate that consciousness
is probably a multi-level system. There is a long tradition in
Western thinking to regard consciousness as a binary (“allor-none”) phenomenon. According to this view a system
can be either conscious or not, but nothing in between.
Typical representatives of this position are, in classical
philosophy, Descartes (1988); in the contemporary
philosophy of mind, D. Chalmers (Chalmers, 1996); in
psychology, B. Baars (Baars, 1988); and in neuroscience, S.
Dehaene (e.g., Dehaene et al., 2006). Examples of the
opposite views are, in classical philosophy, E. Husserl
(Husserl, 2009); in the modern philosophy of mind, N.
Block (Block, 2007); and in neuroscience, A. Damasio and
J. Panksepp (Damasio, 1999; Panksepp, 2005).
We examined about sixty patients with the diagnosis
vegetative state, which implies the complete lack of
conscious awareness. fMRI were recorded in five
experiments, three of which were purely cognitive tasks:
mental imagery (Monti et al., 2010), a verbal task
1

1195

(presentation of factually correct vs. incorrect sentences),
and trace conditioning (short-term memory). The expected
activity in the relevant brain regions (indicating that higher
cognitive functions were at least partially preserved) was
obtained only in < 10% patients. This number is well in
accord with the data of other groups (e.g., Monti et al.,
2010). Two other experiments involved affective stimuli
that addressed the broadly disseminated network called “the
pain matrix of the brain” (rev. Kupers & Kehlet, 2006).
Different components of this matrix responded to pain
stimuli in > 50% of the patients. In many patients, these
reactions also included the activation of such higher-level
regions as the anterior insula and the anterior cingular cortex
(Markl et al., 2013). Brain imaging data on healthy
individuals and conscious patients indicate that the
activation of these areas usually correlates with subjective
feeling of pain (e.g., Colocca & Benedetti, 2005). Moreover,
also in > 50% patients the pain matrix of the brain similarly
responded to pain cries of other people, although these were
not nociceptive but auditory stimuli (Yu et al., 2013). These
and a number of similar findings (e.g., Celesia, 2013;
Kotchoubey, Kaiser, Bostanov, Lutzenberger, & Birbaumer,
2009; Lotze, Schertel, Birbaumer, & Kotchoubey, 2010)
suggest that many individuals who have completely lost all
components of cognitive consciousness (conscious
comprehension of language, intentional actions, declarative
memory, voluntary attention, etc.) may nevertheless
experience pain and pleasure and perhaps even understand
affective states of other people (Panksepp et al., 2007;
Kotchoubey et al., 2011). Apparently, low-level
consciousness (with its very important component, affective
consciousness: Panksepp, 2005) can exists when high-level
consciousness is lacking.
To sum up, these data about the neurological
underpinnings of consciousness are at variance with a
broadly spread and well-respected idea of selfconsciousness as a summit of human cognition, its top level.
Rather, it is a background intimately linked with the basic
aspects of human life and survival (Northoff, 2013).
Looking back to the great philosophical models of the past,
one may say that self-consciousness of the present-day
neuroscience is much more like the phenomenological
model of Husserl or the “being-there” model of Heidegger
than to largely cognitive models of Descartes, Spinoza, or
Kant.

Freedom
A simple naturalistic argument against freedom of human
action is that any action is actually a movement (or a
combination of movements), and that the neural control of
movements is a deterministic chain of events within which
no space for free and unpredictable events is left. An
executive area of the brain (e.g., the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex), taking into account emotional, motivational, social
and other influences, makes a decision; on the basis of this
decision the premotor cortex formulates an action program;
the primary motor cortex transforms this program into a

motor command that is sent to cranial nerve nuclei or the
spinal cord; and the latter does not have other choice than to
obey the command.
Of course, every determinist admits that the above
scheme is very rough. The point is, however, that movement
science has demonstrated that such deterministic schemes
are not just rough. They are simply wrong. The brain does
not (because it cannot) play on muscles like a musician
plays on a keyboard (Requin, 1985; Turvey, 1990). The
brain is unable to solve the so-called Bernstein’s problem
(Bernstein, 1967): the number of degrees of freedom (DFs)
in any movement of a complex animal (such as a bird, a
dog, or a human) is by several orders larger than the number
of DFs an executive system can control. Even a relatively
simple action (e.g., grasping a glass of water, keeping it
with five fingers and bringing it to the mouth) can be
realized by many millions of nearly equivalent activation
patterns at the spinal level, all of them leading to the same
result (Latash, Scholz & Schöner, 2007; Latash, Gorniak &
Zatziorski, 2008). If the executive calculates all advantages
and disadvantages of each particular combination of neural
excitations resulting in the movement described above, and
finally chooses the optimal pattern, these calculations would
take time largely exceeding the life time of the organism.
Movements under exact control of the brain are possible and
even necessary at a first step of motor learning, when an
efficient movement synergy as a self-regulatory system is
not yet built up (e.g., when a first-grader learns to write
letters). However, such movements are highly energy
consuming, and learning consists in their replacement with
uncontrolled, self-organized movements (Latash et al.,
2008; Vereijken, van Emmerik, Whiting, & Newell, 1992).
The biomechanical freedom of movements is necessary for
adaptation of a complex organism to its complex
environment.
Modern kinesiology views a movement as a selforganized, self-regulating multilevel system, in which each
higher level can only set a very limited number of control
parameters, leaving everything else to the next lower level
(Turvey, 1990; Latash, 2012). The higher level does not
know, how exactly the parameters are controlled (the
“principle of executive ignorance”: e.g., Turvey, 1977).
Even though such systems are principally deterministic (i.e.,
they can be mechanistically described in retrospect), their
operations cannot be predicted in advance (Latash, 2012). A
carpenter may make some 10 million hammer strokes
during his professional life; but hardly two of these strokes
are identical. The main reason of why the brain of a scientist
cannot predict the next movement of her subject is the fact
that the subject’s own brain cannot. A movement is created
in the course of its execution.
Another factor that has only recently attracted the
attention of researchers is the stochastic nature of the
essential processes in the nervous system, such as ionic
membrane transfer and synaptic transmission (e.g., Linden,
2007; Finke, Braun, & Feudel, 2010; Rolls & Deco, 2010).
Both processes content noise that cannot be removed by any
2

1196

technique (Braun et al., 2011). The meaning of this
irreducible noise remains unclear, and one may believe that
noise-produced small random fluctuations of neural
excitability, averaged in space and time, do not produce any
effect at the macro-level, i.e., at the level of behavior.
However, the data cited above demonstrate that movement
control at the peripheral level has principally chaotic
character (Kelso & Ding, 1993; Latash, 2012). If this holds
true also for the central control mechanisms, one can
speculate that the tiny fluctuations at the micro-level might
not be behaviorally neutral (Braun, Moss, Postnova &
Mosekilde, 2008), because chaotic processes can serve as
powerful amplifiers of minimal changes due to the so called
butterfly effects.
Of course, neither the irreducible noise in neural microprocesses nor the chaotic complexity of behavioral control
can present a full explanation of freedom or justify this
notion as it is used in common language. Additional
assumptions are necessary for this sake, which I tried to
analyze in details elsewhere (Kotchoubey, 2012). The above
mentioned discoveries do not “prove” the freedom of human
actions, but they rebut deterministic arguments against the
notion of freedom thus removing the illusory opposition
between freedom and natural science.1

Language
“All attempts to teach great apes spoken language have
failed.” This opening sentence of the most recent review
about the evolution of acoustic communication (Ackermann,
Hage, & Ziegler, 2014, p.529) indicates that language
continues to attract attention as a specificum humanum, as
something radically separating human beings even from
their closest phylogenetic relatives. The prevailing idea of
language comprehension during the last decades has been
like this: Visually or acoustically perceived words are
processed by means of three main modules: syntax,
semantics, and pragmatics. The processing in these modules
is sequential and consists of processing stages. Syntax is
strongly separated from both semantics and pragmatics and
represents „the essence of language“: to understand
language means to understand syntax (e.g., Chomsky, 1965;
Pinker, 1994). Syntactic processing (and, thereby, language
processing in general) is mainly genetically determined,

1

There is no space here for an obsolete analysis of the studies
claiming to find electrophysiological or metabolic predictors of
human actions. Such analyses have already been performed by
numerous philosophers (e.g., Dennett, 1991), psychologists (e.g.,
Trevena & Miller, 2010) and neuroscientists (e.g., Herrmann,
Pauen, Min, Busch, & Rieger, 2008) and revealed methodological
flaws of such severity (including even arithmetic errors: Trevena &
Miller, 2002) that a serious discussion of these experiments in
2014 is not worthy any longer. The most what these experiments
really have shown are trivialities such as (i) there are preparatory
processes in the brain, and (ii) voluntary actions are not necessarily
performed in full awareness (everybody who drives a car or a bike
knows this).

while the factors of language usage play relatively minor
roles.
The data obtained using the methods of neuroscience
require, from my point of view, substantial corrections of
this picture. Thus according to the sequential principle, we
match the perceived words with units of our built-in lexicon
and thus identify their meaning (e.g., a combination of five
signs sugar means a white soluble substance with a
characteristic taste, chemically a linkage of glucose and
fructose). This meaning is then compared with other lexical
units already identified before, e.g., with the context of the
sentence. If the meaning of the newly perceived word agrees
with the context (semantic match”), the processing runs
further; if it does not (“semantic mismatch”) a broad
network in the brain is activated to integrate the word into
the context. The best known physiological indicator of this
activation is an electrically negative deflection in the EEG
with a peak latency of about 400 ms after the semantically
inappropriate word, called N400 (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980).
After this micro-context (within a sentence or an
expression) is established, the word is connected with a
macro-context which includes the whole conversation, the
discourse, the previous knowledge about the matter, etc.
First, the originally suggested link between EEG
components and language processing modules (N400 –
semantic module; late positive complex [LPC] – syntactic
module) is not supported by recent data. Thus LPC can be
elicited by virtually any kind of linguistic violation (Münte,
Heinze, Matzke, & Wieringa, 1998; Kotchoubey & Lang,
2003). The false impression of modular specificity was
partially caused by confusion between language domains
and communicational ambiguity, with semantic violations
being in general much more equivocal (inducing higher
ambiguity) then syntactic violations (Kotchoubey, 2006).
In our experiment, we presented not only typical
ambiguous semantic violations (A waiter served tea with
milk and shoes) and unequivocal syntactic violations (I
expect that he cames), but also unequivocal sematic
violations (e.g., A hungry man is an angry lamp) and rather
ambiguous syntactic violations (e.g., He is playing piano
with passionately). The former were constructed so that
only one correct word (man) could replace the incongruent
word at the end of the sentence. The latter allowed for at
least two different ways of syntactic repair (e.g., He is
playing piano with passion or He is playing piano
passionately), both of which had approximately the same
meaning (otherwise the sentence would be semantically
ambiguous!). The ambiguity factor indicates how much of
the message can yet be understood despite the violation. It
should be emphasized that ambiguous syntactic violations
were still much less ambiguous than ambiguous semantic
violations, i.e., the match of the ambiguity level was not
perfect. However, the main results presented in Figure 1
show that notwithstanding this limitation the ambiguity
factor was at least as important as the language domain.
This finding does not, of course, disprove the general theory
of processing modules, but indicates that the different
3

1197

behavior of different EEG components is better explained
but factors other than modular specificity.

incoming stimuli. In the sentence Eva seduced Adam to eat
a… the N400 is elicited already to the article a (expected
an), although a is a function word devoid of the own
content, thus it cannot be semantically integrated (DeLong,
Urbach, & Kutas, 2005). Our recent analysis has
demonstrated that ambiguous words immediately and
strongly activate their context-appropriate meaning, even if
a different meaning dominates in an individual’s lexicon;
e.g. the meaning of queen as a female monarch strongly
dominates over its meaning as a chess piece, but the
dominant meaning is suppressed in a sentence like The
chess master moved his queen (Kotchoubey & El-Khoury,
2014).
In sum, these data are compatible with a model of
language different from that which we began this section
with. Language is not an instinct, but a behavior which,
despite all its peculiar properties, is ruled by the same basic
mechanisms of behavioral control as any other behavior.
This behavior is aimed at pragmatic objectives, i.e., to
communicate, to understand other individuals and to be
understood by them. The syntax is a very particular mean
used for communication, but only a mean and not „the
essence“ of language; understanding language means not
understanding syntax, but rather understanding its use for
communication.
Importantly, language is a very demonstrative example of
a general principle of predictive activity of the brain (e.g.,
Clark, 2013; for a formal approach to this principle, see
Friston, Daunizeau, Kilner, & Kiebel, 2010). Language
comprehension is not a passive processing of verbal stimuli
but a continuous hypotheses-making and hypotheses-testing
project, based on a complex and flexible hierarchy of
anticipations (Kotchoubey, 2006). This is a model that is
always ahead of the arriving messages, which are used to
confirm, correct or upgrade it.

Figure 1: The amplitudes (in µV) of two typically
recorded EEG components (N400 and LPC) as a function of
language domain (semantics vs. syntax) and ambiguity. Top
panel: N400 amplitude. Bottom panel: LPC amplitude. Both
components were measured at the Pz lead as mean
amplitudes in the time windows of 250-500 ms and 500-800
ms, for N400 and LPC, respectively.

Conclusion

As said above, a sentence like A waiter served tea with
milk and shoes is highly typical for elicitation of the N400,
because its end word is semantically incongruent. However,
the sentence There were nuclear weapons in Iraq is
semantically congruent, but also elicits an N400, at least in
those who know that there were none (Hagoort, Hald,
Bastiaansen, & Petersson, 2004). Fully congruent are
sentences My favorite music is Chopin and Perhaps I am
pregnant, but the former also elicits the N400 if presented
together with a picture of a punk, and the latter, if spoken
with a male voice (Van Berkum, Brown, Hagoort, &
Zwitserlood, 2003). Finally, the harmless The nut was salted
elicits a strong N400 after we have heard a fairy tale in
which the nut was a young man, and The nut fell in love
does not elicited an N400 after this tale. Notably, the
properties of the N400 in all these completely different
situations (its waveform, latency, scalp distribution) are
virtually the same (Hagoort & Van Berkum, 2007).
The language processing system does not wait for verbal
information but actively extracts this information from the

Our brief review of the contribution of neuroscience to our
idea on three principal human features (i.e., selfconsciousness, freedom, and symbolic language) results in
fairly unexpected conclusions. Our self-consciousness is
possibly not the top of our most sophisticated cognitive
functions, but rather the basic pre-reflective self-other
distinction intimately related to body control and affective
states, within whose limits cognition processes become
possible (e.g., Northoff, 2013). Freedom is not a violation of
natural (biological) laws, but, in contrast, a necessary
attribute of complex behavior; it roots in the fundamental
biomechanical freedom of a biological movement. The data
of neuroscience do not exhaustively explain freedom (like
they do not exhaustively explain consciousness), but they
make it a natural phenomenon that can be investigated with
methods of neurobiology (e.g., Kotchoubey, 2012).
Language comprehension is neither an instinct (a simple
nature’s gift), nor a set of complex cognitive inferences, but
a behavior based on learnt hierarchy of predictive,
anticipatory processes (e.g., Tomasello, 2003). The answer
4

1198

to the question formulated in the title is, therefore, positive:
yes, data of neuroscience can modify our idea of ourselves.
However, the direction of the change is at variance with that
straightforward mechanistic and computer-like kind of
explanation that is publicly expected. Rather, these changes
emphasize embodied, enacted nature of the specifically
human functions.

Acknowledgment
I am very grateful to N. Birbaumer, S. Lang, A. Markl, F.
Müller and T. Yu for their contribution in patient studies
whose data are used in the present paper.

References
Ackermann, H., Hage, S. R., & Ziegler, W. (2014). Brain
mechanisms of acoustic communication in humans and
nonhuman primates: An evolutionary perspective.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 37, 529-604.
Baars, B. J. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bernstein, N. A. (1967). The Coordination and Regulation
of Movements. Oxford: Pergamon.
Block, N. (2007). Consciousness, accessibility, and the
mesh between psychology and neuroscience. Behavioral
& Brain Sciences, 30, 481-499.
Braun, H. A., Moss, F., Postnova, S., & Mosekilde, E.
(2008). Complexity in neurology and psychiatry. Journal
of Biological Physics, 34, 249-252.
Braun, H. A., Schwabedal, J., Dewald, M., Finke, C.,
Postnova, S., Huber, M. T., Wollweber, B., Schneider, H.,
Hirsch, M. C., Voigt, K., Feudel, U., & Moss, F. (2011).
Noise-induced precursors of tonic-to-bursting transitions
in hypothalamic neurons and in a conductance-based
model. Chaos, 21, Article 047509.
Celesia, G. (2013). Conscious awareness in patients in
vegetative states: Myth or reality? Current Neurology
Neuroscience Reports, 13, Article 395.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a
Fundamental Theory. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax.
Harward, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated
agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral &
Brain Sciences, 36, 181-204.
Colocca, L., & Benedetti, F. (2005). Placebos and
painkillers: Is mind as real as matter? Nature Review
Neuroscience, 6, 545-552.
Damasio, A. R. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body
and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness. San Diego:
Harcourt.
Dehaene, S., Changeaux, J. P., Naccache, L., Sackur, J., &
Sergent, C. (2006). Conscious, preconscious, and
subliminal processing: A testable taxonomy. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10(5), 204-211.

DeLong, K. A., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2005).
Probabilistic word pre-activation during language
comprehension inferred from electrical brain activity.
Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1117-1121.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. BostonToronto-London: Little, Brown and Co.
Descartes, R. (1988). Selected Philosophical Writings.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Fernandez-Espejo, D., Soddu, A., Cruse, D., Palacios, E.
M., Junque, C., Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Rivas, E.,
Newcombe, V., Menon, D. K., Pickard, J. D., Laureys, S.,
& Owen, A. M. (2012). A role for the default mode
network in the bases of disorders of consciousness.
Annals of Neurology, 72, 335-343.
Finke, C., Braun, H. A., & Feudel, U. (2010). The role of
intrinsic dynamics and noise for neural encoding and
synchronization. BMC Neuroscience, 12, 1-2.
Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., Kilner, J., & Kiebel, S. J.
(2010). Action and behavior: A free-energy formulation.
Biological Cybernetics, 102, 227-260.
Hagoort, P., Hald, L., Bastiaansen, M., & Petersson, K. M.
(2004). Integration of word meaning and world
knowledge in language comprehension. Science, 304,
438-441.
Hagoort, P., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2007). Beyond the
sentence given. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society London, Series B, 362, 801-811.
Herbert, C., Herbert, B., & Pauli, P. (2011). Emotional selfreference: Brain structures involved in the processing of
words describing one's own emotions. Neuropsychologia,
49, 2947-2956.
Herrmann, C. S., Pauen, M., Min, B. K., Busch, N., &
Rieger, J. W. (2008). Analysis of a choice-reaction task
yields a new interpretation of Libet's experiments.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 67, 151-157.
Husserl, E. (2009). Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft.
Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag.
Kelso, J.A.S., & Ding, M. (1993). Fluctuations,
intermittency, and controllable chaos in biological
coordination. In K. Newell & D. Corcos (Eds.),
Variability and Motor Control (pp. 291-316). Champaign,
IL: Human Kinetics Publishers.
Kiefer, M., & Brendel, D. (2006). Attentional modulation of
unconscious "automatic" processes. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 18(2), 184-198.
Kiefer, M., & Martens, U. (2010). Attentional sensitization
of unconscious cognition: Task sets modulate subsequent
masked semantic priming. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 139(3), 464-489.
Kotchoubey, B. (2006). Event-related potentials, cognition,
and behavior: A biological approach. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 42-65.
Kotchoubey, B. (2012). Why Are You Free? Hauppage,
N.Y.: Nova Science Publishers.
Kotchoubey, B., & Lang, S. (2003). Parallel processing of
physical and lexical auditory information in humans.
Neuroscience Research, 45, 369-374.
5

1199

Kotchoubey, B., Kaiser, J., Bostanov, V., Lutzenberger, W.,
& Birbaumer, N. (2009). Recognition of affective prosody
in brain-damaged patients and healthy controls: A
neurophysiological study using EEG and whole-head
MEG. Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 9,
153-167.
Kotchoubey, B., Yu, T., Markl, A., Vogel, D., Müller, F., &
Lang, S. (2011). On the way to the deep layers of
consciousness. Advances in Clinical Neuroscience and
Rehabilitation, 11, 10-13.
Kotchoubey, B., Merz, S., Lang, S., Markl, A., Müller, F.,
Yu, T., & Schwarzbauer, C. (2013). Global functional
connectivity reveals highly significant differences
between the vegetative and the minimally conscious state.
Journal of Neurology, 4, 975-983.
Kotchoubey, B., & El-Khoury, S. (2014). Event-related
potentials indicate context effect in reading ambiguous
words. Brain & Cognition, 92, 48-60.
Kotchoubey, B., Yu, T., Mueller, F., Vogel, D., Veser, S., &
Lang, S. (2014). True or false? Activations of languagerelated areas in patients with disorders of consciousness.
Current Pharmaceutical Design, 20, 4239-4249.
Kupers, R., & Kehlet, H. (2006). Brain imaging of clinical
pain states: A critical review and strategies for future
studies. Lancet Neurology, 5, 1033-1044.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading senseless
sentences: Brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity.
Science, 207, 203-205.
Latash, M. L. (2012). Fundamentals of Motor Control.
Amsterdam etc.: Academic Press/Elsevier.
Latash, M. L., Scholz, J. P., & Schöner, G. (2007). Toward
a theory of motor synergies. Motor Control, 11, 276-308.
Latash, M. L., Gorniak, S., & Zatziorski, V. M. (2008).
Hierarchies of synergies in human movements.
Kinesiology, 1, 29-38.
Linden, D. J. (2007). The Accidental Mind. Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press/Harward University Press.
Lotze, M., Schertel, K., Birbaumer, N., & Kotchoubey, B.
(2010). A long-term intensive behavioral treatment study
in patients with persistent vegetative state or minimally
conscious state. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine,
43(3), 230-236.
Markl, A., Yu, T., Vogel, D., Müller, F., Kotchoubey, B., &
Lang, S. (2013). Brain processing of pain in patients with
unresponsive wakefulness syndrome. Brain & Behavior,
2, doi: 10.1002/brb1003.1110.
Monti, M. M., Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Coleman, M. R., Boly,
M., Pickard, J. D., Tshibanda, L., Owen, A., & Laureys,
S. (2010). Willful modulation of brain activity in
disorders of consciousness. New England Journal of
Medicine, 362, 579-589.
Münte, T. F., Heinze, H. J., Matzke, M., & Wieringa, B. M.
(1998). Brain potentials and syntactic violations revisited:
No evidence for specificity of the syntactic positive shift.
Neuropsychologia, 36, 217-226.
Northoff, G. (2013). Unlocking the Brain. Volume 2:
Consciousness. New York: Oxford University Press.

Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greck, M., Bermpohl, F.,
Dobrowolny, H., & Panksepp, J. (2006). Self-referential
processing in our brain - A meta-analysis of imaging
studies on the self. Neuroimage, 31, 440-457.
Panksepp, J. (2005). Affective consciousness: Core
emotional feelings in animals and humans. Consciousness
& Cognition, 14, 30-80.
Panksepp, J., Fuchs, T., Garcia, V. A., & Lesiak, A. (2007).
Does any aspect of mind survive brain damage that
typically leads to a persistent vegetative state? Ethical
considerations. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in
Medicine, 2 (32).
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. London: Penguin
Books.
Rolls, E. T., & Deco, G. (2010). The Noisy Brain:
Stochastic Dynamics as a Principle of Brain Function.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Requin, J. (1985). Looking forward to moving soon. In M.
Posner & O. Marin (Eds.), Attention and Performance
(Vol. XI). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language.
Cambridge MA: Harward University Press.
Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information:
a provisional manifesto. Biological Bulletin, 215, 216242.
Trevena, J. A., & Miller, J. (2002). Cortical movement
preparation before and after a conscious decision to move.
Consciousness & Cognition, 11, 162-190.
Trevena, J. A., & Miller, J. (2010). Brain preparation before
a voluntary action: Evidence against unconscious
movement initiation. Consciousness & Cognition, 19,
447-456.
Turennout, M., Hagoort, P., & Brown, C. M. (1998). Brain
activity during speaking: From syntax to phonology in 40
ms. Science, 280(5363), 572-574.
Turvey, M. T. (1977). Preliminaries to a theory of action
with reference to a vision. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford
(Eds.), Perceiving, Acting, and Knowing. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Turvey, M. T. (1990). Coordination. American
Psychologist, 45, 938-953.
Van Berkum, J. J. A., Brown, C., Hagoort, P., &
Zwitserlood, P. (2003). Event-related brain potentials
reflect discourse-referential ambiguity in spoken language
comprehension. Psychophysiology, 40, 235-248.
van Gaal, S., & Lamme, V. A. F. (2012). Unconscious highlevel
information
processing:
Implication
for
neurobiological theories of consciousness. The
Neuroscientist, 18(3), 287-301.
Vereijken, B., van Emmerik, R. E. A., Whiting, H. T. A., &
Newell, K. M. (1992). Free(z)ing degrees of freedom in
skill acquisition. Journal of Motor Behavior, 24, 133-142.
Yu, T., Lang, S., Vogel, D., Markl, A., Müller, F., &
Kotchoubey, B. (2013). Patients with unresponsive
wakefulness syndrome respond to the pain cries of other
people. Neurology, 80, 345-352.
6

1200

