Causal relations from kinematic simulations
Sangeet Khemlani1, Geoffrey P. Goodwin2, and Phil Johnson-Laird3,4
sangeet.khemlani@nrl.navy.mil, ggoodwin@psych.upenn.edu, phil@princeton.edu
1

US Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375 USA
2
University of Pennsylvania, Philadephia PA 19104 USA
3
Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08540 USA
4
New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA

Abstract

What is less controversial is the centrality of mental
simulation in causal thinking and reasoning: people
construct small-scale simulations of possibilities to make
predictions of outcomes (Kahneman & Tversky, 1981), to
understand mechanisms (Hegarty, 2004) and physical
scenes (Battaglia, Hamrick, & Tenenbaum, 2013), to resolve
inconsistencies and contradictions (Khemlani & JohnsonLaird, 2012, 2013; Park & Sloman, 2014), to deduce the
consequences of algorithms (Khemlani et al., 2013), and to
reason about counterfactual scenarios (Byrne, 2005;
Galinsky & Moskowitz, 2000).
One challenge for theories of causality is how different
causal relations are extracted from a mental simulation.
People distinguish between causal relations such as cause,
enable, and prevent. For example, they recognize that the
meaning of,

Reasoners distinguish between different types of causal
relations, such as causes, enabling conditions, and
preventions. Psychologists disagree about the representations
that give rise to the different relations, but agree that mental
simulations play a central role in inferring them. We explore
how causal relations are extracted from mental simulations.
The theory of mental models posits that people use a
kinematic simulation to infer possibilities. It predicts that
causes should be easier to infer than enabling conditions, and
that the time it takes to infer a causal relation should correlate
with the number of moves in a mental simulation. To test
these two predictions, we adapted a railway domain designed
to elicit mental simulations, and we devised problems in
which reasoners had to infer causal relations from simulations
of the movements of cars in this domain. Two studies
corroborated the model theory's predictions. We discuss the
results in light of recent theories of causation and mental
simulation.
Keywords: causal reasoning, mental models,
simulation, railway domain, enabling conditions.

1. The button caused the missile to launch.

mental

is distinct from,

Introduction

2. The button enabled the missile to launch.

A man presses a button on his computer that switches on
a missile control system. His partner, a woman, presses a
button on the missile control system to launch the missile,
and a few minutes later the missile is launched. Did the first
man cause the missile to launch? Or did he merely enable its
launch? Reasoners often have to make judgments of the
distinction between causing and enabling, and in doing so
they may rely on mental simulations of a sequence of events
(as in the example above). Many people may conclude that
the man caused the launch, because the temporal contiguity
of two events is often all that is required to infer causality
(Bramley, Gerstenberg, & Lagnado, 2013; Lagnado &
Sloman, 2006; Rottman & Keil, 2012). In the case of the
missile launch, the causal inference may be unwarranted,
because the description is consistent with alternative
possibilities, such as one in which the woman decides not to
press the button she controls. Suppressing the initial causal
inference requires mental simulation too, because reasoners
may engage in a search for alternative possibilities
consistent with the description (Frosch & Johnson-Laird,
2011).
Causation is controversial; it has vexed scholars for
centuries, and psychologists disagree on its underlying
mechanisms (Ahn & Bailenson, 1996; Cheng, 1997; Hilton
& Erb, 1996; Sloman, 2005; White, 2014; Wolff, 2007).

Theorists have appealed to the transmission of force (Wolff,
2007), causal model structure (Sloman et al., 2009), and
mental models of possibilities (Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird,
2001), to explain the differences in meaning between causal
relations (for a review, see Khemlani, Barbey, & JohnsonLaird, 2014). But there exists no account of how causal
relations are inferred from simulations, and as such no one
has specified an algorithm that can carry out the task.
Our goal in the present article is to report studies that
should help to solve this problem. We begin by illustrating
how causal relations can be inferred from kinematic models
by introducing the general tenets of mental model theory.
We used a domain designed to elicit kinematic mental
simulations, and so we introduce that domain and describe
its characteristics. We then describe two studies in which
participants’ inferences about causal relations depended on
the number of discrete steps in mental simulations. Finally,
we evaluate the results in the context of current theories of
causal reasoning.

Models of possibilities
The mental model theory – the “model” theory, for short
– applies to reasoning across many domains, including
reasoning based on sentential connectives, such as if, or, and

1075

and (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991), reasoning based on
quantifiers (Khemlani, Lotstein, Trafton, & Johnson-Laird,
2015) and reasoning about temporal, spatial, causal, and
abstract relations (Goodwin & Johnson-Laird, 2005). Three
main principles underlie the theory (Johnson-Laird, 2006).
First, mental models represent discrete possibilities: each
model captures a distinct set of possibilities. Second, mental
models are iconic as far as that is possible: the structure of
the model corresponds to the structure of what it represents
(see Peirce, 1931-1958, Vol. 4), and so kinematic models
that unfold in time can represent a temporal sequence of
events (Johnson-Laird, 1983; Khemlani et al., 2013). But,
models can also include abstract symbols, e.g., the symbol
for negation (Khemlani et al., 2012). Third, the model
theory posits a principle of “truth”: mental models represent
only what is true and not what is false.
Inferences that require more models are more difficult
than those that require fewer models. As a consequence,
reasoners take longer to draw such inferences and are more
likely to err, particularly by overlooking possibilities that
render a given statement false. As such, they often represent
only possibilities that render a statement true – their mental
models – though they can flesh out those mental models to
include additional possibilities to build fully explicit models.
We illustrate the difference for the case of causal reasoning.
The model theory resolves the differences in
interpretation between causal relations by distinguishing the
sets of possibilities to which those relations refer (Goldvarg
& Johnson-Laird, 2001), i.e., fully explicit models. A causal
assertion such as (1) above refers to a conjunction of three
separate models of possibilities, depicted in this schematic
diagram:
button
missile-launch
¬ button
missile-launch
¬ button ¬ missile-launch

Each row in the diagram represents a different temporally
ordered possibility, e.g., the first row represents the
possibility in which the button is pushed and the missile
launches. In other words, the model theory posits that
causality rules out those situations in which the button is
pushed and the missile doesn’t launch, as well as those
situations in which the missile launch precedes the button
push. In contrast, an enabling assertion, such as the one
specified in (2), refers to a different conjunction of
possibilities:
button
missile-launch
button ¬ missile-launch
¬ button ¬ missile-launch

i.e., to say that pushing the button enabled the missile to
launch is to assert that the missile may or may not launch
(the first two possibilities above). The enabling condition is
inconsistent with the possibility in which the missile
launches without the button being pushed. Reasoners list
these possibilities for assertions such as (1) and (2)

(Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird, 2001, Experiment 1).
However, unless otherwise prompted to do so, reasoners
build models in accordance with the principle of truth. As
such, causes and enabling conditions have a single mental
model representing one possibility:
button

missile-launch

Hence, individuals often fail to distinguish enabling from
causing (Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird, 2001, Experiment 5).
When individuals observe or envisage a sequence of
events, such as a button being pressed before a missile is
launched, they can infer a causal relation between them. A
correct inference depends on not only observing the factual
mental model of the relation (e.g., the button being pressed,
then the missile launching) but also envisaging the
counterfactual possibilities to which the relation refers (i.e.,
the set of fully explicit models). If reasoners can envisage
possibilities that correspond to the first conjunctive set
above (e.g., the missile launching after the button press, and
either launching or not in the absence of the button press)
then they should infer that pressing the button caused the
missile-launch. In contrast, inferring an enabling condition
should be more complex. The difference in difficulty
depends on the assumption that at least one of the following
causal relations holds between the button and the missile
launch: causes, enables, or prevents. Reasoners observe
what happens given that the button is pressed. If the missile
launches in this case, then they are likely to infer that the
button causes the missile launch, and they will be correct if
indeed it does. They will even be correct if they also
consider the counterfactuals of what happens given that the
button is not pressed. The only way that they are likely to
infer that the button enables the missile launch is if they can
envisage a counterfactual possibility in which the missile
does not launch when the button is pressed. The asymmetry
arises because the button press and the missile launch are
both possible given either causes or enables, but the button
press and missile not launching is possible only with
enables. Hence, the theory predicts that when reasoners
draw causal conclusions from mental simulations, it should
be more difficult to infer enabling conditions, e.g., that
pressing the button enabled the missile launch.
When individuals need to simulate a sequence of events
in a kinematic model, the theory makes a direct prediction:
the more events that occur in the sequence, the harder the
inference should be – it should take longer and be more
likely to yield an error.
In order to test the theory’s predictions we adapted an
experimental domain used to elicit kinematic mental
simulations in order to study causal inferences. We describe
that experimental domain in the next section.

Kinematic models in a railway domain
We sought to investigate how individuals without any
formal training in logic, probability, or causal reasoning
were able to infer causal relations by carrying out mental

1076

simulations. Accordingly, we developed a domain based on
the railway environment shown in Figure 1. The
environment is composed of a railway track and a siding,
and recent studies demonstrate its ability to elicit kinematic
simulations underlying deductive and abductive inferences
(Khemlani et al., 2013). The environment is simple enough
for children to understand and to reason about (Bucciarelli
et al., under review). Cars are prohibited from moving from
the siding directly to the right track and vice versa, and they
are prohibited from moving from the right track back to the
left track. In other words, there are only three legal moves in
the environment: i) a move from the left track to the siding,
ii) a move from the siding to the left track, and iii) a move
from the left track to the right track. Multiple cars can be
moved at once such that any move of a selected car applies
to all cars in front of it. In Figure 1, if you moved the D car
to the right track, then the E car would move along in front
of it. Because both the siding and the left track function as
stacks in an automaton, the environment in principle has the
computational power of a universal Turing machine. To
restrict the environment to a single stack, cars could move
from the siding only to the output on the right track.

Figure 1. The railway domain with an example of an initial
configuration in which a set of cars is on the left side of the track,
the siding can hold one or more cars while other cars are moved to
the right side of the track.

ABCDE[
]
A[BCDE]

those who envision moving car B from the left track to the
siding might recognize that doing so caused cars C, D, and
E to move along with it. The inference can be drawn
because the causation relation refers to three separate
possibilities in a situation, such as Figure 1:
B moves-to siding
¬ B moves-to siding
¬ B moves-to siding

A moves-to right track

Some reasoners may therefore infer that B’s move causes
A’s move. But, the inference is erroneous. To make the
correct inference, reasoners need to consider two
counterfactual moves:
¬ B moves-to siding
¬ B moves-to siding

]

where the brackets denote the siding, the area to the left of
the brackets denotes the left track, and the area to the right
of the brackets denotes the right track. This sort of notation
is used in a computer program that solves such problems
and infers algorithms for solving them (Khemlani et al.,
2013). To reverse the order of the train, a reasoner can move
the cars as follows:
A[BCDE]
Move all but A to the siding.
[BCDE]A
Move A to the left track.
B[CDE ]A
Move B to the left track…
[CDE ]BA …then to the right track.
C[DE ]BA Repeat for all the remaining cars.
[DE ]CBA
D[E
]CBA
[E
]DCBA
E[
]DCBA
[
]EDCBA

C moves-to siding
C moves-to siding
¬ C moves-to siding

In reversing the order of the cars, individuals can simulate
the first possibility. They might also simulate counterfactual
possibilities, e.g., if B hadn’t moved to the siding, C may or
may not have moved to the siding.
Reasoners can infer enabling conditions in a similar
fashion. For example, reasoners can infer that moving B to
the siding enabled A to move alone to the right track on a
subsequent move. How might reasoners infer the relation?
They may envisage that if B moves to the siding then A can
move alone to the right track:
B moves-to siding

Consider the problem of reversing the order of five cars,
ABCDE, i.e., to produce the sequence, EDCBA on the right
track. The environment can be depicted in this diagram:
ABCDE[

Reasoners can mentally simulate such a sequence of
moves. Indeed, a reasoner who carried out the steps above
to reverse the train ABCDE may have made causal
inferences in passing. Consider the first move in the
sequence:

A moves-to right track
¬ A moves-to right track

In other words, A could have remained on the left track
even if B had moved to the siding; but, A could not have
moved alone to the right track if B hadn’t moved to the
siding. The three models together suffice to infer the
enabling relation: moving B to the siding enabled A to move
to the right-track alone. But, the inference should be more
difficult than inferring that A’s move to the right track
caused B to move there too.
We carried out two studies in which reasoners made such
inferences about the railway environment. The model theory
makes two main predictions about errors and latencies:
1.
2.

1077

Inferences that one event causes another should
be easier than inferences that one event enables
another for the reasons we explain above.
The number of moves required to carry out the
simulation should predict the difficulty of an
inference.

Experiment 1

experiment recorded the latency from the appearance of the
premise and question to when participants clicked one of the
buttons.

Experiment 1 aimed to test the two predictions, and thereby
to corroborate the model theory’s account of causal
meanings and the role of kinematic models. On each trial,
participants saw a picture of three cars on the railway track,
such as one corresponding to the situation:
]

They then had to understand a supposition, such as: Suppose
B has just moved to the empty siding. In this case, they have
to simulate a single move: A[BC]. Finally, they had to
answer a question, such as: Did that move cause C to move
to the siding? In this case, the theory predicts that they
should respond: Yes. The experiment manipulated the
number of moves required in the simulation in order to
respond to the question: 0, 1, 2, or 3, whether the question
referred to “cause” or “enable”, and whether the predicted
answer should be “yes” or “no”.

Method
Participants. Thirty-six students at the University of
Pennsylvania completed the experiment for partial course
credit. All of the participants were native English speakers,
and none had had any prior training in formal logic.
Design. Participants acted as their own controls and carried
out 16 problems in a fully repeated measures design, which
manipulated the number of moves in a simulation (4), the
causal or enabling relation (2), and the correct answer (2).
The 16 problems in the study are in the Appendix. The
study measured the accuracy of participants’ responses to
the questions and their latencies.

Proportion correct

Procedure. The instructions explained the railway
environment, and that moving a car moved all of the cars in
front of it too. As a screening procedure, participants had to
manipulate cars in the environment to reverse the order of a
five-car train. All the participants passed this test. They
were told that all of the descriptions of moves that they
would receive were a result of making the fewest moves
possible. They were also told (bold text in the original):

The participants’ inferences were more accurate for causal
relations than for enabling relations (66% vs. 59%,
Wilcoxon test, z = 1.74, p = .04, one-tailed, Cliff’s δ = .07),
which corroborated the model theory’s first prediction.
Figure 2 presents the proportion of correct responses (left
panel) and the Winsorized latencies of all of the
participants’ responses, both correct and incorrect (rightpanel) as a function of the number of moves in the
simulation. Accuracies did not differ as a function of the
number of moves in simulation (Page’s trend test, z = .03, p
= .98). But, latencies yielded a significant trend depending
on the number of moves (Page’s trend test, z = 3.98, p <
.0007). The effect was more pronounced when isolating
only correct responses (Page’s trend test, z = 4.10, p <
.0001). This result corroborated the model theory’s second
prediction.
An immediate concern is whether participants were in fact
simulating moves in the environment, or whether the
significant trend in latency is attributable to the number of
words in each of the problems. To address the issue, we
conducted a linear regression analysis on log-transformed
latencies that included the number of words and the moves
required as predictors. Both were significant predictors, but
number of words had a lower regression coefficient (B =
.09, p = .02) than moves required (B = .13, p = .007). We
likewise conducted a hierarchical analysis in which two
regression models were contrasted against one another:
Model 1 regressed the latencies on the number of words
alone, while Model 2 regressed latencies on the number of
words in the problem as well as the number of moves
required. An analysis of deviance showed a significant
increase in model fit from Model 1 to Model 2 (Model 1 R2
= .46 vs. Model 2 R2 = .67, F = 10.23, p = .007).
The results corroborated the model theory’s prediction
that causes should be easier to envisage from simulation
than enabling conditions. The results also corroborated the

“When we ask about whether one move causes another,
we are concerned with whether the first move makes
the second move occur. When we ask about whether
one move enables a second, we are concerned with
whether that second move immediately becomes
possible as a result of the first.”
On each trial in the experiment, participants saw an image
of the empty railway track. After a 1000 ms delay, cars in a
specified arrangement appeared on the track. After another
2000 ms delay, a premise and a question appeared in the
center of the screen, below the railway track, together with
two buttons marked “Yes” and “No”, which participants
clicked with the mouse to record their responses. The

20
0.6

Latency (s)

ABC[

Results and discussion

0.4
0.2
0.0

15
10
5
0

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

Number of moves in simulation
Figure 2. The proportion of correct responses (left-panel) and the
response latencies from all responses (right-panel) in Experiment 1
as a function of the number of moves required to carry out a
simulation.

1078

ABC[

]

and they were told:
Suppose B moved to the empty siding.
Did that move cause C to move to the siding? [Y/N]
The premise uses the past tense of “move” to refer to a
situation to be simulated. A more natural formulation would
use premises and questions that fit the temporal constraints
of the simulation, e.g.,
Suppose B moves to the empty siding.
Does that move cause C to move to the siding?
Experiment 2 accordingly replicated Experiment 1 using the
more natural present tense when appropriate.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 used the same task and design as the
previous study, however it used slightly modified materials.
That is, the descriptions used the present tense to refer to
arrangements in the environment that reasoners had to
simulate.

Method
Participants. Twenty-one participants were recruited from
the same subject pool as in the previous study, and they
completed the study for course credit. All of them were
native English speakers; all of them passed the screening
described in Experiment 1; and none of them had received
any training in formal logic.

20

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

15
10
5
0

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

Number of moves in simulation
Figure 3. The proportion of correct responses (left-panel) and the
response latencies (right-panel) in Experiment 2 as a function of
the number of moves required to carry out a simulation.

Results and discussion
Experiment 2 measured participants’ accuracies and
latencies. Their responses were again more accurate for
causal relations than for enabling conditions (69% vs. 57%,
Wilcoxon test, z = 1.71, p = .04, one-tailed, Cliff’s δ = .12).
Figure 3 presents the proportion of correct responses (left
panel) and the Winsorized latencies of all of the
participants’ responses (right-panel) depending on the
number of moves in the simulation. As in Experiment 1,
accuracies did not reflect the number of moves in a
simulation (Page’s trend test, z = .64, p = .52), but latencies
did for all responses and correct responses (Page’s trend
tests, z > 2.95, p < .003).

General discussion
Experiments 1 and 2 corroborated the model theory’s two
predictions: causes were easier to infer than enabling
conditions, and the number of moves in a mental simulation
predicted response latencies.
The distinction in the
meanings of “causes” and “enables” depends on a semantics
for causal relations capable of building discrete
representations, i.e., one that is deterministic (Frosch &
Johnson-Laird, 2011; Khemlani et al., 2014). This
distinction cannot be captured in a probabilistic account
(pace, e.g., Suppes, 1970; Cheng & Novick, 1991).
Previous studies have suggested that mental simulation
underlies reasoning about mechanical systems (Hegarty,
2004), about instabilities in physical systems (Battaglia et
al., 2013), and about the consequences of algorithms
(Khemlani et al., 2013). The present studies also
demonstrate for the first time that the number of discrete
steps in a simulation has a direct effect on the time that it
takes individuals to make inferences. This result
corroborates the use of kinematic mental models in
reasoning.

Design and procedure. Same as Experiment 1.
Materials. Modifications to the materials are shown in the
Appendix.

0.8

Latency (s)

Proportion correct

prediction that latencies should correlate with the number of
steps in a simulation needed to infer a causal relation. Both
of the results suggest that participants extracted causal and
enabling relations by carrying out and inspecting mental
simulations. As the Figure shows, problems calling for zero
moves in a simulation were not reliably easier than those
calling for one move. A simple explanation is that
individuals nevertheless envisaged the move described in
the supposition even though its effects were depicted in the
picture of the railway.
One shortcoming of the present experiment was that the
tenses in the verb phrase of the stimuli were held constant
across the problems. This constancy eliminated some
confounds, but introduced an oddity: for problems that
require at least one or more simulations, the premise used
the past tense to refer to moves that had yet to occur. For
example, consider the first 1-move problem. Participants
saw the a track corresponding to:

Acknowledgements
We thank Paul Bello, Monica Bucciarelli, Ruth Byrne,
Philipp Koralus, David Lobina, Robert Mackiewicz,

1079

Salvador Mascarenhas, Adam Moore, Alex Doumas, and
Greg Trafton for advice. This work was supported by a
Jerome and Isabella Karle Fellowship from the Naval
Research Laboratory (to S.S.K.) and by National Science
Foundation Grant SES 0844851 (to P.N.J-L.) to study
deductive and probabilistic reasoning.

References
Ahn, W., & Bailenson, J. (1996). Causal attribution as a search for
underlying mechanism: An explanation of the conjunction fallacy and
the discounting principle. Cognitive Psychology, 31, 82−123.
Battaglia, P. W., Hamrick, J. B., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2013). Simulation as
an engine of physical scene understanding. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 110(45), 18327-18332.
Bramley, N. R., Gerstenberg T. & Lagnado, D. A. (2014). The order of
things: Inferring causal structure from temporal patterns. In P. Bello, M.
Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Bucciarelli, M., Mackiewicz, R., Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(under review). Simulations and gestures in children's formulations of
algorithms. Manuscript under review.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2005). The rational imagination: How people create
alternatives to reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: a causal power theory.
Psychological Review, 104, 367–405.
Cheng, P. W., & Novick, L. R. (1991). Causes versus enabling conditions.
Cognition 40, 83–120.
Frosch, C.A., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2011). Is everyday causation
deterministic or probabilistic? Acta Psychologica, 137, 280–291.
Galinsky, A., & Moskowitz, G. (2000). Counterfactuals as behavioral
primes: Priming the simulation heuristic and consideration of
alternatives. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 34, 384-409.
Goldvarg, Y., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2001). Naive causality: a mental
model theory of causal meaning and reasoning. Cognitive Science, 25,
565−610.
Goodwin, G.P., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2005). Reasoning about relations.
Psychological Review, 112, 468-493.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning as mental simulation. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 8, 280-285.
Hilton, D.J., & Erb, H-P. (1996). Mental models and causal explanation:
Judgements of probable cause and explanatory relevance. Thinking &
Reasoning, 2, 273−308.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2006). How we reason. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R.M.J. (1991). Deduction. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1998). The simulation heuristic. In (Eds.)
D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, A. Tversky. Judgment under uncertainty:
heuristics and biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Khemlani, S., Barbey, A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2014). Causal reasoning
with mental models. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 849.
Khemlani, S. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2012). Hidden conflicts:
Explanations make inconsistencies harder to detect. Acta Psychologica,
139, 486–491.
Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2013). Cognitive changes from
explanations. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25, 139–146.
Khemlani, S., Lotstein, M., Trafton, J.G., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2015).
Immediate inferences from quantified assertions. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology.
Khemlani, S., Mackiewicz, R., Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(2013). Kinematic mental simulations in abduction and deduction.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110, 16766–16771.
Khemlani, S., Orenes, I., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2012). Negation: a theory
of its meaning, representation, and use. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 24, 541-559.
Lagnado, D. A., & Sloman, S. A. (2006). Time as a guide to cause. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(3),
451–60.
Park, J., & Sloman, S. (2014). Causal explanation in the face of
contradiction. Memory & Cognition, 42, 806-820.
Pearl, J. (2009). Causality: Models, reasoning, and inference (2nd ed). NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Peirce, C.S. (1931-1958). Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. 8
vols. C. Hartshorne, P. Weiss, and A. Burks, (Eds.). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Rottman, B. M., & Keil, F. C. (2012). Causal structure learning over time:
observations and interventions. Cognitive Psychology, 64(1), 93–125.
Sloman, S. A. (2005). Causal models: How people think about the world
and its alternatives. Oxford University Press, USA.
Sloman, S.A., Barbey, A.K. & Hotaling, J. (2009). A causal model theory
of the meaning of “cause,” “enable,” and “prevent.” Cognitive Science,
33, 21-50.
Suppes, P. (1970). A probabilistic theory of causality, Amsterdam: NorthHolland Publishing.
White, P.A. (2014). Singular cues to causality and their use in human
causal judgment. Cognitive Science, 38, 38–75.
Wolff, P. (2007). Representing causation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 136, 82−111.

Appendix. The 16 problems used in Experiments 1 and 2. Where relevant, changes to the stimuli between Experiment 1 and
Experiment 2 are marked in bolded text.
# of
moves
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3

Initial
conf.
A[BC]
A[BC]
A[BC]
A[BC]
ABC[]
ABC[]
ABC[]
ABC[]
ABC[]
ABC[]
ABC[]
ABC[]
[ABC]
[ABC]
[ABC]
[ABC]

Premise

Question

Suppose B has just moved to the empty siding.
Suppose B has just moved to the empty siding.
Suppose B has just moved to the empty siding.
Suppose B has just moved to the empty siding.
Suppose B moved/moves to the empty siding.
Suppose B moved/moves to the empty siding.
Suppose B moved/moves to the empty siding.
Suppose B moved/moves to the empty siding.
Suppose A moved/moves to be alone on the right track.
Suppose A moved/moves to be alone on the right track.
Suppose A moved/moves to be alone on the right track.
Suppose A moved/moves to be alone on the right track.
Suppose C moved/moves to be alone on the left track.
Suppose C moved/moves to be alone on the left track.
Suppose C moved/moves to be alone on the left track.
Suppose C moved/moves to be alone on the left track.

Did that move cause C to move to the siding?
Did that move enable C to move to the siding?
Did that move cause A to stay on the left track?
Did that move enable A to stay on the left track?
Did/Does that move cause C to move to the siding?
Did/Does that move enable C to move to the siding?
Did/Does that move cause A to stay on the left track?
Did/Does that move enable A to stay on the left track?
Did/With that move, does B cause C to move to the siding?
Did/With that move, does B enable C to move to the siding?
Did/Does that move cause B to move to the left track?
Did/Does that move enable B to move to the left track?
Did/With that move, does A cause B to move to the right track?
Did/With that move, does A enable B to move to the right track?
Did/Does that move cause C to move to the right track?
Did/Does that move enable C to move to the right track?

1080

Causal
reln.
Cause
Enable
Cause
Enable
Cause
Enable
Cause
Enable
Cause
Enable
Cause
Enable
Cause
Enable
Cause
Enable

Correct
answer
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes

