Childhood SES affects anticipatory language comprehension in college-aged adults
Melissa Troyer1 (mtroyer@ucsd.edu) & Arielle Borovsky2 (borovsky@psy.fsu.edu)
1
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093
2
Department of Psychology, Florida State University
1107 West Call St., Tallahassee, FL 32304

Abstract
Childhood socioeconomic status (SES) has a broad impact
on cognitive development including nearly every aspect of
language ability. In infancy, lower SES is associated with
delays in real-time language processing skills, but it is not
known whether or how this relationship carries into
adulthood. We explore these questions by assessing the
timecourse of anticipatory sentence interpretation in a
visual-world eye-tracking task in college-aged adults from
higher and lower SES backgrounds. While there were only
subtle SES-related timing differences in anticipation of a
sentence-final target noun, we found SES-related differences
in looks to competitor items on the screen. Particularly,
individuals from higher SES backgrounds showed relatively
more looks to action-related competitors just prior to onset
of the target noun. These findings suggest that early SES
influences the dynamics of lexical activation during sentence
processing even in adulthood and highlight the importance
of early lexical input and experience for adult language skill.
Keywords: sentence comprehension, language processing,
eye movements, socioeconomic status, individual
differences, language acquisition

Introduction
Understanding spoken language involves rapid and flexible
deployment of expectations about speech, shaped at least
in part by real-time activation of event and semantic
knowledge (e.g., Metusalem et. al 2012) which can vary
tremendously according to individual experience. In
children, real-time language processing is influenced by
individual differences in linguistic experience tied to the
quantity of parental input (Weisleder & Fernald, 2013). In
addition, differences in the amount of child-directed speech
may vary according to household socio-economic status
(SES; Hart & Risley, 1995), which may drive differences
in language processing even in infancy (Fernald,
Marchman, & Weisleder, 2012). However, it is not yet
known whether or how these SES-related influences on
language processing persist into adulthood. We
investigated this question by measuring real-time language
processing performance as a function of childhood SES in
college-aged adults.
Socioeconomic status is a construct defined by a number
of factors related to income and environment, with higher
SES generally indicating greater occupational, educational,
and economic prestige (Krieger, Williams, & Moss, 1997).
Importantly, children in lower-SES households are at
greater risk than higher-SES peers for physical, emotional,

2428

or mental health issues and are less likely to succeed in
school or at work (Duncan, Yeung, Brooks-Gunn, &
Smith, 1998; Tracy et al., 2008). Socio-economic status is
also correlated with measures of cognitive development,
including selective attention, short- and long-term memory,
and, in particular, executive function and language skill
(Hackman & Farah, 2009; Neville et al., 2013).
Children from lower-SES backgrounds have different
experiences from those of their higher-SES peers starting
in the womb (Stiles, 2008). They are less likely to
experience cognitively stimulating environments (e.g.,
access to books, toys, etc.; Bradley et al., 2001; Farah et al.
2008). In addition, the quantity and quality of speech to
children varies tremendously as a function of SES (Hart &
Risley, 1995; Hoff, 2003), such that children from lowerSES backgrounds hear fewer words and less complex
speech than those from higher-SES backgrounds.
SES-related differences in language skills emerge in
infancy (Halle et al., 2009), and these differences have
important consequences for the development of speech
processing skills. Fernald and colleagues (2012) assessed
the vocabulary and lexical processing skills of children
from diverse socioeconomic backgrounds between the ages
of 18-24 months. Strikingly, they found that differences in
both measures as a function of SES appeared even at 18
months. Consequently, long-range language learning
trajectories associated with SES in childhood seem to be
initially predicted by differences in the development of
basic language processing skills from infancy.
Importantly, real-time language processing skills predict
individual differences in both language and other cognitive
abilities across childhood. In infancy, the speed and
accuracy of lexical recognition are linked with current and
future vocabulary skills and are associated with later
cognitive outcomes at age 8 (Fernald, Perfors &
Marchman, 2006; Marchman & Fernald, 2008). These
associations scale up to more complex sentence processing
tasks in toddlerhood (Mani & Huettig, 2012) and into
childhood and adulthood (Borovsky, Elman, & Fernald,
2012; Borovsky & Creel, 2014). Reading and other
receptive language skills are also associated with language
processing abilities in school-age children (Nation,
Marshall, & Altmann, 2003; McMurray, Munson &
Tomblin, 2014). Therefore, an individual’s ability to
recognize and interpret information from spoken language
is likely both dependent on his or her early language
environment and crucial for other skills that have far-

reaching consequences for academic and professional
success.
In adults, evidence from behavioral measures like
eyetracking (e.g., Kamide, Altmann, & Haywood, 2003)
and electrophysiological measures like event-related
potentials (e.g., Delong, Urbach, & Kutas, 2005) suggests
that language processing continually involves preactivation of likely upcoming linguistic material (see
DeLong, Troyer, & Kutas (2014) for a recent review).
Fluent listeners do not passively wait to receive
information from the unfolding speech stream to begin
comprehension. Instead, information from previous context
allows listeners to generate predictions and pre-activate
content prior to directly encountering it (e.g., Kamide et
al., 2003). The visual world eye-tracking paradigm (VWP;
Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995)
is one of several methods that have been particularly
productive in elucidating the predictive nature of language
interpretation. The VWP has also differentiated between
individual differences in adolescent and adult language
processing in several groups, including healthy children
and adults as well as adolescents with specific language
impairment (SLI) (Borovsky et al., 2012; Borovsky, Burns,
Elman, & Evans, 2013; Mani & Huettig, 2014; McMurray
et al., 2014).
Here, we use the VWP to investigate differences in how
adults from a range of SES backgrounds use context to
anticipate upcoming linguistic content. Although prior
work (reviewed above) indicates that SES has an impact on
language-processing skills in infancy, little is known
regarding whether this relationship continues into
adulthood. One possibility is that young adults from lower
SES backgrounds continue to show relative slowing in
real-time language comprehension. Such a finding would
indicate that the slowed language processing may
contribute to the lifelong risks for other negative
consequences associated with lower SES. It is also possible
that SES-related differences in the pace of language
processing disappear in adulthood, only to shift to
difficulties in other, perhaps more subtle aspects of
language processing. For example, adolescents with SLI do
not differ from typically-developing peers in the speed or
accuracy of anticipatory processing during sentence
comprehension. Instead, they fail to activate less-likely
sentence completions as the sentence unfolds, suggesting
differences in real-time dynamics of lexical activation
(Borovsky et. al, 2013). Similarly, differences in the
quantity of lifetime language experiences between higher
and lower SES groups (Hart & Risley, 1995; Hoff, 2003)
may shift the degree to which listeners activate uncertain
or unexpected outcomes during linguistic processing.
We explore these issues by measuring the relationship
between childhood SES and language processing skills in
college-aged adults. Specifically, we compare performance
on an eyetracking task that has previously highlighted
differences in anticipatory speed and lexical activation
during sentence processing (Borovsky et al., 2012, 2013).

2429

Methods
Participants
145 college students from UCSD (N=50) and Florida State
University (FSU) (N=95) participated for course credit.
Participants were excluded from analysis if they reported a
current or prior hearing or speech disorder or exposure to
languages other than English during early childhood,
leaving a total of 108 participants in the combined sample.

Stimuli and design
Linguistic materials were eight sentence quartets created
by crossing two agents and two actions. All sentences had
the same syntactic form: ‘The NOUN VERBs the NOUN.’
These sets were paired with four images related to the
content of the sentences. Participants saw the four images
concurrently as they heard each sentence unfold. Each
image served a different purpose for each sentence in the
quartet. For the sentence, ‘The pirate chases the ship,’ the
Target item was the ship. Three distractors were the
treasure (Agent-related; e.g., related to the agent noun
pirate), the cat (Action-Related; e.g., a potential patient of
the action verb chases), and the bones (Unrelated). Each
image appeared once in each condition and was therefore
able to serve as its own control (see Figure 1; all sentence
materials are provided in Borovsky et al., 2012).
Each participant heard 16 out of the total 32 sentences,
and two sentences per quartet were heard by an individual
participant so that each participant saw each image twice.
Across participants, each object was presented an equal
number of times in each condition and screen quadrant,
and spoken sentences were constructed so that each word
had the same length. (see Borovsky et al., 2012, for more
information about the images and spoken sentence stimuli).

Figure 1: Sample images and sentences

Figure 2: Timecourse of fixations to the Target and Distractor conditions by SES group.

Procedure

Results

Participants were seated in front of a 17-inch LCD display.
A standard 5-point calibration procedure was conducted
and stimuli were presented using the EyeLink Experiment
Builder software. Participants were instructed to view the
images and to click the picture that “goes with the
sentence.” As in previous work, we expected participants
to click on the sentence-final noun, which was the Target.
Participants completed one practice trial before beginning
the experiment.
Before each trial, a bullseye fixation appeared which
checked for excessive drift. The four-array image then
appeared on the screen for 2000 ms before the sentence
began. The images remained on the screen through the
duration of the sentence until the participant clicked on a
picture.

Eye movement recording
We used an EyeLink 2000 eye-tracker with remote arm
configuration at 500 Hz for the data collected at UCSD and
an Eyelink 1000+ remote eye-tracker with identical camera
and data sampling configuration at FSU. We recorded eye
movements for each trial beginning at the appearance of
the image and ending with the mouse click. Data were
binned offline into 50-ms intervals for further analysis.

Offline measurements of SES
We assessed maternal and paternal occupation and
education using the Barratt Simplified Measure of Social
Status (BSMSS; Barratt, 2006), an updated version of the
four-factor Hollingshead (1975) SES measure. Because
this score reflects parental measures of SES, we took this
as a measure of an individual’s childhood SES.
Because SES scores for UCSD (M = 47.97, SD = 12.54,
Range = 25-66) and FSU (M = 48.90, SD = 10.31, Range
= 21-66) were similar, W = 1237.5, p = .88, r = -.014, we
pooled the data from both groups (N=108). Median splits
determined Higher and Lower SES group membership.
This led to the exclusion of three participants who scored
exactly the median (resulting N=105).

2430

Accuracy
Correct responses were coded as trials where participants
selected the picture that matched the sentence-final theme.
Accuracy on the task was very high (99.3%), with 12 total
errors out of 1717 recorded trials. Due to a computer error,
an additional 9 responses were not recorded.

Eye-tracking timecourse characterization
Our first goal was to characterize the timecourse of
fixations towards the target and distractor objects across
the entire sentence for each SES group before carrying out
statistical comparisons of looks towards the target in time
windows of interest. We therefore calculated the mean
proportion of time spent fixating to the Target, the AgentRelated distractor, the Action-Related distractor, and the
Unrelated distractor in 50 ms bins from sentence onset to
offset for Higher-SES and Lower-SES groups (Figure 2).
As in previous work, we observed a rapid anticipatory
shift in looks to the Target following the onset of the verb.
In addition, there was an increase in looks to the ActionRelated distractor shortly after the onset of the verb as well
as an increase in looks to the Agent-Related distractor
following the onset of the subject noun. All of these
tendencies replicate patterns found in previous work using
these materials (Borovsky et al., 2012; 2013).
Our first analytic goal was to determine the time points
when fixations towards the Target significantly exceeded
those to the Agent-Related distractor for each of the
Higher- and Lower-SES groups. For instance, given the
sentence, ‘The pirate chases the ship,’ we were interested
in identifying the moment when looks first diverged
between the Target image (SHIP) and the Agent-Related
distractor, (CHEST). As the sentence-initial agent (‘The
pirate’) is spoken, there should be no reason to prefer one
of these alternatives over the other, but as the sentential
action is spoken (‘chases’), participants begin to make use
of additional information available from the action to
anticipate the Target completion (SHIP). To determine
whether there were differences between SES groups in the

timing of looks to the target compared to competitors, we
performed two separate analyses. First, we computed onetailed t-tests over 50 ms bins on raw proportion data to
determine the first point at which individuals reliably
looked to the Target compared to the Agent-Related
competitor. To meet this criterion, all subsequent bins over
the sentential period needed to show the same pattern
(more looks to Target than Agent-Related competitor).
This analysis revealed that the Higher-SES group began to
reliably look to the Target by 1150 ms post sentence onset
(about 250 ms post action onset; t(51) = 1.85, p < .05, d =
.32) whereas the Lower-SES group did not look reliably to
the Target until 50 ms later, at 1200 ms post sentence onset
(300 ms post action onset; t(51) = 2.14, p < .05, d = .44).
The second analysis was a more statistically rigorous
direct comparison of SES differences in timing of looks
towards the Target. We first transformed differences in raw
proportion between looks to the Target and each of the
distractors, respectively, to log-gaze probability ratios.
Unlike raw proportion measures which are bounded
between 0 and 1, this transformation defines the bias of
looking to the Target relative to each of the other
distractors and provides the benefit of allowing the
dependent variable to range in value between positive and
negative infinity (for further explanation and similar
approaches, see Arai, van Gompel, & Scheepers, 2007).
Next, we asked whether group differences in looks towards
the Target relative to each type of distractor emerged by
computing t-tests on log-gaze probability ratios between
Higher- and Lower-SES groups in each 50 ms bin. There
were no significant differences between groups at any time
window when comparing total SES scores. There was a
marginal effect of SES looks to the Target vs. AgentRelated distractor in the time window between 1100-1150
ms, t(99.70) = 1.429, p = .08, d = .280. This time period is
just prior to the point at which the High-SES group began
to converge on looking to the Target. Thus, both analyses
suggest only modest timing differences between Higherand Lower-SES groups.

Eye-tracking effects in periods of interest
Next, we asked whether the magnitude of fixations to each
condition varied according to SES over two longer
anticipatory time windows during (1) the action verb and
(2) the following article. In these time periods, participants
have encountered the information necessary to generate a
prediction for the Target but have not yet heard the final
noun. We calculated relative looking times in these time
periods with log-gaze probability ratios of looks to the
Target vs. Agent-Related distractor, Target vs. ActionRelated distractor, Target vs. Unrelated distractor. We
compare differences across Higher- and Lower-SES groups
using two-way t-tests in both time windows.
During the action region, there were no significant
differences among SES groups in Target vs. Agent-Related
or Target vs. Unrelated log-gaze probabilities, ps > .05.
However, there was a significant effect of SES group on

2431

Figure 3: Timecourse of fixations to the Action-Related and
Unrelated distractors by SES group.
the Target vs. Action-Related comparison: the Higher-SES
group looked relatively more than the Lower-SES group
toward the Action-Related distractor than toward the
Target, t(100.47) = -2.55, p < .05, d = -0.50.
Results were similar during the article region. There
were no significant effects of SES group on either Target
vs. Agent-Related or Target vs. Unrelated comparisons,
ps > .05. Again, SES group had a significant effect on the
Target vs. Action-Related comparison: the Higher-SES
group looked more than the Lower-SES group toward the
Action-Related distractor compared to the Target,
t(91.56) = -3.08, p < .01, d = -0.60.
We also computed correlations between the composite
SES score and each of the dependent measures defined
previously: log-gaze probability ratios of looks to the
Target vs. Agent-Related distractor, Target vs. ActionRelated distractor, and Target vs. Unrelated distractor.
During the action time period, there was a significant
negative relationship between SES and looks to the Target
vs. Action-Related distractor, r = -.24, p < .05, indicating
that individuals with higher SES scores were more likely to
look toward the Action-Related distractor than individuals
in the Lower-SES group. During the article time period,
there was a significant negative relationship between SES
and looks to the Target vs. Action-Related distractor,
r = -.26, p < .05, indicating that individuals with higher
SES scores were more likely to look toward the ActionRelated item. There were no other significant correlations
between SES and looking time comparisons in either time
period. To illustrate the difference between looking times
to the Action-Related vs. Unrelated distractor (as a
baseline) for the Higher- and Lower-SES groups, we replot raw looking times to these two interest areas over the
entire timecourse, including both groups on the same plot
(Figure 3).

Discussion
This study investigated whether childhood SES
background may manifest in language processing
differences in adulthood using an eye-tracked sentence
comprehension task. We initially outlined two potential
hypotheses: (1) that SES may be linked with processing
speed (as in infancy) or (2) that lexical dynamics/activation
may vary according to SES (as in SLI). Our findings lend
minimal support to the first hypothesis and strongly
support the second.

We see relatively small differences in the timing of
anticipatory looks to the target; however, the differences
that do exist are in the expected direction. Participants
from higher-SES backgrounds were only slightly faster
than those from lower-SES backgrounds to look at the
Target. This finding indicates that SES-related differences
in the linguistic processing speed that exist in infancy
extend into adulthood, but this effect is relatively small.
Individuals from lower-SES backgrounds appear to “catch
up” in terms of speed, at least in this relatively simple task.
Instead, our findings lend greater support for a lexical
activation account. We found that individuals from higher(vs. lower-) SES backgrounds showed relatively more
robust looks to unexpected but potentially plausible
endings that cohere with the local semantic content.
Although this finding is somewhat unexpected, it is
consistent with prior findings that adolescents with SLI are
less likely than typically-developing peers to look toward
action-related competitors in an identical task (Borovsky
et. al, 2013).
One possibility for the spike in looks to action-related
competitors is that individuals may temporarily entertain
locally coherent but globally unexpected linguistic
information as a safeguard in case of encountering
unexpected information in sentence comprehension. This
explanation is consistent with connectionist models like
TRACE (McClelland & Elman, 1986) that allow for
temporary activation of items consistent with local context
but inconsistent with prior information.
Language comprehension involves the dynamic
activation of words and concepts in response to a
constantly changing speech stream, and the shape of this
activation is modulated by individuals’ knowledge and
experience. Therefore, SES-related variability in the
quantity and quality of early language experience may
affect the breadth of lexical items likely to be activated at
any given point during language comprehension. Because
individuals from lower-SES backgrounds have likely been
exposed to fewer words relative to higher SES peers, they
may be less likely to pre-activate multiple lexical items for
that context. This possibility has to do with the
probabilistic distribution of lexical items in a given context
and not with total vocabulary per se. For instance,
following a sentence beginning, The boy is reading the…,
an individual experiencing a wealth of linguistic input
might hear words like book, magazine, novel, poem, story,
and so on whereas an individual experiencing a relatively
lower level of linguistic input might only encounter book
in this context. It may therefore make sense for the former
individual to “hedge their bets” and entertain less likely
outcomes whereas an optimal strategy for the latter
individual would be to stick with the most likely option
(e.g., book).
Our speculation that adults from lower-SES backgrounds
(pre-)activate fewer lexical items in language
comprehension leads to the prediction that these adults will
be impaired in situations where less-likely or novel

2432

information occurs. For instance, interpretation of so-called
“garden-path” sentences or other ambiguous content in
language may be more difficult for individuals who are
less likely to maintain multiple lexical (or syntactic)
representations at once. We hope to investigate these
hypotheses in future research.
While our findings do suggest that childhood SES
continues to exert an influence on adult language
processing skills, we should note some important
limitations regarding our sample. First, although we
attempted to recruit a large and diverse sample at two
geographically distinct public institutions across the United
States, we should note that our participants are
nevertheless attending selective college institutions and
gained entry partially by achieving requisite language
scores on major standardized college entrance
examinations. It is likely that recruiting a community
sample of adults of similar ages would increase the range
of socio-economic background of our participants as well
as variability in real-time language processing performance
on this task. It is nevertheless notable that, despite this
restriction in SES variability in our sample, we still find
SES-related differences in language processing skills.
A secondary limitation is that we are using a relatively
simple task that was designed to be easily understood even
by preschool participants. It is possible that we will find
more robust differences in timing with a more challenging
language task that uses more advanced vocabulary or
grammatical structures.
Despite these limitations, our findings highlight at least
one way in which social inequities in childhood may
impact adult language function. Early SES-related
differences in the language experiences of children clearly
have an impact in how adults navigate real-time language
and develop expectations for speech. These changes in the
dynamics of lexical activation may have important
consequences for how early SES may affect older child
and adult learners when they encounter novel or
unexpected information, although further work is needed to
understand precisely how this may occur. A greater
implication of our findings is that early intervention in
language skills is likely to have important positive
implications even into adulthood for outcomes in the lives
of children from lower-SES backgrounds.

Acknowledgments
We thank Tessa Arsenault and Virginia Prestwood for their
assistance with collection and data processing. This work
was supported by grants F32 DC010106 and R03
DC013638 to AB and NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
and Kroner Fellowship to MT.

References
Arai, M, van Gompel, R.P.G., Scheepers, C. (2007). Priming
ditransitive structures in comprehension. Cognitive
Psychology, 54, 218-250.

Barratt, W.B. (2006). The Barratt Simplified Measure of
Social Status (BSMSS). Unpublished manuscript.
Borovsky, A., Burns, E., Elman, J.L., & Evans, J.L. (2013).
Lexical activation during sentence comprehension in
adolescents with history of specific language impairment.
Journal of Communication Disorders, 46, 413-427.
Borovsky, A. & Creel, S. (2014). Children and adults
integrate talker and verb information in online processing.
Developmental Psychology, 50(5), 1600-1613.
Borovsky, A., Elman, J.L., & Fernald, A. (2012). Knowing a
lot for one’s age: Vocabulary skill and not age is associated
with anticipatory incremental sentence interpretation in
children and adults. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 112, 417-436.
Bradley, R.H., Corwyn, R.F., Burchinal, M., McAdoo, H.P.,
& Coll, C.G. (2001). The home environments of children in
the United States part II: Relationships with behavioral
development through age thirteen. Child Development,
72(6), 1868-1886.
DeLong, K.D., Troyer, M., & Kutas, M. (2014). Preprocessing in sentence comprehension: Sensitivity to likely
upcoming meaning and structure. Language and Linguistics
Compass, 8(12), 631-645.
DeLong, K.D., Urbach, T., & Kutas, M. (2005). Probabilistic
word pre-activation during language comprehension
inferred from electrical brain activity. Nature Neuroscience,
8(8), 1117-1121.
Duncan, G.J., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klebanov, P.K. (1994).
Economic deprivation and early childhood development.
Child Development, 65, 296-318.
Farah, M.J., Betancourt, L., Shera, D.M., Savaga, J.H.,
Giannetta, J.M., Brodsky, N.L., Malmud, E.K., & Hurt, H.
(2008). Environmental stimulation, parental nurturance and
cognitive development in humans. Developmental Science,
11(5), 793-801.
Fernald, A., Marchman, V.A, & Weisleder, A. (2012). SES
differences in language processing skill and vocabulary are
evident at 18 months. Developmental Science, 16(2), 234248.
Fernald, A., Perfors, A., & Marchman, V.A. (2006). Picking
up speed in understanding: Speech processing efficiency
and vocabulary growth across the 2nd year. Developmental
Psychology, 42(1), 98-116.
Hackman, D.A. & Farah, M.J. (2009). Socioeconomic status
and the developing brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
13(2), 65-73.
Halle, T., Forry, N., Hair, E., Perper, K., Wandner, L., Wessel,
J., & Vick, J. (2009). Disparities in early learning and
development: Lessons from the early childhood longitudinal
study—birth cohort (ECLS-B). Washington, DC: Child
Trends.
Hart, B. & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful differences in the
everyday experiences of young American children.
Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing.
Hoff, E. (2003). The specificity of environmental influence:
Socioeconomic status affects early vocabulary development
via maternal speech. Child Development, 74(5), 1368-1378.
Hollingshead, A.B. (1975). Four factor index of social status.
Unpublished manuscript, Department of Sociology, Yale
University.

2433

Kamide, Y., Altmann, G.T.M., & Haywood, S.L. (2003). The
time-course of prediction in incremental sentence
processing: Evidence from anticipatory eye movements.
Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 133-156.
Krieger, N., Williams, D.R., & Moss, N.E. (1997). Measuring
social class in US public health research. Annual Review of
Public Health, 18, 341-378.
Mani, N. & Huettig, F. (2012). Prediction during language
processing is a piece of cake—But only for skilled
producers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 38(4), 843-847.
Mani, N. & Huettig, F. (2014). Word reading skill predicts
anticipation of upcoming spoken language input: A study of
children developing proficiency in reading. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 126, 264-279.
Marchman, V.A. & Fernald, A. (2008). Speed of word
recognition and vocabulary knowledge in infancy predict
cognitive and language outcomes in later childhood.
Developmental Science, 11, F9-F16.
McClelland, J.L. & Elman, J.L. (1986). The TRACE model of
speech perception. Cognitive Psychology,
McMurray, B., Munson, C., & Tomblin, J.B. (2014).
Individual differences in language ability are related to
variation in word recognition, not speech perception:
Evidence from eye movments. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 57, 1344-1362.
Metusalem, R., Kutas, M., Urbach, T.P., Hare, M., McRae,
K., & Elman, J.L. (2012). Generalized event knowledge
activation during online sentence comprehension. Journal
of Memory and Language, 66(4), 545-567.
Nation, K., Marshall, C.M., & Altmann, G.T.M. (2003).
Investigating individual differences in children’s real-time
sentence comprehension using language-mediated eye
movements. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 86,
314-329.
Neville, H.J., Stevens, C., Pakaluk, E., Bell, T.A., Fanning, J.,
Klein, S., & Isbell, E. (2013). Family-based training
program improves brain function, cognition, and behavior
in lower socioeconomic status preschoolers. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Science, 110(29), 12138-12143.
Stiles, J. (2008). The fundamentals of brain development:
Integrating nature and nurture. Cambridge: MA, Harvard
University Press.
Tanenhaus, M.K., Spivey-Knowlton, M.J., Eberhard, K.M., &
Sedivy, J.C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632-1634.
Tracy, M., Zimmerman, F.J., Galea, S., McCauley, E., &
Vander Stoep, A. (2008). What explains the relation
between family poverty and childhood depressive
symptoms? Journal of Psychiatric Research, 42, 11631175.
Weisleder, A. & Fernald, A. (2013). Talking to children
matters: Early language experience strengthens processing
and builds vocabulary. Psychological Science, 24(11),
2143-2152.

