Children’s early perceptual and late-emerging social sensitivity to accented speech
Sarah C. Creel (screel@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, UC San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0515

Emilie Seubert (eseubert@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, UC San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0515
Abstract

However,
contradicting
these
early-comprehension
accounts, Nathan et al. (1998) found that 4-year-olds have
difficulty recognizing words in an unfamiliar accent. Creel
(2012), using deliberate mispronunciations of familiar
words, found that preschoolers’ word recognition suffers
more when the mispronounced (“accented”) form is more
featurally distant from the child’s (native-accent) sound
representation of the word.
Another aspect of accented word recognition that is
somewhat less well-studied is the role of context. That is, is
accented word recognition easier when there are many
supporting contextual cues? Such cues might include
broader discourse context, the semantic content of a
sentence, or the presence of a small, limited set of possible
referents. If only one of the candidate referents (e.g. a fish, a
car, a house, and a bear) sounds at all similar to the word
that is spoken (e.g. “fesh”), then children may have
relatively little difficulty in selecting the correct meaning.
On the other hand, if multiple candidate referents bear some
similarity to the spoken for (e.g. both a fish and a fez are
present), children may have more comprehension difficulty.

How early in life, and in what situations, are children
sensitive to speakers’ accents? Some researchers have
suggested that accent is an early-developing, perhaps
intrinsic, signal of group membership. However, other studies
find little sensitivity to or awareness of accent in young
children. Three experiments reported here examine 3-5-yearolds’ comprehension of, and social decision-making with, a
familiar (US English) accent and a foreign (Dutch) accent.
Dutch accents were comprehended less well, particularly
when salient phonological competitors were present, but
social sensitivity was fairly weak until age 6-7 years. The
latter finding contrasts with accounts positing early (perhaps
innate) social sensitivity to accents.
Keywords:
language
development,
accent,
stereotyping, word recognition, eye tracking

social

Introduction
How early, and in what situations, are children sensitive
to speakers’ accents? Studies of social processing suggest
very early accent sensitivity (infants and 5-6-year-olds;
Kinzler et al., 2007), and studies of comprehension suggest
that accents affect word recognition (4-year-olds; Nathan et
al., 1998). However, other research suggests that
recognizing accents themselves, especially regional accents
(vs. foreign), may be difficult (e.g. Floccia et al., 2009). Are
these results truly divergent, or simply due to variability in
the accents used across studies? The current study is the first
to examine social and comprehension effects using the same
accent. American children’s processing of Dutch-accented
speech was assessed in three contexts: friend selection,
perceptual discrimination, and word recognition.

Recognizing accents and making social decisions A very
different line of research examines children’s sensitivity to,
and awareness of, the accents around them. Adults are
highly sensitive to accent as a social signal, making negative
social evaluations of non-standard speakers (e.g. Blair &
Conner, 1978; Lambert, 1967). Some have argued that the
antecedents of adult accent stereotyping appear in children
as young as 6 months (Kinzler et al., 2007), and that accent
may be an innate social signal of group membership
(Pietraszewski & Schwartz, 2014). For example, Kinzler
and colleagues (2007, 2011, 2012) have found that 5-6-yearolds prefer to be friends with (fictitious) children who speak
their own accent or language (US English) rather than
someone who speaks with a different accent or language
(French or Spanish. Children as young as 3 years appear to
be sensitive to native-speaker status when choosing
informants in a word-learning task (Corriveau et al., 2013;
Kinzler et al., 2011), and 2.5-year-olds prefer to give and
receive toys from native English speakers than Spanish
speakers (Kinzler et al., 2012). At 6 months, infants prefer
to look at a face that has been previously associated with a
familiar voice (Kinzler et al., 2007).
Of course, some of the infant results have close parallels
in infant speech perception research (e.g. Mehler et al.,
1988), leaving open the possibility that seemingly-social

Previous research
Comprehending accented speech A major area of active
research concerns effects of accents on speech comprehension. Some research suggests that children by 12 months
of age, or shortly thereafter, can recognize a word form even
over a change in accent (Schmale & Seidl, 2009; Schmale et
al., 2010). Work by Swingley and Aslin (2002), originally
intended to demonstrate that 15-month-olds can detect
subtle mispronunciations of familiar words, might be
reinterpreted to suggest that mild phonetic-feature
deviations to a familiar word are to an extent recognized as
that word. Further work suggests that 19-month-olds readily
adapt to accent-like variability in vowel pronunciations
(White & Aslin, 2011), similar to adults (Maye et al., 2008).

477

effects may be driven by perceptual familiarity preferences.
Yet, given adults’ sensitivity to accent as a social signal, it
seems clear that these effects, if not initially social, become
so by adulthood. The child studies taken together imply that
children may be sensitive to accent differences as early as
infancy and certainly by early childhood.
Research on children’s abilities to detect accents paints a
different picture. Children around age 5 seem to have
difficulty recognizing which speakers have which accents
(Floccia et al., 2009; Girard et al., 2008; Wagner et al.,
2014), even when one of the accents is their own. Note that
adults in these studies (Floccia et al., 2009; Girard et al.,
2008; Wagner et al., 2014) performed at or near ceiling.
This suggests an age gradient in detecting accents. All of
these researchers find that children’s detection of foreign
accents exceeds their detection of native, regional accents.
However, it is not clear if the foreign-accent advantage is
due to greater overall accent strength, or to foreign accents
making sound changes that are more easily detected than
changes in regional accents (see Floccia et al., 2009).
Findings of weak accent recognition contrast strikingly
with children’s apparently strong accent-based social biases.
However, they pattern with a broader class of phenomena in
which perceptual learning seems to extend through at least
several years of early childhood. This includes recognition
of voices (Creel & Jimenez, 2012; Mann et al., 1979), faces
(e.g. Carey et al., 1980), and certain speech sound
characteristics (e.g. Ohde & Haley, 1997). Such protracted
learning accounts contrast with early learning accounts (e.g.
Werker & Tees, 1984), which postulate that children
converge on native perceptual categories by one year of age.

United States (1 female, 1 male), were recorded speaking a
various materials including sentences and isolated words.
Adult monolingual native speakers of English (N=15)
rated the degree of accent for spoken sentences and passages
for the Dutch and US speakers. Dutch speakers were all
detectably more foreign-accented than each of the US
speakers (p < .0001 in all cases), and some Dutch speakers
had stronger accents than others (Figure 1). To maximize
effects of accentedness on results, we selected two highlyaccented speakers, one male, one female. The mostaccented male speaker was chosen. Since the most-accented
female speaker was judged to have a strong idiolect, the
second-most-accented female speaker was chosen.

The current study

Method

Experiment 1
This experiment asked whether children can associate
different accents with different individuals. Previous
research (Creel, 2012) demonstrated that children readily
associated color preferences with voices of different genders
(e.g. Billy likes white, Anna likes black). Children heard
sentences like “I want to see the triangle” while viewing a
display of four shapes—two white, two black. Their eye
movements were tracked. When children heard Billy speak,
they looked more at white shapes (Billy’s favorite) than
black shapes (Anna’s favorite), and vice versa, even before
the shape word was spoken. This suggests that children
readily use voice gender as a cue to speaker identity.
The current experiment explored whether children could
use accent (Dutch vs. US) in an analogous way. That is, are
children aware enough of accents to associate different color
preferences with differently-accented individuals?

The literatures on accented-speech comprehension, social
accent processing, and accent recognition present somewhat
divergent pictures. If accents affect children’s comprehension, why don’t they allow recognition that someone has
an accent? Why are accent-based social decisions more
precocious than accent identification? Are the apparent
differences in these phenomena driven by differences in the
properties of the accents used (e.g. some are stronger
accents), or are the phenomena themselves truly generated
by different underlying knowledge or biases?
Here, we use the same accent—Dutch-accented English—
to test both comprehension and social decisions. Using the
same accent across studies controls for differences in accent
strength, and reveal the extent to which comprehension and
social cognition effects are truly distinct from one another.
Experiments 1 and 2 address 3-5-year-olds’ speech
comprehension and word recognition in Dutch accents (vs.
control US-accented speakers). Experiment 3 asks whether
3-5-year-olds and older children show biases to be friends
with native-accented over Dutch-accented speakers.

Participants Monolingual English-speaking children
(N=32) aged 3-5 years from area preschools and daycares
took part. Monolingual English-speaking adults (N=27) also
took part in the lab.
Stimuli Spoken materials included passages and
sentences from 2 Dutch-accented and 2 US-accented talkers
(1 female, 1 male in each set). Each listener heard either two
female talkers (one Dutch-accented, one US-accented) or
two male talkers (one Dutch, one US).
Procedure Children first heard two favorite-color trials,
where each talker introduced herself verbally and stated her
favorite color. Each talker was depicted as a cartoon
character surrounded by objects of her favorite color (Figure
1). Next were 8 color-selection trials, where two shapes
differing only in color appeared, and each speaker asked,
“Where’s the white/black one?” This verified that children
knew color names well enough to do the task. Next,
favorite-color trials repeated. Last were 32 test trials. Each
test trial depicted four shapes (circle, square, triangle, star):
two white, two black. As children viewed these shapes, they
heard a speaker request one shape: Billy might say “Can
you show me the circle?” The child’s task was simply to

Materials
A set of 12 Dutch speakers of English (9 female, 3 male), as
well as two native speakers of English from the Western

478

point to the requested shape. Of greater theoretical interest
were eye movements: would children visually fixate shapes
of the speaker’s preferred color, indicating that they had
recognized the speaker’s accent and were making on-line
inferences about which shapes might be mentioned?

show looks to favorite-color shapes prior to the target being
named (t(26)=2.50, p=.02; Figure 2, lower), indicating that
they were sensitive to the accent.
While adults were able to use accent differences to guide
interpretation of talkers, children showed very weak evidence of doing so. Both groups showed good comprehension of accented talkers, with little recognition advantage
for US talkers over NL talkers. For children, this excellent
comprehension might indicate that the accents used were
quite mild, and thus too weak to afford accent detection. On
the other hand, it may simply reflect that, of the four salient
response options on each trial (square, circle, star, triangle),
the pictures’ names were very phonologically distinct, even
in the presence of a foreign accent. This raises the question
of whether children’s comprehension might be more
affected by accented speech when phonological competitors
were present among the response options. This was
addressed in Experiment 2.

Figure 1: Experiment 1, characters on favorite-color trials

Results and Discussion

Looks%to%pictures%

Accuracy Children’s accuracy was nearly at ceiling (US
speakers: 95%; Dutch speakers: 92%), though they were
slightly less accurate on the Dutch-accented trials
(t(31)=2.12, p=.04). Adults performed at ceiling throughout.
Favorite"color"target"
Favorite"color"other"shape"
Not"favorite"color"

1"
0.9"
0.8"
0.7"
0.6"
0.5"
0.4"
0.3"
0.2"
0.1"
0"
0"

Looks%to%pictures%

Experiment 2
Does accented speech affect comprehension more when
phonological competitors are salient choices? As in
Experiment 1, children completed a picture recognition task.
However, unlike Experiment 1, the words depicted had
more similar names. Names were especially similar when
produced with Dutch accent characteristics (Table 1).
On each trial, a Dutch-accented or US-accented voice
would speak a word. Children then pointed to the picture
that had been named. If children are more affected by accent
differences when making more fine-grained phonological
distinctions, then comprehension accuracy (pointing to
targets) and visual fixations to targets should be lower for
Dutch accents than US accents, especially on phonologically-similar trials. However, if the Dutch accents here were
too mild to affect word recognition, then accuracy should be
equivalent for US and Dutch accents.

500"
1000"
1500"
Time%from%sentence%onset%

2000"

1"
0.9"
0.8"
0.7"
0.6"
0.5"
0.4"
0.3"
0.2"
0.1"
0"

Method
Participants A new group of 3-5-year-old participants
(N=24) took part.

0"

500"
1000"
1500"
Time%from%sentence%onset%(ms)%

Stimuli Words were drawn from the original set of
Dutch- and US-accented recordings. Selected words (Table
1) were ones that contained particular Dutch accent features
of vowel changes (merging of /æ/ and /ɛ/, similarity of /u/
and /ʊ/; see Adank et al., 2004), diminished contrastive
vowel duration before voiced codas (bed and bet having
similar vowel durations), and sibilant fricatives (Dutch /s/
has a lower frequency center than English /s/). On “similar”
trials, pictures with similar-sounding names in the Dutch
accent were paired together. On “dissimilar” trials, the same
pictures were used, but were paired so that pictures with less
similar-sounding names appeared together.

2000"

Figure 2: Experiment 1, eye movements to pictures
(upper: children; lower: adults). Dashed line indicates target
word onset, plus 200 milliseconds to execute an eye
movement.
Eye movements Children’s eye movements reflected no
substantial deviations toward favorite-color shapes, and
looks to the target itself only rose above looks to other
shapes after the target name was mentioned (Figure 2,
upper), with no differences between favorite-color shapes
and other-color shapes in the pre-name window (200 ms950 ms; t(31)=0.21, p=.84). Adults, on the other hand, did

Procedure Eye movements were tracked as children
viewed picture pairs and heard one of the pictures named.
Pointing responses were also recorded.

479

Table 1. Pictured words with names that sounded similar
in Dutch accent. Bolded were especially similar.

Word%recogni+on%accuracy%

1"
0.9"
0.8"
0.7"
0.6"
0.5"
0.4"
0.3"
0.2"
0.1"
0"

Similar in accent
Vowels
Fricatives
Vowels, coda
No coda
Vowels; similar onsets
Vowels
Vowels, coda
Vowels

Target'looks'minus'other'
picture'looks'

Word pair
hat
head
soup shoe
hook hug
bell
boy
foot
spoon
apple egg
bat
bed
book boots

their comprehension is nonetheless affected. Further, these
two experiments suggest that good accent comprehension
may partly be a function of contextual influences (in this
case, visual displays), which can be used to rule out phonologically-plausible (but contextually absent) alternatives.

***"

Sim.%words,%Dutch%
Diﬀ.%words,%%Dutch%

0.7%
0.6%

Sim.%words,%US%
Diﬀ.%words,%%US%

0.5%
0.4%
0.3%
0.2%
0.1%
0%
!0.1%

0%

500%
1000%
1500%
Time'from'word'onset'(ms)'

2000%

Figure 4: Experiment 2, eye movements.
US"
accent"
Dutch"
accent"

What, then, do these results suggest about children’s
social processing of accents at this age? Experiment 1 would
seem to suggest that children cannot make accent-based
social decisions, at least for this accent. However, it is
possible that social decisions are made on a more implicit
basis than the sentence-processing task used in Experiment
1. Thus, the final experiment tested whether children
hearing the same sentences as in Experiment 1 would show
evidence of preferring native-accented “friends” over
Dutch-accented “friends.”

phonologically"similar" phonologically"dis;nct"
Words%depicted%

Figure 3: Experiment 2, accuracy with standard errors.

Results and Discussion
Accuracy Children were more accurate for US accents
than for Dutch accents (Figure 3), carried by the
phonologically-similar trials (t(23)=3.73, p=.001).

Experiment 3
Children completed a friend-selection task patterned after
Kinzler et al. (2007). If children are socially sensitive to our
Dutch-accented speakers, then they should show an ownaccent bias in friend selection, as found in previous
research. If they are unable to use the Dutch accent to make
social decisions, then they should be at chance in selecting
friends of one accent or another.
The friend-selection task was immediately followed by a
location-judgment task, in order to more clearly tap overt
awareness of accentedness. If friend selections are
calculated on a conscious basis, then accuracy in the
location task might be expected to pattern with the friend
selection biases. On the other hand, if friendship judgments
are calculated more implicitly, then friendship judgments
may show stronger effects than location judgments.

Eye movements A target advantage score was computed
by subtracting looks to the non-target picture from looks to
the target (correct) picture. When this exceeds 0, children
are looking more at the target (Figure 4). In a 1-second
window after word onset (shifted by 200 ms to allow for
time to execute eye movements), children showed a greater
proportion of target fixations on US-accented trials than on
Dutch-accented trials (t(23)=4.68, p=.0001). There was no
interaction with Condition (similar word pair, distinct word
pair), suggesting that words were recognized more slowly
even when close phonological competitors were not present
on a given trial.
These findings demonstrate that accented speech
comprehension becomes more challenging when listeners
must make finer phonetic discriminations. Such fine
discriminations are required not only in laboratory scenarios
where a few highly-salient competitors are present; they
also happen more naturalistically whenever there is a wider
range of potential referents, either referents in the listener’s
immediate environment or in decontextualized language—
speaking about topics not in the here-and-now.
The results of Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that
preschool-aged children may be less aware of accents as an
identifying characteristic than adults are (Experiment 1), but

Method
Participants A sample of 33 new child participants ages
3-5 years (range: 3.1-5.5 years) took part. Following these
results, an additional 8 older children (6-7 years) were
recruited to assess the age trajectory of the effects.
Stimuli Auditory stimuli were those used in Experiment
1. Visual stimuli were pictures of children’s faces (8 female,

480

General Discussion

8 male), selected from Creative-Commons licensed photographs on flickr.com. Faces that appeared side by side were
matched for gender and approximate hair and skin color.

Three experiments tested young children’s sensitivity to
accents. In Experiment 1, 3-5-year-olds did not show
different interpretations of sentences (looks to the speaker’s
favorite color) according to accent, but their word recognition was mildly affected. In Experiment 2, the presence of
salient strong phonological competitors decreased 3-5-yearolds’ word recognition in the accent more markedly.
Finally, Experiment 3 showed that children at age 3 do not
make social judgments based on accent, with a strong
increase in own-accent preference with age, through age 7.
Thus, for younger children, accent appeared not to be
socially salient, but affected comprehension nonetheless.
These results suggest three things. First, accents can be
strong enough to affect children’s comprehension
(Experiments 1, 2) without children registering the accented
speaker as socially different (Experiment 3). Second, social
responsiveness to accents may develop somewhat slowly
(Experiment 3), though more research is clearly needed.
Third, social responsiveness to accents may occur in the
absence of full awareness of other correlates of accentedness such as living in a different geographical region.

Procedure This largely followed Kinzler et al.’s (2007)
study. There were 16 trials. On each trial, two faces
appeared, each looming as it “spoke” in turn. One face
spoke in a US accent, the other spoke in a Dutch accent.
Children indicated their friendship preferences by pointing.
Each face appeared twice, and each voice occurred
equally often for a particular child. Face pairs were yoked
so that each character appeared with the same other face on
two different trials. For each child, the order of the accents
(US, Dutch) was counterbalanced. Order of trials in each list
was prerandomized with the constraints that: the same
character pair did not appear on consecutive trials.
For the location task, children were first asked where they
lived. Most replied “California.” Those who did not were
corrected. They were then asked to say whether a speaker on
a given trial was “from here” or “not from here.” On each of
32 trials, a cartoon character appeared (similar to that in
Figure 2), and it spoke one of the sentences from the friendselection task. Children responded verbally, and an
experimenter entered the response by keyboard.

Propor%on'responses'

1"
0.8"
0.6"

Prefer"na4ve"as"friend"
Know"from/not"from"here"
*"
+"

Development of sensitivity to accented speech
One question raised here is how children’s sensitivity to
accented speech develops. Are they sensitive from birth to
accent properties? Infants seem to decrease in sensitivity to
phonetic deviation in word recognition (e.g. Schmale &
Seidl, 2009; Schmale et al., 2010). Why, if children
increasingly tolerate phonetic deviations, might they show
increasing social awareness of accents?
There are at least two possibilities. One possibility is that
young children are working to learn words, and so
temporarily “tune out” accent-like variability in order to
focus on meaningful sound variation. This would imply a Ushaped function in accent sensitivity, with the bottom of the
U in early childhood. A second possibility is that children
may need extended perceptual exposure to—protracted
learning of—their own accent patterns in order to recognize
deviations from that pattern. It is clear that extensive
experience with accents facilitates their recognition, in that
even adults are rather inaccurate at identifying accents to
which they have had relatively little exposure (e.g. Clopper
& Pisoni, 2004). Future work should explore the roles of
accent strength and child age in order to understand how
accent awareness develops.

**"

0.4"
0.2"
0"
3"years"

4"years" 5"years" 6+"years"
Age'
Figure 5. Experiment 3, age effect on friendship
selections and location knowledge.

Results and Discussion
Children showed increasing social sensitivity to accent
with age, with no biases shown by 3-year-olds (M=.48;
t(10)=0.56, p=.59) but strong biases seen in 6-7-year-olds
(M=.79; t(7)=3.82, p=.007). The effect of age on nativeness
bias was significant (r(39)=.64, p<.0001). Interestingly,
location judgment accuracy was marginally weaker than
friendship biases (t(40)=2.02, p=.051).
While children overall showed social sensitivity to
accented speech, effects were not as strong as seen in
previous studies (e.g. Kinzler et al., 2007) and seemed to
emerge over a lengthier developmental time frame.
Further, overt awareness of geographic correlates of
accentedness speech was quite low. This suggests that, even
for children who do make negative social evaluations of
foreign-accented speakers, they may not be fully aware of
the real-world concomitants of accented speech.

Accent strength and the regional/foreign distinction
These results contribute to debates between the roles of
accent strength vs. the regional/foreign accent distinction.
Recall that previous findings suggest better identification of
foreign accents than regional ones. The current study used a
foreign accent, but showed weak accent awareness in social
decision-making. This somewhat resembles age-based
changes in social sensitivity to American regional accent
variability (e.g. Kinzler & DeJesus, 2013). This similarity
between regional and foreign accent findings suggests that

481

regional/foreign may be a less relevant distinction than
accent strength. An account based on accent strength is
more parsimonious in predicting effects on both accent
identification and word recognition.
Note that the Dutch-accented voices used here were rated
in the “moderate accent” range by adult listeners, not
“strong accent”. This may mean that the accents, while
readily detectable to adults, were not as detectable to young
children, thus blocking children from making social
judgments based on accent. Another possibility is that
Dutch, like English, is a Germanic language with a similarly
large vowel system to English (e.g. Adank et al., 2004),
leading to fairly preserved English vowels in Dutch accents.
Important differences between regional vs. foreign
accents may nonetheless exist (see, e.g., Floccia et al., 2009,
for acoustic analyses). However, such effects are likely to be
intertwined with effects of accent strength, accent
familiarity, and idiosyncratic accent properties.

Kinzler, K. D., & DeJesus, J. M. (2013). Northern=smart
and Southern=nice: The development of accent attitudes
in the United States. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 66(6), 1146–1158.
Kinzler, K. D., Dupoux, E., & Spelke, E. S. (2007). The
native language of social cognition. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104(30), 12577–80.
Kinzler, K. D., Dupoux, E., & Spelke, E. S. (2012).
“Native” objects and collaborators: infants’ object choices
and acts of giving reflect favor for native over foreign
speakers. Journal of Cognition and Development, 13(1),
67–81.
Mann, V. A., Diamond, R., & Carey, S. (1979).
Development of voice recognition: Parallels with face
recognition. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
27(1), 153–165.
Maye, J., Aslin, R. N., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2008). The
weckud wetch of the wast: Lexical adaptation to a novel
accent. Cognitive Science, 32, 543–562.
Mehler, J., Jusczyk, P. W., Lambertz, G., Halsted, N.,
Bertoncini, J., & Amiel-Tison, C. (1988). A precursor of
language acquisition in young infants. Cognition, 29,
143–178.
Nathan, L., Wells, B., & Donlan, C. (1998). Children’s
comprehension of unfamiliar regional accents: a
preliminary investigation. Journal of Child Language,
25(2), 343–365.
Ohde, R. N., & Haley, K. L. (1997). Stop-consonant and
vowel perception in 3- and 4-year-old children. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 102(6), 3711–22.
Pietraszewski, D., & Schwartz, A. (2014). Evidence that
accent is a dimension of social categorization, not a
byproduct of perceptual salience, familiarity, or ease-ofprocessing. Evolution and Human Behavior, 35(1), 43–
50.
Schmale, R., Cristià, A., Seidl, A., & Johnson, E. K. (2010).
Developmental Changes in Infants’ Ability to Cope with
Dialect Variation in Word Recognition. Infancy, 15(6),
650–662.
Schmale, R., & Seidl, A. (2009). Accommodating
variability in voice and foreign accent: flexibility of early
word representations. Developmental Science, 12(4), 583–
601.
Schmale, R., Seidl, A., & Cristia, A. (2014). Mechanisms
underlying accent accommodation in early word learning:
evidence for general expansion. Developmental Science,
1–7.
Swingley, D., & Aslin, R. N. (2002). Lexical neighborhoods
and the word-form representations of 14-month-olds.
Psychological Science, 13, 480–484.
Wagner, L., Clopper, C. G., & Pate, J. K. (2014). Children’s
perception of dialect variation. Journal of Child
Language, 41, 1062–1084.
White, K. S., & Aslin, R. N. (2011). Adaptation to novel
accents by toddlers. Developmental Science, 14(2), 372–
384.

Acknowledgments
Research was supported by NSF CAREER Award BCS1057080 to SCC.

References
Adank, P., van Hout, R., & Smits, R. (2004). An acoustic
description of the vowels of Northern and Southern
Standard Dutch. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 116(3), 1729.
Blair, L. M., & Conner, H. S. (1978). Black and rural
accents found to lessen job opportunities. Monthly Labor
Review, (May), 35–36.
Carey, S., Diamond, R., & Woods, B. (1980). Development
of face recognition: A maturational component?
Developmental Psychology, 16(4), 257–269.
Clopper, C. G., & Pisoni, D. B. (2004). Homebodies and
army brats: Some effects of early linguistic experience
and residential history on dialect categorization.
Language Variation and Change, 16(1), 31–48.
Corriveau, K. H., Kinzler, K. D., & Harris, P. L. (2013).
Accuracy trumps accent in children’s endorsement of
object labels. Developmental Psychology, 49(3), 470–9.
Creel, S. C. (2012). Phonological similarity and mutual
exclusivity: on-line recognition of atypical pronunciations
in 3-5-year-olds. Developmental Science, 15(5), 697–713.
Creel, S. C., & Jimenez, S. R. (2012). Differences in talker
recognition by preschoolers and adults. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 113, 487–509.
Floccia, C., Butler, J., Girard, F., & Goslin, J. (2009).
Categorization of regional and foreign accent in 5- to 7year-old British children. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 33(4), 366–375.
Girard, F., Floccia, C., & Goslin, J. (2008). Perception and
awareness of accents in young children. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 26(3), 409–433.
Kinzler, K. D., Corriveau, K. H., & Harris, P. L. (2011).
Children’s selective trust in native-accented speakers.
Developmental Science, 14(1), 106–11.

482

