Children’s Online Processing of Ad-Hoc Implicatures
Erica J. Yoon

Yunan Charles Wu

Michael C. Frank

ejyoon@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

ywu15@wabash.edu
Department of Psychology
Wabash College

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract
Language comprehenders routinely make pragmatic inferences
that go beyond the literal meanings of utterances. If A said “I
ate some of the cookies,” B should infer that A ate some but
not all. Children perform poorly on experimental tests of scalar
implicatures like this, despite their early-emerging sensitivity
to pragmatic cues. Our current work explores potential factors
responsible for children’s successes and failures in computing
pragmatic inferences. In two experiments, we used an eyetracking paradigm to test children’s ability to compute implicatures when they have access to contextual alternatives to the
target word (Experiment 1), and when they hear prosodic cues
that emphasize the contrast between the target and alternative
(Experiment 2). We found that by the time children are four
years old, they successfully identify the inferential target referent in this paradigm; with supportive prosodic cues, we saw
evidence of success in three-year-olds as well. In sum, with
sufficient contextual support, preschool children are capable
of making online pragmatic inferences.
Keywords: Pragmatics; implicature; eye-tracking; cognitive
development

Introduction
Language comprehension involves not only interpreting the
literal meanings of words in utterances, but also understanding the communicative intentions behind what is said. Listeners make pragmatic implicatures, inferences about speakers’
intended meanings that go beyond the semantics of their utterances (Grice, 1975). One common type of implicatures,
called scalar implicatures, involves scales built based on the
knowledge of lexical alternatives (Horn, 1972). For example,
if A says to B, “Some of the students failed the test,” B may
infer that A intended to say “Some, but not all, of the students
failed the test.” That is, A’s use of the term “some” implicates
that the stronger scalar alternative “all” is negated.
Whereas adults readily compute scalar implicatures (SIs),
children tend to perform poorly on SI tasks (e.g., Noveck,
2001; Papafragou & Musolino, 2003; Huang & Snedeker,
2009). For example, given a context in which three out of
three horses jumped over a fence, adults reject a statement
such as “some of the horses jumped over the fence” as infelicitous, whereas children typically judge it to be acceptable
(Papafragou & Musolino, 2003).
Children’s failures on SI computation are surprising, given
their early-emerging sensitivity to the informativeness of utterances. For example, by around approximately five years,
children adjust informativeness of their own expressions depending on the listeners’ knowledge (Matthews, Lieven,
Theakston, & Tomasello, 2006); reward speakers based on
their informativeness (Katsos & Bishop, 2011); and provide more information when disambiguation between potential referents is difficult (Matthews, Butcher, Lieven, &

Tomasello, 2012). Given this body of research, it seems unlikely that children’s lack of pragmatic ability per se causes
their failures on SI tasks. What then causes children’s failures, and what factors can help them succeed on implicature
tasks? The current work investigates two potential factors:
availability of alternatives to the current term, and cues that
highlight the contrast between current term and its alternatives.
On standard accounts, implicature involves generating and
negating stronger alternatives to a given term. Upon hearing
“some,” the listener needs to generate a stronger alternative
(“all”) based on lexical knowledge, and then negate it. One
potential cause of children’s difficulty with previous SI tasks
could be issues generating these alternative terms (Barner,
Brooks, & Bale, 2011). If this hypothesis is true, children
might succeed on implicature computation if they are given
access to alternatives in the context.
Indeed, there is evidence that children can compute adhoc implicatures, which depend on contextually- rather than
lexically-derived scales (Stiller, Goodman, & Frank, 2014)1 .
Children saw three faces, one wearing glasses and a top-hat,
one wearing glasses only, and one with no item. When children heard: “My friend has glasses,” 3.5-year-old children
and older chose the face with glasses only as the referent
above chance, successfully computing the implicature “My
friend has glasses, but not a top-hat,” given the contextual access to the stronger alternative (face with glasses and top-hat).
In our current work we adopt a similar ad-hoc implicature
paradigm for eye-tracking, to ask both about factors underlying the previously-observed developmental trajectory and
about the decision-making processes underlying children’s
implicature computation.
Eye-tracking offers several advantages over purely behavioral measures for examining pragmatic inference. First, it
is possible to track participants’ gaze as an utterance is being produced, providing moment-by-moment data about responses to spoken language. Second, eye gaze reflects a
more implicit measure of comprehension and hence allows
for more direct developmental comparisons compared with
behavioral choices that may reflect conscious deliberation.
A previous eye-tracking paradigm looking at SI computation in children (Huang & Snedeker, 2009) suggested that
children do not calculate SI during online language process1 These inferences are sometimes known in the pragmatics literature as “particularized” implicatures, in contrast to “generalized”
implicatures. Here we use the term “ad-hoc” implicature as a descriptive term and remain agnostic with respect to the reality of this
distinction.

2757

ing. For example, when they saw a girl who has two out of
four (some but not all) of the socks and another girl who has
three out of three (all) of the soccer balls, and heard “... the
girl who has some of the soc...,” unlike adults, children did
not look more toward the girl with socks until they heard the
disambiguating word “socks.” Children might have struggled
with SI computation from the lack of access to lexical scales
(some-all), and the time constraint to process implicatures (in
less than one second). Our current work uses a similar but
simpler paradigm that tests children’s inference of implicatures given scales that are set up contextually.
Thus, in addition to replicating previous research on adhoc implicatures in the online processing context, we are able
to pursue two goals: measure the time-course of ad-hoc pragmatic inference; and identify potential factors that contribute
to the developmental differences in implicature computation
performance. In Experiment 1, we measure implicature performance across a wide developmental range; in Experiment
2, we examine the contribution of contrastive intonation on
performance for a subset of age groups. Our findings suggest
that young children are able to spontaneously generate implicature inferences when contextual support is present, even
though these inferences are slower and harder to make than
interpretations of semantically unambiguous utterances.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Parents and their 2- to 5-year-old children visiting Children’s Discovery Museum in San Jose, CA, were invited to participate in a short video study. The current sample
comprised of children who were exposed to English at least
75% of the time as indicated by their parents. In addition,
individual trials with more than 50% missing gaze data were
excluded from analysis, and only participants who completed
at least half of the trials according to this criterion were included in the analysis. These exclusion criteria led to a final
sample of 108 (out of 113 participants): 24 2-year-olds (M =
2:6, range 2;1–2;11, 10 girls), 28 3-year-olds (M = 3;5, range
3;1–3;11, 19 girls), 24 4-year-olds (M = 4;6, range 4;1–4;11,
13 girls), 32 5-year-olds (M = 5;4, range 5;1–5;9, 9 girls).
Children were given a sticker for participating in the study.
We also tested fourteen adult participants, undergraduate students recruited through Stanford Psychology credit pool.
Stimuli and Design On each trial, participants saw two images: a target and distractor, which could either be an item
with a single feature (e.g., a plate with only a carrot or only
a banana), or an item with double features (e.g., a plate with
a carrot and a banana). Each trial contained three phases: in
the initial phase (8.5 seconds), two images were presented
in silence for two seconds, then a pre-recorded voice said a
sentence (e.g., “Look at these plates. Elmo’s plate has a carrot.”). Then, in the anticipatory phase (1.5 seconds), a chime
sound played to induce participants’ anticipatory gaze. In the
following feedback phase (1.5 seconds), a character appeared
next to the target with an amusing sound effect. This outcome

served to keep the task engaging for participants.
There were three types of test trials (pictured in Figure 1,
bottom). In inference trials, the target item had a single feature (e.g., a carrot), and the distractor item had two features,
one that was common with the target (e.g., a carrot) and the
other feature that was unique (e.g., a banana). The test sentence named the feature that was common to the target and
distractor. Thus, if participants understood that “Elmo’s plate
has a carrot” implicates “Elmo’s plate has a carrot but not a
banana,” given the context, they should look more toward the
target than the distractor, but otherwise look equally to both.
There were two additional trial types, with semantically
unambiguous targets: Control-double trials looked identical
to inference trials, but the target and distractor were switched,
such that the double-feature item was the target and the
single-feature item was the distractor, and the test sentence
named the unique feature on the target. Control-single trials
presented two items that each had a unique single feature, and
either could be the target. Children saw 4 inference, 4 controldouble, and 4 control-single trials; adults saw 6 inference, 6
control-double, and 12 control-single trials.
There were six sets of item and feature types, and the features were named with nouns found on the MacArthur-Bates
Communicative Development Inventory word list (Fenson et
al., 1994). Two orders of the test trials were created, such
that trial types and item types were counterbalanced and trial
order was pseudo-randomized across the two orders.
Procedure Participants sat in a booster seat, approx. 60 cm
away from the monitor of an SMI RED 120 Hz binocular remote eye-tracker. Participants were introduced to the task as
watching a short video. The video began with a short Elmo
video clip that lasted for 1-2 minutes, during which any necessary adjustments to the eye-tracker and participants’ chair
positions were made. The eye-tracker was then calibrated
using a 2-point calibration and validation of the calibration
points. Then participants were introduced to Sesame Street
characters and told ‘Today, [they] will show us lots of fun
things. Are you ready? Let’s go!’ Following the introduction,
participants saw two gaze-contingent practice trials, with unambiguous targets that differed from the test items. Then children watched 16 test trials and adults watched 24 test trials,
as well as 4 filler photos of children playing and 2 Elmo video
clips, presented at a pseudo-random points between test trials.
The video lasted approximately 8 minutes.

Results and Discussion
Participants of all ages looked to the targets in both controldouble and control-single trials reliably above chance (50%;
Figure 1). There were age differences in the speed of looking
at the target and the proportion of correct looking across both
control trial types.
For inference trials, children of 4 years and above robustly
looked to inferential targets (for 4-year-olds: t(23) = 2.74,
p = .01). For example, upon hearing “Bert’s plate has a carrot,” older children identified the plate with only a carrot as

2758

Control-double

Proportion correct looking

1.00

Control-single

Inference

Adults
0.75

5-yr
4-yr
3-yr

0.50

2-yr

0.25

0.00

target
word
onset

-1

0

target
word
offset

1

target
word
onset

2

3-1

0

target
word
offset

1

Time (s)

target
word
onset

2

3-1

0

target
word
offset

1

2

3

Figure 1: Proportion of 2- to 5-year-old children and adults looking to the target image as the utterance unfolds. Time 0
represents the target word onset. Proportion correct looking is defined by looks to the target divided by the total looks to both
the target and the distractor. Bottom panels show example stimuli from each condition; the named character emerged at the end
of the trial to mark the correct target.

the referent rather than the plate with a carrot and a banana,
replicating Stiller et al. (2014)’s findings of ad-hoc implicature (though that study found successes in 3.5–4-year-old
children as well). Although previous studies are not directly
comparable due to low-level differences in the task and materials, our finding is consistent with the hypothesis that children’s inferential ability might have been obscured in previous SI tasks due to the unavailability of lexical alternatives
(e.g. “all” given “some”; Barner et al., 2011).
We additionally observed an unpredicted trend in two-yearolds’ behavior: they did not disengage from distractors relative to their baseline bias prior to hearing the target word, and
were marginally below chance in their overall performance
(t(23) = 1.93, p = .07). We return to this pattern in the General Discussion and speculate about the sources for the observed developmental changes.
We fit a linear mixed-effects model2 to measure the effects
of trial type and age on the proportion of children looking to
the target between 1 and 4s after noun onset (Table 1). We
selected this time window because participants would have
to wait until the end of target noun (0.8 seconds on average)
to know they should switch to the inferential target, given
the absence of a disambiguating continuation (e.g., “Elmo’s
plate has a carrot and banana.”). Results of the mixed-effects
model indicate significant main effects of trial type and age:
participants looked to the target significantly less in inference
trials compared to control-single trials, and across all trial

Table 1: Coefficient estimates from mixed-effects models
predicting proportion of looks to target in Experiment 1.
Predictor
Intercept (Control-single)
Age
Control-double
Inference
Age × Control-double
Age × Inference

Value (SE)
.60 (.05)
.04 (.01)
.10 (.06)
-.24 (.07)
-.02 (.01)
.01 (.02)

t-value
12.22
3.21
1.78
-3.69
-1.17
.87

types, participants’ looking to target increased with age.
We next analyzed participants’ reaction times (Fernald,
Zangl, Portillo, & Marchman, 2008). We selected trials on
which participants were looking at the distractor at the point
of disambiguation, and measured the average length of time
prior to a shift to the target. Looks to the target were slower
in inference trials compared to both control trial types across
all age groups (Figure 2). We next fit a linear mixed-effects
model with the same structure as the previous analysis, but
predicting reaction time rather than accuracy. This model
again showed significant main effects of trial type (β = .109,
p < .001) and age (β = .341, p < .001) on the average RT,
with no interaction (largest β = .02, p > .24). Inference trials were generally slower compared to unambiguous control
trials, regardless of the participants’ age.

2 All mixed-effects models were run using the lme4 package, version 1.1-7. The random effects structure for this model was as follows: (trial type | subid) + (age + trial type | item).

2759

Reaction Time (s)

1.5

Stimuli, Design, and Procedure The stimuli, design and
procedure were identical to Experiment 1, except for one
change: Target nouns in inference trials were produced with
contrastive stress (low-high-low pitch accent and longer duration, 1.2 seconds on average). Based on previous findings that children identify contrastive prosody based on the
norms set within an experiment (Kurumada, 2014), we included prosodic cues only on inference trials.

Inference

1.2

0.9

Control-single
0.6

Results and Discussion

Control-double
2

3

Age group

4

5

Figure 2: Average reaction times for first switches to target in
trials in which participants were looking at the distractor (and
not the target) at the target word onset. Error bars indicate
95% confidence intervals.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, we found that 4- and 5-year-olds looked
more at the target of simple ad-hoc implicatures, but younger
children did not show the same effect. In Experiment 2, we
explored whether prosodic stress could improve children’s
performance. Contrastive stress—a change in pitch, characterized by an initial drop followed by a rise—is a signal of
the contrast between possible referents and can facilitate processing of simple references for adults (Ito & Speer, 2008).
For children, evidence of the use of contrastive stress is
more mixed (Cutler & Swinney, 1987). Two recent papers
found evidence for sensitivity to contrastive stress in 6-yearolds (Sekerina & Trueswell, 2012; Ito, Jincho, Minai, Yamane, & Mazuka, 2012), but both of these studies found
that processing was relatively slow and only present in cases
where contrast was highly supported by the discourse context. On the other hand, Kurumada (2014) found that younger
preschoolers could make use of contrastive stress on a simple
forced-choice task. Children saw a picture of a zebra and a
picture of an okapi (an animal that resembles a zebra); when
they heard “It LOOKS like a zebra” with contrastive stress
on the word “looks,” children reliably chose the picture of the
okapi, if they heard the same speaker use simpler sentences
(e.g., “It’s a zebra”) to refer to unambiguous targets. Thus,
the evidence is mixed on whether preschoolers are sensitive
to contrastive focus as a cue for reference resolution.
In the current experiment, we investigate whether a contrastive stress on the final noun (e.g., “Elmo’s plate has a
CARROT”) in the inference trials would assist children in
identifying the pragmatically-correct referent.

Method
Participants Participants were recruited as in Experiment
1. For Experiment 2, we focused on 3- and 4-year-olds. Out
of 57 initial participants, the final sample was chosen based
on the same criteria as Experiment 1, and consisted of 17 3year-olds (8 girls), and 31 4-year-olds (18 girls).

A linear mixed-effects model predicting accuracy based on
age and trial type in Experiment 2, as in Experiment 1,
showed a significant main effect of trial type (β = −.216, p <
.001), such that looking at target was lower in inference trials
than in control trials. There was no significant main effect of
age or interaction between age and trial type (largest β = .05,
p > .18), though t-tests indicated that 4-year-olds looked reliably more than chance to inferential targets (t(30) = 5.34,
p < .001), while 3-year-olds did not (t(16) = 1.60, p = .13).
A linear mixed-effects model looking at the reaction times of
making first switch from distractors to targets as in Experiment 1, found a significant main effect of trial type (β = .109,
p < .001) on the average RT, with no interaction (β = .369,
p < .003). Thus, looking at inferential targets was slower
and overall lower compared to unambiguous targets, but was
above chance (for 4-year-olds), consistent with what was observed in Experiment 1.
To determine the effect of prosodic cues on children’s inferential processing, we compared looking at targets across
both Experiment 1 and 2 for inference trials (Figure 3). Children’s looking toward inferential targets increased slightly
Experiment 2, especially towards the end of trials. We conducted a post-hoc analysis in which we split trials into an
early and late period (Figure 4). In the late window, both
3- and 4-year-olds looked at the correct inferential target
above chance for Experiment 2 (3-year-olds: t(16) = 2.47,
p < .03). In contrast, 3-year-olds in Experiment 1 were
not above chance in either window (largest t(27) = 1.49,
p = .15). Nevertheless, these two groups did not differ from
one another. We fit a linear mixed-effects model for inference
trial accuracy with experiment and age as predictors and did
not find any interactions (largest β = .07, p > .27). Thus, although there was a numerical advantage for both age groups
in inference trials in Experiment 2, this advantage was not
statistically reliable.
Overall, we found a hint of successful implicature computation for the three-year-olds in Experiment 2, but we interpret this result with caution given the lack of a significant
difference between the two experiments. Nevertheless, these
findings may suggest some congruence with the results of
Stiller et al. (2014). In that study, 3.5-year-olds succeeded
at above-chance levels in resolving ad-hoc implicatures, but
the referring expressions were produced naturalistically by an
experimenter and may have contained some contrastive stress
on the target noun.

2760

3-year-olds

1.00

Proportion correct looking

target
noun
offset

4-year-olds

early
window

target
noun
offset

late
window

Expt 2

0.75

early
window

late
window

Expt 2

0.50

Expt 1

Expt 1

0.25

0.00

target
noun
onset

-1

target
noun
offset

0

early
window

1

target
noun
onset

late
window

2

3

4-1

Time (s)

0

target
noun
offset

early
window

1

late
window

2

3

4

Figure 3: Proportion of 3- and 4-year-old children looking to the target image as the utterance unfolds, comparing across two
Experiments. Early window is the first half of the period between offset and end of trial for each Experiment, and late window
is the second half.

Proportion correct looking

3-year-old

4-year-old

Expt 1
Expt 2

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
early

late

window

early

late

Figure 4: Looking to the target as a proportion of looking to
the target and distractor in inference trials, averaged during
two windows. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

General Discussion
Are young children able to make pragmatic inferences in online language processing? The current work looked at children’s understanding of ad-hoc (contextually-based) implicatures using an eye-tracking paradigm, and found that adults
and older preschoolers showed robust looking toward inferential targets, although at slower and overall lower rates compared with semantically unambiguous targets. On the other
hand, younger children did not show successful implicature
computation within the time windows we examined. In a second experiment we found a limited boost in performance for
the use of contrastive stress (consistent with other literature
on the lack of sensitivity to prosodic cues for preschoolers).
Nevertheless, 3-year-olds in this experiment did show some
signs of above-chance performance, though they did not differ significantly from 3-year-olds in Experiment 1.

Our findings are broadly convergent with previous behavioral work on this topic (Stiller et al., 2014), suggesting that
the ability to make ad-hoc implicatures is fragile but measurable in 3-year-olds (with contrastive prosody) and more
robust with 4-year-olds. Nevertheless, accuracy in the two
paradigms differed: The rate of looking to the inferential target was overall lower in the current study than the accuracy
rates in Stiller et al. (2014), even though the current paradigm
was simpler (with two referent choices instead of three). This
difference is plausibly due to the difference between eyetracking and multi-alternative forced-choice paradigms: in
particular, accuracy in our paradigm reflects graded patterns
of looking across targets rather than a single forced-choice
judgment.
One unpredicted and intriguing—albeit tentative—finding
was that 2-year-olds not only did not look at the correct inferential target, but seemed to look if anything more toward
the distractor. A potential explanation for this pattern comes
from the inhibitory demands of our task. The two items in
inference trials differed in salience: Since the distractor item
contained an extra referent (e.g., a carrot and a banana), it was
likely to be more salient. Supporting this idea, looking to the
two-referent item was greater than chance during the baseline
period of each trial. Perhaps 2- and 3-year-olds had difficulty
disengaging from this more salient (and logically possible)
distractor item in favor of the inferentially-correct target item.
Inhibitory control is difficult for children and continues to develop throughout the period we studied here (e.g., Davidson,
Amso, Anderson, & Diamond, 2006). In addition, several recent studies suggest that inhibitory control might affect word
recognition in similar eye-tracking paradigms (Yurovsky &
Frank, 2014; Nordmeyer & Frank, 2013). Future work should
thus address this possibility by explicitly manipulating the
salience of potential pragmatic targets.
Our findings are consistent with previous claims that chil-

2761

dren’s difficulties with SI are caused by their lack of access
to linguistic scales (e.g., some-all; Barner et al., 2011). Since
our paradigm featured pictures of all the possible referents,
the demands of generating scalar alternatives were reduced.
This aspect of the study also probably led to the relatively
faster generation of implicatures than has been found in previous processing studies. It has previously been suggested
that children are not able to compute SIs in a timely way during online language comprehension (e.g., Huang & Snedeker,
2009). The current work suggests another possibility: implicature computation may indeed be delayed compared to
interpretations of unambiguous utterances, even for adults.
However, with contextual access to scales relevant to implicature computation, children can generate implicatures quickly
enough for them to be relevant to ongoing conversation.
Even young children are sensitive to the communicative intentions behind utterances they hear (Clark, 2009; Baldwin,
1993). Our work adds to the body of evidence suggesting that
by preschool age they are able to generate sophisticated pragmatic implicatures as well, even though these inferences are
easily masked by other processing demands of specific contexts and situations. Overall, our current work takes one step
further towards reconciling children’s early-emerging communicative abilities with the complex pattern of successes
and failures that they show in Gricean pragmatics.

Acknowledgments
We thank the parents, children, and staff at the San Jose
Children’s Discovery Museum. This work was supported
by a Postgraduate Scholarship and Doctoral Program Fellowship provided by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada.

References
Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Early referential understanding: Infants’ ability to recognize referential acts for what they are.
Developmental psychology, 29(5), 832.
Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the unsaid: The role of scalar alternatives in children’s pragmatic
inference. Cognition, 118(1), 84–93.
Clark, E. V. (2009). First language acquisition. Cambridge
University Press.
Cutler, A., & Swinney, D. A. (1987). Prosody and the development of comprehension. Journal of Child Language,
14(01), 145–167.
Davidson, M. C., Amso, D., Anderson, L. C., & Diamond,
A. (2006). Development of cognitive control and executive
functions from 4 to 13 years: Evidence from manipulations
of memory, inhibition, and task switching. Neuropsychologia, 44(11), 2037–2078.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J.,
Pethick, S. J., . . . Stiles, J. (1994). Variability in early
communicative development. Monographs of the society
for research in child development, i–185.
Fernald, A., Zangl, R., Portillo, A. L., & Marchman, V. A.
(2008). Looking while listening: Using eye movements to

monitor spoken language. Developmental psycholinguistics: On-line methods in children’s language processing,
113–132.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. Syntax and
semantics, 3, 41–58.
Horn, L. R. (1972). On the semantic properties of logical operators in english. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.
Huang, Y. T., & Snedeker, J. (2009). Semantic meaning
and pragmatic interpretation in 5-year-olds: Evidence from
real-time spoken language comprehension. Developmental
psychology, 45(6), 1723.
Ito, K., Jincho, N., Minai, U., Yamane, N., & Mazuka, R.
(2012). Intonation facilitates contrast resolution: Evidence
from japanese adults and 6-year olds. Journal of Memory
and Language, 66(1), 265–284.
Ito, K., & Speer, S. R. (2008). Anticipatory effects of intonation: Eye movements during instructed visual search.
Journal of Memory and Language, 58(2), 541–573.
Katsos, N., & Bishop, D. V. (2011). Pragmatic tolerance:
Implications for the acquisition of informativeness and implicature. Cognition, 120(1), 67–81.
Kurumada, C. (2014). Contextual inferences over speakers’
pragmatic intentions: Preschoolers’ comprehension of contrastive prosody. In Proceedings of the 36th annual meeting
of the cognitive science society.
Matthews, D., Butcher, J., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M.
(2012). Two-and four-year-olds learn to adapt referring expressions to context: Effects of distracters and feedback
on referential communication. Topics in cognitive science,
4(2), 184–210.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M.
(2006). The effect of perceptual availability and prior discourse on young children’s use of referring expressions.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 27(03), 403–422.
Nordmeyer, A. E., & Frank, M. C. (2013). Measuring the
comprehension of negation in 2-to 4-year-old children. In
Proceedings of the 35th annual meeting of the cognitive
science society.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: Experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78(2), 165–188.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar implicatures:
experiments at the semantics–pragmatics interface. Cognition, 86(3), 253–282.
Sekerina, I. A., & Trueswell, J. C. (2012). Interactive processing of contrastive expressions by Russian children. First
language, 32(1-2), 63–87.
Stiller, A., Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2014). Ad-hoc
implicature in preschool children. Language Learning and
Development.
Yurovsky, D., & Frank, M. C. (2014). Beyond naıve cue combination: Salience and social cues in early word learning.
In Proceedings of the 36th annual meeting of the cognitive
science society.

2762

