Children and adults differ in their strategies for social learning
Falk Lieder1 (falk.lieder@berkeley.edu)

Zi Lin Sim1 (zi@berkeley.edu)

Jane C. Hu (janehu@uw.edu)

Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute
University of California at Berkeley

Department of Psychology
University of California at Berkeley

Institute of Learning & Brain Science
University of Washington

Thomas L. Griffiths (tom griffiths@berkeley.edu)

Fei Xu (fei xu@berkeley.edu)

Department of Psychology
University of California at Berkeley

Department of Psychology
University of California at Berkeley

1

These authors contributed equally.

Abstract
Adults and children rely heavily on other people’s testimony.
However, domains of knowledge where there is no consensus
on the truth are likely to result in conflicting testimonies. Previous research has demonstrated that in these cases, learners
look towards the majority opinion to make decisions. However, it remains unclear how learners evaluate social information, given that considering either the overall valence, or the
number of testimonies, or both may lead to different conclusions. We therefore formalized several social learning strategies and compared them to the performance of adults and children. We find that children use different strategies than adults.
This suggests that the development of social learning may involve the acquisition of cognitive strategies.
Keywords: cognitive development; social learning; decisionmaking; Bayesian models; probabilistic reasoning

Introduction
Many of our beliefs, such as “The Earth revolves around the
Sun,” are based on other people’s testimony rather than direct
experience. Learning from others is even more critical for
beliefs that are neither true nor false (Gelman, 2009; Harris
& Koenig, 2006); this includes cultural beliefs and practices,
as well as preferences (e.g., movies, foods). In all of these
domains we are likely to encounter multiple conflicting testimonies. So how do we determine whom to believe?
Research on persuasion and consumer choice has demonstrated that “consensus information is an important driver
of attitudes and behavior” (Benedicktus, Brady, Darke, &
Voorhees, 2010). In other words, we often look towards the
majority to guide our beliefs and decisions. Classic studies
have shown strong effects of group consensus when adults
are asked to make public judgments (Asch, 1956; Sherif,
1936), as well as the influence of word-of-mouth on consumer choice (Katz & Lazarsfeld, 1955). The popularity of
rating websites (e.g., yelp.com, tripadvisor.com) shows that
people deliberately seek out social recommendations to make
choices (Lim & Van Der Heide, 2014).
According to the idea of natural pedagogy children efficiently learn from similar social information (Csibra &
Gergely, 2009, 2011). Recent empirical work confirmed that
children learn very well from other people’s testimony: for
example, when an experimenter shows 3 year-olds one way to
play a game they readily consider it a general norm (Rakoczy,
Warneken, & Tomasello, 2008).

But children do not learn indiscriminately. Just like adults,
they are sensitive to the agreement and disagreement among
informants, and they learn from the majority. In Corriveau,
Fusaro, and Harris (2009), preschoolers watched a group of
adults being asked to point to the referent of an unfamiliar
word. When the children were later asked about the novel
word, they relied on the opinion of the majority. This effect
is not limited to word learning; it has been demonstrated for
tool use as well (Haun, Rekers, & Tomasello, 2012).
While it is now well-established that adults and children often rely on the majority opinion when learning from others’
testimonies, the mechanism underlying how they integrate the
conflicting information inherent in multiple testimonies remains unclear. What factors do learners take into account,
and how do they do so? Two prominent factors in the evaluation of multiple testimonies are the overall valence (e.g. the
average number of stars) and the number of testimonies. The
overall valence provides a quick and easy indicator of what
the consensus is. The following example illustrates why the
number of testimonies is also important: Suppose you want
to choose between Restaurant A, which has 2 ratings with an
average rating of 100%, and Restaurant B, which has 300 ratings with an average rating of 90%. If you only considered
the overall valence of the testimonies, Restaurant A would
seem to be the better option. However, that doesn’t take into
account the fact that you simply have more information about
Restaurant B – and that people consistently consider it to be
good. Ultimately, making a decision requires weighing both
the overall valence and the number of ratings. How do children and adults reconcile these two sources of information?
Previous studies with adults focused on the effects of overall valence (Benedicktus, 2011; Benedicktus & Andrews,
2006; Benedicktus et al., 2010; Jimnez & Mendoza, 2013;
Lim & Van Der Heide, 2014), and in previous studies with
children, the overall valence and the number of ratings have
always been confounded in the experimental design: the option with the higher overall valence always had the higher
number of informants (Corriveau et al., 2009; Corriveau &
Harris, 2010; Haun et al., 2012). We thus examine how children and adults reconcile conflicts between these two types of
information to learn effectively from others. In addition, we
investigate whether children use different learning strategies
than adults. A difference between child and adult strategies

1368

would suggest that cognitive development includes discovering cognitive strategies in addition to acquiring knowledge
and representations.

Social Learning Strategies
To characterize how children versus adults learn from other
people’s ratings, we formalize five social learning strategies
using probabilistic models and determine which model best
explains children’s versus adults’ choices. All of these strategies provide a way to make a choice based on the same pieces
of information: the choice is between two unknown options,
one with n1,+ positive and n1,− negative ratings and another
with n2,+ positive and n2,− negative ratings. In brief, the five
strategies we consider are to choose the option with more positive ratings (strategy 1, Count+), choose the option with the
highest proportion of positive ratings (Strategy 2, Ratio), apply a rational sampling strategy that approximates Bayesian
inference (BI) with an optimistic or neutral prior (strategies
3-4; BI), or choose at random (Strategy 5).
Apart from choosing at random, the first of these strategies
is the simplest and the most frugal in its use of cognitive resources: It ignores the negative ratings and prior knowledge
about the distribution of ratings. It merely compares the number of positive ratings. Strategy 2, by contrast, also takes into
account the number of negative ratings to compute and compare the proportions of positive ratings. Strategies 3 and 4
augment the observed numbers of ratings by prior knowledge.
These strategies integrate the fraction of positive ratings (valence) with the number of ratings. This enables strategies 3
and 4 to choose an option with 99 positive and only 1 negative
rating over an alternative with 1 positive and 0 negative ratings, whereas Strategy 2 would choose the option with only
one positive rating.
All models take into account that people’s perceptual uncertainty σn about how many items there are increases linearly with their numerosity n:
σn = w · n,

where the denominator is the perceptual uncertainty about the
difference in the number of positive ratings, Φ is the cumulative distribution function of the normal distribution, and β
is a free parameter that determines choice variability. Our
model’s prior distribution on this parameter is the standard
uniform distribution, that is P(β) = Uniform([0, 1]).
If people used Strategy 2, the choice probability would be
determined by the perceived difference between the proportions of positive ratings (i.e. r1 − r2 ):
!
E[R1 |n1 ] − E[R2 |n2 ]
,
P(C = 1|β, m2 ) = Φ β · p
Var(R1 |n1 ) + Var(R2 |n2 )
(3)
where R1 and R2 are the perceived fraction of positive ratings
of option 1 and option 2 respectively, n1 = (n1,+ , n1,− ), n2 =
(n2,+ , n2,− ), and the prior on β is again Uniform([0, 1]).
Strategies 3 and 4 instantiate the sampling hypothesis
(Bonawitz, Denison, Griffiths, & Gopnik, 2014; Denison,
Bonawitz, Gopnik, & Griffiths, 2013). According to the sampling hypothesis, the variability of people’s judgments reflects approximate Bayesian inference by sampling. From
a Bayesian perspective, the goal of preference formation is
to infer whether the probability µ1 that option 1 will generate a positive experience is greater than the probability
µ2 that option 2 will generate a positive experience (i.e.
µ1 > µ2 ). This inference integrates the numbers of ratings
n = (n1,+ , n1,− , n2,+ , n2,− ) with prior knowledge about the
overall proportion of positive ratings. We model this prior
knowledge by a Beta distribution with mean µ and strength τ:
µ1 , µ2 |µ, τ ∼ Beta(α = µ · τ, β = (1 − µ) · τ).

Under these assumptions, the sampling hypothesis predicts
that people’s choices C are samples from the posterior distribution on which of the two options is better:
P(C = 1|θ) = P(µ1 > µ2 |n, θ) +

(1)

where the slope w is known as the Weber fraction (Halberda
& Feigenson, 2008). Adults perceive numbers more precisely
than children. This difference has been quantified in terms of
their Weber fractions (Halberda & Feigenson, 2008): Adults’
Weber fraction is wadults = 0.108. By contrast, five-year-olds’
Weber fraction is w5y = 0.229 and six-year-olds’ Weber fraction is w6y = 0.179. To model the responses of 5- and 6-yearolds we therefore use the average of their Weber fractions,
that is wchildren = 0.21.
We derived how people’s choices would be distributed if
they used either of the five strategies. If people used Strategy
1 (model m1 ), then the probability of choosing the first option
(P(C = 1)) would be determined by the perceived difference
between the two options’ numbers of positive ratings:


n
−
n
1,+
2,+
,
(2)
P(C = 1|m1 ) = Φ β · q
2
2
w · n1,+ + n2,+

(4)

1
· P(µ1 = µ2 |n, θ),
2

(5)

where the model parameters θ = {µ, τ} are the mean µ and
strength τ of the prior belief on the frequency of positive ratings. We consider two Bayesian sampling strategies: While
Strategy 3 assumes that most ratings are positive (P(µ|m3 ) =
Uniform([0.5, 1])), Strategy 4 does not rely on this assumption (P(µ|m4 ) = Uniform([0, 1])). Both models share a uniform prior on the scale of the strength τ of people’s prior
knowledge: p(log(τ)) ∝ 1 for 0.1 ≤ τ ≤ 10 and 0 else.
Finally, if people used Strategy 5 they would choose both
options with equal probability:
P(C = 1|m5 ) = P(C = 2|m5 ) = 0.5.

(6)

We used these probabilistic models of the five strategies to
design an experiment that can discriminate between them.

Experiment 1: Comparing children and adults
The goal of Experiment 1 was to compare children’s versus
adults’ strategies for learning from other people’s ratings.

1369

Table 1: Design and results of Experiment 1.

Figure 1: Example trial for distinguishing the Count+ strategy from Bayesian inference and the ratio strategy.

Methods

Results and Discussion

Participants. Sixty-six English-speaking 4- to 6-year-olds
(33 boys and 33 girls; 10 4-year olds, 38 5-year olds, and
18 6-year-olds) and 300 adult participants were tested. Childred were recruited from schools and museums surrounding
Berkeley, CA. Their average age was 67.5 months (range =
48.9 to 81.6 months). Two additional children were tested
but excluded due to experimenter error. Three hundred adult
participants were recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk and
paid $0.20 for about three minutes of work. Twelve adults
were excluded because of incomplete data or color blindness.
Materials and Procedure. Eighteen pairs of ratings were
selected for use in this experiment; see Table 1. The first
twelve pairs of ratings were designed to be maximally informative with regards to differentiating between strategies 1–
4. The remaining 6 paired ratings were questions designed
to ensure that participants understood the task instructions
and discriminate strategies 1–4 from random choice (Strategy 5). Child participants were tested individually in front
of a laptop. An experimenter recorded their responses for
each trial. Adult participants were tested through an online
survey and their responses were recorded automatically. On
each trial, participants viewed an image consisting of two unknown items (termed “mystery items”) belonging to one of
six domains: books, games, movies, snacks, stickers, and
stuffed animals. Each item was presented with its associated
binary ratings, presented as smiling and frowning faces (see
Figure 1). Participants were told, “Some people played with
Item 1, and some people played with Item 2. A green smiley
face means the person liked that item, and a red frowny face
means the person did not like that item.” Upon presenting the
ratings for both items, participants were asked, “Which item
do you think is better? Item 1 or Item 2?” and their responses
were recorded. The order of the trials was randomized, and
the domain used on each trial and the placement of the smiling/frowning faces were counterbalanced.

The frequencies with which children versus adults chose either option are summarized in Table 1. To estimate the proportion of children and adults using each of the five strategies
defined above, we performed random-effects Bayesian model
selection at the group level separately for children versus
adults (Stephan, Penny, Daunizeau, Moran, & Friston, 2009).
This analysis performs hierarchical Bayesian inference on the
strategy used by each participant and the relative frequency
of each strategy within the population. Figure 2 summarizes
our results. We found that a significantly larger proportion
of adults than children chose according to Bayesian inference
(67.1% vs. 39.9%, p < 0.0001). We can be 99.99% confident that, among adults, Bayesian inference with a neutral
prior (Strategy 4) is the most common of the five strategies.
By contrast, the proportion of children using this strategy is
not significantly larger than the proportion of children using
Strategy 1 (p = 0.19). Conversely, more children than adults
used Strategy 1 (31.0% vs. 13.1%, p < 0.001) or the ratio
strategy (4.84% vs. 0.36%, p < 0.03).
We re-analyzed the data under the assumption that each
person might use multiple strategies, and the results led to the
same conclusion. The difference between children and adults
was most pronounced in trial types 11 and 12 (see Table 1).
In trial 11, about 75% of our child participants preferred the
option with 2 positive and 28 negative ratings to the option
0 positive and 1 negative rating, whereas Bayesian inference
and more than 70% of adults prefer the second option; and
similarly for trial 12.
While the experiment discriminated the strategies considered so far, people might use other strategies such as choosing
the option with the highest difference between the numbers
of positive ratings and negative ratings. In the present experiment this strategy would have lead to exactly the same
decisions as performing Bayesian inference with the neutral
prior for all but two choices. To resolve this ambiguity, we

1370

70

adults
children

60
50
40
30
20

ther
om/O
Rand

r)
l prio
eutra
BI (n

rior)
pt. p
BI (o

Ratio

0

+

10

Coun
t

Strategy Users in % with 95% CI

Table 2: Design and results of Experiment 2.

80

Figure 2: Proportion of children versus adults forming preferences according to Bayesian inference or heuristic strategies.
designed a second experiment.

Experiment 2: Testing more models with adults
The goal of Experiment 2 was to test if adults use a rational sampling strategy or a simple heuristic that Experiment 1
could not distinguish from Bayesian inference.

Methods
Modeling alternative strategies and experimental design.
Our first step in designing the experiment was to formalize four alternative strategies by probabilistic computational
models. According to the difference strategy (m6 ), people
stochastically choose the option for which the surplus of positive ratings (i.e. the difference between the number of positive ratings and the number of negative ratings) is largest:


(n1,+ − n1,− ) − (n2,+ − n2,− ) 
P(C = 1|β, m6 ) = Φ β · q
,
w · n21,+ + n22,+ + n21,− + n22,−
where the numerator is the difference between the first option’s and the second option’s surplus of positive ratings and
the denominator is people’s perceptual uncertainty about this
quantity. The prior over the choice variability parameter is
again uniform on the interval from zero to one. Strategy 7
probabilistically chooses the option with less negative ratings:


n2,− − n1,− 
.
(7)
P(C = 1|m7 ) = Φ β · q
w · n21,− + n22,−
The prior on the choice variability parameter is again P(β) =
Uniform([0, 1]). Strategy 8 determines if there is an option
that has only positive ratings. If exactly one such option exists, strategy 8 chooses it, else it picks one of the options at
random. Strategy 9 chooses the only option that has no negative ratings, if one exists, and otherwise chooses at random.

We used these probabilistic models to select trials that
jointly discriminate between all 36 pairs of the nine strategies. For each pair of strategies, we picked at least two trials
for which the two strategies make opposite predictions, and
the predictions differ by at least 20%.
Participants. One hundred and sixty participants were recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Each participant was
paid $0.20 for about three minutes of work.
Materials and Procedure. The experiment comprised the
23 trials shown in Table 2. The trial order was randomized
between subjects and two spatial arrangements of the ratings
were counterbalanced.

Results and Discussion
Four participants were excluded due to incomplete data. The
choice frequencies of the remaining participants are summarized in Table 2.
We analyzed our participants’ individual choices using random effects Bayesian model selection as described above.
According to this analysis, 77.5% of adults use the Bayesian
sampling strategy with a neutral prior (95% CI: 71.1% −
83.7%); see Figure 3. We can be more than 99.99% confident
that this is the most frequently used strategy among adults.
By contrast, the difference strategy is used by only about 8%
of adults (95% CI: 4.90% − 13.05%), and only 6% use Strat-

1371

cide with Bayesian inference, Experiment 1 included trials in
which they do not and neither did the choices of our child
participants.

80

These results suggest that most children use simple strategies whose inferences will sometimes (but not always) coincide with those of Bayesian inference. However, the conclusion that children do not use a rational sampling strategy
should be interpreted with caution, as we cannot be sure that
our task analysis is correct. For instance, we assumed that the
total number of ratings is independent of the object’s quality, but participants might assume that good options receive
more ratings. Adults might be better able to override this intuitive (but wrong) interpretation in our experiment because
their executive functions are superior to those of children.

60
40

t−

e
renc

Coun

sitive

Diffe

ve

r)

om

egati

e Po
Som

No N

Rand

l prio

rior)
pt. p

eutra
BI (n

BI (o

Coun

0

Ratio

20

t+

Percentage Strategy Users %

100

Figure 3: Proportion of adults using each of the nine social
learning strategies according to Experiment 2.
egy 1 (95% CI: 2.66−9.69%). We re-analyzed the data under
the assumption that each person might use multiple strategies
and the results led to the same conclusion. In conclusion,
we found that adults’ choices are indeed best explained by
Bayesian inference. This consolidates our interpretation of
the results of Experiment 1.

General Discussion
Both adults and children need to learn from the testimony of
others, but may use different strategies to make sense of that
testimony. In Experiment 1 we found that the judgments of
adults were consistent with Bayesian inference, while children seemed to rely on simpler heuristics more often than
adults. A more detailed examination of adult performance in
Experiment 2, using a wider range of alternative models, provided further support for the conclusion that adults’ choices
are consistent with a Bayesian sampling model. Our results
raise interesting questions about the development of probabilistic reasoning.
Superficially, our results appear to contradict previous findings that infants’ inferences conform to the principles of
Bayesian inference (Xu & Kushnir, 2013) and that infants’
decisions reflect those rational inferences (Denison & Xu,
2010). Note, however, that Xu and Kushnir (2013) describe
modal or average responses across all participants and a small
number of inference problems, demonstrating that behavior
at the group level can be characterized as consistent with principles of Bayesian inference, whereas Experiment 1 analyzed
the responses of individual participants across a large number
of inference problems to determine strategy use at the individual level. Moreover, most previous infant studies have not
contrasted specific competing models. By considering a wide
range of problems we found that more than 50% of 5-6 yearold children employ simple heuristics rather than a sampling
strategy to learn from statistical social information. Although
the inferences drawn by the heuristic strategies often coin-

The differences between children and adults in Experiment
1 raise the question how the rational sampling strategy is
learned and how and when children transition to using it. Is
this strategy domain-general or domain-specific, and are there
individual differences with regards to its uptake? Our results
suggest the following answers to these questions (Bonawitz et
al., 2014): First, cognitive strategies for reasoning under uncertainty or the mechanism by which they are chosen develop
during childhood. According to our data, the transition to a
rational sampling strategy is still incomplete at age 6. Thus
either there is no innate rational sampling strategy, or it takes
children more than six years to learn when to use it. Second,
rather than using a single, universal sampling strategy, children appear to use multiple specialized strategies. The strategies children use for some problems, such as inferring others’
preferences in the experiments reviewed by Xu and Kushnir (2013) and the causal inference tasks used by Denison et
al. (2013), accomplish sampling, but the strategies they used
to make choices based on conflicting social information in
our task did not. Third, our results indicate qualitative interindividual differences: While some children appeared to use
a rational sampling strategy, others appeared to rely solely on
the number of positive ratings. Similarly, while most adults
employed a rational sampling strategy, others appeared to use
simpler heuristics. Future experiments will rigorously test alternative explanations of children’s responses and zoom in on
the strategic development during childhood.
The interpretation that children’s social learning strategies
change during development is consistent with Siegler’s observations that children discover new arithmetic strategies
and gradually transition to using the most effective strategy
(Siegler, 1999). Such findings illustrate that cognitive development is not limited to the acquisition of knowledge and
representations but also includes learning cognitive strategies.
While there has been substantial progress in characterizing
the acquisition of knowledge and representations using rational models of cognition (Xu & Griffiths, 2011), theoretical
frameworks for the development of cognitive strategies and
strategy selection are still in their infancy (Shrager & Siegler,
1998; Lieder et al., 2014; Lieder & Griffiths, 2015). Developing a rational framework for the development of cognitive

1372

strategies and the metacognitive mechanisms of strategy selection is an important goal for future research.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. SMA-1228541. We thank Meg
Bishop and Shirley Chen for collecting the children’s data. Part of
this work was presented as a poster at the Biennial Meeting of the
Society for Research in Child Development in March 2015.

References
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity:
I. A minority of one against a unanimous majority. Psychological monographs: General and applied, 70(9), 1–70.
Benedicktus, R. L. (2011). The effects of 3rd party consensus
information on service expectations and online trust. Journal of Business Research, 64(8), 846–853.
Benedicktus, R. L., & Andrews, M. L. (2006). Building
Trust with Consensus Information : The Effects of Valence
and Sequence Direction. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 6(1), 17–29.
Benedicktus, R. L., Brady, M. K., Darke, P. R., & Voorhees,
C. M. (2010). Conveying Trustworthiness to Online Consumers: Reactions to Consensus, Physical Store Presence,
Brand Familiarity, and Generalized Suspicion. Journal of
Retailing, 86(4), 310–323.
Bonawitz, E., Denison, S., Griffiths, T. L., & Gopnik, A.
(2014). Probabilistic models, learning algorithms, and
response variability: sampling in cognitive development.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18(10), 497–500.
Corriveau, K. H., Fusaro, M., & Harris, P. L. (2009). Going
with the flow preschoolers prefer nondissenters as informants. Psychological Science, 20(3), 372–377.
Corriveau, K. H., & Harris, P. L. (2010). Preschoolers (sometimes) defer to the majority in making simple perceptual
judgments. Developmental psychology, 46(2), 437–445.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in cognitive sciences, 13(4), 148–53.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2011). Natural pedagogy as
evolutionary adaptation. Philosophical transactions of the
Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences,
366(1567), 1149–57.
Denison, S., Bonawitz, E., Gopnik, A., & Griffiths, T. L.
(2013). Rational variability in children’s causal inferences:
The sampling hypothesis. Cognition, 126(2), 285–300.
Denison, S., & Xu, F. (2010). Twelve- to 14-month-old
infants can predict single-event probability with large set
sizes. Developmental Science, 13(5), 798–803.
Gelman, S. A. (2009). Learning from others: Children’s
construction of concepts. Annual review of psychology(60),
115–140.
Halberda, J., & Feigenson, L. (2008). Developmental change
in the acuity of the ”number sense”: The approximate number system in 3-, 4-, 5-, and 6-year-olds and adults. Developmental Psychology, 44(5), 1457–1465.

Harris, P. L., & Koenig, M. A. (2006). Trust in testimony:
How children learn about science and religion. Child development, 77(3), 505–524.
Haun, D. B. M., Rekers, Y., & Tomasello, M. (2012).
Majority-biased transmission in chimpanzees and human
children, but not orangutans. Current Biology, 22(8), 727–
731.
Jimnez, F. R., & Mendoza, N. A. (2013). Too popular to
ignore: The influence of online reviews on purchase intentions of search and experience products. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 27(3), 226 - 235.
Katz, E., & Lazarsfeld, P. (1955). Personal influence. New
York, NY: Free Press.
Lieder, F., & Griffiths, T. L. (2015). When to use which
heuristic: A rational solution to the strategy selection problem. In D. C. Noelle & R. Dale (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 37th annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Lieder, F., Plunkett, D., Hamrick, J. B., Russell, S. J., Hay,
N., & Griffiths, T. (2014). Algorithm selection by rational
metareasoning as a model of human strategy selection. In
Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, &
K. Weinberger (Eds.), Adv. neural inf. process. syst. 27 (pp.
2870–2878). Curran Associates, Inc.
Lim, Y.-S., & Van Der Heide, B. (2014). Evaluating the
wisdom of strangers: The perceived credibility of online
consumer reviews on Yelp. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication. doi: 10.1111/jcc4.12093
Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2008). The
sources of normativity: young children’s awareness of the
normative structure of games. Developmental psychology,
44(3), 875–881.
Sherif, M. (1936). The psychology of social norms. New
York, NY: Harper.
Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1998). SCADS: A model of
children’s strategy choices and strategy discoveries. Psychological Science, 9(5), 405–410.
Siegler, R. S. (1999). Strategic development. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(11), 430–435.
Stephan, K. E., Penny, W. D., Daunizeau, J., Moran, R. J., &
Friston, K. J. (2009). Bayesian model selection for group
studies. NeuroImage, 46, 1004–1017.
Xu, F., & Griffiths, T. L. (2011). Probabilistic models of
cognitive development: Towards a rational constructivist
approach to the study of learning and development. Cognition, 120(3), 299 - 301.
Xu, F., & Kushnir, T. (2013). Infants are rational constructivist learners. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22(1), 28–32.

1373

