Children Learn Better When They Select Their Own Data
Zi L. Sim (zi@berkeley.edu)
Michelle Tanner (michellemtanner@gmail.com)
Nina Y. Alpert (nalpert@berkeley.edu)
Fei Xu (fei_xu@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94703 USA

Abstract
Human learners ask questions, manipulate objects, and
perform interventions on their environment. These behaviors
are true of adults, but even more so for young children.
Recent studies have demonstrated that adults learn better
under conditions of selection learning, where they can make
decisions about the information they wish to acquire, as
compared to reception learning, where they merely observe
data that happens to be available to them. Yet to date, it
remains unclear whether this advantage is available to
children, and if so, does it arise because children can gather
data in a non-random way? In the current study, we show that
7-year-old children show superior learning under conditions
of selection in a category-learning task, and that their
information gathering is systematically driven by uncertainty.
Keywords: self-directed learning; active learning; education

Introduction
“You’re speaking too loudly! No, that’s too soft; you have
to speak up!” What volume do these adults mean exactly?
As a young child, learning how to modulate our speaking
volume is an important aspect of learning how to socialize
with others. However, instructions that adults give can be
quite opaque at times. What is a child to do?
One solution might simply be to observe what others are
doing; taking note of the volumes that they are speaking at.
Or one might choose to actually collect the necessary data:
try a variety of different volumes (hopefully spread out
across time!), and observe how mommy responds.
Children probably use a mix of strategies to learn the right
volume to speak with, but as can be seen from the above
example, there are at least two modes of learning that people
engage in to refine their knowledge about the world:
reception learning, in which learners merely observe data
that happens to be available and attempt to find structure
within them; and selection learning, in which learners are
allowed to make decisions about the information they wish
to acquire (Bruner, Goodnow, & Austin, 1956; Bruner,
1961).
Much of cognitive research has focused on the former
mode of learning. Researchers study category and concept
learning in experiments where they tightly control the
exemplars that are presented to the participants (e.g. Medin
& Schaffer, 1978; Shepard, Hovland, & Jenkins, 1961).
Language learning has also traditionally been examined in
the laboratory by presenting infants and young children with
repetitive sentences, speech streams, or word-object pairings

(e.g. Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996; Waxman & Gelman,
2009; Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007).
Selection learning, in contrast, has found its niche mostly
in the domain of causal learning, because certain causal
networks can only be distinguished with data gained from
intervention, rather than mere observation. In other words,
the data generated by intervention simply cannot be
acquired through observation. In such cases, researchers
have empirically shown that se lection learning has distinct
advantages over reception learning (Sobel & Kushnir, 2006;
Steyvers, Tenenbaum, Wagenmakers, & Blum, 2003). For
example, Sobel and Kushnir (2006) demonstrated that when
learners observed the data that they generated themselves,
they were better at learning the underlying causal structure
than learners who observed data that others generated.
Recent cognitive research with adults has gone on to
study this advantage in domains outside of causal learning,
especially in domains where it is possible to generate the
same information from both selection and reception learning
(Gureckis & Markant, 2012). Studies by Castro et al. (2008)
and Markant and Gureckis (2013) have successfully shown
that learners benefit from selection in category learning as
well. In Castro et al. (2008), adults were presented with
novel 3D shapes that varied continuously only in how spiky
their edges were. They were told that these shapes were
alien eggs: spiky eggs would most likely hatch into alien
snakes, while smooth eggs would most likely hatch into
alien birds. The task for each participant was therefore to
find out the precise egg shape (category boundary) for
which eggs that were any spikier would hatch into snakes,
while eggs that were any smoother would hatch into birds.
Critically, participants in a selection condition were allowed
to choose which eggs they wanted to learn about, while
participants in a reception condition were presented with
randomly generated egg shapes. Both groups observed
whether each egg hatched into a snake or a bird after each
selection or presentation.
The results of this study were striking. Participants who
were allowed to actively select samples to learn about had
more accurate guesses about the category boundary as
compared to participants who could only observe samples
that were randomly generated for them. This result was
successfully replicated in Markant and Gureckis (2013)
using a slightly modified procedure. However, these results
do come with some caveats: the selection advantage is only
present at low noise levels, i.e. when the spiky and smooth
eggs reliably hatched into snakes and birds respectively

2194

(Castro et al., 2008), and in low complexity tasks, e.g. when
the classification rule is based on only one dimension (e.g.
spikiness only), rather than multiple dimensions (e.g. a
combination of spikiness and size).
The same authors also performed a comprehensive
analysis aimed at uncovering the psychological processes
underlying the found selection advantage, concluding that
learners benefit from selection learning because they can
gather data in a “non-random, useful way” that maximizes
their own future learning (Markant & Gureckis, 2013).
Do these results naturally extend to young children? It is
indubitable that young children often engage in some forms
of selection learning; one only needs to recall their incessant
questions, or their mucking around the house and whatnot.
Does this effortful form of learning where children have to
both generate and learn from the data benefit them, as
compared to the less demanding form of learning where
they simply observe data that happens to be available to
them? If so, are the psychological processes underlying the
selection advantage similar between children and adults?
When given the opportunity, do children gather data in a
“non-random, useful way”? Addressing these questions
would provide insights into the developmental origins of
selection learning and its underlying mechanisms.
However, these questions remain mostly unaddressed in
the literature. At this point, there is still a lack of empirical
evidence demonstrating that children actually benefit from
selection, relative to reception. What we do know, though,
is that young children may be able to gather data in nonrandom manner (Cook, Goodman, & Schulz, 2011; Kidd,
Piantadosi, & Aslin, 2012; Legare, Mills, & Souza, 2013;
Nelson, Divjak, Gudmundsdottir, Martignon, & Meder,
2014; Ruggeri & Lombrozo, under review; Schulz &
Bonawitz, 2007; Sim & Xu, 2014). For example, Schulz and
Bonawitz (2007) showed that preschoolers prefer to explore
a toy for which the causal structure remained ambiguous to
them, over a completely novel toy. Nelson et al. (2014) also
demonstrated that 10-year-old German children had good
intuitions about how useful various questions would be in
sequential search tasks that resembled games such as
“Guess Who?” Children were also able to search adaptively,
varying their questions according to the statistical structure
of the environment they were presented with (e.g. when the
population in a “Guess Who?” game was modified such that
asking about gender first would no longer be quite as useful,
children were less likely to ask about it at the beginning).
But such evidence does not necessarily imply that
children will benefit from selection over reception when it
comes to refining their beliefs about the world. Indeed, it
would be quite a leap to make the claim that just because
children are exploring in a systematic way, they are learning
from that form of exploration.
Furthermore, although Castro et al. (2008) provides a
formal proof for the advantage of selection learning over
reception learning in deterministic (noise = 0) environments,
there is currently no evidence that children are optimal in
their information gathering either. Without this evidence, it

is difficult to support a theoretical argument that selection is
necessarily more efficient than reception for learning.
To begin examining selection learning in children, at
minimum, we need to establish three points within the very
same task: (1) children can learn successfully under
conditions of selection, (2) they can gather data in a
systematic manner, and (3) selection learning has distinct
advantages over reception learning. We address these points
in the current study by examining whether children perform
better at a category-learning task when they can select the
information they wish to acquire, as compared to when they
are merely presented with randomly generated data.
In an experimental design inspired by Castro et al. (2008)
and Markant and Gureckis (2013), 7-year-old children were
presented with a row of identical worms that were ascending
in size, and told that the worms live in either a green house
or a blue house. The house that each worm lives in
depended on its size, so the goal of the game was to figure
out the category boundary as quickly as possible in order to
bring them home before a thunderstorm arrives. Each child
was randomly assigned to one of two conditions: selection,
where they could choose sequentially which worms to learn
about, or reception, where they were presented with
randomly generated worms one after the other. There were 4
test blocks, and within each block, children learned about 2
worms and then were given a classification task. The design
of this task allowed us to examine the children’s learning
performance and their information gathering strategy (for
example, were children taking advantage of feedback
generated by previously selected worms?) when they are
given the opportunity to actively make decisions about the
information they wish to acquire.

Method
Participants
Sixty-four English-speaking 7-year-olds (23 boys and 42
girls) with a mean age of 88.4 months (range = 74.6 to
104.3 months) were tested. All were recruited from schools
and museums in Berkeley, California, and its surrounding
communities. An additional 8 children were tested but
excluded due to difficulties in following task instructions
(e.g. indicating that a worm, which had a little blue reminder
house beneath it, lived in the green house; N = 6), technical
error (N = 1), and experimenter error (N = 1). Each child
was randomly assigned to a Selection condition or a
Reception condition.

Materials
The experiment was presented in the form of an interactive
PowerPoint presentation. Each presentation sequentially
showed 3 sets of animals, with each set consisting of 13
identical animal images that varied only in their size, i.e.
their heights and widths.
These animals were arranged from smallest to largest (left
to right). The animals lived in either a green house or a blue
house, and these houses were represented by colored images

2195

placed on the top left and top right of the screen respectively
(Figure 1). When an animal image was clicked on, it would
move across the screen towards its designated house,
disappearing upon arrival. A “reminder house,” which is a
scaled down version of its house, would then appear in the
space below where the animal was located previously.

Figure 1: Thirteen worms that can be categorized into the
green house or the blue house.

Procedure
Children were tested individually in our laboratory, a quiet
room in their elementary school, or in a quiet area at a
museum. An experimenter sat next to the child to control the
slide show. The procedure for both the Selection and
Reception conditions consisted of a demonstration phase,
and 4 test blocks (each with 2 sampling trials). Each block
consisted of a sampling phase, followed by a classification
phase. The experiment lasted about 10 minutes.
Demonstration Phase The demonstration phase consisted
of two practice trials. These practice trials were to establish
to the child that (1) the displayed animals lived in one of the
two houses, (2) the house that each animal lived in was
determined by an invisible category boundary that divided
the animals into two groups, and (3) that the boundary
location was different for each set of animals.
In the first practice trial, the participant was shown a row
of 13 spiders that increased in size, together with a green
house and a blue house placed at the top corners of the
screen. When the experimenter clicked on each house, a
flashing box surrounding the spiders that lived in the
selected house appeared. The experimenter subsequently
pointed at two spiders, one at a time, asking the child “Does
this spider live in the green house or the blue house?” The
experimenter praised the child if he/she answered accurately
(“Good job!”), and corrected the child otherwise (“No, that
spider actually lives in the green house!”).
The second practice trial that followed was identical to
the first, except that we used a row of frogs instead, and a
new category boundary.

but only the 3rd through the 10th boundary were used in this
experiment. This step was taken to ensure that there was at
least a small number of worms that lived in each house. For
each participant, a boundary location was randomly
generated, and this location was used for all test blocks.
To begin the sampling phase, the experimenter informed
the child that she would be asked to figure out which house
each worm lived in. The experimenter then clicked on the 1 st
and 13th worm, showing that they lived in the green house
and the blue house respectively. As mentioned above, an
appropriately colored “reminder house” subsequently
appeared below the worm that had just been selected.
An image of a storm then appeared. In the Selection
condition, the experimenter told the child that there was
only time left to tap on one worm, and asked the child to
choose one worm to “figure out which worms live in the
green house, and which worms live in the blue house”. The
experimenter clicked on the chosen worm, which moved to
its given house as determined by the category boundary.
The child was then told that the storm had not arrived yet,
so there was still time to learn about another worm. After
the child made this second selection, the experimenter
clicked on the worm to show where it lived. Reminder
houses appeared after each worm was selected. The key
feature in the Selection condition was thus that the child was
allowed to independently generate data about the worms in
order to learn about their category structure.
In the Reception condition, a program was ran such that
one worm would be randomly selected at appropriate time
points. Based on information obtained about children’s
choices during pilot testing of the Selection condition, the
script was constrained such that 1) a single worm cannot be
selected twice within each critical block, and 2) a previously
selected worm can be reselected in a later critical block.
Within each test block, two worms were randomly selected
one after another. Upon being selected, the worm wiggled to
attract the child’s attention before moving to the house that
it lived in. Again, reminder houses appeared to provide a
visual memory aid of where the selected worms lived. The
key feature in the Reception condition was therefore that the
child could only observe, but not generate, data about the
worms to learn about their category structure.
Test Block: Classification Phase After the sampling phase,
the experimenter informed the child that the storm was
almost here, so they had to take the rest of the worms home.
The child was asked to point to all the worms that lived in
the green house, as well as all the worms that lived in the
blue house. If the child skipped the classification of some
worms, the experimenter pointed to each of these skipped
worms and asked, “Which house does this worm live in?”
The children’s answers allowed us to determine where they
believed the boundary was located. After all the worms had
been classified, they disappeared and the experimenter told
the child, “Phew, all the worms are safe! But we don’t know
if they went to their correct houses.”

Test Block: Sampling Phase Children were presented with
a row of 13 worms. 12 category boundaries were possible,

2196

The test blocks were repeated until the child had
classified all the worms correctly, or when the child had
engaged in 4 test blocks (i.e. viewed a maximum of 8
worms), whichever occurred first.

Coding
In the Selection condition, we recorded the worms that each
child selected during the sampling phase. We then measured
the sampling distance, i.e. the distance between each of their
selections and the true category boundary. For example, if
the child selected a worm that was adjacent to the category
boundary (left and right), the sampling distance was 0. The
sampling distances allowed us to examine how children
were sampling across time. This measure was recorded in
the Reception condition as well, although note that these
“selected” worms were randomly generated.
For each child, we also obtained a classification accuracy
score for all test blocks. Each correctly classified worm was
scored as 1 point, so the maximum score in each block was
13. The children’s scores were then converted into a
percentage of classification accuracy.

children’s selections and the true category boundary, as a
general measure of uncertainty-driven information selection.
As Figure 2 indicates, children in the Selection condition
were sampling closer to the true category boundary over
time. Using the children’s average sampling distance for
each test block, we performed a 2x4 repeated measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Condition (Selection
vs. Reception) as a between-subjects factor and Test Block
(1–4) as a within-subjects factor. There were significant
main effects of Condition, F(1, 62) = 15.2, p < .001, η2 =
.197, and Test Block, F(3, 60) = 10.77, p < .001, η2 = .350.
There was also a significant interaction between the two
factors, F(3, 61) = 8.58, p < .001, η2 = .30.
Planned comparisons showed that average sampling
distance in the Selection condition was significantly smaller
than expected by a random-sampling strategy by the second
test block, t(31) = 2.34, p = .026, d = .413, while the average
sampling distance of the randomly generated data points in
the Reception condition never differed from chance, e.g. in
the fourth test block, t(31) = .684, p = .50, d = .121.

Results
An alpha level of 0.05 was used in all statistical analyses.
Preliminary analyses found no effects of gender or location
of boundary on children’s accuracy on classification trials.
Subsequent analyses were collapsed over these variables.

Figure 3: Classification accuracy in the Selection and
Reception conditions. Error bars show standard error.

Classification

Figure 2: Sampling distance from the category boundary in
the two conditions. Dashed line indicates average sampling
distance expected by a random-sampling strategy.
Error bars show standard error.

Information Sampling
After learners have acquired some data in a category
learning task, they would easily classify items that are far
from the true category boundary, but are more uncertain
about items that are near the boundary. Following the
analyses in Markant & Gureckis (2013), we thus examined
children’s sampling distances, i.e. the distance between the

Using children’s average classification accuracy across the
four blocks, we then performed a 2x4 repeated measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Condition (Selection
vs. Reception) as a between-subjects factor and Test Block
(1–4) as a within-subjects factor. There was only a main
effect of Test Block, F(3, 60) = 14.5, p < .001, η2 = .42. No
other main effects or interaction was found.
Planned comparisons revealed that the overall
classification accuracy for children in both the Selection (M
= .935, SD = .064) and Reception conditions (M = .924, SD
= .059) was significantly different from chance (0.689). For
the Selection condition, t(31) = 21.8, p < 0.01, d = 3.85. For
the Reception condition, t(31) = 22.7, p < 0.01, d = 4.01.
Although children’s classification accuracy did increase
steadily in both conditions, their classification accuracy
diverged over time. By the final block, children in the
Selection condition were significantly more likely to
classify the worms correctly (M = .986, SD = .046) than

2197

children in the Reception condition (M = .954, SD = .064),
t(62) = 2.24, p = .029, d = .574.

Discussion
The present study examined whether 7-year-old children
had the capacity to engage in and benefit from selection
learning. Using a category learning task, we demonstrate
that young children can learn successfully under conditions
of selection, that they can gather data in a systematic
manner, and that selection learning has distinct advantages
over reception learning.
First, our results indicate that children can learn
successfully when they are allowed to make decisions about
what information they wish to gather. The overall
classification accuracy in the Selection condition was very
high, suggesting that children are perfectly capable of
learning from the data they generate by themselves. Their
performance was comparable to that of children in the
Reception condition, the latter of which should not be
surprising given previous research showing that children are
proficient at learning categories using randomly-generated
exemplars when the classification rule is based only on a
single dimension (i.e. rule-based category structure) similar
to that used in our experiment (Huang-Pollock, Maddox, &
Karalunas, 2011; Minda, Desroches, & Church, 2008). It
should also be noted that the task may have been too easy
for children, resulting in near-ceiling performance in both
conditions. Ongoing work improves the current design by
increasing the number of classification items and removing
the “reminder houses.”
Second, 7-year-olds are able to gather data in a systematic
way. As our results show, children sampled closer to the
true category boundary over time. This result suggests that
the children’s information gathering was informed by
uncertainty and previous feedback, leading them to sample
items that were near the true category boundary. Such a
strategy would allow children to avoid generating redundant
information, and focus on collecting data that is expected to
help them learn effectively and efficiently.
Third, and most importantly, children showed better
learning under conditions of selection as compared to
reception over time. By the final block, the classification
accuracy obtained by children in the Selection condition
was reliably higher than that of children in the Reception
condition. Given the extremely small amount of information
observed by the children over four blocks (as compared to
previous adult studies), we found this measure to be more
revealing of children’s learning under different modes of
information gathering than that of average classification
accuracy, which unduly weighs children’s early guesses.
Establishing these findings within a single task suggests
that children benefit from selection learning over reception
learning partly because they are able to gather data in a
systematic, non-random fashion. Researchers have
previously examined the systematicity and optimality of
children’s exploration strategies, but few have shown that
these strategies have consequences on children’s learning.

The current study thus adds an important piece to the puzzle
by demonstrating that when given the opportunity, children
can gather data in a systematic manner, and this uncertaintydriven data generation is associated with superior
performance during category learning.
One notable difference between the selection and the
reception conditions is that the learners observed different
data points. Thus, to further establish the advantages of
self-directed data generation, ongoing work in our lab
examines how children perform in a “yoked” condition
(Gureckis & Markant, 2012). In such a condition, each child
will be presented with the same sequence of worms that was
generated by another child in the Selection condition. If the
learners in the Selection and the Yoked condition perform
differently despite having observed the same data, this result
would provide additional evidence that being able to gather
data that systematically addresses one’s own regions of
uncertainty is crucial for selection to result in more effective
and more efficient learning (Markant & Gureckis, 2013).
Our discussion above offers a cognitive explanation for
the selection advantage. Children performed better under
conditions of selection because they generated data that was
informative for them. However, the present results cannot
speak directly to other psychological processes that may
also drive the advantage found for selection learning. A
variety of different psychological factors have been posited
to account for such an advantage: enhanced memory
encoding (Metcalfe & Kornell, 2005); deeper processing of
the problem structure (Sobel & Kushnir, 2006); attention
and motivation (Corno & Mandinach, 1983; Kersh, 1962),
etc. Given the design of our experiment in which children in
both conditions were provided with visual reminders of the
house that each worm lives in, we are inclined to believe
that the advantage found for selection over reception
learning cannot be attributed to enhanced encoding of the
presented information. As for other psychological factors,
we do not think that they run contrary to our arguments –
after all, those processes could have certainly been recruited
when children were deciding which items to learn about.
Another important note is that even though we have
demonstrated that children learn better in the Selection
condition as compared to the Reception condition, it is
highly unlikely that the children’s information gathering
was normatively optimal. In this two-category learning task,
the optimal strategy is to engage in a binary search, such
that the learner should always sample the item that is in the
middle of the region of uncertainty (e.g. the space between
the worm that one is certain lives in the green house, and the
worm that one is certain lives in the blue house). By using
such a strategy, the learner’s error in estimating the category
boundary should exponentially converge (Castro et al.,
2008). In our task, optimal learners need to sequentially
sample at least 3 worms, but at most 4 worms, to discover
the category boundary. However, most of the children in the
Selection condition did not appear to have used such a
strategy, as only 7 out of 32 children successfully classified
all the worms in Test Block 2 (having sampled 4 worms).

2198

Thus, like adults (Castro et al. 2008), children were not able
to take full advantage of being able to select their own data.
Self-directed learning has been a hugely influential and
long-standing debate in education. While educators have
consistently encouraged their young students to engage in
hypothesis testing and self-directed exploration in order to
boost learning, there has been a relative dearth of empirical
evidence supporting such a belief. Our results provide
strong evidence that in a simple two-category learning task,
children do perform better under conditions of selection,
and this phenomenon stems from them being able to gather
information in a systematic, non-random way. That being
said, we believe that self-directed learning might not
necessarily be beneficial at all developmental levels, or in
all situations (Castro et al., 2008; Markant & Gureckis,
2013). More research is thus necessary to plug these gaps
before work in this field can properly guide educators.

Acknowledgments
We thank Kuldeep Mahal and the Berkeley Early Learning
Lab (BELL) for their help in testing and recruitment, as well
as the parents and children for their participation.

References
Bruner, J. (1961). The act of discovery. Harvard
Educational Review, 31, 21–32.
Bruner, J., Goodnow, J., & Austin, G. (1956). A Study of
Thinking. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons.
Castro, R., Kalish, C., Nowak, R., Qian, R., Rogers, T., &
Zhu, J. (2008). Human active learning. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 21,
241–249.
Cook, C., Goodman, N. D., & Schulz, L. E. (2011). Where
science starts: spontaneous experiments in
preschoolers’ exploratory play. Cognition, 120(3),
341–9.
Corno, L., & Mandinach, E. B. (1983). The role of cognitive
engagement in classroom learning and motivation.
Educational Psychologist, 18(2), 88–108.
Gureckis, T. M., & Markant, D. B. (2012). Self-Directed
Learning: A Cognitive and Computational
Perspective. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
7(5), 464–481.
Huang-Pollock, C. L., Maddox, W. T., & Karalunas, S. L.
(2011). Development of implicit and explicit category
learning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
109(3), 321–335.
Kersh, B. Y. (1962). The motivating effect of learning by
directed discovery. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 53(2), 65–71.
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S. T., & Aslin, R. N. (2012). The
Goldilocks effect: human infants allocate attention to
visual sequences that are neither too simple nor too
complex. PloS One, 7(5), e36399.
Landau, B., Smith, L., & Jones, S. (1988). The importance
of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3(3), 299–321.

Legare, C. H., Mills, C., & Souza, A. (2013). The use of
questions as problem-solving strategies during early
childhood. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
114, 63–76.
Markant, D. B., & Gureckis, T. M. (2013). Is It Better to
Select or to Receive? Learning via Active and Passive
Hypothesis Testing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. General, 142(2).
Medin, D., & Schaffer, M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85(3),
207–238.
Metcalfe, J., & Kornell, N. (2005). A Region of Proximal
Learning model of study time allocation. Journal of
Memory and Language, 52, 463–477.
Minda, J. P., Desroches, A. S., & Church, B. a. (2008).
Learning rule-described and non-rule-described
categories: a comparison of children and adults.
Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 34(6), 1518–1533.
Nelson, J. D., Divjak, B., Gudmundsdottir, G., Martignon,
L. F., & Meder, B. (2014). Children’s sequential
information search is sensitive to environmental
probabilities. Cognition, 130(1), 74–80.
Ruggeri, A., & Lombrozo, T. (under review). Learning By
Asking: How Children Ask Question s To Achieve
Efficient Search.
Saffran, J. R. J., Aslin, R. N. R., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical Learning by 8-Month-Old Infants. Science,
274(5294), 1926 – 1928.
Schulz, L. E., & Bonawitz, E. B. (2007). Serious fun:
preschoolers engage in more exploratory play when
evidence is confounded. Developmental Psychology,
43(4), 1045–50.
Shepard, R. N., Hovland, C. I., & Jenkins, H. M. (1961).
Learning and memorization of classifications.
Psychological Monographs: General and Applied,
75(13), 1–42.
Sim, Z., & Xu, F. (2014). Acquiring Inductive Constraints
from Self-Generated Evidence. In P. Bello, M.
Guarini, M. McShane, & S. Scassellati (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1431–1436). Austin,
Texas: Cognitive Science Society.
Sobel, D. M., & Kushnir, T. (2006). The importance of
decision making in causal learning from interventions.
Memory & Cognition, 34(2), 411–9.
Steyvers, M., Tenenbaum, J. B., Wagenmakers, E.-J., &
Blum, B. (2003). Inferring causal networks from
observations and interventions. Cognitive Science,
27(3), 453–489.
Waxman, S. R. S., & Gelman, S. a S. (2009). Early wordlearning entails reference, not merely associations.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(6), 258–263.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning as
Bayesian inference. Psychological Review, 114(2),
245–72.

2199

