Complex Mental Addition and Multiplication Rely More on Visuospatial than
Verbal Processing
Tommy Kwun-leuk Cheung (tckl@connect.hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road,
Hong Kong, China

Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road,
Hong Kong, China

between storage and retrieval of arithmetic facts by verbal
rote and by manipulation of numerical quantities mentally.
While the former is believed to be attributed to a left
subcortical network, the latter involves bilateral parietal
network. A later study by Zago et al. (2008) have linked
number processing, or calculation, to the model of working
memory proposed by Baddeley and Hinch in 1974, that is,
central executive, phonological loop and visuospatial
sketchpad. By comparing participants’ activation pattern
using fMRI when they held or manipulated numbers and
spatial patterns, they proposed that each of the components
in the working memory model is essential for a complete
calculation to work. While the central executive is needed to
coordinate the two systems, the left-lateralized phonological
component around the inferior fronto-temporal area is
required for retrieval of arithmetic information, whereas the
right-lateralized visuospatial component around the superior
and posterior fronto-parietal area is essential for
manipulation of numbers.
Some recent studies have examined how the components
in the working memory model can be linked to specific
arithmetic processing. For example, in an EEG study, Zhou
et al. (2006) found that when performing single-digit
arithmetic problems, multiplication relies more on the
phonological processing than addition and subtraction. A
subsequent paper by Zhou et al. (2007) has further extended
the idea by testing participants with single-digit addition and
multiplication problems using fMRI. Their findings showed
that mental multiplication relied more on verbal processing,
which is lateralized to the LH, and that mental addition
relied more on visuospatial processing, which is lateralized
to the right hemisphere (RH). One of the explanations given
by the authors was that we are encouraged to learn addition
through procedural strategies such as counting, and
multiplication through rote learning (e.g. Dehaene & Cohen,
1997). While counting involves the manipulation of visual
Arabic digits and their quantities, which requires
visuospatial processing, rote learning and retrieval require
verbal/phonological processing. However, since only single
digit arithmetic was tested in the experiments, it remains
unclear whether these findings also apply to complicated
arithmetic processing involving more than one digit.
In the literature on arithmetic processing, the anatomical
and functional mechanisms underlying mental arithmetic
processing remains unclear because arithmetic processing is

Abstract
Recent imaging studies have found that in simple arithmetic
processing, addition is lateralized to the right hemisphere,
whereas multiplication to the left. Here we aimed to
investigate the cognitive mechanism underlying complicated
arithmetic processing with a dual task paradigm. Participants
were asked to complete a calculation task (addition or
multiplication) and a letter judgment task (rhyme or shape
judgment) simultaneously. We found that participants’
performance in addition and multiplication was interfered
more by the simultaneous shape judgment task than the rhyme
judgment task. This effect suggested that both complicated
addition and multiplication relied more on right-lateralized
visuospatial
than
left-lateralized
phonological/verbal
processing. The shift from left- to more right-lateralized
processing in complicated multiplication suggests that
participants may have adopted a visuospatial strategy to
approximate numerosity when the calculation involved large
numbers. These results suggest that the cognitive mechanism
involved in arithmetic processing depends on both the
operation and the context.
Keywords: arithmetic processing; hemispheric lateralization;
dual task paradigm

Introduction
Mental representation of arithmetic processing
Although it is generally believed that logical reasoning or
mathematical processing is lateralized to the left hemisphere
(LH), the specific neural mechanism of arithmetic and
number processing is still unclear. In general, Dehaene and
Cohen’s (1995) triple-code model of number processing has
been widely used to conceptualize the anatomical and
functional properties of human’s number processing. In this
model, there are three main components of mental
representation of numbers and its manipulation within the
human brain. The components are: (1) visual Arabic number
form, where numbers are represented as strings of digits; (2)
verbal word form, where numbers are represented with
syntactic structure; (3) analogical magnitude representation,
where numbers are associated with their “meanings” or
quantities. Different studies have provided converging
evidence for the existence of a modular structure of number
processing, yet, the exact brain mechanisms for specific
functions, such as arithmetic, remain unclear.
By studying patients with different lesions, Dehaene and
Cohen (1997) argued that there is a double dissociation

363

a complicated cognitive process that involves several
different components, such as the ones proposed in the
triple-code mode (Dehaene & Cohen, 1995; 1997) and its
link to the working memory model. Different
strategies/components may be used under different contexts,
such as calculations with small versus large numbers. Thus,
the type of strategy used by participants may contribute to
the inconsistency in the literature. In one study, it was found
that addition and its reverse operation, subtraction, rely
more on RH processing (Zhou et al., 2006; Zhou et al.,
2007). However, in another study examining strategy use
during calculation, whole-calculation strategy, or exact
approach in addition, was found to be lateralized to the LH,
whereas approximate-calculation strategy involved both
hemispheres (Yagoubi, Lemaire & Besson, 2003).
Indeed, some recent studies have suggested that the brain
mechanism for mental arithmetic processing depends on the
use of strategy given the context such as time constraint or
difficulty level of the task. For example, an ERP study by
Yagoubi, Lemaire and Besson (2003) found that different
brain mechanisms were involved for different strategies
employed in different contexts. Specifically, when
participants were asked to judge whether the solution of a
complicated addition problem was smaller than 100 or not,
they showed two types of processing patterns depending on
the discrepancy between the proposed sum and 100. If the
proposed sum was close to 100 (2% or 5% away from 100;
i.e., a small-split problem), participants adopted a wholecalculation strategy, which was slower and primarily done
by the LH; however, if the proposed sum was far from 100
(10% or 15% away from 100; i.e., a large-split problem),
participants adopted an approximate-calculation strategy,
which was faster and involved bilateral brain activation.
Although the study claimed to tap on arithmetic processing
with large numbers, the task only required a comparison to a
fixed number, which may not resemble how a more genuine
complicated arithmetic problem looks like. Andres, Seron
and Oliver (2005) examined similar topics using the TMS
technique and found that comparison between digits close
together involved the left posterior parietal cortex (PPC)
only, while comparison between digits that were further
away could be done by either left or right PPC. More
specifically, participants were asked to compare singledigits ranging from 1 to 9 (excluding 5) against 5 and
determine if the digit shown was smaller or larger than 5. It
was found that disrupting the left PPC alone was enough to
increase the reaction time for comparing numbers close to 5,
whereas bilateral disruption was needed for numbers further
away from 5. Using both fMRI and ERP designs, StanescuCosson et al. (2000) found that small number addition,
which involves mainly rote verbal memory, was lateralized
to the LH, while larger number addition, which typically
involves both approximation and exact calculation, relied on
both hemispheres, especially the parietal regions. However,
the larger numbers (operands) in the study were only
ranging from 5 to 9, which are small as compared with
double-digit calculation. As the study examined comparison

of small numbers only, it remains unclear how arithmetic
problems involving large numbers are processed as
compared with those with small numbers.
Recent studies have shown that those who are extremely
good at mathematics may also have a different neural
mechanism when undergoing number processing. In
particular, using different imaging techniques, it has been
suggested that mathematically gifted adolescents may be
attributed to a more bilateral activation pattern in their
frontal and parietal areas. For example, Desco et al. (2011)
found that mathematically gifted adolescents always show a
bilateral activation and recruit more regions, especially in
the RH, while performing different reasoning tasks. In
particular, the precuneus, superior occipital lobe and medial
temporal lobe in the Tower of London (TOL) task, and the
right inferior parietal lobe, anterior cingulated gyrus, and
frontal areas in the Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices
(RAPM) task. O’Boyle et al. (2005) also found that when
mathematically gifted adolescents performed mental
rotation tasks, which has been shown to be lateralized to the
RH among ordinary people, showed a bilateral activation
pattern involving the parietal lobe and the anterior cingulate.
Given the greater involvement of the RH, in addition to
the LH, in arithmetic with relatively larger numbers or
involving
non-verbal
number
processing
(e.g.
approximation), and the findings from mathematically
gifted adolescents, who typically show a bilateral activation
pattern in different reasoning tasks, it seems to suggest that
bilateral activation, i.e., engagement of both hemispheres,
may be generally beneficial to complicated mathematical
processing, such as calculations with large numbers.

Dual-task paradigm
The use of a dual-task paradigm in psychological
experiments can be dated back to the early 70s and 80s,
where researchers tried to examine specific brain
mechanisms responsible for a particular kind of cognitive
processing. By asking participants to do two tasks
simultaneously, the neural representation of a particular
processing can be deduced. The underlying assumption of a
dual-task paradigm is that if two tasks share the same neural
mechanism, there will be greater interference than when
they do not share the same mechanism (Shaillice, McLeod
& Lewis, 1985).
Fernandes and Guild (2009) used the dual-task paradigm
to investigate the underlying mechanisms responsible for
retrieving words and visuospatial patterns. In the study,
participants were interfered more by a visuospatial
distracting task when retrieving visuospatial patterns, but
interfered more by a phonological distracting task while
doing retrieval of words. Hence, they argued that the
representations of verbal and visuospatial episodic
memories were different qualitatively. In a later study,
Fernandes, Wammes and Hsiao (2013) have used the dualtask paradigm to examine the representation of linguistic
information in a visual word recognition task. It was found
that when bilingual Chinese-English speakers retrieved

364

Chinese characters, they were interfered more by the
visuospatial distracting task than phonological task. In
contrast, monolingual English speakers were affected more
by the phonological task when they retrieved English words.
The study has demonstrated how the representation of
linguistic information can be addressed by examining the
interference effect generated by the dual tasks.
Lee and Kang (2002) examined the connections between
arithmetic functions and working memory using a dual-task
paradigm, where the distracting task was to suppress either
the phonological component or visuospatial component.
Results showed that multiplication was significantly delayed
by concurrent phonological rehearsal while subtraction was
delayed by maintaining an image in the mind. This suggests
that while multiplication is more related to phonological
processing, subtraction is more related to visuospatial
processing. However, their study used only single digit
stimuli, which cannot fully demonstrate how people do
mental calculation when facing more complex scenarios
with larger numbers.
In sum, this study aims to examine the processes and
representations involved in complicated arithmetic problem
solving with large (two-digit) numbers using a dual task
paradigm. According to the results from studies examining
simple arithmetic problem solving with single-digit numbers,
if complicated arithmetic processing shares similar neural
mechanisms to simple arithmetic processing, we expect that
participants may rely more on the RH processing for
addition and more on the LH processing for multiplication
(Zhou et al., 2006; Zhou et al., 2007). More specifically,
they may be interfered more by a visuospatial task in
addition and more by a phonological task in multiplication.
However, given the potential benefit of bilateral processing
in complicated calculations when using approximation
(Yagoubi, Lemaire & Besson, 2003; Stanescu-Cosson et
al.,2000), and in experts in mathematics (Desco et al., 2011;
O’Boyle et al., 2005), it is likely that participants will show
bilateral processing in a complicated arithmetic task. In our
study, only addition and multiplication were examined
because similar strategies are typically used between inverse
operations, such as addition and subtraction, and
multiplication and division. We hypothesize that
participants will show more bilateral processing in both
addition and multiplication with large numbers.

Method
Participants
Twenty-four local Chinese participants who had Chinese as
their native language were recruited for the experiment (10
males and 14 females, mean age = 21.33, SD = 2.60 years).
They received honorariums for their participation in the
experiment. All participants had normal or corrected to
normal vision and hearing. They were all right-handed
according to the Edinburgh handedness inventory (Oldfield,
1971).

Materials

365

Calculation task Equations for addition and multiplication
were created, such that 96 double-digit equations with one
operation sign, where all numbers and signs were arranged
horizontally (e.g. 12 + 24 = 36), were randomly formed for
each operation sign and for the experimental session. There
was no repetition of numbers within an equation. The range
of numbers used in the left-hand side of the addition
equations was from 11 to 99 and that of the multiplication
equations was from 10 to 25. Half of the equations were
correct and half were incorrect. For incorrect equations, the
number shown on the right-hand side (the solution) was
created by either adding 1 or 10 to, or subtracting 1 or 10
from, the correct answer.
Letter judgment task The materials were adapted directly
from Fernandes and Guild (2009), where audio files (.wav)
of letters of the English alphabet (omitting A, M, and W)
were recorded by the respective author EG via a microphone
using SoundDesigner II software (Palo Alto, CA). The same
stimuli were used for both the rhyme (phonological) and
shape (visuospatial) judgment tasks. Each .wav file was
approximately 1,500 ms in duration.

Procedure
The experiment is conducted using E-prime v.2 software
(Psychology Software Tools Inc., Pittsburgh, PA), with the
stimuli presented on a 19’ Dell LCD Monitor. Participants
were tested individually and completed all the sessions.
They gave all their responses through a response box.
Full attention tasks Participants completed a calculation
task and a letter judgment task under full attention. For the
calculation task, they completed both addition and
multiplication, separated into two blocks. In each block,
equations were presented in black on a white background, in
18-point Arial font, at the centre of the screen one at a time,
followed by a fixation cross for 500 ms. The presentation
time for addition equations was 3,000 ms while that for
multiplication equations was 4,500 ms. Different
presentation times were used to avoid ceiling/floor effects
since multiplication equations in general were more difficult
to solve. In each trial, participants were asked to judge
whether the equation was correct or not by pressing “1” for
correct equations and “2” for incorrect equations. They were
asked to respond as fast and as accurately as possible. .
Participants also completed two types of letter judgment
tasks, namely rhyme (phonological) and shape (visuospatial)
judgment tasks. For both tasks, a trial started with a fixation
cross for 500 ms. Participants then listened to a female voice
speaking one of a list of 16 letters aloud. Each letter sound
was played at the beginning of a 3,000 ms interval.
Participants were asked to respond by pressing “4” for “yes”
and “5” for “no” within the 3,000 ms interval. For the
rhyme judgment task, participants judged whether the letter
presented rhymed with the long "e" vowel (e.g., letters B, C,
D, E, G, P, T, and V). For the shape judgment task,
participants judged if the letter presented contained a curved

line, in the capitalized form (e.g., B, C, D, G, P, J, O, P, Q,
R, S, and U). The experimenter referred to the letters on the
computer keyboard for illustrating how participants should
visualise the alphabet. For both letter judgment tasks, half of
the trials required a “yes” response and half required a “no”
response. They were asked to respond as fast and as
accurately as possible.

Results
Full attention tasks
Calculation tasks Paired-sample t-test on the task accuracy
showed that participants did significantly better in addition
(M = .811, SE = .025) than in multiplication (M = .737, SE
= .014), t(23) = 3.073, p = .005.

Divided attention tasks Participants did four blocks of dual
tasks, which were different combinations between the
calculation tasks (addition and multiplication) and letter
judgment tasks (rhyme and shape judgment). In each trial,
they had to give response to both the equation and the letter
simultaneously, using the same instructions as before. The
two responses should be made within the respective time
interval: 3,000 ms for blocks with addition equations and
4,500 ms for those with multiplication equations.
Participants were told to give both responses as quickly and
accurately as possible, regardless of whether the responses
were given simultaneously or in different orders.
In the whole experiment, participants completed 8
experimental blocks, each with 32 trials. The block order
and trial order within each block were randomized. In the
dual task conditions, half of the trials were congruent (both
responses requiring “yes” or “no” responses) and half were
incongruent (the two responses contradicting with each
other, i.e. one “yes” and one “no”). Participants were given
a 45-second break between each block. The button pressing
patterns were counterbalanced across participants. Practice
sessions on all the full attention tasks and the dual task
condition between addition and rhyme judgment were given
before the experiment. Sample trial sequence for calculation
task (addition), letter judgment task (rhyme judgment) under
full attention (FA), as well as trial sequence for both tasks
(addition and rhyme judgment) under divided attention (DA)
were given in Figure 1.

Letter judgment tasks The accuracy of the two letter
judgment tasks, rhyme judgment (M = .945, SE = .087) and
shape judgment (M = .951, SE = .095) did not differ from
each other significantly, t(23) = -.276, p = .785.

Divided attention tasks
Calculation tasks To see the effect of the two distraction
(letter judgment) tasks on the calculation of the two
operation signs, a 2 (letter judgment: rhyme vs. shape) x 2
(operation sign: addition vs. multiplication) repeated
measures ANOVA was conducted on the accuracy of the
calculation tasks. It was revealed that there was a significant
main effect of letter judgment, F(1,23) = 10.075, p = .004,
where calculation performance under phonological
distraction (M = .704, SE = .017) was significantly better
than visuospatial distraction (M = .654, SE = .019); however,
there was no significant main effect of operation sign
(F(1,23) = .543, p = .469) or interaction between letter
judgment and operation sign (F(1,23) = .937, p = .343).
Figure 2 showed the mean accuracy within each operation
sign under divided attention. In order to investigate the
degree of interference from the distractions on each
operation sign, two additional paired-sample t-tests were
conducted. Performance in addition under phonological
distraction was significantly better than that under
visuospatial distraction, t(23) = 2.281, p = .032; and
performance in multiplication under phonological
distraction did not differ significantly from that under
visuospatial distraction, t(23) = 2.281, p = .212.

Figure 2: Mean accuracy of the calculation tasks under
divided attention (* p < .05).

Figure 1: Trial sequence. Letter in brackets denotes the
respective letter presented in that trial.

Letter judgment tasks The mean accuracy of letter
judgment tasks for each operation sign under divided

366

attention was shown in Figure 3. For performance under
divided attention in addition, rhyme judgment did not differ
from shape judgment significantly, t(23) = -1.007, p = .324.
For performance under divided attention in multiplication,
again rhyme judgment did not differ from shape judgment
significantly, t(23) = -.589, p = .561. Similar performance in
the letter judgment tasks suggests that the interference
observed in the calculation task was due to the difference in
processing addition and multiplication, rather than the
difficulty of the letter judgment tasks.

When we examined the results of the two operation
conditions separately, in the addition condition, participants
performed significantly better under phonological
distracting task than visuospatial distracting task; however,
this difference was not significant in the multiplication task.
The result that participants relied more on visuospatial
processing than phonological processing in addition
calculation is consistent with previous studies with simple
calculation questions, which typically show that addition is
lateralized to the RH, suggesting more involvement in
visuospatial processing (Zhou et al., 2006; Zhou et al.,
2007). This result was also in line with the Triple-code
model proposed by Dehaene and Cohen (1995) that people
tend to perform addition visually by manipulating numbers
in visual Arabic form through the coordination of the
analogue magnitude representation.
Nevertheless, in contrast to the left-lateralized
processing observed in simple multiplication problem
solving (Zhou et al., 2006; Zhou et al., 2007), suggesting the
involvement of verbal processing, here we found that for
complex multiplication calculation participants engaged
more right-lateralized visuospatial or bilateral processing.
This effect suggests that, instead of relying solely on the
left-lateralized phonological/verbal strategy as reported in
previous studies using simple one-digit multiplication (e.g.
Zhou et al., 2006; Zhou et al., 2007), complicated
multiplication problems involving two-digit numbers may
rely more on the RH for visuospatial processing. This result
also suggests that visuospatial processing may be
particularly important for complicated arithmetic problem
solving. A possible explanation for this phenomenon is that
participants have utilized the visuospatial component to
approximate the numerosity when the multiplication
calculation involved large numbers. This processing was
found to be lateralized to the RH, covering the frontal and
parietal cortexes (Piazza, Mechelli, Price, & Butterworth,
2006).
On the other hand, from our findings, it seems that no
matter how large or small the numbers are, mental addition
may still rely more on visuospatial processing. This
phenomenon may be because of the way we learn arithmetic
(e.g. Dehaene & Cohen, 2007; Zhou et al., 2007). As
mentioned earlier in the Introduction, children are
encouraged to use procedural strategies such as counting
and visual imagination of the quantities to perform addition,
which relies more oh right-lateralized visuospatial
processing. Our results suggest that this phenomenon may
apply to both simple and complicated addition calculations.
Future work will examine whether similar effects can be
obtained with numbers of more than two digits.
In general, our results seem to suggest that the brain
mechanism underlying arithmetic processing depends on the
strategy use, which in turn, is driven by the context, such as
the operation involved and whether it is a simple or
complicated calculation that involves small or big numbers.
In the current study, we also found that under full
attention, performance in addition calculation was

Figure 3: Mean accuracy of letter judgment tasks under
divided attention.

Discussion
In this study, we have examined the processes and
representations involved in complicated arithmetic problem
solving (involving two-digit numbers) using a dual task
paradigm. It was hypothesized that number processing, in
particular arithmetic, is multi-modal, involving both
visuospatial and phonological processing. Previous research
has suggested that addition is linked to visuospatial
processing more whereas multiplication relies more on
phonological processing (Zhou et al., 2006; Zhou et al.,
2007). Nevertheless, these findings were based on simple
arithmetic processing with single-digit numbers. If a similar
neural mechanism is involved in solving complicated
arithmetic problems, we expected that in the dual task
participants would be interfered more by the visuospatial
task in addition and by the phonological task in
multiplication. Our results showed that, in contrast to simple
arithmetic processing, participants were interfered by the
visuospatial task more in the calculation tasks, suggesting
that they in general adopted a visuospatial strategy. This
effect also suggests that RH processing may become more
important for solving complicated than simple arithmetic
problems. Since the performance in two letter judgment
tasks did not differ significantly under either full attention
or divided attention, the difference in calculation
performance between these two distracting conditions was
unlikely to be due to difference in task difficulty between
the two distracting tasks.

367

significantly higher than that of multiplication, suggesting
that although the time interval for response in multiplication
trials was adjusted to 150% (4.5s) of the respective addition
trials (3s), the multiplication task was still more difficult
than the addition task to the participants. Indeed, the product
of two double-digit numbers can be as 2 to 3 times larger
than the sum of two double-digit numbers. To better
understand the difference in the underlying cognitive
mechanism between the two operation conditions, future
studies can try to match the performance level of the
calculation tasks.
In conclusion, in this study we have investigated the brain
and cognitive mechanism underlying large number mental
arithmetic processing using a dual-task paradigm. It was
found that in addition calculation, consistent with previous
studies examining simple arithmetic processing with singledigit numbers, participants engaged more right-lateralized
visuospatial processing. In contrast, in multiplication
calculation, different from previous studies showing more
involvement of LH/verbal processing in simple
multiplication with one-digit numbers, here we showed that
participants relied more on visuospatial strategies in
performing large number multiplication calculations. This
effect may be related to the use of visuospatial processing to
approximate numerosity when a multiplication calculation
involves large numbers. Our results suggest that the
cognitive mechanism involved in arithmetic processing
depends on both the operation and the context. Future work
will investigate arithmetic processing using a wider range of
numbers with different operation signs to further examine
specific points of strategy switch.

Fernandes, M. A., Wammes, J. D., & Hsiao, J. H. (2013).
Representation of linguistic information determines its
susceptibility to memory interference. Brain sciences, 3,
1244-1260.
Lee, K.-M., & Kang, S.-Y. (2002). Arithmetic operation and
working memory: differential suppression in dual tasks.
Cognition, 83, B63-B68.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia.
9, 97-113.
O’Boyle, M. W., Cunnington, R., Silk, T. J., Vaughan, D.,
Jackson, G., Syngeniotis, A., & Egan, G. F. (2005).
Mathematically gifted male adolescents activate a unique
brain network during mental rotation. Cognitive Brain
Research, 25, 583-587.
Piazza, M., Mechelli, A., Price, C. J., & Butterworth, B.
(2006). Exact and approximate judgements of visual and
auditory numerosity: An fMRI study. Brain Research,
1106, 177-188.
Shallice, T., McLeod, P., & Lewis, K. (1985). Isolating
Cognitive Modules with the Dual-Task Paradigm: Are
Speech Perception and Production Separate Processes?
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 37A,
507-532.
Stanescu-Cosson, R., Pinel, P., van de Moortele, P. F., Le
Bihan, D., Cohen, L., & Dehaene, S. (2000).
Understanding dissociations in dyscalculia: A brain
imaging study of the impact of number size on the
cerebral networks for exact and approximate calculation.
Brain, 123, 2240-2255.
Yagoubi, R. E., Lemaire, P., & Besson, M. (2003). Different
brain mechanisms mediate two strategies in arithmetic:
evidence from Event-Related brain Potentials.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 855-862.
Zago, L., Petit, L., Turbelin, M.-R., Anderson, F., Vigneau,
M., & Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2008). How verbal and
spatial manipulation networks contribute to calculation:
An fMRI study. Neuropsychologia, 46, 2403-2414.
Zhou, X. L., Chen, C. S., Dong, Q., Zhang, H. C., Zhou, R.
L., Zhao, H., Chen, C. H., Qiao, S. B., Jiang, T., & Guo,
Y. (2006). Event-related potentials of single-digit addition,
subtraction, and multiplication. Neuropsychologia, 44,
2500-2507.
Zhou, X. L., Chen, C. S., Zang, Y. F., Dong, Q., Chen, C.
H., Qiao, S. B., & Gong, Q. Y. (2007). Dissociated brain
organization for single-digit addition and multiplication.
NeuroImage, 35, 871-880.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (ECS scheme project # HKU 758412H to J.H. Hsiao).

References
Andres, M., Seron, X., & Oliver, E. (2005). Hemispheric
lateralization of number comparison. Cognitive Brain
Research, 25, 283-290.
Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (1995). Towards an anatomical
and functional model of number processing.
Mathematical Cognition, 1, 83–120.
Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (1997). Cerebral Pathways for
Calculation: Double Dissociation between Rote Verbal
and Quantitative Knowledge of Arithmetic. Cortex, 33,
219-250.
Desco, M., Navas-Sanchez, F. J., Sanchez-Gonzàlez, J.,
Reig, S., Robles, O., Franco, C., … Arango, C. (2011).
Mathematically gifted adolescents use more extensive and
more bilateral areas of the fronto-parietal network than
controls during executive functioning and fluid reasoning
tasks. NeuroImage, 57, 281-292.
Fernandes, M., & Guild, E. (2009). Process-Specific
Interference Effects During Recognition of Spatial
Patterns and Words. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 63, 24-32.

368

