Comparing Metaphors Reveals their Persuasive Capacity
Paul H. Thibodeau (paul.thibodeau@oberlin.edu)
Karlyn Gehring (karlyn.gehring@oberlin.edu)
Oberlin College, Department of Psychology
120 W Lorain St; Oberlin, OH 44074, USA
Abstract

reducing crime by instituting social reform programs than
people who had read that crime was a beast. Those who
read the beast version were more likely to suggest reducing
crime through increased law enforcement and prison
sentences.

Metaphors pervade discussions of sociopolitical issues and
influence the way we think. One challenge facing researchers,
however, is that it can be difficult to make principled
predictions about exactly how metaphors will influence
thought. Here, we use an explicit comparison task to quantify
the persuasive capacity of metaphors. In Experiment 1, people
were given two metaphors and two policy responses. They
were asked to match one policy to each metaphor. In
Experiment 2, people read metaphorically framed issues and
chose between policy responses. We found that data from the
explicit comparison task predicted behavior from another
group of participants on the metaphor framing task; a measure
of linguistic association from LSA did not predict behavior on
the framing task. These results suggest a relationship between
explicit analogical comparison and more implicit natural
language metaphor processing. It also provides a method for
measuring the conceptual entailments of metaphors.
Keywords: metaphor; analogy; relational
comparison; framing; decision making

A Challenge for Research on Conceptual Metaphor

reasoning;

Introduction
Metaphors pervade discussions of social and political issues
and powerfully influence the way we think and act. At a
mechanistic level, metaphors can shape thought in a variety
of ways. For instance, metaphors can explicitly influence
how people process information. Deliberately invoked,
instructive metaphors can make novel concepts seem more
familiar and encourage elaboration (Ottati, Rhoads, &
Graesser, 1999). However, metaphors can also play a more
implicit role in how people process information by shaping
the way people build representations of complex problems
(e.g., Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011, 2013). In this way,
metaphors are especially powerful tools for persuasion (cf.
Petty & Cacioppo, 1986).
A fundamental premise of this work is that metaphors
provide structure (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). They
encapsulate systems of entailments from a source domain in
the form of relations between attributes that facilitate
thinking about a target domain (Gentner, 1983). Indeed,
some have argued that metaphorical mappings from
embodied domains like SPACE are fundamental for
thinking about abstract ideas like TIME (e.g., Boroditsky,
Fuhrman, & McCormick, 2010; Clark, 1973; Traugott,
1978).
Prior work has revealed that relational structure conveyed
though metaphor frames can systematically affect patterns
of inference (e.g., Hauser & Schwarz, 2014; Landau,
Sullivan, & Greenberg, 2009; Thibodeau & Boroditsky,
2011, 2013). For instance, in one study, people who read
that crime was a virus were 18% more likely to suggest

One challenge facing researchers who study the role of
metaphor in reasoning is that it can be difficult to quantify
the entailments of metaphors. That is, is there a way to
make principled predictions about how metaphors will
influence the way people think about the domains they
describe?
The most common approach has been to use intuition-either the researcher’s own intuitions or intuitions based on
detailed linguistic analyses (e.g., Hauser & Schwarz, 2014;
Hauser & Schwarz, 2014; Landau, Sullivan, & Greenberg,
2009; Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011, 2013). For instance,
it seems like describing the economy as a stalled vehicle
should make people more likely to infer that the economy is
in need of large-scale financial stimulus – a metaphorical
jumpstart; it seems like describing the economy as a stunted
plant should make people more likely to think about
sustainable economic practices – metaphorical sunlight,
water, and nutrients.
However, using intuition as a foundation for prediction
can be problematic because people have limited access to
higher order cognitive processes (cf. Nisbett & Wilson,
1977). Different people may have different intuitions about
the inferences that a given metaphor should support (Keysar
& Bly, 1995). Further, it can be difficult to predict the
extent to which metaphors encourage particular inferences.
In the current paper, we offer a method for making
principled predictions about the persuasive capacity of
metaphor frames, using an explicit metaphor comparison
task. We present the results of two experiments. In the first,
people compared two metaphors for a target domain like the
educational system (e.g., schools are factories, molding or
gardens, nurturing young minds) and two policy responses
(e.g., underperforming schools should “adopt a common
curriculum” or “increase opportunities for extracurricular
activities like music and athletics”). Participants were asked
to match one of the policies to one metaphor and the other
policy to the other metaphor.
In the second experiment, a separate group of participants
made judgments about metaphorically framed issues. In this
case, a single metaphor was embedded in the description of
the issue (e.g., an underperforming school was framed as a
factory or a garden). Participants were asked to choose
which of two policy responses (e.g., “adopting a common

2368

curriculum” or “increasing opportunities for extracurricular
activities”), in their opinion, would lead to a better outcome.
Our hypothesis was that judgments from the first
experiment – the explicit comparison task – would predict
the persuasive influence of the metaphors in the second
experiment – the metaphor framing task. Such a finding
would be valuable for key theoretical and practical reasons.
On theoretical grounds, the finding would suggest a
relationship between explicit analogical comparison and
relatively implicit metaphor processing (Bowdle & Gentner,
2005; Kurtz & Gentner, 2013). Indeed, one alternative
hypothesis was that we would not find a relationship
between patterns of behavior on the two experiments
because processing metaphors in natural language engages
different mechanisms than deliberate comparison (Keysar,
Shen, Glucksberg, & Horton, 2000; but see Thibodeau &
Durgin, 2008). Reading conventional metaphors in natural
language may not sufficiently evoke the conceptual
entailments of the frames.
This method also allows us to test the possibility that
metaphors influence thought because of their linguistic
associations rather than conceptual entailments (McGlone,
2011). To predict behavior on the metaphor framing task,
we pit judgments from the metaphor comparison task
against a measure of semantic association, gathered from
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA; Landauer, Foltz, & Laham,
1998). We predicted that patterns of behavior from the
explicit comparison task would be more strongly related to
patterns of behavior on the metaphor framing task because
natural language metaphors are more than linguistic primes
(Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011, 2013). On this view,
metaphors instantiate conceptual structure, which influences
how people build representations of target issues.
There are also several practical advantages to quantifying
the persuasive capacity of metaphor frames with an explicit
comparison task. For instance, this method avoids
idiosyncratic biases that may be associated with any
individual conducting a linguistic analysis. It also provides a
means of quantifying the degree to which a metaphor frame
lends support for a target issue. Larger differences between
the metaphors on the explicit comparison task should
indicate more persuasive metaphor frames.

because an incorrect completion code was submitted or
because they had participated in Experiment 1.
In both experiments our samples included slightly more
males (56% and 51%) than females. The average age of
participants was 34.4 (sd = 12.2) in Experiment 1 and 32.4
(sd = 10.3) in Experiment 2.

Materials & Design
Ten descriptions of socio-political issues were created for
the two experiments. For each issue, we designed two
metaphor frames and four policy responses. The two
metaphor frames seemed to have different conceptual
entailments. The four policies for each issue were chosen to
reflect real world proposals; some were constructed to be
more consistent with the entailments of one of the
metaphors and others were constructed to be more
consistent with the entailments of the other (e.g., “adopting
a common curriculum” seemed to be more consistent with a
factory metaphor for education, whereas “increasing
opportunities for extracurricular activities like music and
athletics” seemed to be more consistent with a garden
metaphor).
In Experiment 1, participants read each issue and matched
policy proposals to metaphors in an explicit comparison
task. In Experiment 2, participants read each issue and were
asked to judge which of the policies seemed best (in their
opinion). In Experiment 2, unlike Experiment 1, a single
metaphor frame was embedded in the description of the
issue. Participants in this experiment were only exposed to
one of the two metaphors for each domain. We used data
from the first experiment to predict behavior on the second
experiment.
The order of the stories and response options were
randomized between participants in both experiments. The
full instructions for the two experiments and example
stimuli are shown below.
Experiment 1: The Comparison Task In the comparison
task (Experiment 1), people were presented with a
description of an issue (e.g., education) and a pair of
metaphor frames (e.g., factory and garden). The description
of the education issue read:

Methods

Norwalk is a city with an education problem.
Historically, the schools have been excellent.
Unfortunately, in recent years, there have been cuts to
the budget, which have forced the city to fire teachers
and eliminate extracurricular activities. Each year a
smaller and smaller number of students have graduated
who meet the standards that city officials hope to
achieve. A recent assessment found that a minority of
students were able to read at their grade level and that
more and more are dropping out.

Participants
We sampled 600 participants in the first experiment and
1,200 participants in the second experiment. Roughly 100
participants were exposed to each stimulus item in each
experiment. We recruited and paid people $1.00 in
exchange for participation through Mechanical Turk. We
used Turk’s exclusion criteria to ensure that participants
lived in the United States and had a good performance
record (at least 90% approval on previous tasks). We also
required that participants be at least 18 years old.
In Experiment 1, data from 3 participants were excluded
because an incorrect completion code was submitted. In
Experiment 2, data from 125 participants were excluded

Participants were told that different metaphors were being
used to support different policy interventions. For instance:

2369

The city's officials know that they have to change
certain policies in response to the problem, but they
aren't sure which policies to change or how much to
change them. Two of the city’s officials are leading this
debate and they tend to talk about the problem in
different ways.

fire teachers and eliminate extracurricular activities.
Each year a smaller and smaller number of students
have graduated who meet the standards that city
officials hope to achieve. A recent assessment found
that a minority of students were able to read at their
grade level and that more and more are dropping out.

One argues that “Schools are factories, attempting to
mold young minds.”

The city’s officials know they must make policy
changes in response to the problem. Which of the
following should officials emphasize to improve school
performance?

The other argues that “Schools are gardens, attempting
to nurture young minds.”

Participants were asked to choose between two
interventions. There were 12 versions of each stimulus item
in the metaphor framing task (six for each metaphor frame).
Each participant read one version of each stimulus item (i.e.
everyone read and responded to 10 issues).

The participant’s task was to match an intervention to
each metaphor. The instructions for this part read:
What should officials emphasize to improve school
performance? Pick the item that you think is most
consistent with the factory expression, then drag and
drop that item into the ‘Factory’ box. Do the same with
the proposal that is most consistent with the garden
expression and drag and drop it into the ‘Garden’ box.

Using LSA to Measure Lexical Association We used LSA
to measure the lexical association between the metaphor
frames and response options. We did this three ways,
computing the relationship between:

We designed four policy responses for each issue. For
example, the following four options were adapted from
current real-world policy proposals for education:
1. Increase extracurricular opportunities like music and
athletics
2. Increase the diversity of the student-body
3. Adopt a common curriculum
4. Conduct more rigorous teacher assessments

The three methods for quantifying semantic association
were significantly correlated with each other (r[78] = .740,
between methods 1 and 2; r[78] = .423, between methods 1
and 3; r[78] = .779, between methods 2 and 3; all ps <
.001). Here, we report analyses using the first method
because it maximized the variability of the scores between
metaphor conditions. The results were similar when we used
methods 2 and 3.

Participants in the comparison task were presented with a
subset of two of the four possible response options. This
created six versions of each stimulus item. Each participant
read one version per domain (i.e. everyone read and
responded to 10 issues).
Experiment 2: The Metaphor Framing Task The
metaphor framing task (Experiment 2) was a betweensubjects test of the persuasive capacity of the metaphors.
Participants in this experiment read issues with metaphor
frames embedded in the text. The metaphor was not
highlighted in Experiment 2, nor were participants
instructed to choose responses that they thought were
consistent with the metaphors they were given. For instance,
the education story read:
Schools are {factories/gardens}, attempting to
{mold/nurture} young minds. Norwalk is a city with an
education problem. Historically, the schools have been
excellent. Unfortunately, in recent years, there have
been cuts to the budget, which have forced the city to

1. The metaphoric words and policy descriptions.
2. The sentence that contained the metaphor(s) and policy
descriptions.
3. The entire metaphorically framed report and policy
descriptions.

Results
The results of Experiment 1 revealed substantial variability
in the degree to which policy interventions were associated
with metaphors. On average, there was a 39.803 percentage
point difference in the associations between metaphors and
policies (sd = 21.895; range: 4.4 to 81.6). In some cases,
there was overwhelming agreement in how the responses
should be paired with the metaphors. For instance, almost
all participants (84.6%) thought that “adopting a common
curriculum” was a better fit to a factory metaphor for the
educational system and that “increasing extracurricular
opportunities for students” was a better fit to a garden
metaphor; only 15.4% of participants thought that “adopting

2370

Intervention 1:

Intervention 2:

Comparison Task
Garden
Factory

Garden

Framing Task
Factory

Diff
Extracurricular
Common
.846
.154
.692
.593
.490
.103
opportunities
curriculum
Extracurricular
Student diversity
.620
.380
.24
.871
.879
-.008
opportunities
Table 1. The proportions of participants who chose Intervention 1 (“Increase extracurricular opportunities like
music and athletics”) over Intervention 2 in the Comparison Task (Experiment 1) and the Framing Task
(Experiment 2). Correlations were run on the difference scores from the two experiments.
participants thought the schools should “increase
extracurricular opportunities for students.” In this case
changing the metaphor for the educational system from
factory to garden led to a shift in .8 points (less than 1%) in
participants’ preference.
We used the difference scores from the two experiments
to compute a correlation between patterns of behavior on the
two tasks. For instance, people were 69.2 percentage points
more likely to think that “increasing extracurricular
opportunities” (compared to “adopting a common
curriculum”) was a better fit to the garden than factory
metaphor in the comparison task; a separate group of people
were 10.3 percentage points more likely to endorse this
policy response for an underperforming school that was
framed as a garden compared to when the underperforming
school was framed as a factory (see the “Diff” columns of
Table 1).
Consistent with our hypothesis, the results of the two
experiments were significantly correlated, r[58] = .290, p =
.025. That is, the metaphor frames showed a larger effect on
policy preferences in Experiment 2 when they were judged
as better fits to a given metaphor in Experiment 1 (see
Figure 1).
0.4

0.2

Framing

a common curriculum” was better fit to the garden
metaphor and that “increasing extracurricular opportunities”
was a better fit to the factory metaphor1 (a difference of 69.2
percentage points; 84.6 – 15.4).
In other cases, there was less agreement as to how the
response options paired with the metaphors. For instance, a
small majority of participants (62.0%) thought that
“increasing the diversity of the student body” was a better
fit to a factory metaphor and that “increasing extracurricular
opportunities” for students was a better fit to a garden
metaphor for the educational system (a difference of 24.0
percentage points; 62.0 – 38.0) (see Table 1).
Similarly, the results of Experiment 2 revealed substantial
variability in the degree to which the metaphors influenced
people’s policy preferences. On average, changing the
metaphor frame led to a 7.112 (sd = 6.223) percentage point
shift in policy preference (range: 0.1 to 34.1). For instance,
those who read that the educational system was a factory
were almost equally likely to think that schools should
“increase extracurricular opportunities for students” (49.0%)
as to think that schools should “adopt a common
curriculum”. However, people who read that the educational
system was a garden were more likely to think that schools
should “increase extracurricular opportunities for students”
(59.3%) over “adopting a common curriculum”. In this case,
changing the metaphorical frame for the educational system
from factory to garden led to a shift in 10.3 points (or 21%)
in participants’ preference for these two policies (see Table
1).
However, changing the metaphor for the school system
did not seem to affect whether people preferred “increasing
the diversity of the student body” compared to “increasing
extracurricular opportunities for students”. When the
educational system was framed as a factory, 87.9% of
participants thought the schools should “increase
extracurricular opportunities for students”; when the
educational system was framed as a garden, 87.1% of

Diff

0.0

-0.2
-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Comparison
1

Because there are two metaphors and two response options in this
task, the percentage of responses that matched the first intervention
to the first metaphor is equal to the percentage of responses that
matched the second intervention to the second metaphor (i.e. in
this case, 84.6% of people matched “common curriculum” to
factory and matched “extracurricular opportunities” to garden; in
contrast, 15.4% of people matched “extracurricular opportunities”
to factory and “common curriculum” to garden).

Figure 1. Scatterplot of the relationship between difference
scores from the Comparison and Framing Tasks
(Experiment 1 and Experiment 2).
For some issues, the correlation between the results of the
two experiments was particularly strong. For instance,
descriptions of a relatively mundane story about pool

2371

players showed a remarkably high correlation across
experiments, r[4] = .651, p = .161. In contrast, the
relationship between the results of the two experiments was
virtually zero for the stories relating to the educational
system, r[4] = .018, p = .974.
One explanation for this variability is that people were
more persuaded by the metaphors for relatively mundane
issues (e.g., pool: in which a billiards player was compared
to a sniper or detective; science: in which conducting
research was compared to climbing a mountain or solving a
puzzle) and less persuaded by the metaphors for relatively
important real world issues (e.g., education, crime, cheating:
in which an administrator was compared to a boxer fighting
for or a goalkeeper defending the integrity of tests like the
SAT).
Another possibility is that some of the metaphors may
have been more apt (Jones & Estes, 2006) or conventional
(Bowdle & Gentner, 2005) than others (or more clearly
related to the policy responses), leading people to be better
able to access the conceptual entailments of the frames.

Issue

Comparison

LSA

Cheating

0.084

-0.426

Clinic

-0.206

0.205

Crime

0.235

0.066

Education

0.018

-0.798

Income inequality

0.563

-0.843

Nature

0.494

-0.736

Real estate

0.517

-0.780

Politics

0.701

-0.131

Pool

0.651

0.694

Science
0.459
0.057
Table 2. The first column shows correlations between the
data from the comparison and metaphor framing tasks by
issue; the second column shows correlations between the
measure of semantic association from LSA and behavior on
the metaphor framing task by issue.
Although the correlations are positive for nine of the 10
issues, we did find a negative correlation between data from
the two tasks for one issue: a description of a health clinic.
We think this may be because the words used to represent
the metaphors for that issue in Experiment 1 may have
misled participants. In that case, the clinic was described as
a manufacturing plant or ecosystem that had a breakdown in
the assembly line or network. We used the words assembly
line and network rather than manufacturing plant and
ecosystem to reference the two metaphors in the comparison
task (i.e. “Pick the item that you think is most consistent
with the assembly line / network”). For each of the other
issues we used the first word or phrase that instantiated the
metaphors, which, in this case would have been
manufacturing plant and ecosystem. In addition to being the

first words that instantiate the two metaphors, these words
seem to better reflect the underlying conceptual metaphors
that were instantiated for this issue (e.g., the word network
seems like it could reference a manufacturing plant or an
ecosystem). When data from this item are excluded, the
correlation between data from the two tasks increases to
r[52] = .468, p < .001.

Lexical Association
We also used a measure of semantic association from LSA
to predict behavior on the metaphor framing task. This
allowed us to test the possibility that the metaphors
influence patterns of behavior on Experiment 2 because of
low-level lexical associations between the frames and
policies. For instance, the word factory may be more
semantically related to “common curriculum” and the word
garden may be more semantically related to “extracurricular
actives.” If this were the case, then the persuasive capacity
of the metaphors may be grounded in a spreading activation
mechanism (e.g., McGlone, 2011) rather than the deeper
conceptual entailments of the metaphors.
We tested this possibility by computing the difference in
semantic associations between the metaphor frames and
each pair of policy responses. For instance, the factory
metaphor for education was .28 LSA units more associated
with “adopting common curriculums” (.52) than “increasing
extracurricular opportunities” (.24). In contrast, the garden
metaphor for education was .32 LSA units more associated
with “adopting a common curriculum” (.61) than
“increasing extracurricular opportunities” (.29). Then we
computed the difference between the degree to which the
metaphor frames were associated with the policies. In this
case the LSA scores predicted that people would be more
likely to select “adopting a common curriculum” (over
“increasing educational opportunities”) after reading the
garden metaphor by .04 LSA units (.32 - .28). Across the
full range of stimuli, this measure ranged from 0 to .18 (M =
.041, sd = .038).
We found that there was no relationship between this
measure of semantic association and behavior on the
metaphor framing task, r[58] = .076, p = .562 (see Table 2
for correlations between this measure and behavior on the
metaphor framing task by issue).
When both measures – data from the comparison task and
scores from LSA – were included as predictors in a linear
regression model to predict behavior on the metaphor
framing task, we only saw an effect of data from the
comparison task. Patterns of behavior from the comparison
task were predictive of patterns of behavior on the framing
task, β = .333, SE = .131, p = .014. Scores from LSA were
not predictive of patterns of behavior on the framing task, β
= .155, SE = .132, p = .247. There was no interaction
between these measures, β = .071, SE = .134, p = .599.
In other words, variability on the metaphor framing task
was positively predicted by judgments from the explicit
comparison task while the measure of semantic association
was not predictive of behavior on the metaphor framing

2372

task. This suggests that the conceptual entailments of
metaphors, and not their low-level linguistic associations,
influence the way people think about the target issues.

General Discussion
To study how metaphors influence thought, we ran two
experiments: an explicit comparison task and a metaphor
framing experiment. We also collected data on the lexical
association between metaphors and policy interventions.
We found that the degree to which the metaphors were
viewed as supporting a particular policy response (in
contrast to another), predicted the extent to which they were
persuasive in the metaphor framing task. This relationship
was particularly strong for more mundane issues, although
future work will aim to measure other important variables
that may also play a role (e.g., the aptness and
conventionality of the metaphors).
We found that a measure of lexical association was not
related to the persuasive capacity of the metaphors.
Together, these findings suggest a relationship between
explicit analogical comparison and relatively implicit
metaphor processing (Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Kurtz &
Gentner, 2013). Reading conventional metaphors in natural
language seems to evoke the conceptual entailments of the
frames and influence the way that people build
representations of the target domain, although people may
not be aware of this process (Thibodeau & Boroditsky,
2011, 2013).
Along with the theoretical implications of the work, the
method that we have presented offers a practical technique
for making principled predictions about the persuasive
influence of metaphor frames. Importantly, gathering
intuitions from the sample population about the entailments
of metaphors in a comparison task avoids idiosyncratic
biases that may be associated with any individual
conducting a linguistic analysis. It also provides a means of
quantifying the degree to which a metaphor frame lends
support for a target issue. Larger differences between the
metaphors on the explicit comparison task suggest more
persuasive metaphor frames.
This work also represents an important step toward
building a broader and more representative stimulus base for
work on metaphor and inference.

References
Boroditsky, L., Fuhrman, O., & McCormick, K. (2010). Do
English and Mandarin speakers think differently about
time? Cognition. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2010.09.010
Bowdle, B. F., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of
metaphor. Psychological review, 112(1), 193.
Clark, H.H. (1973). “Space, time, semantics, and the child,”
in Cognitive Development and the Acquisition of
Language, ed. T. E. Moore (New York, NY: Academic
Press), 27–63.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155-170.

Hauser, D. J., & Schwarz, N. (2014). The War on
Prevention Bellicose Cancer Metaphors Hurt (Some)
Prevention Intentions. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 0146167214557006.
Keysar, B., & Bly, B. (1995). Intuitions of the transparency
of idioms: can one keep a secret by spilling the beans?.
Journal of Memory and Language, 34(1), 89-109.
Keysar, B., Shen, Y., Glucksberg, S., & Horton, W. S.
(2000). Conventional language: How metaphorical is it?.
Journal of Memory and Language, 43(4), 576-593.
Kurtz, K. J., & Gentner, D. (2013). Detecting anomalous
features in complex stimuli: The role of structured
comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 19(3), 219.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphor we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Landau, M. J., Sullivan, D., & Greenberg, J. (2009).
Evidence that self-relevant motives and metaphoric
framing interact to influence political and social attitudes.
Psychological Science, 20(11), 1421-1427.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). An
introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse
processes, 25(2-3), 259-284.
McGlone, M. S. (2011). Hyperbole, Homunculi, and
Hindsight Bias: An Alternative Evaluation of Conceptual
Metaphor Theory. Discourse Processes, 48(8), 563-574.
Murphy, G. L. (1996). On metaphoric representation.
Cognition, 60(2), 173-204.
Nisbett, R.E., & Wilson, T.D. (1977). Telling more than we
can know: Verbal reports on mental processes.
Psychological Review, 84(3), 231-259.
Ottati, V., Rhoads, S., & Graesser, A. C. (1999). The effect
of metaphor on processing style in a persuasion task: A
motivational resonance model. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 77(4), 688.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration
likelihood model of persuasion. Advances in experimental
social psychology, 19, 123-205.
Thibodeau, P., & Durgin, F. H. (2008). Productive
figurative communication: Conventional metaphors
facilitate the comprehension of related novel metaphors.
Journal of Memory and Language, 58(2), 521-540.
Thibodeau, P.H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we
think with: The role of metaphor in reasoning. PLoS
ONE, 6(2): e16782.
Thibodeau, P.H., & Boroditsky, L. (2013). Natural language
metaphors covertly influence reasoning. PLoS ONE, 8(1):
e52961.
Traugott, E. C. (1978). In J. H. Greenberg, On the
expression of spatiotemporal relations in language, Word
structure, Universals of human language, vol. 3. (pp. 369400). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

2373

