Conflict Sensitivity and the Conjunction Fallacy: Eye-tracking Evidence for
Logical Intuitions in Conjunction Probability Judgments
Jenny Faure-Bloom, Gaëlle Vallée-Tourangeau, and Sabira Mannan
Department of Psychology, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
j.faure/g.vallee-tourangeau/s.mannan@kingston.ac.uk

Abstract
necessary to intervene, correct or support heuristic
reasoning (Glöckner & Witteman, 2010). Erroneous
judgments are assumed to result from the failure to detect
the conflict between heuristic and logical considerations;
hence heuristic responses are readily endorsed without
scrutiny from the deliberative system (Kahneman, 2011).
Parallel-competitive models argue that people are able to
detect the conflict, but fail to inhibit the enticing heuristic
response and are unable to replace it with a more
deliberate logical response (Reyna & Brainerd, 2008).
Both of these models assume that logical answers emerge
from slow, deliberative, and rule-based processes whereas
heuristic answers arise from faster, intuitive, and
associative processes. It is assumed that the “fast
thinkers” who rely on heuristic thinking by default, are
also prone to making biased judgments and committing
fallacies (Kahneman, 2011); however, few studies have
empirically put this claim to the test. For example, in the
original conjunction fallacy task (the Linda task, see next
section), it is not possible to assess whether people’s
judgments are solely informed by heuristic considerations
or whether they are also sensitive to logic considerations
even if their final answer is congruent with a heuristic
assessment.

Recent evidence shows that, contrary to what is commonly
assumed, people who are pressured to think fast are also less
likely to provide a heuristic judgment when heuristic and
logical considerations point to conflicting answers in a
conjunction fallacy task (Vallée-Tourangeau & FaureBloom, under review). The present study explores this
finding using an eye-tracking methodology. Eye movements
from 41 participants were recorded while they read a
thumbnail description and made a judgment on a statement
comparing the probability of a single-event and that of a
conjunctive event. Results showed participants focused more
on the comparative probability statement under logicoheuristic conflict while they focused more the task
description in the absence of conflict. Additionally, longer
judgment latencies predicted higher rates of heuristic
responding, which contradicts the original dual-process
assumption that heuristic thinking in conjunction fallacy
tasks is fast.
Keywords: Conjunction fallacy, heuristics and biases,
intuition, dual-processes, eye-tracking.

Introduction
People typically use heuristic thinking to make many of
their day-to-day judgments and decisions. For example,
judging the quality of a good based on its price, or
judging a job candidate based on her level of
assertiveness. In fact, most of the “educated guesses” we
make are founded on heuristics. It would be very
impractical to write exhaustive lists or use decision trees
every time we needed to make a judgment. Heuristic
thinking is often assumed to involve fast decision
strategies that save time and effort (Kahneman, 2011). It
is considered to be an efficient and reliable process in
most instances (i.e., when the heuristic response is
congruent with logical principles). However, when
heuristic responses conflict with laws of logic and
probability, heuristic thought has been known to lead to
erroneous, so-called “biased” judgments.
A current debate in the literature asks the question: are
people aware when their heuristic response conflicts with
logical considerations? Default-interventionist models
assume that heuristic processes are always activated first
and that deliberate processes are activated only if

The Conjunction Fallacy
The conjunction rule of probability states that a
conjunction cannot be more probable than one of its
constituents. This is logically sound because conjunctions
have an extensional nature, which means that the
probabilities associated with the conjunction of events
A&B are included in the probabilities associated with the
event B. In other words, the likelihood of two events
occurring simultaneously is always less than either one
occurring alone. The representativeness heuristic is
defined as a cognitive tool that uses past knowledge (e.g.,
stereotypes) to estimate probabilities and representativeness is an evaluation of the degree to which something
corresponds to a stereotype or prototype (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1983). Although this heuristic is fast, and at
times efficient, it can lead to erroneous judgments, also
known as conjunction fallacies. This was first showcased
in the Linda task (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983), where

668

students were provided with a description of Linda
designed to be highly representative of an active feminist.
They then had to rank the likelihood of her being a) a
feminist (F), b) a bank teller (B), and c) both a feminist
and a bank teller (F&B). Over 80% of the participants
ranked the conjunction as more likely than the
unrepresentative constituent (i.e., F&B > B). This is an
error of judgment because the probability of the
conjunction (F&B) can never be more than the probability
of its constituents (either F or B); at best, they can equal
one another.
Fast Logical Intuitions. Heuristic thinking has
traditionally been assimilated with (i) intuitive processes
and (ii) biased judgements: people provide erroneous
judgements because their intuition fails to detect the
conflict between logic and heuristic considerations which
is only available to deeper, more effortful, more
deliberative cognitive processing (e.g., see Kahneman,
2011). By contrast, a recent alternative theoretical
position calls for distinguishing heuristic-biased thinking
from intuitive processes. Namely, heuristic thinking may
lead to biased judgements but the empirical evidence
suggests that intuitive processes are not necessarily
biased; people can be fast and logical and they can
intuitively and implicitly detect the conflict between
logical and heuristic considerations (e.g., De Neys, 2012;
Villejoubert, 2009, 2011).
Thus, using a novel approach designed to disentangle
logical and heuristic considerations, Vallée-Tourangeau
and Faure-Bloom (under review) recently showed that
people who were put under severe time pressure to
provide a judgement about a conjunctive probability
statement were almost six times more likely to provide a
logical answer. This finding suggests that fast intuitive
answers are not necessarily biased while heuristic and
biased answers are not necessarily fast. Still, when logical
and heuristic considerations were in conflict but
participants were not pressured to make fast judgements,
those who provided logical answers also took longer to
respond. What is not clear is whether those longer
response latencies were cued by heuristic considerations
or logical considerations. Previous gaze and eye-tracking
studies showed that longer latencies are associated with
longer inspection of normatively critical problem
information in syllogism tasks (Ball, Philips, Wade &
Quayle, 2006) and in base-rate neglect tasks (De Neys &
Glumicic, 2008) but the source of conflict in conjunction
fallacy tasks remains to be identified.

superficial levels of processing have shorter fixation
latencies, while deeper processing and a deliberate
consideration of information is related with longer
fixations (Glöckner & Herbold, 2011). Furthermore, eye
tracking permits the detection of conflict in processing as
eye movements are known to be disrupted when readers’
general knowledge conflicts with the text they are given
to read (e.g., Duffy & Keir, 2004).
The aim of this experiment was to shed light on the
processes involved in judging conjunctive probabilities,
focussing in particular on the question of conflict
detection between heuristic and logical considerations. It
was hypothesized that eye movements would differ under
conflict and non-conflict judgment settings. Specifically,
it was expected that people would have longer total dwell
times, and would spend longer re-fixating and the
stereotypical description in non-conflict trials as a mean
to confirm their initial judgment. By contrast, it was
expected people would spend longer re-fixating the
statement in conflict trials compared to non-conflict trials,
as this statement conflicted with the mental model they
had built after reading the description. In this task, the
statement is the normatively critical problem. The
statement controls the logicality, or illogicality, of the
trial.

The Present Experiment

Materials

Method
Participants
Forty-three psychology students from Kingston University
were recruited for this experiment Two students were
familiar with the task and therefore were removed from
subsequent analyses. Of the remaining 41 participants (6
men and 35 women; mean age = 27.9 years, SD = 3.48),
29% were postgraduates and 71% were undergraduates.
All the participants had background knowledge of
psychology. The majority of the participants were enrolled
in psychology courses (66%); however, some had dual
majors which included criminology (7%), business (7%),
human biology (5%), sociology (5%), journalism (2%),
human rights (2%), English (2%), and creative writing
(2%). The experiment was conducted in English; 61% of
the participants were native English speakers. Participation
was voluntary and anonymous, and the study took 45
minutes on average to complete. Participants were either
paid £6 or received course credits for their time and
participation.

Materials were adapted from those used in ValléeTourangeau and Faure-Bloom (under review). Participants
were presented with 16 trials of a “Comparative
Conjunction Probability Judgment” (CCPJ) task.
Sixteen
Comparative
Conjunction
Probability
Judgment (CCPJ) tasks were programmed in Matlab and

The experiment reported here used a more fined-grained
measure of conflict processing than response latencies,
namely eye movements. Eye-tracking methodology has
been proposed as the method of choice for tracing
intuitive and deliberative processes (Glöckner & Herbold,
2011). Recent research suggests that automatic,

669

presented to each participant on a 21-inch CRT display
screen. Participants’ eye movements were recorded using a
head mounted video-based Eyelink II eye tracker with a
spatial resolution of 0.5 degrees and temporal resolution of
2ms while they assessed the validity of the statements
presented.
Each CCPJ trial consisted of a thumbnail description
and a statement sentence. The descriptions were short
paragraphs that outlined the personality traits, hobbies and
vocations of fictitious people. These portraits were
intended to be congruent with a stereotype (e.g., Linda was
presented as single, outspoken young woman who studied
philosophy at university and who is deeply concerned with
issues of discrimination and social justice to evoke the
stereotype of feminists). Each description was followed by
a unique statement; one sentence that contained both a
single clause and a conjunction clause. Statements always
featured a category that corresponded to the stereotype
suggested by the thumbnail description (e.g., feminist in
the Linda task) and an atypical category chosen to be at
odds with the stereotype (e.g., bank cashier; the word
“teller” was replaced with “cashier” as this is the term
commonly used in the UK).
Representativeness was determined by the short
description presented before the statement. Each of the 16
descriptions created were piloted to ensure that the person
presented appeared both as a highly representative member
of a stereotypical category and a highly unrepresentative
member of an atypical category, without openly
mentioning that this individual belonged to either category.
Representative statements presented the stereotypical
category as more likely than the atypical category and
logical statements presented the single clause as more
likely than the conjunction clause. Two main types of
statements were used: conflict statements and no conflict
statements (see Table 1 presenting all statements with the
Linda task for illustration purposes; this scenario was only
used once in the actual trials). Conflict was created by
presenting statements where the conjunction of the
stereotypical category and the atypical category was said to
be more likely than the atypical category (a representative
but illogical statement) or by presenting the atypical
category as more likely than the conjunction of the atypical
and the stereotypical categories (a logical but
unrepresentative statement). Conversely, conflict was
absent in statements where the stereotypical category was
said to be more likely than the conjunction of the
stereotypical and atypical categories (a representative and
logical statement) or in statements where the conjunction
of the atypical category and the stereotypical one was said
to be more likely than the stereotypical one (an
unrepresentative and illogical statement).

670

Conflict statements
Lynn is more likely to be a bank cashier and an active feminist than she is
to be a bank cashier.
Lynn is more likely to be a bank cashier than she is to be a bank cashier
U/L
and an active feminist.
No conflict statements
Lynn is more likely to be an active feminist than she is to be a bank
R&L
cashier and an active feminist.
Lynn is more likely to be a bank cashier and an active feminist than she is
U&I
to be an active feminist.
R/I

Table 1: Illustration of the four types of statements used to study
the conjunction fallacy in CCPJ tasks.
Note. R/I: Representative but Illogical; U/L: Unrepresentative but
Logical; R&L: Representative and Logical; U&I: Unrepresentative and
Illogical.

On each trial, participants were required to either
accept the statement as correct, or reject it as incorrect.
Participants’ answers were heuristic if they accepted
representative statements as correct and rejected
unrepresentative statements as incorrect. Conversely,
answers were logical if they accepted logical statements as
correct and rejected illogical statements as incorrect. The
CCPJ tasks thus affords a new insight into the cognitive
underpinnings of people’s probability judgments under
conflict as the answer given could suggest what type of
process was employed to produce the final judgment (i.e.,
either a heuristic or logical one).
To ensure the quality of the eye-tracking data, we
conducted manipulation checks on the CCPJ tasks. The
number of words was counted for each thumbnail
description and for each statement sentence, and an
average word count was computed for each description and
statement type (i.e., one value for each of: R&L, R/I, U/L,
U&I). The mean number of words for the descriptions and
statements were each subjected to a repeated-measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with four levels (statement
type). Results confirmed there was no significant
difference in word count between the 4 types of
description vignettes (MR&L = 37.50, SDR&L = 8.23, MR/I =
34.75, SDR/I = 5.32, MU/L = 38.75, SDU/L = 5.62, MU&I =
39.50, SDU&I = 2.38), F < 1; and no significant difference
for the 16 statements (MR&L = 18.75, SDR&L = .96, MR/I =
19.50, SDR/I = 1.29, MU/L = 19.00, SDU/L = .82, MU&I =
19.00, SDU&I = 1.41), F < 1. Thus, any differences found
in reading latencies or eye-movements could be assumed
to result from our experimental manipulations and not
from lack of experimental control in our design.

Design and Procedure
The experiment took place in a psychology laboratory on
the Kingston University campus. Upon giving their

informed consent, all participants completed the 16 CCPJ
trials.
CCPJ Task. Participants were sat in front of a 21-inch
CRT display screen while the experimenter set up the
Eyelink II. The eye-tracker was placed and secured on the
head of the participants, and the video cameras were
positioned to get a clear and accurate reading of the pupils.
The experimenter then performed the calibration and
instructed the participants to keep their head as still as
possible for the remainder of the task. The first slide of the
CCPJ task presented the instructions to the participants:
“In this experiment, you will be presented with a series of
scenarios describing a person followed by a statement.
Your task is to read these descriptions and then indicate if
you think the accompanying statement is true or false”. At
this point the experimenter explained that if they wanted to
answer true, and accept the statement, they must click on
the left mouse button, and if their answer was false, and
they wanted to reject the statement, they must click on the
right mouse button. “YES” was positioned on the bottom
left of the screen and coincided with the left mouse button,
while “NO” was situated bottom right and coincided with
the right mouse button. The next screen explained to the
participants that they would be given three example trials
before beginning the experiment. This allowed them to
become familiar with the task and understand what was
expected of them before beginning the experimental
problems. They were prompted to take as much time as
they needed to read the descriptions, and to consider the
information carefully before reaching a decision. After
completing three examples, they completed the 16 CCPJ
problems in a random order while their responses and time
latencies were recorded for each CCPJ problem as well as
eye movements in two areas of interest (AoI). The first
AoI was the description vignette, and the second was the
statement sentence (see Fig. 1 for an example of a CCPJ
trial with the AoI definitions). More specifically, eye
movements were measured through number of refixations
and the total dwell time for each AoI.
C-Span Task. Each participant also completed a
computation span measure adapted from Salthouse and
Babcock (1991) designed to measure working memory
span. The task involved solving simple arithmetic
problems whilst remembering the second digit of each
equation for a recall test after each series of problems.
Participants viewed the task stimuli on a computer monitor
and recalled their answers verbally whilst the experimenter
recorded and scored the participants’ answers, both for the
arithmetic problems and the recall test, on an answer sheet.
The arithmetic problems were presented as a video in
Windows Media Player.

671

THE COMPARATIVE LYNN TASK
Lynn is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very
bright. She majored in philosophy. As a student,
she was deeply concerned with issues of discriminiation and social justice, and also participated in
anti-nucelar demonstrations.
Do you think the following statement is correct?
Lynn is more likely to be a bank cashier and an
active feminist than she is to be a bank cashier.
Areas of Interest (AoI):

Description

Statement

Figure 1: Design and layout of a Comparative Conjunction
Probability Judgment problem.

Results
Behavioural Data
To examine patterns of heuristic responding, a heuristic
score was computed for each statement type by
calculating the proportion of time participants either
accepted statements that were congruent with heuristic
considerations (R&L and R/I statements) or rejected
statements that were incongruent with such considerations
(U/L and U&I statements). The heuristic score ranged
from 0 (never followed the heuristic consideration) to 1
(always followed the heuristic consideration). As
anticipated by the logical intuitionist account, statements
for which heuristic considerations conflicted with logical
ones led to lower rates of heuristic responding than nonconflict statements, Mconflict = .83, SD = .22 vs. Mno_conflict =
.87, SD = .16. This difference, however, failed to reach a
statistically significant threshold, t(40) = -1.04, p = .15,
one-tailed. Thus, it was not possible to conclude that
participants were sensitive to the conflict between
heuristic and logical considerations on the sole basis of
the behavioural data.

Eye Tracking Data
Eye movement patterns were examined to assess whether
participants were sensitive to the conflict between heuristic
considerations (i.e., representativeness) and logical
considerations. The number of refixations (i.e., number of
times participants revisited an AoI with at least one
fixation outside the AoI) and the total dwell times (i.e.,
total amount of fixation time within an AoI) were
examined across both of the conflict conditions (no
conflict vs. conflict) and the two AoIs (description vs.
statement).
Refixations. Participants redirected their eyes more
often towards the description in the absence of conflict,
Mno_conflict = 3.74, SD = 1.46, Mconflict = 3.41, SD = 1.27.
However, in conflict trials, participants refixated more
often on the statement, Mno_conflict = 3.20, SD = 1.52, Mconflict

Statement

4
Mean frequency

12

3
2
1
0
No Conflict

Conflict

Description

Heuristic bias

Statement

Working memory
1.00

1.00

10

Heuristic Index

Description

Mean dwell time (s)

5

Total dwell times

8
6
4

Heuristic Index

Refixations

.75

.50

.75

.50
Conflict

Conflict

2

.25

.25
0

0
No Conflict

Conflict

5

10

15

20

25

0

Mean Latency (s)

25
Working Memory

50

Figure 2: Mean number of refixations as a function of AoI (description vs. statement) and conflict (absent vs. present; left
panel); mean dwell times as a function of AoI and conflict (middle left panel); rate of heuristic responding as a function
of judgment latency (seconds; middle right panel); rate of heuristic responding as a function of working memory (C-Span
score; right panel).
= 4.15, SD = 2.00. A 2 (description vs. statement) x 2
(conflict vs. no conflict) ANOVA confirmed significant
differences between the number of refixations as a function
of the conflict conditions, F(1,40) = 5.54, p < .05, ηp2 =
.12. It also revealed a significant interaction between the
AoIs and the conflict conditions, F(1,40) = 32.96, p < .001,
ηp2 = .45 (see Figure 2: Left Panel).
Dwell times. A 2 (description vs. statement) x 2
(conflict vs. no conflict) ANOVA revealed that, on
average, participants spent more time looking at the
descriptions (Mno_conflict = 9.51, SD = 3.26, Mconflict = 8.79,
SD = 2.53) compared to the statements (Mno_conflict = 4.21,
SD = 1.55, Mconflict = 4.71, SD = 1.50, F(1,40) = 209.27, p
< .001, ηp2 = .84), regardless of the conflict condition. This
is not surprising as the descriptions were short paragraphs
containing 3-4 sentences, while the statements were only
one sentence in length. More importantly however, the
analysis revealed a significant interaction between AoIs
and conflict condition for mean dwell times, F(1,40) =
17.01, p < .001, ηp2 = .30 (see Figure 2: Middle Left
Panel).
Altogether, the eye-tracking data revealed that, when
logic conflicted with representativeness (i.e., conflict
statements, see Table 1), participants spent more time
looking at the statements compared to descriptions and
they revisited statements more often. The reverse was true
in the absence of conflict. These differences in eyemovement patterns clearly show that participants were
sensitive to the conflict between representativeness and
logicality even if their final behaviour appeared to be
solely influenced by heuristic considerations.

Judgment Latencies
Next, response latencies were analyzed to empirically test
whether “fast thinkers” who are assumed to rely on
heuristic considerations by default (e.g., Kahneman, 2011),
were also prone to making biased judgments and
committing conjunction fallacies. A heuristic index was
computed for each participant for the conflict trials. This

672

entailed subtracting the unrepresentative answers from the
representative answers (e.g., RI1 + RI2 + RI3 + RI4 – UL1
– UL2 – UL3 – UL4).
A regression analysis showed that longer judgment
latencies predicted higher rates of heuristic responding in
conflict statements, R2 = .52, F(1, 39) = 41.11, p < .001, β
= .72, t(39) = 6.44, p < .001 (see Figure 2: Middle Right
Panel). These findings suggest that people who responded
more logically to the conflict trials also responded
significantly faster; heuristic responding in these trials
were not fast.

Homogeneity of sample
Working memory scores were analysed to ascertain
whether individual measures caused some participants to
perform better (i.e., more logically) than others on the
CCPJ trials.
A regression analysis showed lower working memory
scores did not predict higher heuristic responding, R2 = .00,
F(1, 39) = .01, p = .92, β = .02, t(39) = .11, p = .92. These
findings show that working memory played no role in
participants logicality when making conjunction
judgements (see Figure 2: Right Panel).

Discussion
Our aim with this experiment was to shed light on the
processes involved in generating conjunction probability
judgments. Specifically, we focussed on conflict detection
between heuristic and logical considerations, and we
provided empirical data to test the widely accepted
assumption that heuristic thinking is fast and automatic
while logical thinking is slower and more deliberate.
The evidence presented in this study goes against the
default-interventionist interpretation since participants’ eye
movements suggest they easily detected the conflict
between logical and heuristic considerations. In the
presence of conflict, participants looked for longer
amounts of time at probability statements compared to

descriptions and they revisited statements more often. The
reverse was true in the absence of conflict. Evidence also
goes against the parallel-competitive view. Although this
interpretation allows for conflict detection, it also assumes
that in order to answer logically one must inhibit the
persuasive heuristic answer. The data indicated that faster
judgments were also more logical, which suggests that
logical answers come first and are intuitive, but are
overridden by the compelling heuristic answer when
people take time to deliberate. When this happens, logical
responding requires even more deliberation and effort to be
reinstated. These findings support the notion of logical
intuitions (De Neys, 2012; Villejoubert, 2009, 2011). This
idea posits that people have an implicit knowledge of the
laws of probability, and as a result, logical responses are an
intuitive, effortless process. In other words, logical
considerations can be fast and automatic. The bias,
previously believed to exist in fast automatic
considerations, in fact could exist in slow deliberate
considerations.
The question remains, if people are able to detect
conflict in conjunction probability judgments and they also
have logical intuitions, why then do the majority of people
still commit conjunction fallacies? A possible explanation
for this could be that although people are able to generate
fast logical intuitions about conjunctive probability
judgments, when there is conflict they employ deliberate
thinking and this is when the logical intuitions are
overcome by slow heuristic deliberations. Nonetheless,
despite the convincing evidence for conflict detection
presented in this study, it remains true that the heuristic
answer stayed prevalent even under conflict. Future
research may also consider the factors that might sway
participants towards the logical answer, such as an implicit
learning task or a priming task. Future research may also
consider the implications of these results for recent
proposals attempting to cognitive biases as a consequence
of random noise in otherwise rational judgements (see
Costello, 2009).

Acknowledgements
Support from the Leverhulme Trust (grant RPG-228) is
gratefully acknowledged. We thank Frédéric ValléeTourangeau for comments on earlier drafts of this article
and James Lockwood for his assistance with data
collection on this project.

References
Ball, L. J., Phillips, P., Wade, C. N., & Quayle, J. D.
(2006). Effects of Belief and Logic on Syllogistic
Reasoning. Experimental Psychology, 53, 77–86.
doi:10.1027/1618-3169.53.1.77
Costello, F.J. (2009). How probability theory explains the
conjunction fallacy. Journal of Behavioural Decision
Making, 22, 213-234. doi: 10/1037/a0037010

673

De Neys, W. (2012). Bias and Conflict: A Case for Logical
Intuitions. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7,
28–38. doi:10.1177/1745691611429354
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring
in dual process theories of thinking. Cognition, 106,
1248–1299. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2007.06.002
Duffy, S. A., & Keir, J. A. (2004). Violating stereotypes:
Eye-movements and comprehension processes when
text conflicts with world knowledge. Memory &
Cognition, 32, 551-559.
Evans, J. S. B. T., & Stanovich, K. E. (2013). Dual-Process
Theories of Higher Cognition: Anvancing the debate.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8, 223-241.
Doi: 10.1177/1745691612460685.
Glöckner, A., & Herbold, A. (2011). An eye-tracking study
on information processing in risky decisions: Evidence
for compensatory strategies based on automatic
processes. Journal of Behavioural Decision Making,
24, 71-98.
Glöckner, A., & Witteman, C. (2010). Beyond dualprocess models: A categorisation of processes
underlying intuitive judgment and decision making.
Thinking & Reasoning, 16, 1-25.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. London:
Penguin Books.
Reyna, V.F., & Brainerd, C. J. (2008). Numeracy, ratio
bias, and denominator neglect in judgments of risk and
probability. Learning and Individual Differences,18,
89–107. Doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2007.03.011.
Salthouse, T. A., & Babcock, R. L. (1991). Decomposing
adult age differences in working memory.
Developmental Psychology, 27, 763-776. Doi:
10.1037/0012-1649.27.5.763.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in
probability judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293–
315. Doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.90.4.293.
Vallee-Tourangeau, G., & Faure-Bloom, J. (2014).
Intuitively logical, even under time pressure: rethinking
the role of intuitive and deliberative processes when
making social judgments under uncertainty. Manuscript
under revision.
Villejoubert, G. (2009). Are representativeness judgments
automatic and rapid? The effect of time pressure on the
conjunction fallacy. In N. Taatgen, H. van Rijn, L.
Schomaker and J. Nerbonne (Eds.), Proceedings of the
31th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2980-2985). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Villejoubert, G. (2011). Rethinking the Role of Intuition in
the Conjunction Fallacy. In W. Brun, G. Keren, G.
Kirkebøen, & H. Montgomery (Eds.). Perspectives on
Thinking, Judging, and Decision Making (pp. 109–
119). Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.

