Constructional paradigms affect visual lexical decision latencies in English
Nicholas A. Lester (nlester@umail.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics, South Hall 3432
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Fermín Moscoso del Prado Martín (fmoscoso@linguistics.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics, South Hall 3432
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Abstract
Previous research on morphological processing suggests that
the probability distribution of a word across its inflected
variants influences the recognition of that word. Recently,
similar effects have been reported for relations between
prepositions and definite-noun-phrase heads in English
trigrams (e.g., in the bucket). In the present study, we test
whether both effects could be accounted for in terms of string
proximity and/or semantic similarity alone, or whether the
findings for English trigrams should be attributed to syntactic
paradigm effects. We ‘fake’ a case system for English using
syntactic positions and prepositions as proxies for the
relational meanings expressed inflectionally in other
languages. Based on these syntactic factors, we define a
syntactic inflectional entropy to parallel the morphological
entropy measures used in prior studies. We found that this
new measure correlates negatively with visual lexical decision
RTs. However, unlike prior studies, we did not find a
semantic priming effect between nouns with similar
distributions in our paradigmatic vectors. This finding
suggests that abstract constructional distributions facilitate
lexical access while obscuring semantic relations between
similarly distributed words.
Keywords: inflectional entropy; case systems; morphology;
lexicon.

Introduction
Many recent studies of morphological processing have
investigated how inflectional paradigms influence lexical
recognition. An inflectional paradigm is the structured set
of grammatically licensed word-form variants available to a
given word in a given grammatical domain. Earlier work on
inflectional paradigms and lexical processing focused on the
frequencies of inflected and uninflected variants of words,
either together (stem-frequency) or individually (surfacefrequency). For example, Baayen, Dijkstra, and Schreuder
(1997) showed that visual lexical decision response times
for Dutch singulars (unmarked) and plurals (marked with –
en) were sensitive to different frequencies within the
number paradigm. Expanding on these findings, Kostić,
Marković and Baucal (2003) showed that, beyond the mere
frequencies, the distribution of forms within their
inflectional paradigms was of crucial importance. This point
was further elaborated by Moscoso del Prado Martín,
Kostić, and Baayen (2004) for Serbian. These paradigmatic
effects have also been shown to co-determine the order in
which children acquire words (Stoll et al., 2012).

Looking beyond the inflectional paradigms of individual
lexemes in isolation, Milin, Filipović-Đurđević, and
Moscoso del Prado (2009) introduced the additional notion
of an inflectional class. An inflectional class represents the
‘prototypical’ or average distribution of word forms within
an inflectional paradigm taken across all lexemes that
participate in that paradigm. Milin and colleagues showed
that the more divergent the inflectional paradigm of a word
is from the prototype of the inflectional class, the more
difficult it is for people to recognize that word in visual
lexical decision.
One question that has yet to be resolved concerns the
extent to which these effects are semantic in nature. Kostić
et al. (2003) argued that paradigmatic effects could not be
fully separated from those of the meanings of the particular
affixes, suggesting that semantic and formal properties are
ultimately entangled during lexical processing. Moscoso del
Prado et al. (2004) provided further evidence of the
importance of semantic relations for the representation of
morphological paradigms. In the most extreme case,
Moscoso del Prado Martín (2007) showed that the effects of
a word’s inflectional paradigm could not be distinguished at
all from those attributable to its positioning in semantic
space, as estimated by the variability of contexts in which it
was used.
Relatively little attention has been paid to the presence of
the above effects in languages with much less pervasive
inflectional morphology. However, Baayen, Milin, Filipović
Đurđević, Hendrix, & Marelli (2011) report that the
paradigmatic relations between English prepositions and
their head nouns – defined relative to trigrams of the form
preposition + article + noun – affect word recognition
latencies in ways similar to those reported for
morphologically defined paradigms in inflectionally rich
languages. Specifically, they found that the divergence
between a noun’s distribution across prepositions (its
syntactic paradigm) and the overall distribution of
prepositions in the sample (the class) correlated positively
with visual lexical decision reaction times. Moreover, when
trained on the same data, a connectionist model with no
intermediary representations for paradigms whatsoever
yielded similar results. Baayen and colleagues interpret their
findings as evidence that morphological effects arise from
the direct association of form and meaning.
A possible caveat needs to be mentioned here. The
patterns of usage of the prepositional trigrams do indeed

1320

capture some of the structural mechanisms by which English
encodes information for which other languages would use
inflectional morphology. However, in English, sheer cooccurrence at short distances is not the sole way in which
relations are encoded. More sophisticated structural factors
also encode these relations. Furthermore, it is not clear
whether, by examining only the short-distance relations
between nouns and prepositions, one is not just tapping into
purely semantic factors, which are known to be strongly
reflected at such short distances (cf., Bullinaria & Levy,
2007, 2012). If this were the case, the possibility of
circularity could arise, in that one would in fact be arguing
from semantic effects to semantic effects.
Another question concerns what information must be
stored in order to generate the observed paradigmatic
effects. Traditionally, frequency effects for linguistic units
of a certain complexity (lexical roots, inflected stems, ngrams, etc.) that are not reducible to similar effects at lower
levels of complexity have been taken as evidence for those
units being stored independently in the lexicon. For
example, Arnon & Snider (2010) found a facilitatory effect
of frequency for compositional 4-word n-grams that was not
correlated with frequencies of the constituent uni-, bi- or trigrams. They concluded that we must store frequency
information linked to multi-word units, regardless of
compositionality (but see Baayen, Hendrix, & Ramscar,
2013, for a replication with an alternative explanation of the
findings). This finding meshes well with current usagebased linguistic theories (Goldberg, 2006). However, it also
introduces some potential problems. It does not seem
realistic to argue that the all instances of all multi-word
expressions (at least up to 4 words) are explicitly
represented in memory. Recognizing this, Baayen et al.
(2011) were able to replicate the paradigmatic effects
previously reported for Serbian (cf., Milin et al., 2009) by
making reference solely to the orthographic content of the
strings (that is, without defining class membership a priori
and without representations of paradigms). Therefore,
frequency effects alone cannot be taken as evidence for
explicit exemplar storage.
One feature common to all of the previous studies which
have considered the effects of morphological paradigms on
lexical processing is their reliance on non-discontinuous
strings, either in the form of individual words or fully
specified sequences (i.e., n-grams). However, if English
exhibits anything close to a proper case system, it does so
syntactically, through prepositional phrases and privileged
positions within the clause. Prepositional phrases may
dominate the ‘case-relevant’ head of a noun phrase (NP)
across a theoretically infinite amount of interceding material
of any degree of hierarchical complexity (much more than a
single determiner, as tested in Baayen et al., 2011). Nonprepositional, syntactic ‘cases’ (e.g., nominative case) are
defined in terms of specialized mother-daughter and sibling
relations within the sentence (S) and verb phrase (VP).
Therefore, any satisfactory account of paradigmatic
processing for English must allow for possibly largely

discontinuous and purely positional specification of
functional roles.

Present Study
In the present study, we effectively ‘fake’ a case system for
English on analogy with the semantically informed
paradigms of languages with robust morphological case
systems. More specifically, we substitute prepositions and
some syntactic positions for the inflectional cases of
morphologically rich languages. We expand on the effect
reported for phrasally specified, but sequentially contiguous,
trigrams of Baayen et al. (2011) by allowing discontinuous
dependencies at much greater distances. To do so, we rely
explicitly on the grammatical relation between the
preposition or syntactic position and the head noun. This
provides a closer approximation of the actual distribution of
nouns across functional categories and side-steps the
possible confound of short-scale semantic effects.

Data
We constructed a semi-arbitrary case system for English
loosely based (and expanding) on that of the Balto-Finnic
languages (e.g., Finnish). Twenty-two such cases were
defined on the basis of prepositional meaning, while two
(nominative and accusative) were defined by specific
positions within the phrase-structure tree. In addition, the
genitive case was linked to both the possessive clitic ’s (as
in John’s car) and to the prepositional phrase with of. Some
cases have been linked to multiple prepositions in an
attempt to capture the variation in meaning (‘polysemy’)
found for those cases cross-linguistically (see Kostić et al.,
2003, for evidence that such affixal polysemy is relevant for
lexical recognition). The entire fake case system, including
the associated English prepositions (or syntactic positions)
is presented in Table 1.
We further divided each case into singular and plural to
distinguish local, truly morphological effects from syntactic
‘fake-inflectional’ effects. Including morphological number
is important because if, for example, the nouns in our
sample were biased in their singular or plural realization
(e.g., many singular but few plural instances appearing in
one case but many plurals and few singulars in another for a
single word), any effect of entropy across the cases might be
reducible to the effects of a stem’s inflectional paradigm for
number. Dividing the cells in this way left us with a total of
48 paradigm cells.
All singular and plural common nouns occurring in each
case were extracted from the parsed version of the Open
American National Corpus (Reppen, Ide, & Suderman.,
2005). This corpus contains approximately 14 million words
of written and transcribed-spoken American English which
were automatically parsed using a phrase-structure
grammar. For the prepositionally defined cases, we took

1321

Table 1: A ‘fake’ case system for English
Case
nominative
accusative
adessive
inessive
intrative
subessive
superessive
ablative
allative
sublative
illative
perlative
prosecutive
instrumental
benefactive
distributive
genitive
privative
semblative
adversative
essive
co-temporal
pre-temporal
post-temporal

H୤ ሺ‫ݓ‬ሻ = − ෍

Preposition/Position
NP immediately governed by S node
NP immediately governed by VP node
near, at, beside
inside, in, within
between
under, beneath, below
above, on
from
to
onto
into
through, along
across, over
with, via, by
for
per
’s, of
without
like, as
against, despite
concerning, regarding, about
during, throughout
before
after

any terminal noun immediately dominated by an NP which
was itself dominated – possibly through an (unbroken) chain
of NPs – by a PP whose head was one of the target
prepositions. For the syntactically defined cases, we
followed a similar procedure. We collected all nouns
dominated by an NP (or an unbroken chain thereof) which
were dominated by an S (nominative) or a VP (accusative).
In this manner, we obtained 1,389,619 tokens.
We then converted all words to lowercase and lemmatized
them (i.e., we collapsed singulars and plurals together, so
that cat and cats both counted as an instance of cat). This
process resulted in the identification of 4,613 unique noun
types (i.e., lemmas). This list of lemmas was crossed with
the 48 case/number-inflected categories, forming a vector
whose cells contained the frequency of occurrence of each
lemma in each case. We refer to these as paradigmatic
vectors, which describe the frequency distribution of the
grammatical usages of each lemma. These frequencies
estimate the probability of usage of each noun in each
case/number.
Following Moscoso del Prado, et al. (2004), we computed
the entropy (Shannon, 1948) of the probability distribution
of the cells in the paradigm. Moscoso del Prado and
colleagues refer to this measure as the inflectional entropy
of the paradigm. Inflectional entropy is the minus average
log-probability (i.e., pointwise informativity) of the cells in
the paradigm. In our case, given our 48 paradigm cells, this
‘fake’ inflectional entropy (denoted by Hf) is defined as,

ସ଼
௜ୀଵ

‫݌‬ሺ‫ݓ‬௜ ሻ log ‫݌‬ሺ‫ݓ‬௜ ሻ .

Moscoso del Prado and collaborators showed that this
measure correlates negatively with visual lexical decision
reaction times. This has been further confirmed in other
studies (e.g., Baayen, Feldman & Schreuder, 2007; Baayen
& Moscoso del Prado, 2007).
Notice that the entropy shown above is defined in terms
of probabilities. However, our frequency-based measures
are estimates of the probabilities themselves, not their actual
values. These maximum-likelihood probability estimates are
biased; they are certain to underestimate the true entropy
values (cf., Cover & Thomas, 1991). Crucially, this
underestimate will be directly related to sample size (i.e.,
the lemma frequency). Therefore, using the uncorrected
maximum-likelihood estimates will result in a larger
underestimation for low frequency words than for high
frequency words. This introduces a potential confound
between frequency and inflectional entropy effects (a
confound that was not addressed in any of the previously
published studies using inflectional entropy).
In order to correct the bias of the entropy estimator, we
used the James-Stein Shrinkage Estimator (Hauser and
Strimmer, 2009).1 This estimate is particularly well suited to
correct entropy underestimates in extremely under-sampled
situations, in which the number of possible alternatives (48
in our case) is known a priori. As we suspected, whether or
not this smoothing was used was of crucial importance for
the presence or absence of correlations between frequency
and inflectional entropy: the correlations were rather strong
with the uncorrected estimates, but disappeared after we
applied the smoother.
In order to assess to what extent our fake inflectional
measure added independent predictive value over and above
morphological inflection, we computed the inflectional
entropy in actual morphological terms (i.e., contrasting
singular and plural frequencies, as done for instance by
Baayen et al., 2007). We denote this ‘true’ inflectional
entropy by Hm (for ‘morphological’ entropy). Hm was
computed by the same method as Hf but with only two cells
in the sum (instead of 48).
By pitting this traditional measure against our ‘fake’
inflectional entropy, we can ensure that a significant effect
of the latter is not reducible to number morphology.
Further, to normalize the scales of Hf and Hm, we measured
both of them on a normalized [0,1] scale by taking the logs
to the base of the number of alternatives (i.e., either two or
48). Based on previous studies, we expect that Hm will
correlate negatively with visual lexical decision reaction
times. In addition, if the purely grammatical factors are also
of importance to the noun’s representation, we predict that
Hf should also correlate negatively with the reaction times,
over and above any effects of Hm.
1
This method outperforms Good-Turing based methods (e.g.,
Chao & Shen, 2003) in extreme undersampling situations.

1322

Materials
We obtained reaction times from the visual lexical decision
data provided as part of the British Lexicon Project2 (BLP;
Keuleers, Lacey, Rastle, & Brysbaert, 2012). The BLP
contained response time data for 2,051 nouns for which we
had reliable vectors. Vectors were considered reliable if they
had a lemma frequency of at least 50 occurrences in our
corpus. The resulting dataset consisted of 80,056 trials
across 78 subjects. We added token and lemma frequencies
for each target from the CELEX database (Baayen,
Piepenrock & Gulikers, 1995). The reason to include both
frequency counts (which can induce some collinearity in the
dataset) was that both frequencies have been found to
separately influence reaction times in visual lexical
decision. In addition, both have been treated as evidence for
a layer of representation at the level of inflectional
paradigms (Baayen et al., 1997; Taft, 1979). In order to
minimize the impact of the collinearity between both
frequency counts, we residualized lemma frequency from
surface frequency using a linear model, and used this
residual instead of the lemma frequency measure in the later
models.

Procedure
We fit a structured additive regression (STAR; Umlauf,
Adler, Kneib, Lang & Zeileis, 2012)3 model with the logtransformed reaction times as dependent variable and the
log-transformed token frequency and residualized lemma
frequency from CELEX, along with our normalized
measures of inflectional entropy Hm and Hf as fixed effects,
and lemma and subject as random effects. We considered
the possibility of including non-linear smoothers (i.e.,
penalized splines) for each of the fixed-effect terms. We
used the Deviance Information Criterion (DIC;
Spiegelhalter, Best, Carlin & van der Linde, 2002) to select
the most parsimonious combination of smoothers.
Model selection suggested keeping a non-linear effect of
surface frequency and simple linear effects for both Hf and
Hm. The residualized lemma frequency variable was not
found to provide any significant contribution over and
above the other predictors, and was thus excluded from the
final model. The final model was validated using model
criticism.

Results and Discussion
As one would expect, we found facilitatory effects of
surface frequency. This frequency effect was non-linear
(even in the log scale) in the sense that the strength of the
effect was attenuated for the highest frequency words
(β=.0002, 95% C.I. [.0000, .0007]). The estimated effect is
plotted in the leftmost panel of Figure 1.

Crucially both our main variables of interest, Hm, and Hf,
had significant facilitatory effects on the reaction times (Hm:
β=-.0209, 95% C.I. [-.0349, -.0079]; Hf: β=-.0766, 95% C.I.
[-.1262, -.0261]). The middle and rightmost panels in Fig. 1
plot the estimated effects of both entropy measures. Both
effects are clearly significant over and above each other.
However, notice that the effect of Hf is much stronger than
that of Hm. This is evidenced by the β values for the former
being over three times stronger than for the latter, and by the
much larger differences in estimated RTs (about 20 ms. for
Hf versus some 6 ms. for Hm). It is important to note here
that these differences are not due to different scales: both
entropy measures range from zero to one.
On the one hand, we have replicated previous results for a
negative correlation between inflectional entropy and visual
lexical decision response times (Baayen. Feldman &
Schreuder. 2007; Moscoso del Prado, et al., 2004). On the
other hand, we have extended the results of Baayen et al.
(2011) for English prepositional phrases. The more evenly
distributed a noun is across our English ‘cases.’ regardless
of contiguity of the noun and preposition, the faster it is
recognized. Importantly, this new effect is not only much
stronger than that of morphological inflectional entropy; it is
also clearly separate from it. The truly morphological
inflectional entropy neither subsumes, nor is it subsumed
by, the new effect of the fake paradigm. This indicates that
the nature of the grammatical paradigm effects is to some
degree distinct from the morphological effects. Note that
number was also included in our new syntactic paradigmatic
measure, such that the new measure could have absorbed
the whole predictive power of the traditional inflectional
entropy. As we will see below, it is not clear that both of
these entropy measures are tapping into the same
representational levels.
The effects of inflectional entropy within inflectional
paradigms are typically interpreted as involving semantic
relations. This raises an interesting question: are the
facilitatory effects of Hf yet another consequence of the
semantic content of the target nouns? The fake inflectional
entropy was computed on the basis of the paradigmatic
vectors described above. It is possible that these
distributions themselves reflect aspects of lexical meaning,
as has recently been shown for the equivalent vectors in
inflectionally rich languages (Wdzenczny & Moscoso del
Prado, 2014). To investigate this possibility, we analyzed
whether the degree of semantic priming between pairs of
nouns correlates with how similar their paradigmatic vectors
are. In addition, we also used word co-occurrence similarity
metrics to assess whether our vectors could simply be
considered to capture another type of semantically driven
word co-occurrence.

2

Although we are comparing data from a corpus of American
English with behavioral data from British speakers of English, we
cannot see how the effects we observe could be attributable to
dialectal variation.

1323

Figure 1: Effects of log surface frequency (left panel), Hm (center panel) and Hf (right panel) on RTs in a visual lexical
decision task. Note the different scales of the y-axes, which reflect the different effect sizes of each predictor on RTs.
We collected overt visual lexical decision priming
responses from the Semantic Priming Project (SPP;
Hutchison, et al., 2013), and a measure of semantic
relatedness for pairs of words using Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA; Landauer & Dumais, 1997). We followed
Wdzenczny and Moscoso del Prado (2014) in using the
Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD; Lin, 1991) to assess the
degree of similarity between paradigmatic vectors. The JSD
is a symmetrical extension of the Kullbach-Leibler
Divergence (KLD), useful for summarizing the symmetric
point-wise similarity between probability distributions.
We fit a linear mixed effect model with log-transformed
priming RTs as dependent variable and token frequency,
LSA score, JSD, and stimulus onset asynchrony (200 ms or
1200 ms) as fixed effects. We found no effect of JSD
(F<1). However, we did find the usual facilitatory semantic
priming effect of LSA similarity (F[1, 1986.4] = 69.27, p <
.0001). These analyses do not support the hypothesis that
distances in the paradigmatic space reflect distances in
semantic space. Furthermore, we do not even find any
correlation between distances in paradigmatic (i.e., JSDs)
and semantic (i.e., LSA) measures. This null correlation,
illustrated in Figure 2, further suggests that our paradigmatic
measure is not tapping into the semantics of the nouns.

Conclusions
Using a ‘fake’ syntactic case system for English, we showed
that languages that tend to encode grammatical information
on nouns non-morphologically (i.e., syntactically) may also
develop paradigmatic relations between words, in this case
defined over abstract, possibly discontinuous syntactic
distributions.
Previous studies have shown that
distributional similarities between the inflectional paradigms
of nouns reflect semantic similarities between those nouns
(Wdzenczny & Moscoso del Prado, 2014; replicated here
for English number). However, the grammatical space that
we have defined does not seem to correlate with the
semantic space occupied by English nouns. Crucially, we do
not interpret this finding as evidence for an explicit and
autonomous level of representation for lexico-syntactic

Figure 2: Scatterplot of LSA similarity scores and
Jensen-Shannon Divergence values for prime/ target
pairs in a primed lexical decision task. The regression
line was calculated using a non-parametric smoother.
relations. One reason not to accept such a conclusion is
simply that the majority of our cases were not strictly
syntactic, but also included morphological and lexical
information (the former in terms of number contrasts, the
latter in terms of the specific prepositional heads used to
define cases within the PP frame). Instead, we take these
findings as support for the tracking of constructionally (in
the sense of Goldberg, 2006) mediated dependencies at
quite abstract levels of representation. The distributions of
words within and among directly linked networks of
constructional templates (including partially lexically
specified PP constructions) could generate the orthogonal
entropy effect observed here. But if we have found a
constructional paradigm effect, which therefore entails the
involvement of semantics, why do we not find a lexical
priming effect? The answer may be that abstract
constructions like PP provide for a wide variety of possible
syntactic embeddings – constructional interleavings – both
internally and externally. Each layer of the constructional
assemblage will contribute some meaning to the whole. The
‘semantic noise’ produced by such diversity may interfere

1324

with the formation of stable semantic associations between
lexemes. Work in progress has revealed that increasing the
size of the co-occurrence window (operationalized as the
distance of the head noun from the preposition) decreases –
but does not overturn – the potency of the constructional
paradigmaticity effect. These findings suggest that reducing
the semantic noise within words’ abstract-constructional
distributions sharpens their ‘paradigmatic resolution,’
allowing for stronger semantic associations to develop.

References
Arnon, I. & Snider, N. (2010). More than words: Frequency
effects for multi-word phrases. Journal of Memory and
Language, 62, 67-82.
Baayen, R. H., Dijkstra, T. & Schreuder, R. (1997).
Singulars and plurals in Dutch: Evidence for a parallel
dual route model. Journal of Memory and Language, 37,
94-117.
Baayen, R. H., Feldman, L. B., Schreuder, R., (2006).
Morphological influences on the recognition of
monosyllabic monomorphemic words. Journal of Memory
and Language, 55, 290–313.
Baayen, R. H., Hendrix, P. & Ramscar, M. (2013).
Sidestepping the combinatorial explosion: Towards a
processing model based on discriminative learning.
Language and Speech, 56 , 329-347)
Baayen, R. H., Milin, P., Filipović-Đurđević, D., Hendrix,
P. & Marelli, M. (2011). An amorphous model for
morphological processing in visual comprehension based
on naive discriminative learning. Psychological Review,
118, 438-482.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX lexical database. Philadelphia: Linguistic Data
Consortium.
Bullinaria, J. A. & Levy, J. P. (2007). Extracting Semantic
Representations from Word Co-occurrence Statistics: A
Computational Study. Behavior Research Methods, 39,
510-526.
Bullinaria, J.A. & Levy, J.P. (2012). Extracting Semantic
Representations from Word Co-occurrence Statistics:
Stop-lists, Stemming and SVD. Behavior Research
Methods, 44, 890-907.
Chao, A. & Shen, T-J. (2003). Non-parametric estimation of
Shannon’s index of diversity when there are unseen
species in sample.
Environmental and Ecological
Sciences, 10, 429-443.
Cover, T. M., & Thomas, J. A. (1991). Elements of
Information Theory. New York: Wiley.
Goldberg, A. (2006). Constructions at work: The nature of
generalization in language. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Hausser, J. & Strimmer, K. (2009). Entropy inference and
the James-Stein estimator, with application to nonlinear
gene association networks. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 10, 1469-1484.
Hutchison, K.A., Balota, D.A., Neely, J.H., Cortese, M.J.,
Cohen-Shikora, E.R., Tse, C.-S., Yap, M.J., Bengson, J.J.,

Niemeyer, D., Buchanan, E. (2013). The Semantic
Priming Project. Behavior Research Methods, 45(4),
1099-1114.
Keuleers, E., Lacey, P., Rastle, K., & Brysbaert, M. (2012).
The British Lexicon Project: Lexical decision data for
28,730 monosyllabic and disyllabic English words.
Behavior Research Methods, 44, 287-304.
Kostić, A., Marković, T., & Baucal, A. (2003). Inflectional
morphology and word meaning: Orthogonal or coimplicative domains? In R. H. Baayen & R. Schreuder
(Eds.), Morphological structure in language processing
(pp. 1-44). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Landauer, T. & Dumais, S. (1997), A solution to Plato’s
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104(2), 211–240.
Lund, K. & Burgess, C. (1996), Producing high-dimensional
semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence. Behaviour
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 28(2),
203-208.
Milin, P., Filipović-Đurđević, D. & Moscoso del Prado, F.
(2009). The simultaneous effects of inflectional
paradigms and classes on lexical recognition: Evidence
from Serbian. Journal of Memory and Language, 60, 50–
64.
Moscoso del Prado, F. (2007). Co-occurrence and the effect
of inflectional paradigms. Lingue e Linguaggio, 2, 1-16.
Moscoso del Prado, F., Kostić , A., & Baayen, R. H. (2004).
Putting the bits together: An information theoretical
perspective on morphological processing. Cognition, 94,
1-18.
Reppen, R., Ide, N., & Suderman, K. (2005).
Open
American
National
Corpus.
Retrieved
from
http://americannationalcorpus.org.
Schütze, H. (1992). Dimensions of meaning. Proceedings of
Supercomputing ’92, 787–796.
Spiegelhalter, D. J., Best, N. G., Carlin, B. P. & van der
Linde, A. (2002). Bayesian measures of model
complexity and fit. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, 64(4), 583-639.
Stoll, S., Bickel, B., Lieven, E., Paudyal, N. P., Banjade, G.,
Bhatta, T. N., Gaenszle, M., Pettigrew, J., Rai, I. P., Rai,
M. and Rai, N. K. 2012. Nouns and verbs in Chintang:
Children’s usage and surrounding adult speech. Journal of
Child Language 39, 284–321.
Taft, M. (1979). Recognition of affixed words and the word
frequency effect. Memory & Cognition, 7, 263-272.
Umlauf, N., Adler, D., Kneib, T., Lang, S. & Zeileis, A.
(2012). Structured Additive Regression Models: An R
interface to BayesX. Working Papers in Economics and
Statistics No. 2012-12, University of Innsbruck
Wdzenczny ,D., & Moscoso del Prado, F. (2014).
Inflectional Affordances: The semantic implications of
Alutor and Estonian inflectional paradigms. Presented at
the 16th International Morphology Meeting, Buapest,
Hungary.

1325

