Contingent Labeling after Infants’ Pointing Helps Infants Learn Words
Zhen Wu (zhen-wu@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, the University of Iowa
E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA, 52246 USA

Julie Gros-Louis (julie-gros-louis@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, the University of Iowa
E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA, 52246 USA

Abstract
Previous studies provide suggestive evidence that infants’
pointing gesture is associated with language development, but
cannot verify a causal role of pointing in word learning. The
present study thus experimentally manipulated infants’
production of pointing, and responses to pointing, to
investigate the role of pointing in infants’ performance of
forming novel word-object associations. Sixteen-month-olds
were introduced to pairs of novel objects, and then heard the
labels after they had pointed to an object, or when they were
just looking at it, or at a predetermined time schedule. Results
showed that children learned the labels the best when the
labels were provided contingently after their pointing gesture.
These results suggest that offering information in response to
infants’ pointing gestures may lead to better word learning.
Keywords: pointing gesture; word learning; infants

Introduction
The pointing gesture usually emerges in human infants at
about 12 months of age (e.g., Carpenter, Nagell, &
Tomasello, 1998; Leung & Rheingold, 1981). Observation
studies found correlations between infants’ pointing skill
and subsequent vocabulary growth (Blake, Vitale, Osborne,
& Olshansky, 2005; Brooks & Meltzoff, 2008; Butterworth
& Morissette, 1996; Desrochers, Morissette, & Ricard,
1995; Rowe & Goldin-Meadow, 2009a, b; Rowe,
Özçalışkan, & Goldin-Meadow, 2008), but it is unclear
whether pointing influences children’s language learning in
real time contexts. The present study thus aimed to study the
on-line effect of pointing on word learning.
By 20 months of age, children communicate mainly
through gestures (Iverson, Capirci, & Caselli, 1994).
Gestures also play an important role during the transition
from
prelinguistic
communication
to
linguistic
communication (Gullberg, de Bot, & Volterra, 2008).
Infants’ frequency of gestures at 14 months related to their
vocabulary size measured by the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test at 42 months (Rowe et al., 2008). Notably,
children from high SES families gesture more than children
from low SES families, and these differences in early
gesture predict the disparities in vocabulary that children
bring with them to school at 52 months (Rowe & GoldinMeadow, 2009a). In addition, the age when children
produce supplementary gesture-plus-word combinations, in

which gesture and speech express different semantic
meanings through one single communicative act, predicts
the onset of two-word combinations (Iverson & GoldinMeadow, 2005; Özçalışkan & Goldin-Meadow, 2005).
Rowe and Goldin-Meadow (2009b) further showed that the
number of different meanings conveyed in gesture at 18
months predicted vocabulary size at 42 months, while the
number of supplementary gesture-word combinations at 18
months predicted sentence complexity at 42 months, thus
gesture selectively predicts vocabulary and syntactic skills.
Among gestures, pointing has been attributed a special
role in the development of language (e.g., Liszkowski,
2008; Tomasello, Carpenter, & Liszkowski, 2007). The
conventional pointing gesture, defined as the simultaneous
extension of the arm and index finger towards a target,
usually appears in human development around 12 months of
age (Carpenter et al., 1998; Leung & Rheingold, 1981). In
classic developmental theories, pointing has a special status
with respect to other preverbal forms of communication. For
example, pointing is considered particularly relevant for
language acquisition, whether as a precursor of labeling
(Werner & Kaplan, 1964) or as a symbolic instrument
(Vygotsky, 1986). Clark (1978) further claimed that the
evolution of a naming relation between object and word is
formed on top of the link made through pointing. In a
theoretical framework supporting continuity between nonverbal and verbal communication, pointing is described as
particularly important in the transition to language (e.g.
Bates, Camaioni & Volterra, 1975). This argument is further
elaborated by the social pragmatic theory (Tomasello et al.,
2007), which considers infants’ pointing as a referential
communicative tool that enables children to initiatively
direct adults’ interests and attention to external events and
objects (Liszkowski, 2008; Liszkowski et al., 2004;
Liszkowski et al., 2007). Moreover, other researchers argue
that pointing is a powerful cultural learning tool by which
infants can obtain information from knowledgeable adults
(Southgate, van Maanen, & Csibra, 2007). Infants who
interacted with a knowledgeable experimenter pointed
significantly more to novel objects than infants who
interacted with an ignorant experimenter (Begus &
Southgate, 2012), and they replicated the actions on novel
objects that they pointed to better than those they did not
point to (Begus, Gliga, & Southgate, 2014). In sum,

2679

pointing gestures produced by infants before the onset of
full-fledged speech are hypothesized to be infants’ “royal
road to language” (Butterworth, 2003).
Many studies support the importance of pointing for
language development. For example, children were found to
produce more object-labeling words with pointing than with
other gestures (Masur, 1982), and pointing also elicits more
labeling responses from adults compared to other behaviors,
such as reaching, vocalizing or object extension (Kishimoto
et al., 2007; Masur, 1982; Olson & Masur, 2011; Wu &
Gros-Louis, 2014). Both the onset and the frequency of
pointing have been shown to be positively correlated to
expressive and receptive language (Blake, Vitale, Osborne,
& Olshansky, 2005; Brooks & Meltzoff, 2008; Butterworth
& Morissette, 1996; Desrochers, Morissette, & Ricard,
1995). By contrast, infants’ reach-request and protest
gestures (e.g., pushing things away) at 15 months were
negatively related to language at 3 years (Blake et al., 2005).
These correlational studies are suggestive that pointing is
associated with language development, but cannot verify a
causal role of pointing in word learning. To explore this
question, we need to experimentally manipulate infants’
production of pointing and responses to pointing. A prior
study suggests that experimental manipulation of pointing is
possible and impacts vocabulary: increasing children’s
pointing led to an increase in their overall gesture
production, which correlated to their speech production
during follow-up interactions with their parents (LeBarton,
Goldin-Meadow, & Raudenbush, in press). In this study,
fifteen 17-month-old children received training at home
once a week for 6 weeks. Children were randomly assigned
to one of the three training conditions: (1) in the child and
experimenter gesture (C & EG) condition, the experimenter
pointed to a target picture, labeled it, and asked the child to
point to it (e.g., the experimenter pointed to a dress in a
picture book and said, “look at the dress! Can you do it?
That’s a dress!”); (2) in the experimenter gesture condition,
the experimenter pointed at and labeled the target picture,
but did not ask the child to do so; (3) in the no gesture
condition, the experimenter just labeled the target picture,
but did not point to it or ask the child to point to it. In
addition, children were observed in free-play caregiver-child
interactions at home before each training session and 2
weeks after the training session to assess children’s gesture
production in naturalistic interactions as a function of
training. Results showed that in the C & EG condition in
which children were trained to point, the number of distinct
gesture meanings that they produced (gesturing at different
things, e.g., a point at a dog is assumed to mean dog and is
thus counted as one gesture meaning, while a point to a bird
is counted as another gesture meaning) increased
significantly both during training and in follow-up
interactions with caregivers. Furthermore, gestures
correlated to larger spoken vocabulary in follow-up
interactions in the group whose gestures were
experimentally increased. However, this study did not
control responses to infants’ gesture, and did not investigate

whether pointing influences word learning in real-time
contexts.
The present study aimed to directly test whether infants’
pointing gestures could help them learn the association
between words and objects in a short time period.
Specifically, we asked whether 16-month-old infants would
show superior learning when they received labels about
referents to which they pointed. We compared their learning
when they heard an object label contingent on their
pointing, looking without a point, or at a predetermined time
during the trial (details in Procedure below).

Methods
Participants
Thirty-six 16-month-olds (18 females, range 15.0 – 18.5
months) participated in the study. An additional 5 infants
were tested but excluded from analysis due to fussiness (4)
and absence of pointing (1).

Materials
The experimental set-up is illustrated in Figure 1. A curtain
with two window openings stood blocking the back of the
testing room. An assistant experimenter (AE) protruded
objects through the openings, one for each opening (toys
popping out unexpectedly is successful in eliciting infants’
pointing behaviors, e.g., Liszkowski et al., 2004). Infants sat
on a high chair at a table (or on the caregiver’s lap if
preferred) facing the curtain. The main experimenter (E) sat
across the table from the infant and in front of the curtain.
One camera recorded infants from the middle line of the
curtain (above the head of E), and one camera recorded E
and the stimuli from the side; both cameras were fed into a
quad-splitter. The Macarthur Communicative Development
Inventory (MCDI) and a demographic questionnaire were
filled out by caregivers. This was to examine whether
infants’ performance in the experiment relates to general
vocabulary acquisition. Caregivers were asked not to
interfere during the study.

2680

AE
Curtain
E
Cameras
Table
Infant
Parent
Figure 1: Schematic of experimental set-up

Figure 2: Photographs of 4 novel objects
Four novel objects (Figure 2) and four familiar objects
were used as stimuli. The familiar objects were a shoe, a
dog, a book and a cup. A set of familiar substitute objects (a
banana, a cat, a duck, a hat, and a car) was also on hand in
case a child did not know the name of one of the familiar
objects.

Procedure
Each infant was randomly assigned to one of the three
experimental conditions. In the point contingent (PC)
condition and the look contingent (LC) condition, they heard
object labels right after pointing or looking. In order to
control for the potential effect of general communicative
ability on word learning, infants were assigned to the yoked
control (YC) condition if their language scores (measured
by the MCDI) matched scores of infants in the PC
condition. These infants heard labels at a time
predetermined by when infants pointed in the PC condition
(more details below). The procedure was divided into warmup, novel word learning and testing phase.
Warm-up Phase. Infants played with four familiar
objects one by one for up to 60 s. E then passed those
objects underneath the curtain to AE, who protruded two
familiar objects simultaneously out of the window openings
for 30 s. E looked at the protruded object and labeled it with
its name (e.g., “that’s a dog”) 1) immediately after the infant
pointed to it (the point contingent condition, PC); or 2) at a
schedule predetermined by when a vocabulary-matched
infant in the pointing condition heard a label, i.e., when they
pointed in the trials (the yoked control condition, YC). In
the YC condition, therefore, infants heard labels after being
exposed to the stimuli for the same amount of time in the
trial as the matched infant in the PC condition, but the label
was unrelated to their own behavior. Experimenter 1 was
prompted over headphones for the timing of these labels. In
the look contingent (LC) condition, E labeled an object
while holding two objects at a distance near the window
openings after infants oriented their first look to an object
and maintained looking at it. Having E holding objects near
the window openings is to further differentiate the PC and

LC condition, because a pilot study found that infants
usually pointed very quickly after seeing objects popping
out of the openings on the curtain, making the LC condition
the same as PC; instead, infants rarely pointed if E held
objects because it was unnecessary to point when the partner
already knew the existence of target objects (Liszkowski,
Schäfer, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2009). In this way, we
can thus test infants’ word learning when they were just
looking without pointing. It should be noted, however,
because of this, in the look contingent condition, infants and
experiments both saw the objects and were not ‘surprised’
by their presentation.
After labeling one object in the first pair four times, the
procedure was repeated with a second pair of objects. Note
that only one object within each pair (the first object they
pointed to or looked at) was labeled. If infants pointed to the
other object within a pair of objects, E followed infants’
attention and said “I see”, but did not label it. After
providing the 2 names, one name for each pair, AE then
passed all four objects under the curtain to E, who gave
them one by one to infants to examine up to 60 s again.
After that, infants were presented with a word
comprehension test. E presented two familiar objects
simultaneously, side by side, on a white tray divided into 2
equal sections. She set the tray on the table and silently
counted for 3 sec. This period gave the child an opportunity
to look at the objects. E then looked at the child and asked,
“Can you get the XX (name of one familiar object, e.g.,
dog)? Where is the XX?” and slid the tray forward. Infants
were prompted up to four additional times on each trial.
They were praised heavily for correct responses and
corrected if necessary. Only when infants correctly
identified objects out of 4 trials then the novel word learning
and testing phase occurs. These warm-up stimuli were also
used as familiar objects during the novel word testing phase.
Novel Word Learning and Testing Phase. The novel
word learning and testing phase immediately followed the
warm-up trials and proceeded in the same way except that
1) infants saw two pairs of novel objects, 2) infants thus
heard two novel names (“stad” and “jick”) after they
pointed, when they were just looking, or at a predetermined
time schedule; 3) they were not praised or corrected on the
word comprehension test. Instead, E simply said “OK” or
“thank you”; 4) There were two kinds of word
comprehension tests: On an easy testing trial, only one
novel object had been labeled previously during word
learning; on a hard testing trial, both novel objects had been
labeled. In order to maintain infants’ interest and decrease
fussiness, we presented the easy testing trials before the
hard testing trials. Each novel word testing trial was
repeated, resulting in 8 novel word testing trials. Moreover,
after every two novel word testing trials, there was one
familiar word comprehension trial, in which infants were
shown familiar objects seen in the warm-up session. These
known object trials were included as a control to check that
the child stayed on task. Therefore, there were 4 familiar
word testing trials, resulting in 12 testing trials in total.

2681

Coding
A naïve coder coded infants’ selections from video
recordings of each session. A random selection of 33% of
the sessions was coded by a second naïve coder. Inter coder
agreement was 97%.

Results
Infants’ mean comprehension vocabulary is 137.19 (SD =
88.36, range = 33-336), and production vocabulary is 27.39
(SD = 36.10, range = 0-159). Preliminary data analyses
showed no significant differences in infants’ age and
vocabulary scores across the three conditions, ps > .10. The
proportion of infants’ final choice was used as the
dependent variable. Proportions in all analyses were
submitted to the arcsin transformation (
).
Chi-square tests showed that the number of infants who
pointed during the test was different across the conditions,
χ2(2) = 6.74, p = .03. Specifically, fewer infants pointed in
the look contingent condition (7 out of 12) than the point
contingent condition (12 out of 12), χ2(1) = 6.31, p = .01.
Comparisons between the other two pairs (look contingent
and yoked control condition, point contingent and yoked
control condition) showed no significant differences, ps >
.10; however, the proportion of pointing gestures to the
target objects (arcsin transformed) overall did not differ
significantly across the three conditions, F (2, 25) = 2.30, p
= .12, partial 2 = .16. An independent-Samples KruskalWallis Test showed similar results, test statistic = 3.78, p =
.15. Thus, the proportion of pointing toward the target
objects was the same across three conditions, yet infants in
the point contingent condition heard labels immediately
after they pointed to the target objects. By contrast, though
some infants in the look contingent condition and the yoked
control condition pointed, the naming events rarely occurred
contingently on their pointing.
Infants’ object choice on the familiar label trials were
quite high, suggesting that they stayed on task (MPC =
81.65%, SDPC = 22.55%; MLC = 84.03%, SDLC = 18.99%;
MYC = 80%, SDYC = 16.67%); furthermore, their
performance on the familiar label trials did not differ across
conditions, p > .10.

Figure 3: The proportion of infants’ correct object
choice on novel word testing trials

The proportion of infants’ final choice was used as the
dependent variable. Infants’ word learning performance on
novel label trials is shown in Figure 3. One-sample t-test
showed that, infants chose the correct object significantly
above the chance level only in the point contingent
condition, for the easy test, t(11) = 2.57, p = .03, d = 0.74;
for the hard test, t(11) = 2.76, p = .02, d = 0.78. Their object
choice did not differ significantly from chance level in the
other two conditions, ps > .10.
Moreover, a 2 (within-subject factor, test: easy vs. hard) ×
3 (between-subject factor, condition: PC, LC, YC) mixeddesign analysis showed that there was a significant effect of
condition, F (2, 33) = 4.39, p = .02, partial 2 = .21. Posthoc analyses showed that the word learning performance
was significantly better in the PC condition than that in the
LC condition, p = .048, and better than the YC condition, p
= .042, but no difference was found between LC and YC, p
= 1.00. The main effect of test [F (1, 33) = .01, p = .92,
partial 2 = .00] and the interactive effect of test and
condition [F (2, 33) = .23, p = .80, partial 2 = .01] were not
significant.

Discussion
Previous studies have shown a positive relationship between
the onset and frequency of infants’ pointing gestures, and
vocabulary growth in infancy (for a review, see Colonnesi,
Stams, Koster, & Noom, 2010). However, it was not clear
whether the pointing gesture influences language learning in
the moment. In the present study, we found that 16-monthold infants formed the correct object-word associations
significantly more often when the word was provided
contingently after pointing, than after looking or at
predetermined time schedule. These experimental findings
supplement previous natural observations that mothers
frequently translated children’s gestures into words;
furthermore, these translations were related to later wordand sentence-production (Goldin-Meadow, Goodrich, Sauer,
& Iverson, 2007). Therefore, the current study provides the
first direct experimental evidence that words offered in
response to infants’ pointing gestures were more likely to be
learned.
Previous studies have shown that infants’ pointing
gestures can elicit linguistic input from the environment
(Masur, 1982; Olson & Masur, 2011, 2013; Wu & GrosLouis, 2014). Our study suggests that, in addition to
eliciting information, the pointing gestures might have
created an effective state that is conducive for word
learning. Given the same linguistic input, the labels
provided in response to pointing were better learned than
the labels provided when infants were just looking. It thus
suggests that the gestures may support infants for learning
word-object associations.
One caveat to be noted is that further assessment of the
labeling events are necessary to guarantee that the
experimenter delivered the label with the same temporal
contingency on looking and pointing. Maybe infants receive
a label more immediately after looking than after pointing if

2682

looking is easier to identify than pointing. But, if it is the
contingency that matters, and this potentially differed
between conditions, why did infants in the look contingent
condition learn words worse than infants in the point
contingent condition? One possible explanation is that the
probability of contingency was higher in the point
contingent condition than that in the look contingent
condition, because it is impossible to label toys every time
the child shifts gaze direction.
What remain to be determined are the mechanisms
underlying the positive effect of pointing on word learning.
One possibility is that pointing may increase infants’ arousal
or attention to an object, in a manner similar to the selfstimulating function of vocalizations, which help infants
process object properties and learn word-object associations
(Goldstein, Schwade, Briesch, & Syal, 2010). Goldstein and
colleagues (2010) found that the more infants vocalized to
an object, the more likely they would learn the shape of that
object, as well as the word associated with it. They
interpreted these results as vocalizations focusing infants’
attention on the target object and the accompanying label. It
might also be that in the look condition objects were in view
for both infants and experimenters, rather than appearing by
surprise through the curtain openings as they did in the point
condition. Therefore, it is possible that seeing stimuli
presented by surprise enhances learning in the point
contingent condition due to arousal or excitement; however,
some suggestion for the fact that the pointing gesture itself
enhances attention comes from Campos et al. (2000) who
posit that children’s action experiences can impact their
cognitive development due to changes in the focus of their
attention associated with the accomplishment of those

actions. Although not speaking specifically about
vocabulary development, Campos and colleagues (2000)
propose that infants’ actions may focus their attention to
new events and entities. From this viewpoint, infants’
pointing gesture may focus their attention to the targets and
perhaps the labels accompanying them. This attention may
facilitate learning labels for objects.
In addition, a second possibility is that caregiver’s
contingent label responses after pointing might be exactly
the words that the child is ready to hear (Goldin-Meadow,
2003, 2007). Young children often use gestures to express
their interests and attention that are too complicated for
them to convey via speech. Therefore, the words they
expressed via gesture may be exactly what the infants are
ready to learn.
Thirdly, the pointing gesture may show what infants want
to learn. They solicit information by pointing (Kovács,
Tauzin, Téglás, Gergely, & Csibra, 2014), thus responding
to infants’ solicitation may result in superior learning
(Begus et al., 2014). Future studies are required to test these
possibilities.

References

Butterworth, G., & Morissette, P. (1996). Onset of pointing
and the acquisition of language in infancy. Journal of
Reproductive and Infant Psychology, 14(3), 219–231.
Campos, J. J., Anderson, D. I., Barbu-Roth, M. A.,
Hubbard, E. M., Hertenstein, M. J., & Witherington, D.
(2000). Travel broadens the mind. Infancy, 1(2), 149–219.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social
cognition, joint attention, and communicative competence
from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society of
Research in Child Development, 255(63), 1–143.
Clark, R. (1978). The transition from action to gesture. In A.
Lock (Ed.), Action, gesture and symbol: The emergence
of language (pp. 231–257). New York, NY: Academic
Press.
Cochet, H., & Vauclair, J. (2010). Pointing gesture in young
children: Hand preference and language development.
Gesture, 10(2-3), 129–149.
Colonnesi, C., Stams, G. J. J. M., Koster, I., & Noom, M. J.
(2010). The relation between pointing and language
development: A meta-analysis. Developmental Review,
30(4), 352–366.
Desrochers, S., Morissette, P., & Ricard, M. (1995). Two
perspectives on pointing in infancy. In C. Moore P. J.
Dunham (Ed.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in

Bates, E., Camaioni, L., & Volterra, V. (1975). The
acquisition of performatives prior to speech. MerrillPalmer Quarterly, 21, 205–226.
Begus, K., Gliga, T., & Southgate, V. (2014). Infants learn
what they want to learn: Responding to infant pointing
leads to superior learning. PLoS ONE, 9(10), e108817.
Begus, K., & Southgate, V. (2012). Infant pointing serves
an interrogative function. Developmental Science, 15(5),
611–617.
Blake, J., Vitale, G., Osborne, P., & Olshansky, E. (2005).
A cross-cultural comparison of communicative gestures in
human infants during the transition to language. Gesture,
5(1-2), 201–217.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Infant gaze following
and pointing predict accelerated vocabulary growth
through two years of age: A longitudinal, growth curve
modeling study. Journal of Child Language, 35(1), 207–
220.
Butterworth, G. (2003). Pointing is the royal road to
language for babies. In S. Kita (Ed.), Pointing: Where
language, culture, and cognition meet (pp. 9–33).
Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Publishers.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by National Science Foundation
(NSF) 11-547, Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grants, USA
(No. 1323285). We thank Larissa Samuelson, Bob
McMurray, Susan Wagner Cook, and Karla McGregor for
their helpful suggestions; research assistants at Infant
Communicative Development Lab for their help with data
collection and coding; and infants who participated in the
research.

2683

development (pp. 85–101). Hillsdale, NJ, England:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2007). Pointing sets the stage for
learning language and creating language. Child
Development, 78(3), 741–745.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Goodrich, W., Sauer, E., & Iverson, J.
(2007). Young children use their hands to tell their
mothers what to say. Developmental Science, 10(6), 778–
785.
Goldstein, M. H., Schwade, J., Briesch, J., & Syal, S.
(2010). Learning while babbling: Prelinguistic objectdirected vocalizations indicate a readiness to learn.
Infancy, 15(4), 362–391.
Gullberg, M., de Bot, K., & Volterra, V. (2008). Gestures
and some key issues in the study of language
development. Gesture, 8(2), 149–179.
Harris, M., Yeeles, C., Chasin, J., & Oakley, Y. (1995).
Symmetries and asymmetries in early lexical
comprehension and production. Journal of Child
Language, 22(1), 1–18.
Iverson, J. M., Capirci, O., & Caselli, M. C. (1994). From
communication to language in two modalities. Cognitive
Development, 9(1), 23–43.
Iverson, J. M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Gesture paves
the way for language development. Psychological
Science, 16(5), 367.
Kishimoto, T., Shizawa, Y., Yasuda, J., Hinobayashi, T., &
Minami, T. (2007). Do pointing gestures by infants
provoke comments from adults? Infant Behavior &
Development, 30(4), 562–567.
Kovács, Á. M., Tauzin, T., Téglás, E., Gergely, G., &
Csibra, G. (2014). Pointing as epistemic request: 12month-olds point to receive new information. Infancy,
19(6), 543–557.
LeBarton, E. S., Goldin-Meadow, S., & Raudenbush, S. (in
press). Experimentally-induced increases in early gesture
lead to increases in spoken vocabulary. Journal of
Cognition and Development.
Leung, E. H., & Rheingold, H. L. (1981). Development of
pointing as a social gesture. Developmental Psychology,
17(2), 215–220.
Liszkowski, U. (2008). Before L1: A differentiated
perspective on infant gestures. Gesture, 8(2), 180–196.
Liszkowski, U. (2008). Before L1: A differentiated
perspective on infant gestures. Gesture, 8(2), 180–196.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., Henning, A., Striano, T., &
Tomasello, M. (2004). Twelve-month-olds point to share

attention and interest. Developmental Science, 7(3), 297–
307.
Liszkowski, U., Schäfer, M., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello,
M. (2009). Prelinguistic infants, but not Chimpanzees,
communicate about absent entities. Psychological
Science, 20(5), 654–660.
Masur, E. F. (1982). Mothers’ responses to infants’ objectrelated gestures: Influences on lexical development.
Journal of Child Language, 9(1), 23–30.
Olson, J., & Masur, E. F. (2011). Infants’ gestures influence
mothers’ provision of object, action and internal state
labels. Journal of Child Language, 38(5), 1028–1054.
Olson, J., & Masur, E. F. (2013). Mothers respond
differently to infants’ gestural versus nongestural
communicative bids. First Language, 33(4), 372–387.
Rowe, M. L., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2009a). Differences in
early gesture explain SES disparities in child vocabulary
size at school entry. Science, 323(5916), 951–953.
Rowe, M. L., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2009b). Early gesture
selectively
predicts
later
language
learning.
Developmental Science, 12(1), 182–187.
Rowe, M. L., Özçalışkan, Ş., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2008).
Learning words by hand: Gesture’s role in predicting
vocabulary development. First Language, 28(2), 182–
199.
Southgate, V., van Maanen, C., & Csibra, G. (2007). Infant
pointing: Communication to cooperate or communication
to learn? Child Development, 78(3), 735–740.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., & Liszkowski, U. (2007a). A
new look at infant pointing. Child Development, 78(3),
705–722.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., & Liszkowski, U. (2007b). A
new look at infant pointing. Child Development, 78(3),
705–722.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and Language - Revised
Edition. (A. Kozulin, Ed.) (revised edition.). Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Werner, H., & Kaplan, B. (1964). Symbol formation: An
organismic developmental approach to language & the
expression of thought (1St Edition.). New York, NY: John
Wiley & Sons.
Wu, Z., & Gros-Louis, J. (2014). Caregivers provide more
labeling responses to infants’ pointing than to infants’
object-directed vocalizations. Journal of Child Language,
1–24.

2684

