Defaulting effects contribute to the simulation of cross-linguistic
differences in Optional Infinitive errors
Daniel Freudenthal, Julian M. Pine
Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Liverpool

Gary Jones
Division of Psychology, Nottingham Trent University

Fernand Gobet
Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Liverpool
Abstract

prevents them from checking the D-feature of the subject
DP against more than one DP. In obligatory subject
languages such as Dutch and English, which require the
checking of two D-features (Agreement and Tense), this
results in the under-specification of Agreement or Tense and
the production of an uninflected verb form. Null subject
languages such as Spanish and Italian only require the
checking of Tense on finite main verbs, and OI errors are
therefore rare in these languages.
An alternative account of OI errors is provided by
MOSAIC (Freudenthal et al. 2006, 2007, 2010). MOSAIC,
which is implemented as a computational model,
instantiates a view of language acquisition as input-driven
learning. MOSAIC views language learning as heavily
biased towards the ends of utterances and simulates OI
errors as truncated compound finites: auxiliary/modal +
infinitive constructions with a missing modal or auxiliary.
An early version of MOSAIC (Freudenthal et al. 2006,
2007) simulated (English1) OI errors directly through its
utterance-final bias by omitting the utterance-initial
modal/auxiliary from questions: (Can) he go? A later
version of MOSAIC (Freudenthal et al. 2010, submitted)
expanded on these simulations by complementing
MOSAIC’s utterance-final bias with a small utterance-initial
bias. This version is capable of utterance-internal omission,
and can produce OI errors by omitting the auxiliary or
modal from declarative compound constructions: He (can)
go. Both versions of MOSAIC have been shown to provide
a good fit to the data from a range of languages (English,
Dutch, German, French and Spanish). The simulations with
MOSAIC show that the key aspects that determine the rates
of OI errors in a language are the frequency of compound
finite constructions, and the way in which these
constructions pattern (see Table 1 for examples of English,
Dutch and Spanish simple and compound finite
constructions). Thus, MOSAIC simulates the slightly higher
rates of OI errors in Dutch compared to German (two
languages that are virtually identical in terms of verb
placement), as a result of compound finite constructions
being slightly more frequent in Dutch. It furthermore

This paper describes an extension to the MOSAIC model
which aims to increase MOSAIC’s fit to the cross-linguistic
occurrence of Optional Infinitive (OI) errors. While previous
versions of MOSAIC have successfully simulated these errors
as truncated compound finites with missing modals or
auxiliaries, they have tended to underestimate the rate of OI
errors in (some) obligatory subject languages. Here, we
explore defaulting effects, where the most frequent form of a
given verb is substituted for less frequent forms, as an
additional source of OI errors. It is shown that defaulting in
English tends to result in the production of bare forms that are
indistinguishable from the infinitive, while defaulting in
Spanish is less pronounced, and tends to result in the
production of 3rd person singular forms. Dutch verb forms are
dominated by the stem in corpus-wide statistics, and the
infinitive in utterance-final position, suggesting defaulting in
Dutch may change qualitatively across development.
Defaulting is shown to increase MOSAIC’s fit to English and
Dutch without affecting its already good fit to Spanish, and
provides a potential way of simulating the cross-linguistic
pattern of verb-marking errors in children with SLI.
Keywords: Language Acquisition; MOSAIC; Optional
Infinitive errors; defaulting; SLI

Introduction
Children in many languages have been shown to produce
so-called Optional Infinitive (OI) errors, involving the use
of non-finite verb forms in contexts in which a finite verb
form is obligatory in the adult language. Thus, Englishspeaking children produce utterances like He go there, and
Dutch-speaking children produce utterances like Mama
helpen (Mummy help). While this may not be apparent from
the English example (where the infinitive is a zero-marked
form), the Dutch example makes it clear that the errors
actually involve the use of a non-finite form – in this case
the infinitive, which is marked by the infinitival morpheme
–en. Optional Infinitive errors have attracted a great deal of
attention, since they are produced in a large number of
(Germanic) languages, but are relatively rare in highly
inflected pro-drop languages such as Spanish and Italian.
An influential Generativist account of Optional Infinitive
errors is that of Wexler (1994, 1998), who argues that
language-learning children have set all the inflectional and
clause structure parameters for their language from an early
age but are subject to a ‘Unique Checking Constraint’ which

1

Due to the impoverished morphology of English, the presence
of a 3rd singular subject is required for the identification of an OI
error. In (many) other languages, the simple occurrence of a form
matching the infinitive is sufficient.

746

simulates the far higher rates of OI errors in Dutch (and
German) compared to Spanish, despite the fact that, in
Spanish, compound constructions occur at rates that are
similar to Dutch/German. The key aspect here is that nonfinite forms in Dutch and German occur in utterance-final
position, following potential complements, whereas they
tend to occur in medial position in Spanish (preceding
potential complement). The proportion of verbs in
utterance-final position that are non-finite is therefore far
higher in Dutch/German, and MOSAIC’s utterance-final
bias thus results in higher levels of OI errors in
Dutch/German compared to Spanish.

contexts – an error that is currently beyond MOSAIC’s
capabilities.
Räsänen et al. (in prep) compared elicited production data
from Swedish and English children in compound (modal)
and simple finite contexts. Unlike in English, the Swedish
infinitive is a marked form, which is clearly distinguishable
from the highest frequency finite form. Räsänen et al. found
that, while English children produced OI errors in both
simple and compound finite contexts, Swedish children did
so only in compound finite contexts. Data from this study
thus suggest that the positional effect implemented in
MOSAIC operates in both Swedish and English, while the
defaulting effect is much more pronounced in English where
the infinitive matches the most frequent finite form.
In summary, while there is strong (cross-linguistic)
evidence for OI errors being compound finite structures
with missing modals or auxiliaries, children appear to
produce a second type of error that contributes to OI errors
in some, but not all languages.
This paper aims to extend MOSAIC’s existing
mechanisms for the simulation of OI errors with a lexicallyspecific defaulting mechanism that substitutes the most
common form of a verb for less common forms where a
default forms exists for a given verb. The mechanism will
be tested using three languages that have different
inflectional paradigms and structural properties: English,
Dutch and Spanish. The key question is whether the crosslinguistic differences in the inflectional paradigms and
frequencies of verb forms give rise to different patterns of
defaulting and whether such a mechanism is able to boost
OI levels for English simulations without affecting the good
fit to other languages. A second question concerns the
plausibility of utterances with defaulted forms. A key
characteristic of Dutch children in the OI stage, is that,
when they produce non-finite forms, they overwhelmingly
place them correctly in utterance-final position (rather than
in finite V2 position). Since a defaulting mechanism does
not affect verb position, it could potentially result in
utterances that have non-finite verb forms in finite position,
a feature that is rare in child speech.

Table 1: Simple and compound finite constructions
in English, Dutch and Spanish.
Simple Finite
I eat a cookie
Ik eet een koekje (I eat a cookie)
Como una galleta ((I) eat a cookie)
Compound Finite
I want to eat a cookie
Ik wil een koekje eten (I want a cookie eat)
Quiero comer una galleta ((I) want eat a cookie)
However, one problem with the current version of MOSAIC
is that it is unable to simulate the very high level of OI
errors in early child English. Thus, Freudenthal et al. (2010)
report that MOSAIC underestimates English OI rates by
about 25 percentage points during the early stages, and
suggest that a paradigm-building (cf MacWhinney 1978) or
defaulting mechanism may provide an additional source of
OI errors over the positional mechanism employed in
MOSAIC. In particular, they point out that the impoverished
morphological system of English results in a large
proportion of present tense forms being indistinguishable
from the infinitive. The high rate of OI errors in English
children’s speech may therefore partially reflect them
producing the bare form as a default, and the inclusion of
such a mechanism in MOSAIC may boost the model’s rate
of OI errors and improve the fit to the English data.
Räsänen, Ambridge and Pine (2014) provide support for
this suggestion from an elicited production study in which
English children were required to produce 3rd singular verb
forms. Räsänen et al. found that, across 48 verbs, there was
a significant negative correlation between the children’s rate
of 3rd singular –s production and the proportion of bare vs.
3rd singular forms for these verbs in a representative input
sample. Thus, children tended to omit the 3rd singular –s
most for those verbs that showed the greatest tendency to
occur as bare rather than 3rd singular forms in the input.
Since defaulting effects reflect the frequency distribution
of individual verbs, they are likely to differ across different
languages. This suggestion is supported by data from
Spanish. Aguado-Orea (2004) provides data from a Spanish
child who erroneously produced (the frequent) 3rd person
singular present tense in 3rd person plural present tense

Input Analysis
In order to determine the potential effects of defaulting
across the three languages, corpora of child-directed speech
were analysed to derive counts for the different verb
inflections. There are substantial differences between the
inflectional paradigms of English, Dutch and Spanish. The
English (present tense) paradigm consists of two forms: the
bare form (which matches the infinitive) and the 3rd person
singular. The Dutch paradigm contains three forms. The
stem (1st person singular), stem+t (2nd and 3rd person
singular)2 and stem +en (all 3 plurals). Dutch plural forms
match the infinitive. In Spanish, all present tense forms are
different, and none of them matches the infinitive. The
2
The –t suffix on the 2nd person singular is dropped in questions
where the subject follows the verb, and the resulting form is the
stem.

747

Spanish paradigm (including the infinitive) thus has 7
distinct forms, compared to 3 for Dutch and 2 for English.
Counts were collected from a range of speakers. For
English, the adult speech directed at all (12) children in the
Manchester corpus (Theakston et al. 2001) was pooled. For
Dutch, the pooled data from the Groningen corpus (Bol,
1996) was used. The Spanish counts were derived from the
corpora of Juan and Lucia from the Nottingham corpus
(Aguado-Orea, 2004) and combined with those of the FernAguado corpus.
The main aim of the input analysis was to arrive at a
distribution of verb forms in contexts that require an
inflected verb form. In English and Dutch, this was done by
restricting the analysis to utterances containing a
pronominal subject and a matching verb in an appropriate
position. For Spanish, which does not require overt subjects,
the morphology tier of the transcript was used. This allowed
for the exclusion of imperative forms. The input analysis
counted forms in interrogative as well as declarative input.
A key manipulation in the input analysis was the
collection of corpus-wide counts as well as counts from
utterance-final sentence fragments of differing lengths
(‘bins’). A central assumption in MOSAIC is that children
produce increasingly long utterance-final phrases and
children’s knowledge of inflection is likely to reflect the
changing distribution of verb forms in these increasingly
long utterance-final phrases. In order to facilitate the bin
analysis, the input corpora were marked in the following
way. Verb forms in simple finite utterances were marked as
being tensed (e.g. he goes-tensed away). For compound
finite utterances, the non-finite main verb was marked as
untensed, while the modal was marked as tensed (e.g. he
can-tensed go-untensed, does-tensed he go-untensed?). This
procedure makes it possible to identify verb forms in
contexts requiring a tensed form even when restricting the
analysis to utterance-final fragments.
Counts for the different verb forms were collected across
the corpus as well as for utterance-final bins of increasing
length. For the bin analysis, untensed forms of main verbs
were counted, provided the tensed modal was not included
in the bin. Thus, the utterance does-tensed he go-untensed
contributes to the counts for go for bins of length 1 and 2,
but not for bin 3, at which point the utterance contributes to
the count for does. In terms of the developing child, this
procedure is designed to simulate an increasing realization
on the part of the child that, in modal contexts, tense and
agreement are marked on the modal/auxiliary rather than the
main verb. The counts generated in the input analysis were
collected on a verb-by-verb basis. That is, for every English
verb, the number of times it occurred as a 3rd person
singular or as a form that matched the bare form was
counted (past tense forms as well as progressives and
participles were ignored in the counts). For Dutch, forms
matching the stem, 3rd person singular and plural/infinitive
were counted, and all 6 present tense forms and the
infinitive were distinguished in Spanish.

The main aim of the input analysis was to determine the
extent to which individual verbs showed a clear default. For
present purposes, a verb was considered to have a default
form when one form made up at least 65% of its
occurrences. Only verbs that occurred a minimum of 5 times
were included in the counts. Results for the English, Dutch
and Spanish input analysis are shown in Tables 2 through 4.
Table 2: Proportion of verbs that show a default in the
English input analysis for different bin sizes. Complete
utterances are included in bins that exceed their length.
Bin size
Bare
3rd Sg.
No
N
Form
default
1
.94
.01
.06
108
2
.96
.01
.03
181
3
.94
.02
.04
215
5
.89
.05
.07
213
10
.82
.06
.12
195
As can be seen in Table 2, English verbs predominantly
default to the bare form/infinitive. Only a handful of verbs
show a default for the 3rd person singular. Examples of these
verbs are belongs, tastes, rains, and begins. The proportion
of verbs that show a default is affected by bin size. As bin
size increases beyond 3, fewer verbs show a default. This is
caused by the fact that, as bin size increases, bare forms in
compound constructions disappear from the counts as they
are replaced by auxiliaries and modals. However, increasing
bin size does not change the nature of the default: fewer
verbs show a default, but the bare form remains the
dominant default form.
The analysis of the Dutch input (Table 3) shows more of a
qualitative shift. For bin 1, most verbs show a default for the
infinitive/plural, which occurs in utterance-final position
(see Table 1). However, this effect is relatively short-lived,
and, with increasing bin-size, the stem and 3rd person
singular take over as defaults. By bin 10, roughly half of the
verbs show a default, split between the stem (~ two-thirds)
and the 3rd person singular (~ one-third). As in the analysis
of English, this shift is (partly) caused by modals and
auxiliaries replacing non-finite forms. However, the main
reason for this shift is that the (high frequency) singular
finite forms differ from the infinitive. Since these finite
forms take second position, they tend to occur in larger bins.
Table 3: Proportion of verbs that show a default in the
Dutch input analysis for different bin sizes.
Bin
Inf.
Stem
3rd
No
N
size
SG
default
1
.82
.05
.04
.09
78
2
.57
.14
.09
.20
93
3
.39
.20
.09
.31
99
5
.12
.26
.14
.49
101
10
.00
.36
.19
.46
101
Results for the Spanish analysis are shown in Table 4. The
3rd person singular is the most frequent default form across

748

all bin sizes. While some verbs show an (initial) default for
the infinitive, this effect is far less pronounced than it is in
Dutch, where infinitives occur in utterance-final position
(after potential complements). However, the main difference
between the Spanish and Dutch analysis is that the
proportion of verbs that show a default is far lower in
Spanish. This difference reflects the fact that the Spanish
(present tense) inflectional system is split across 6 forms,
compared to 3 for the Dutch system.

MOSAIC thus consists of a corpus of utterances, which can
be directly compared to a corpus of child speech3.
All models were trained to a stage where MOSAIC’s
output reached a Mean Length of Utterance (MLU) of
approximately 2.0. The output was then analysed to
determine the number of utterances containing a main verb
that were and were not marked for finiteness. Non-finite
utterances were those that only contained a verb matching
the infinitive (learned from a 3rd person singular context for
English), whereas finite utterances were those containing a
finite main verb or auxiliary or modal. Freudenthal et al.
(2010) analysed the speech of children from a number of
different languages at an MLU of ~ 2.0 and report
approximate rates of OI errors of .90 for English, and .75 for
Dutch. OI levels for 2 Spanish children were considerably
lower at .05 and .20. MOSAIC models for these languages
showed OI levels of .63 (English), .65 (Dutch) and .15
(Spanish). MOSAIC thus underestimated OI levels for
English by approximately 25 percentage points, and by 10
percentage points for Dutch, while Spanish scores were
within the range displayed by the children. Table 5 reports
the results for MOSAIC models trained on the maternal
speech to two English and Dutch children (Anne, Becky,
Peter and Matthijs) and one Spanish child (Juan). OI rates
before defaulting are similar to those reported by
Freudenthal et al. (2010). Defaulting was implemented by
searching MOSAIC’s output for finite (present tense) verbs.
In instances where a verb showed a default and the finite
form did not match this default, the finite form was replaced
with the default form. Tables 6 and 7 report the OI levels
(and proportion of affected utterances) after defaulting
based on thresholds of 0.60, 0.65 and 0.70. Table 6 reports
results based on the counts for Bin10. Table 7 reports results
for Bin2, a value close to the model MLUs, and hence
developmentally appropriate.

Table 4: Proportion of verbs that show a default in the
Spanish input analysis for different bin sizes.
Bin Inf.
1st
2nd
3rd
No
N
size
SG SG. SG default
1
.15
.02
.03
.17
.63
147
2
.10
.01
.02
.15
.71
163
3
.07
.01
.02
.21
.70
179
5
.04
.01
.02
.21
.72
189
10
.04
.01
.02
.25
.68
193

Implementing defaulting in MOSAIC
The analyses reported in Tables 3, 4 and 5 suggest that
defaulting is likely to result in different effects as a function
of language and bin-size. In order to investigate how
defaulting affects simulated child speech, MOSAIC models
were trained on English, Dutch and Spanish input. The
simulations were run using a new, more efficient
implementation of MOSAIC, which replaces MOSAIC’s
discrimination net with a hash-table. The current
implementation does not (yet) incorporate MOSAIC’s
chunking or generativity mechanism. However, the current
implementation produces very similar results to those
reported by Freudenthal et al. (2010), particularly at early
points in development. Like the version used in Freudenthal
et al., the current version complements MOSAIC’s
utterance-final bias with a small utterance-initial bias. This
allows MOSAIC to produce incomplete utterance-final
phrases as well as concatenations of utterance-initial words
with utterance-final phrases. These concatenations allow for
utterance-internal omission and the production of OI errors
with subjects through modal omission (e.g He (can) go).
The training procedure was similar to that employed in
Freudenthal et al. (2010). For English, this involved the use
of an input file that was coded for 3rd singular contexts. This
allowed for the identification of English OI errors in the
absence of (3rd person singular) subjects, and therefore a
straightforward comparison with Dutch and Spanish, which
do not require the presence of a subject to identify OI errors.
Training MOSAIC models involves feeding the input
through MOSAIC several times. Each run of the model
produces increasingly long utterance-final phrases, which
may be associated with (short) utterance-initial phrases.
Since learning is frequency-sensitive, high frequency words
or phrases have a higher likelihood of being learned than
low frequency ones. Output is generated from MOSAIC by
producing all utterance-final phrases and their
concatenations with utterance-initial words. Output from

Table 5: Descriptive statistics for English, Dutch and
Spanish models before defaulting.
MLU
Prop. OI
(verbal)
utterances
Anne
2.07
.59
130
Becky
1.99
.66
109
Peter
1.97
.61
513
Matthijs
2.02
.66
1008
Juan
1.97
.15
1021
As can be seen in Table 6, defaulting based on Bin10
results in a small (8-12 percentage points) increase in OI
levels for English, but has (virtually) no effect on Dutch and
Spanish. The proportion of utterances that is affected by the
defaulting mechanism also differs across languages. For
English, it varies between 18 and 28%, while it is around
5% for Dutch and 3% for Spanish.
3
Since MOSAIC does not duplicate utterances, analyses are
typically restricted to utterance types, and duplicate utterances are
removed from child corpora.

749

In summary, the analysis of the output revealed that the
defaulting mechanism produced few obvious errors. At an
MLU of around 2, relatively few utterances contain enough
syntactic elements for defaulting to result in clear errors.
Non-matching subject-verb sequences (i.e. OI errors) are
attested in child speech, and verb-object sequences can be
contextually, but not grammatically, inappropriate. This
latter type of error is likely to remain unnoticed in situations
where the context is ambiguous or cannot be recovered – a
situation that is likely to occur in corpus analyses, a
common method in language acquisition research. An
interesting observation in this respect is made by Verhagen
and Blom (2014), who argue that the rate of inflectional
errors in elicited production is far higher than in
spontaneous speech. Apparently, children are worse at
inflection than their spontaneous speech suggests.
While the error analysis raises the question of whether
defaulting in Dutch is likely to result in higher error rates at
higher MLUs (when more syntactic elements are present),
this is unlikely to be the case. Defaulting is likely to reduce
as children grow older and their MLU increases. Larger
MLUs furthermore correspond to larger bins. Fewer verbs
show a clear default in larger bins, and 3rd person singular
and (in particular) stem defaults become more frequent. To
the extent that defaulting still occurs at high(er) MLUs, it is
thus likely to involve defaulting to the stem, which is a
phonologically simpler or reduced form. A relevant
observation in this respect is that omission of 3rd person
singular –t (or production of the stem in a 3rd person
singular context) occurs in adult speech in some Dutch
dialects. Defaulting at higher MLUs is therefore more likely
to take the form of an error that is not uncommon in the
adult language.

Table 6: Proportion of OIs for three levels of defaulting
based on Bin 10 (proportion of affected
utterances in parentheses).
Defaulting Threshold
.60
.65
.70
Anne
.70 (.28)
.70 (.28)
.71 (.27)
Becky
.74 (.18)
.74 (.18)
.74 (.18)
Peter
.62 (.05)
.61 (.03)
.61 (.00)
Matthijs
.66 (.06)
.66 (.05)
.66 (.03)
Juan
.16 (.03)
.16 (.03)
.16 (.02)
Defaulting based on the counts for Bin2 shows larger
effects. Relative to Table 5, OI levels for English have
increased by 18 to 27 percentage points, substantially more
than for Bin10. OI levels for Dutch have increased by 4-5
percentage points, while Spanish OI levels are unaffected.
The proportion of utterances affected by the defaulting
mechanism is similar across Tables 6 and 7. The increase in
OI levels for Bin2 relative to Bin10 thus does not reflect a
simple increase in affected utterances. Instead, it represents
a shift in the forms to which the model defaults.
Table 7: Proportion of OIs for three levels of defaulting
based on Bin 2 (proportion of affected
utterances in parentheses).
Defaulting Threshold
.60
.65
.70
Anne
.86 (.34)
.86 (.34)
.80 (.29)
Becky
.81 (.19)
.80 (.18)
.79 (.17)
Peter
.66 (.05)
.66 (.05)
.65 (.05)
Matthijs
.70 (.07)
.70 (.07)
.70 (.06)
Juan
.16 (.04)
.16 (.03)
.16 (.03)

Conclusions

Error Analysis
Since verb placement in Dutch is dependent on finiteness,
defaulting in Dutch has the potential to result in
grammatical errors that are not typical of child speech. This
possibility was investigated by examining the nature of the
utterances that resulted from defaulting in Dutch (at a
threshold of 0.65 and Bin2). For Peter’s model, 26
utterances were affected by defaulting, all of which involved
a finite form being changed into an infinitive. Eight of the
utterances contained a verb in final position, and thus
resulted in a stereotypical OI error. Ten utterances contained
a verb in finite (V2) position – a position occupied by plural
verbs. However, since these utterances did not contain a
subject they were not grammatically anomalous. A further 8
utterances contained a singular subject combined with a
plural verb in V2 position. This type of error is rare in child
speech. However, it makes up less than 2% of the entire
output for Peter’s model.
A similar pattern was apparent in Matthijs’s output. Out
of 66 utterances affected by defaulting, 5 resulted in clear
error, and the remainder was roughly equally split between
subjectless plurals and stereotypical OI errors.

The main aim of this paper was to investigate defaulting
effects as a contributing factor in children’s cross-linguistic
production of Optional Infinitive errors. An analysis of
English, Dutch and Spanish child-directed speech corpora
showed large cross-linguistic differences in the distribution
of verb forms. A corpus-wide analysis showed that English
verbs tend to be used in forms that match the bare form,
whereas Spanish verbs tend to be used in either the 2nd or
3rd person singular form. Dutch shows a similar pattern to
Spanish with most verbs showing a default for the stem or
3rd person singular. A developmentally-inspired input
analysis which restricted the analysis to utterance-final
phrases boosted the pattern for English. All but a handful of
verbs occurred overwhelmingly in the bare form. The Dutch
developmental analysis showed a shift from the stem and 3rd
person singular towards the infinitive, while the Spanish
analysis saw a reduction in the forms that default to the 2nd
and 3rd singular forms. The input analysis thus suggested
that the pattern of defaulting would differ across the three
languages. English children are expected to default to the
bare form. The fact that the bare form remains the default
for larger bin sizes suggests that this effect may continue

750

until late in development. Dutch children are expected to
initially default to the infinitive, while they may default to
the stem and 3rd person singular in later stages of
development. Spanish children are expected to show
relatively little defaulting, and this is likely to be restricted
to 2nd and 3rd person singulars. Implementation of the
defaulting mechanism in MOSAIC showed a large boost in
OI errors for English a small increase for Dutch, and little
change for Spanish. Defaulting thus has the largest effect for
those languages where MOSAIC’s earlier fit was poorest.
However, defaulting does not just boost levels of OIs; it also
allows MOSAIC to produce verb forms in contexts where it
previously could not – including the provision of finite verb
forms in incorrect contexts, and the production of non-finite
verb forms in contexts that do not have a modal reading - a
feature that is thought to be more prominent in English than
in Dutch (Hoekstra & Hyams, 1998).
Importantly, rather than rendering MOSAIC’s main
mechanism for the production of OI errors (the utterancefinal bias) superfluous, defaulting effects are strongest and
most plausible when combined with the utterance-final bias.
An important consequence of these results is that they
suggest a way in which MOSAIC might be extended to
provide an account of atypical language development.
Children with Specific Language Impairment (SLI) show
slow development of language in the apparent absence of
deficits outside the linguistic domain. English and German
(but not Spanish) children with SLI are thought to have
particular difficulty with verb inflection and have been
characterized as going through an extended Optional
Infinitive Stage (Rice, Wexler & Cleave, 1995). Compared
to typically developing children at the same MLU, English
children with SLI produce more OI errors, and they
continue to do so at higher MLUs. The mechanism reported
here suggests several potential causes for such differences.
Defaulting effects may be more pronounced, continue for
longer in children with SLI, or, if we take the bin analysis
seriously, children with SLI may be slower to access larger
bins. This latter suggestion has considerable overlap with a
recent account by Leonard et al. (in press) who, in line with
MOSAIC’s biases, suggest that children with SLI may show
a continued reliance on subject-verb sequences that have
their origins in utterance-final input sequences.

Bol, G. W. (1996). Optional subjects in Dutch child
language. In C. Koster & F. Wijnen (Eds.), Proceedings
of the Groningen Assembly on Language Acquisition (pp.
125-135). Groningen: Centre for Language and
Cognition.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. M., Aguado-Orea, J. & Gobet, F.
(2007). Modelling the developmental patterning of
finiteness marking in English, Dutch, German and
Spanish using MOSAIC. Cognitive Science, 31, 311-341.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. M. & Gobet, F. (2006). Modelling
the development of children’s use of Optional Infinitives
in Dutch and English using MOSAIC. Cognitive Science,
30, 277-310.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. M. & Gobet, F. (2010). Explaining
quantitative variation in the rate of Optional Infinitive
errors across languages: A comparison of MOSAIC and
the Variational Learning Model. Journal of Child
Language, 37, 643-669.
Hoekstra, T. & Hyams, N. (1998). Aspects of Root
Infinitives. Lingua, 106, 81-112.
Leonard, L.B., Fey, M.E., Deevy, P. & Bredin-Oja, S.L. (in
press). Input sources of third person singular –s
inconsistency in children with and without specific
language impairment. To appear in Journal of Child
Language.
MacWhinney,
B.
(1978).
The
acquisition
of
morphophonology. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 43, 1-123.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: tools for
analyzing talk (3rd Edition). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Räsänen, S., Ambridge, B. & Pine, J.M. (2014). Infinitives
or bare stems. Are English Speaking Children defaulting
to the highest-frequency form? Journal of Child
Language, 41, 756-779.
Räsänen, S., Ambridge, B. & Pine, J.M. (in preparation).
Investigating the optional infinitive phenomenon: a
comparison of English and Swedish.
Rice, M.L., Wexler, K. & Cleave, P.L. (1995). Specific
Language Impairment as a period of extended optional
infinitive. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38,
850-863.
Theakston, A. L., Lieven, E. V. M., Pine, J. M. & Rowland,
C. F. (2001). The role of performance limitations in the
acquisition of Verb-Argument structure: An alternative
account. Journal of Child Language, 28, 127-152.
Verhagen, J. & Blom, E. (2014). Assymmetries in the
acquisition of subject-verb agreement in Dutch: evidence
from comprehension and production. First Language, 34,
315-335.
Wexler, K. (1994). Optional infinitives, head movement and
the economy of derivation in child grammar. In N.
Hornstein & D. Lightfoot (Eds.), Verb Movement (pp.
305-350). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wexler, K. (1998). Very early parameter setting and the
unique checking constraint: A new explanation of the
optional infinitive stage. Lingua, 106, 23-79.

Acknowledgements
Julian Pine, and Fernand Gobet are members of the
International Centre for Language and Communicative
Development (LuCiD) at the University of Liverpool, for
which support of the Economic and Social Research
Council [ES/L008955/1] is gratefully acknowledged. This
research was supported by ESRC Grant ES/J011436/1.

References
Aguado-Orea, J. (2004). The acquisition of morpho-syntax
in Spanish: Implications for current theories of
development. Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of
Nottingham.

751

