Developmental Changes in the Relationship Between Grammar and the Lexicon
Mika Braginsky

Daniel Yurovsky

Virginia A. Marchman

Michael C. Frank

mikabr@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

yurovsky@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

marchman@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

One source of such data is the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory (CDI), a widely-used assessment tool in which parents report which words their child
produces on a checklist organized by lexical-semantic categories. Children’s vocabulary size can thus be estimated over
the entire checklist, or for sub-categories. The CDI also provides indices of grammar learning by asking about children’s
use of inflected forms (e.g., walked) and the complexity of
their word combinations (e.g., kitty sleeping / kitty is sleeping). Influential early findings using this measure showed that
early vocabularies tend to be composed primarily of nouns,
while verbs and closed-class forms, which might support the
transition into complex sentences, are typically acquired later
(Bates et al., 1994). Further, across different populations and
languages, global estimates of grammatical development are
more strongly predicted by overall vocabulary size than by
age, providing support for lexicalist theories (see Bates &
Goodman, 1999 for a review).
While impressive in their time, the scope and power
of these early studies were limited, relying on relatively
small norming samples (1000–2000 children) with few opportunities for direct comparisons of the nature or extent
of these relations across languages. The current study
addresses these limitations by using data from Wordbank
(wordbank.stanford.edu), a new web-based tool that aggregates pre-existing samples of CDI data into a consistent
format across forms and languages. While still in development, the resulting database is already considerably larger
than those previously available, and thus allows analyses
of lexical-grammar-age relations with enhanced statistical
power and broader cross-linguistic representation.
In the current study, we present data from 19,822 children
aged 16–32 months, using adaptations of the CDI Words &
Sentences form in four languages: English, Spanish, Norwegian, and Danish. We replicate classic findings of strong
lexicon-grammar relations and patterns of vocabulary composition across four languages. We also extend these findings
through novel analyses afforded by the Wordbank database.
We explore a hypothesis that was not explicitly tested in
these earlier studies: that there remains age-related variance
in grammatical development unexplained by vocabulary development. While the overall relationship between grammar
and the lexicon provides support for lexicalist theories, the
identification of age-related variance would suggest the presence of developmental processes that regulate grammar learning, above and beyond those captured by measures of vocabulary size. Such age-related processes could be either maturational or experiential, and either domain-general (like work-

How does abstract structure emerge during language learning?
On some accounts, children’s early syntax emerges from direct
generalizations from particular lexical items, while on others,
syntactic structure is acquired independently and follows its
own timetable. Progress on differentiating these views requires
detailed developmental data. Using parental reports of vocabulary and grammar abilities, previous analyses have shown that
early syntactic abstraction strongly depends on the growth of
the lexicon, providing support for lexicalist and emergentist
theories. Leveraging a large cross-linguistic dataset, we replicate and extend these findings, demonstrating similar patterns
in each of four languages. Moreover, the power of our dataset
reveals that there are measurable effects of age over and above
those attributable to vocabulary size, and that these effects are
greater for aspects of language ability more closely tied to syntax than morphology. These findings suggest non-lexical contributions to the growth of syntactic abstraction that all theories
must address.
Keywords: Language acquisition; word learning;
morphology; syntax; development.

Introduction
A child as young as two or three (who happens to be acquiring English) can hear someone say Alice glipped the blicket
and draw a wealth of inferences from the morphological and
syntactic structure of that utterance: that Alice and blicket are
entities in the world and glipping is an action; that Alice is
the one glipping and the blicket is the thing being glipped;
that glipping occurred in the past (rather than the present, as
in Alice is glipping the blicket); that a single blicket was involved (rather than multiple, as in Alice glipped the blickets).
What mechanisms underlie the formation of generalizations
that support such inferences? Does an understanding of the
abstract structure of language emerge from the interactions
of individual words, or is structure acquired and represented
separately?
On nativist theories like principles and parameters
(Chomsky, 1981; Baker, 2005), grammar emerges independently from lexical knowledge following its own, largely maturational, timetable. According to lexicalist theories, in contrast, grammatical structure emerges from graded generalizations on the basis of lexical items, and at least early in development, there may be little or no representation of morphological and syntactic rules or regularities per se (Tomasello,
2003). Even when syntactic structures are eventually represented, these representations are directly related to more concrete lexical structure (Bannard, Lieven, & Tomasello, 2009).
Therefore, grammatical development should be tightly yoked
to lexical development (Bates & Goodman, 1999). Data on
the relationship between the lexicon, grammar, and age are
important for informing this fundamental theoretical debate.

256

ing memory) or language-specific (like grammatical competence). Since both nativist and constructivist theories could in
principle predict age-linked variance in grammatical development, our goal in the current work is not to differentiate between these theories, but instead to test this novel prediction
and explore its implications for future work on understanding
the processes of grammatical development.
An additional contribution of our work is that due to the
size of our dataset, we are able to make more fine-grained
distinctions than the initial cut between grammar and the lexicon. In particular, we distinguish morphology from multiword syntax, since morphological generalizations might be
more specifically dependent on vocabulary size than those
requiring more global, sentence-level syntactic regularities.
Similarly, we distinguish age-related contributions to different parts of the vocabulary. Lexical items like verbs often
require some syntactic information to learn (Gleitman, 1990)
and hence might be more linked to age-related factors that
extend beyond vocabulary size.
The outline of the paper is as follows. We begin by describing the Wordbank database, the CDI measures, and our general analytic approach. We then describe two sets of analyses
exploring the contribution of age to lexicon-grammar links
(Analysis 1) and to patterns of vocabulary composition (Analysis 2). In Analysis 1, we delineate the grammar sections into
items that reflect a broad distinction between inflectional morphology vs. sentence-level syntactic knowledge. We expect
that age-related contributions to grammar should be evident
to a larger extent for syntax than morphology. In Analysis 2,
we further leverage this technique to determine if age-related
contributions vary across word classes. In particular, we predict that acquisition of predicates (verbs and adjectives) and
function words should be relatively more dependent on syntactic factors than acquisition of nouns, and thus should exhibit a greater relative influence of age. These analyses reveal
greater effects of age on aspects of grammar that are more
aligned with syntax than with morphology, and greater effects of age on function words and perhaps on predicates than
on nouns. In the General Discussion, we consider potential
domain-specific and domain-general explanations consistent
with these findings.

al., 2008), with both cross-sectional and longitudinal data.
This dataset encompasses norming data from each language
as well as a number of smaller-scale studies, some of which
did not provide data from the grammar sections.
CDI Measures In all four languages, the CDI forms contain both vocabulary checklists and other questions relevant
to the child’s linguistic development. All of the data reported
here come from the Words & Sentences form, administered
to children ages 16–32 months. Each of these instruments includes a Vocabulary section, which asks whether the child
produces each of around 700 words from a variety of semantic and syntactic categories (e.g., foot, run, so); a Word
Form section, which asks whether the child produces each
of around 30 morphologically inflected forms of nouns and
verbs (e.g., feet, ran); and a Complexity section, which asks
whether the child’s speech is most similar to the syntactically
simpler or more complex versions of around 40 sentences
(e.g., two foot / two feet, there a kitty / there’s a kitty). Each
language’s instrument is not just a translation of the English
form, but rather was constructed and normed to reflect the
lexicon and grammar of that language.
To analyze lexical and grammatical development, we derive several measures. Each child’s vocabulary size is computed as the proportion of words on the corresponding CDI
form that the child is reported to produce. Similarly, each
child’s Word Form score is the proportion of word forms they
are reported to produce, and their Complexity score is the proportion of complexity items for which they are reported to use
the more complex form. We compute all of these quantities as
proportions to make the scales comparable across languages.

Analysis 1: Syntax and Morphology
By two years, most children have a sizable working vocabulary, including verbs, prepositions, and closed class forms
that perform grammatical work. They are also beginning to
use multi-word combinations (e.g., mommy sock) and may
demonstrate productive use of inflectional morphemes (e.g.,
past tense -ed). Previous studies have found a strong connection between the size of the lexicon and grammatical development as measured by the Complexity section, in many
languages including English, Italian, Hebrew, and Spanish
(see Bates & Goodman, 1999). However, no study has had
the power and cross-linguistic representation to go beyond
this initial finding to explore relations to grammatical items
that vary in morphological/syntactic features. We extend this
work by examining grammatical development using two measures: the Word Form checklist as a window into morphology
and the Complexity checklist as a window into syntax. For
each measure, we investigate the effects of vocabulary size
and age.

Analyses
Methods
CDI Form Database We developed Wordbank, a structured database of CDI data, to aggregate and archive CDI data
across languages and labs and facilitate easy querying and
analysis. By collecting language development data at an unprecedented scale, Wordbank enables the exploration of novel
hypotheses about the course of lexical and grammatical development. At the time of writing, Wordbank included data
on four languages: English (Fenson et al., 2007), Spanish
(Jackson-Maldonado, Thal, Marchman, Bates, & GutiérrezClellen, 1993), Norwegian (Simonsen, Kristoffersen, Bleses, Wehberg, & Jørgensen, 2014), and Danish (Bleses et

Results We wanted to estimate how much variance in children’s syntactic and morphological development remains after accounting for that child’s vocabulary size. Specifically,
we asked whether age provides additional predictive power

257

Figure 1: Each point shows an individual child, indicating their total vocabulary size and Word Form or Complexity score, with color showing
their age bin (English n = 4137; Spanish n = 1094; Norwegian n = 8505; Danish n = 2074). Panels show different languages, and curves are
logistic regression models fit separately for each language and measure. The models were specified as score ∼ vocab + age.

beyond vocabulary size. To estimate this effect, we fit logistic regression models to each child’s Word Form and Complexity scores, predicting score as a function of vocabulary
size and age in months. For all languages and measures, the
evidence is overwhelmingly in favor of the model using both
vocabulary and age as predictors, as compared to the model
using only vocabulary (the smallest difference in AIC is 76).
Figure 1 shows the data and models: each point represents
a child’s score on a measure, while curves show the relationship between score and vocabulary size. For all languages,
the curves for Word Form are nearly overlapping, showing
little differentiation across age groups. This indicates only
small contributions of age above and beyond vocabulary. In
contrast, the curves for Complexity show a characteristic fan
across age groups, indicating that the relationship between
vocabulary size and complexity score is modulated by age.

Figure 2: For each language and measure, the model’s age effect
coefficient. Ranges show the 95% confidence interval of the coefficient estimate. Across languages, Complexity has a substantially
larger age effect than Word Form.

Because of the size of our samples, all main effects and
interactions are highly significant. To assess the extent of
the age contribution to children’s morphological and syntactic development, we compared the coefficients of Word Form
and Complexity models. Figure 2 shows the coefficient of

All data and code for these analyses are available at
https://github.com/dyurovsky/cdi-grammar

258

Figure 3: For each language and item, the model’s age effect coefficient. Ranges show the 95% confidence interval of the coefficient estimate.
Across languages, Word Form items tend to have smaller age effects, Morphological Complexity items tend to have middling age effects, and
Syntactic Complexity items tend to have larger age effects. (Note: No Spanish complexity items had exclusively morphological content.)

Analysis 2: Vocabulary Composition

the age effect for each measure across languages. In each
language, the age effect coefficient is substantially larger for
Complexity than for Word Form, indicating a greater age effect on those items that generally align with syntax than morphology.
Given the heterogeneous nature of the CDI instruments,
particularly in the Complexity sections, we further broke
down these items by classifying them as capturing more morphological or more syntactic phenomena. Items for which the
difference between the simple and complex sentences is in the
inflection of a noun or verb (such as doggie kiss me / doggie
kissed me) were coded as Morphological. The remainder of
the items were coded as Syntactic, since they involve the use
of some sentence-level syntactic construction (such as doggie
table / doggie on table).
We then fit predictive models as above separately for every
item. Figure 3 shows the age effect coefficient for each item.
In general, there is a three-way split: age effects are smallest
for Word Form items, then Morphological Complexity items,
and largest for Syntactic Complexity items, suggesting that
more syntactic phenomena have greater age contributions.

Early vocabulary development is typically characterized by
the learning of names for caregivers and common objects,
while later in development, children tend to diversify their vocabulary by increasing the proportion of predicates (verbs and
adjectives) and closed class words. This over-representation
of nouns has been found across a number of analyses and in
a variety of languages (Bates et al., 1994; M. Caselli et al.,
1995; Bornstein et al., 2004), though not all (Tardif, 1996;
Choi & Gopnik, 1995). For our purposes, we are interested
in using these analyses of vocabulary composition to test for
the same kind of age-related differences that we found in the
Complexity and Word Form analyses.
We predict that age should have relatively more effect
on the proportion of predicates and function words in children’s vocabularies than on the proportion of nouns. Concrete nouns are hypothesized to be learned initially from both
co-occurrences between words (Yu & Smith, 2007) and by
social cues to reference to particular objects (Bloom, 2002).
On neither account should syntactic information be a primary
information source (though syntax might be more informative for abstract nouns). In contrast, for other types of words,
syntax should be more important for learning their meaning.
On the syntactic bootstrapping hypothesis (Gleitman,
1990; Fisher, Gertner, Scott, & Yuan, 2010), verbs especially are learned by mapping the syntactic structure of utterances to the thematic structure of observed events, for example by noticing that the subject of a sentence matches the
agent in one particular ongoing event but not another (“the
cat is fleeing the dog” matches FLEES ( CAT, DOG ) but not
CHASES ( DOG , CAT )). A similar argument can be made for
adjectives, since identification of the modified noun is sim-

Discussion Building on previous analyses that showed a
strong relationship between lexical and grammatical development, we incorporated age into this relationship. Across languages, our measures of syntactic development consistently
showed greater age modulation than measures of morphological development. Further, distinguishing between items that
were more reflective of syntax than morphology, we again
found greater age effects for more syntactic items. Thus, this
analysis provides evidence for a relationship between syntactic development and age not captured by lexical development.

259

Figure 4: Proportion of a particular CDI category, plotted by total vocabulary size. Each point shows an individual child, with color showing
their noun, predicate, and function word vocabulary. Panels show different languages, and curves are regression models fit separately for each
language, specified as proportion ∼ vocab + age (English n = 5595; Spanish n = 1094; Norwegian n = 10095; Danish n = 3038).

ilarly critical for inferring the meaning of the modifier. By
the same logic, function words should be even harder to
learn without some understanding of their syntactic relations.
Thus, if syntactic development is related in some way to age,
we should see larger age effects on predicate and function
word acquisition than on noun acquisition.
Results Each CDI form contains a mixture of words in different classes. We adopt the categorization of Bates et al.
(1994), splitting words into nouns, predicates (verbs and adjectives), function words, and other words. For each child’s
vocabulary, we compute the proportion of the total words in
each of these categories that they are reported to produce.
For each of the four languages in our sample, we plot
these proportions against total vocabulary. These functions
are shown in Figure 4: Each point represents a child’s knowledge of a particular class, while curves show the relationship
between a class and the whole vocabulary. If categories grow
independently of one another, these curves should approximate the diagonal. This pattern is not what we observe, however: Across the languages in our sample, nouns are systematically over-represented in smaller vocabularies (shown by a
curve that is above the diagonal), while function words—and
to some extent, predicates—are under-represented.
Next, we measure the contribution of age to vocabulary
composition. We fit a logistic model to all children’s data for
each word class, predicting word-class proportion as a function of total vocabulary and age (as in Analysis 1). Figure 5
shows age coefficients for each of these models across languages. In all four languages, the age coefficient is substantially larger for function words than for nouns. This asymmetry can be interpreted as evidence that, for two vocabularymatched children, the older child would tend to produce relatively more function words than the younger. In English and
Norwegian, the same regularity holds for predicates, while
for Spanish and Danish, predicates and nouns are more similar to one another.

Figure 5: For each language and lexical category, the model’s
age effect coefficient. Ranges show the 95% confidence interval of
the coefficient estimate. Across languages, predicates and function
words tend to have a substantially larger age effect than nouns.

oping lexicon and an under-representation of predicates and
function words. We also predicted that—if syntactic generalization was in some way tied to age—predicates and function
words would show relatively more age influence than nouns.
Although there was some cross-language variation in predicate terms, overall this prediction was confirmed across the
languages we examined. Thus, this analysis provides additional evidence for a relationship between syntactic development and age, independent of the growth of the lexicon.

General Discussion
The current study revisits classic findings but also explores
novel questions regarding lexicon-grammar relations and vocabulary composition through Wordbank, a newly-developed
web-based tool for cross-linguistic analyses of large CDI
datasets. Our results provided general support for a lexicalist view, in that, in four languages, variance in vocabulary
production strongly aligned with variance in grammar. However, we also estimated additional age-related contributions,
specifically contrasting the links to morphological forms vs.
syntactic constructions, and to different lexical categories.

Discussion We replicated previous analyses (Bates et al.,
1994) showing an over-representation of nouns in the devel-

260

In general, we find that measures of grammar that are more
closely aligned with syntax are modulated by age to a greater
extent than those reflecting morphology. Also, we find that
the trajectories of predicate and function word representation
in the vocabulary are modulated by age to a greater extent
than noun representation (albeit with some variability across
languages). Both findings suggest a place for developmental
processes that facilitate grammatical acquisition beyond pure
lexical growth.
Our analyses suggest interesting new areas of research regarding possible mechanisms driving children’s early lexical development and how those mechanisms might support
children’s transition from single words to more grammatically complex utterances. One possibility is that these developments are dependent on maturational factors that operate
on grammatical development in a domain-specific way, independent of lexical-semantic processes. Another possibility is
that age-related effects represent more domain-general learning mechanisms, such as attention or working memory, that
provide differential support for sentence-level processes than
word-internal ones (Gathercole & Baddeley, 2014). Future
studies should also explore the extent to which lexical and
age-related processes are shaped, either independently or in
tandem, by features of the learning environments that children experience (e.g., Weisleder & Fernald, 2013).
Questions about the nature of grammatical representations in early language have often seemed deadlocked. But
by mapping out developmental change across large samples
and multiple languages, our findings here challenge theories
across the full range of perspectives to more fully describe the
mechanistic factors underlying the interaction of vocabulary,
grammar, and development.

developmental trends. Journal of Child Language, 35(03),
651–669.
Bloom, P. (2002). How children learn the meanings of words.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bornstein, M. H., Cote, L. R., Maital, S., Painter, K., Park,
S.-Y., Pascual, L., . . . Vyt, A. (2004). Cross-linguistic
analysis of vocabulary in young children: Spanish, Dutch,
French, Hebrew, Italian, Korean, and American English.
Child Development, 75(4), 1115–1139.
Caselli, C., Casadio, P., & Bates, E. (1999). A comparison of
the transition from first words to grammar in English and
Italian. Journal of Child Language, 26(01), 69–111.
Caselli, M., Bates, E., Casadio, P., Fenson, J., Fenson, L.,
Sanderl, L., & Weir, J. (1995). A cross-linguistic study of
early lexical development. Cognitive Development, 10(2),
159–199.
Choi, S., & Gopnik, A. (1995). Early acquisition of verbs
in Korean: A cross-linguistic study. Journal of Child Language, 22(03), 497–529.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Principles and parameters in syntactic
theory. Explanation in linguistics: The logical problem of
language acquisition, 32–75.
Fenson, L., Bates, E., Dale, P. S., Marchman, V. A., Reznick,
J. S., & Thal, D. J. (2007). MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventories.
Fisher, C., Gertner, Y., Scott, R. M., & Yuan, S. (2010). Syntactic bootstrapping. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 1(2), 143–149.
Gathercole, S. E., & Baddeley, A. D. (2014). Working memory and language processing. Psychology Press.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb meanings.
Language Acquisition, 3–55.
Jackson-Maldonado, D., Thal, D., Marchman, V., Bates, E.,
& Gutiérrez-Clellen, V. (1993). Early lexical development
in Spanish-speaking infants and toddlers. Journal of Child
Language, 20(03), 523–549.
Simonsen, H. G., Kristoffersen, K. E., Bleses, D., Wehberg,
S., & Jørgensen, R. N. (2014). The Norwegian Communicative Development Inventories: Reliability, main developmental trends and gender differences. First Language,
34(1), 3–23.
Tardif, T. (1996). Nouns are not always learned before verbs:
Evidence from Mandarin speakers’ early vocabularies. Developmental Psychology, 32(3), 492.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usagebased theory of language acquisition. Harvard University
Press.
Weisleder, A., & Fernald, A. (2013). Talking to children matters: Early language experience strengthens processing and
builds vocabulary. Psychological Science, 24(11), 2143–
2152.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. (2007). Rapid word learning under uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological Science, 18(5), 414–420.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the MacArthur-Bates CDI Advisory Board, Dorthe
Bleses, Kristian Kristoffersen, Rune Nørgaard Jørgensen, and
the members of the Language and Cognition Lab.

References
Baker, M. C. (2005). Mapping the terrain of language learning. Language Learning and Development, 1(1), 93–129.
Bannard, C., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Modeling
children’s early grammatical knowledge. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 106(41), 17284.
Bates, E., & Goodman, J. (1999). On the emergence of grammar from the lexicon. In B. Macwhinney (Ed.), The emergence of language. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bates, E., Marchman, V., Thal, D., Fenson, L., Dale, P.,
Reznick, J. S., . . . Hartung, J. (1994). Developmental and
stylistic variation in the composition of early vocabulary.
Journal of Child Language, 21(01), 85–123.
Bleses, D., Vach, W., Slott, M., Wehberg, S., Thomsen, P.,
Madsen, T. O., & Basbøll, H. (2008). The Danish Communicative Developmental Inventories: Validity and main

261

