Diagrams Benefit Symbolic Problem Solving
Junyi Chu (Junyi.Chu@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Emily R. Fyfe (Emily.R.Fyfe@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Bethany Rittle-Johnson (Bethany.Rittle-Johnson@Vanderbilt.Edu)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University, Peabody College #552, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203-5701 USA
Abstract

referent can be disregarded so that only the relevant
problem features and quantitative relations are depicted.
There are at least three reasons why diagrams might be
helpful for solving symbolic problems such as algebraic
equations.
First, diagrams may help highlight relevant information.
For example, visual scanning is easier when information is
presented spatially than when it is presented in a list of
numbers or verbal statements (Larkin & Simon, 1987).
Thus, including diagrams with equations may facilitate the
cognitive process of searching the problem space and may
help students extract relevant information.
Second, diagrams may decrease working memory load
and support quantitative reasoning (Munez, Orrantia, &
Rosales, 2013; Murata, 2008). For example, in a study with
adults, functional magnetic resonance imaging results
revealed that solving a word problem by constructing a
mental diagram required fewer resources for controlling
attention or retrieving procedural knowledge than solving
the problem by constructing a mental equation (Lee et al.,
2007). Thus, presenting diagrams may free up cognitive
resources that are important for accurate problem solving,
such as correctly selecting and implementing strategies.
Third, diagrams may scaffold algebraic reasoning by
facilitating connections between concrete and symbolic
representations (Koedinger & Terao, 2002; Lee et al., 2013).
Specifically, diagrams may elicit students’ intuitive,
informal knowledge and strategies. Presenting diagrams
with equations may allow students to connect this
knowledge to formal, symbolic problem formats. Thus, a
diagram benefit may be particularly apparent for students
who are still developing familiarity with manipulating
abstract symbols.

Problem presentation can influence students’ understanding,
choice of strategy, and accuracy. For example, the presence
and type of external representation can alter performance. In
this study, we examined the effect of diagrams on students’
performance in a symbolic problem domain. Sixty-one
seventh-grade students solved algebraic equations with or
without an accompanying diagram. The presence of diagrams
increased accuracy and use of informal strategies. Overall, the
benefits of diagrams found for word problems generalized to
symbolic problems.
Keywords: External Representation; Problem Solving;
Algebra Equations

Problem Representation
If you had to teach children basic addition, what would be
more helpful – a set of blocks they could touch and count,
or a list of common arithmetic equations such as “2+3=5”?
External representations such as blocks and equations
impact learning and performance (Belenky & Schalk, 2014).
They exist as physical symbols or objects and impact how
people internally represent problems, which in turn
influences how they solve the problems (Koedinger, Alibali,
& Nathan, 2008).
External representations vary in their concreteness.
Concrete representations such as pictures, diagrams, and
physical models are grounded in familiar experiences,
connect with learners’ prior knowledge, and have an
identifiable perceptual correspondence with their referents
(Fyfe, McNeil, Son, & Goldstone, 2014). However, they
may contain extraneous perceptual details that distract
learners from relevant information or inhibit transfer of
knowledge to novel situations (Harp & Mayer, 1997;
Kaminsky, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2008).
In contrast,
symbolic representations such as formal equations and line
graphs eliminate extraneous surface details, are more
arbitrarily related to their referents, and represent the
underlying structure of the referent more efficiently. Thus,
they allow greater flexibility and generalizability to multiple
contexts, but may appear as meaningless symbols to
learners who lack conceptual understanding (Nathan, 2012).
Diagrams are one type of concrete, external representation
thought to aid problem solving. In this study we focus on
the effect of combining diagrams with a more symbolic
representation, namely, algebraic equations.

Evidence for a Diagram Benefit
In addition to theoretical reasons for a diagram benefit, there
are several lines of work suggesting that diagrams can
improve mathematical problem solving. Past research has
focused on the benefits of diagrams for solving word
problems.
The first line of evidence comes from research on
individual differences in the spontaneous use of diagrams
during word problem solving. 4th to 6th grade students who
tend to use diagrams, whether by drawing diagrams on
paper or by mental visualization, are more accurate solvers
(e.g. Edens & Potter, 2008; Hegarty & Kozhevnikov, 1999).
Similar results are reported for students with learning
disabilities (Van Garderen & Montague, 2003).

Potential Benefits of Diagrams
Diagrams are schematic visual representations that express
information via spatial relationships. Concrete details of the

381

A second line of evidence for a diagram benefit comes
from instructional practice. Countries such as Japan and
Singapore have long incorporated diagrams into math
instruction on a national level, and these countries typically
perform at the top in international tests of mathematics
achievement (Murata, 2008; Ng & Lee, 2009). For instance,
1st and 2nd graders in Singapore are introduced to a heuristic
using horizontal bar diagram drawings to solve word
problems (Ng & Lee, 2009). Students who construct a
diagram representation are able to use informal arithmetic
strategies to solve algebraic problems, thus making
algebraic problems accessible earlier – beginning in 3rd
grade, as opposed to the 7th grade in most US classrooms
(Lee et al, 2013). In fact, 6th grade pre-algebra students in
the US were able to learn and apply this diagram heuristic to
solve algebra word problems (Koedinger & Terao, 2002).
Extensive interventions that include practice generating
diagrams have helped U.S. 3rd grade students improve their
word problem solving success (Jitendra et al., 2007).
However, it is unclear if benefits of the intervention are due
to the use of diagrams or to receiving more general
problem-solving strategy instruction.
A third, more direct line of research clarified this issue by
experimentally manipulating whether students are given
diagrams in conjunction with word problems. Munez,
Orrantia, and Rosales (2013) found that presenting novel
diagrams could enhance 9th graders’ accuracy and response
times on arithmetic word problems. Further, the
improvement was greatest on more difficult problems.
These findings are consistent with similar research on
undergraduates (Lewis, 1989). However, the benefits of
provided diagrams may be less robust in middle school
students. Booth and Koedinger (2012) assessed 6th to 8th
grade students on three algebraic problems differing in
complexity. Each problem was presented in one of three
formats: equation only, word, or word-with-diagram. The
diagrams used were novel to students and tailored to each
problem. While high-ability students of all grades
performed equally with or without diagrams, low-ability
students in the 7th and 8th grades were more accurate and
made fewer conceptual errors on word problems with
diagrams. However, these students benefited from diagrams
only on the more complex double-reference problem where
the unknown variable appeared twice. No diagram benefit
was found on the simpler single-reference problem where
the variable appeared only once. This suggests that grade,
ability level and problem complexity may be key
moderators of the potential diagram benefit. Although
informative, this study did not include an equation-withdiagram condition, which would have revealed whether the
diagram benefit was consistent across problem types or only
for word problems.
In summary, diagrams generally aid in problem
comprehension and solution of word problems. Little is
known about the use of diagrams with more symbolic tasks
such as equation solving. Extending the diagram research to
a symbolic domain will test the generalizability of the

diagram effect and also provide insight into how children
interpret and solve symbolic problems.

Current Study
The present study investigated the effectiveness of
presenting diagrams alongside algebraic equations. Previous
research suggests that diagrams can help students make
sense of word problems. However, algebra equations are
more abstract than word problems. Algebra equations not
only require students to understand complex mathematical
structure, but also require students to decode the symbolic
language of algebra (Payne & Squibb, 1990).
Our primary research question was whether the presence
of diagrams would influence algebraic equation-solving
performance, including accuracy, type of errors made, and
strategy use. We predicted that problem-solving accuracy
would be higher if a diagram was provided than if it was
not. We also hypothesized that diagrams could elicit
students’ intuitive knowledge of quantitative relations in the
problem. Similar to findings in word problems (e.g.
Koedinger & Nathan, 2004), this should reduce the
frequency of conceptual errors, and increase both the usage
of non-algebraic strategies and the accuracy of algebraic
strategies.
Our secondary research question was whether the effect
of diagrams would depend on student or problem
characteristics. We explored problem complexity and
students’ general math ability as two factors that could
influence the benefits of diagrams. We varied problem
complexity by including both single-reference and more
difficult double-reference problems, which differed in
whether the variable appeared once or twice in the equation
(Table 1). We explored the importance of general math
ability by working with students drawn from advanced and
regular mathematics classes.
Table 1: Examples of equations and diagrams
Equation

Diagram

SingleReference

(x-45) / 3 = 20.5

DoubleReference

N + 1/5N = 30

Note: These two equations were taken from Booth &
Koedinger (2012). Other equations were adapted from these.

Method
Middle-school students participated in an experimenter-led
classroom session. Using a within-subjects design, we
manipulated the presence of diagrams during the equation
solving assessment.

382

Participants

a double-reference problem. After 10 minutes of individual
work, the experimenter announced the correct answer for
each problem. Students checked their own work. The intent
was to increase familiarity with the diagrams.

Participants were 62 seventh-grade students from four
classes attending an independent private school. Students
were tested 2 months into their first pre-algebra course. Two
classes (34 students) were in an advanced math class, which
covered the same breadth of content but in greater depth.
Students were placed into the advanced class by their math
teachers based on multiple components of their 6th grade
performance, including standardized test scores and in-class
grades. Students had experience with reading algebraic
expressions and solving simple one step equations, but had
not studied the equation forms used in the experiment. They
did not have prior experience with the type of diagrams used
in this study. We dropped the data of one student who did
not attempt any of the assessment items. The final sample
contained 61 students (33 male, mean age = 12.7 years).

Representation-translation task. We constructed four
items to measure how well students could translate between
diagrams and equations. The first two problems required
students to choose between two diagrams that described a
given equation. Students received one point for circling the
correct diagram. The next two problems required students to
generate and write an equation describing a given diagram.
Students received one point for writing a valid equation;
expressions (e.g. 2x + 1) were not valid. For both pairs of
problems, a single-reference problem was presented first,
followed by a double-reference problem. Students first read
directions and a completed example before attempting each
pair of problems. No feedback was provided. We included
this task as a check of how well students were able to make
the connection between diagrams and equations.

Design and Procedure
Students completed the experiment in their classrooms
during their regular 50-minute math period. The experiment
included four parts: introduction, diagram practice,
representation translation, and equation solving. The withinsubjects manipulation occurred only during equation
solving. There were no time limits for any of the tasks.
Calculators were not permitted on any task.

Equation-solving Assessment. To evaluate our primary
research question, we designed eight algebra problems
contrasting two factors, presentation format and problem
complexity. Students saw four problems as equations and an
isomorphic set of four problems as equations with
accompanying diagrams, using different variable letters and
constant values. For each presentation format, the first two
problems were single-reference and the other two problems
were double-reference. On the four equation-with-diagram
problems, students also indicated if they had used the
diagram to solve each problem by circling “yes” or “no”
inside a small box below the diagram. This provided a
measure of diagram use frequency.
We designed four counterbalanced forms of the equationsolving assessment to control for order of presentation
(equation-first or equation-with-diagrams first), and version
(which problems had diagrams). Problems were blocked by
presentation format.

Diagram Introduction. The experimenter spent about 8
minutes with the entire class to describe diagrams as a
special kind of picture that represents information about
numbers and quantities. She explained four guidelines used
to construct diagrams, highlighting important features (e.g.
arrows, labels, dotted lines). She described how diagrams
could represent each of the basic operations: addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division. For each operation,
she presented and described an example diagram and asked
students to copy her drawings on a worksheet. These
example diagrams were much simpler than the diagrams
students would encounter in the rest of the experiment. The
intent was to develop basic knowledge of interpreting the
diagrams as they were unfamiliar to the students. No
references to equations were made.
Based on the diagram approach used in Singapore,
diagrams were constructed according to these guidelines: (1)
Quantities were represented by rectangular bars using solid
borders; (2) Dotted vertical lines divided bars into equal
portions; (3) Rectangular bars were labeled internally with
variables; and (4) Horizontal arrows over the length of a bar
indicated the quantity’s magnitude and were labeled with
known values or ‘?’. Diagrams were drawn to approximate
the relative quantities in each problem, but were not of the
same scale across problems.
Diagram practice. To provide brief exposure to problemsolving using diagrams in isolation, we asked students to
work individually on four problems. Students had to solve
for an unknown variable from a given diagram. The
corresponding equation was not included. The first three
problems were single-reference problems and the fourth was

Coding
Students received one point for each correct answer. We
coded students’ errors and strategy use based on their
written work, using the scheme outlined in Tables 2 and 3.
These schemes were adapted from previous research on
students’ solution of algebraic equations and word problems
(Koedinger et al., 2008). To establish inter-rater reliability, a
second rater coded the written responses of 25% of the
children. Inter-rater agreement was high (Cohen’s = .92
for errors, = .85 for strategies).

Results
To evaluate the effect of counterbalanced forms, a 2 (order)
x 2 (version) ANOVA on equation-solving assessment
scores was done. This analysis revealed no significant
effects of either factor or their interaction, F’s < 1. Thus the
subsequent analyses treated the four forms as equivalent.

383

Table 2: Errors made on Equation-solving Assessment
Error
Conceptual

Error frequency
Equation
Equationonly
with-diagram

Definition
Student employs invalid or incomplete strategies.

34 (4.0)

21 (3.0) *

Arithmetic
No Attempt
No Work

Student makes a computational error, but solution is otherwise correct.
4 (1.3)
5 (1.4)
Student leaves problem blank or wrote some form of “I don’t know”.
13 (3.0)
12 (3.0)
Student write incorrect answer without any work shown.
12 (3.3)
15 (3.7)
Student miscopies a value from the problem or from own work, but solution
Copy Slip
2 (.01)
0(-)
is otherwise correct.
Note: Scores are percentages of all problems on the Equation-solving Assessment, presented as mean (with standard errors
in parentheses). * denotes differences at p = .05 level of significance.
We evaluated students’ performance on the equationsolving assessment using a repeated-measures ANOVA
with presentation format (equation or equation-withdiagram) and problem complexity (single- or doublereference) as within-subjects variables and math proficiency
(regular or advanced class) as the between-subjects variable.
As shown in Figure 1, students provided more correct
answers when solving equations with provided diagrams
(48%) than without (36%), F(1,59) = 11.6, p=.001, ηp2 =.16.
Students also solved fewer double-reference equations
correctly (32%) than single-reference equations (50%),
F(1,59) = 17.6, p < .001, ηp2 = .23. Students in advanced
classes solved more problems correctly (56%) than students
in regular classes (22%), F(1,60) = 24.28, p < .001, ηp2 =
.29. None of the two-way or three-way interactions between
presentation format, problem complexity and math ability
were significant (F’s < 1). Thus, the positive effect of
diagrams was consistent across simple and complex
problems and across students with low and high ability.
Eleven students failed to indicate whether they used a
diagram for a specific problem at least once. The remaining
50 students reported using the diagram on a majority of
problems (60% of equation-with-diagram problems).
Students reported using diagrams more often on doublereference problems (72%) than on single-reference
problems (49%), t(49) = 3.34, p < .01. However, reported
diagram use was not correlated with accuracy on equationwith-diagram problems (r = -.045, p > .75).
Table 2 presents the frequencies of each type of error, as a
percentage of all problems on the equation-solving
assessment. Overall, conceptual errors were the most
common. Students made fewer conceptual errors on
equation-with-diagram problems, compared to equationonly problems, t(33) = 3.51, p < .001.
Next consider the strategies students used to solve the
equations (see Table 3). Overall, students used an unwind
strategy twice as often as an algebra strategy (35% vs. 15%
of problems), t(60) = 4.03, p < .001. Though not reliable,
the presence of diagrams marginally increased use of the
unwind strategy, t(60) = 1.69, p < .1. We also evaluated the
effectiveness of each strategy by considering the percentage
of problems where each strategy led to a correct answer.
Overall, accuracy of the strategies was moderate. The

presence of diagrams appeared to increase the success of
these strategies, although overall frequencies are too small
for meaningful statistical analyses.
Finally, consider student success on the representationtranslation task. Students were moderately successful, (M =
2.44 out of 4, SD = 1.35), and their representationtranslation score was positively correlated with their overall
equation-solving accuracy (r = .492, p < .001) To assess if
representation translation ability moderated the diagram
benefit, we calculated a diagram effect score for each
student (equation-with-diagram score – equation score) and
found a small but insignificant correlation between
representation translation score and diagram effect score (r
= .21, p > 0.1).
70
60

Equation-Solving Accuracy (%)

50
Equation

40
30

Equation-withDiagram

20
10
0
Single Reference Double Reference

Figure 1: Percentage correct on Equation-solving
Assessment by presentation format and problem
complexity. Error bars are standard errors.

Discussion
External representations such as diagrams generally support
learning and problem solving. However, incorporating
diagrams with symbolic problems has largely gone
unstudied. As predicted, we found a clear diagram benefit.
Presenting diagrams alongside algebra equations enhanced
students’ accuracy and reduced the frequency of conceptual
errors. The diagram benefit was independent of problem
complexity or students’ math proficiency. In contrast, a
previous study on word problem-solving found that

384

Table 3: Strategies used on Equation-solving Assessment
Strategy
Algebra
Unwind
Guess and Check
Other
Answer Only
Not Attempted

% Used (% Correct)
Equation
Equationonly
with-diagram

Definition
Student uses algebraic manipulations to derive solution. A subequation or simplified algebraic expression is written.
Student works backward using arithmetic strategies to derive
solution.
Student substitutes different value(s) for the variable.
Student uses other strategies, or strategy is ambiguous
Answer is provided without any working.
Student leaves problem blank or wrote some form of “I don’t know”

diagrams were most helpful for more difficult problems and
for students with lower ability (Booth & Koedinger, 2012;
Lewis, 1989). Other research has found that concrete
representations might even reduce performance on complex
problems. For instance, college students are more accurate
solving double-reference problems in equation format than
in word problem format, even though they benefit from the
concreteness of word problems on simpler single-reference
problems (Koedinger et al, 2008). Why did diagrams
provide a clearer benefit in this study than in previous work
with word problems?
One possible explanation is that students in our sample
had greater diagram familiarity and understanding than
students in previous studies, due to the experimenter-led
diagram introduction. We also used a consistent diagram
type for all problems, unlike in Booth & Koedinger’s (2012)
study. However, students had not seen these diagrams
before the experiment, and we did not teach them how to
relate diagrams to equations. The assessment problems used
were also much harder than the examples we used in the
introduction. It is unlikely that familiarity played a major
role for helping students to benefit from diagrams.
Another explanation is the fact that algebra equations are
generally more difficult than equivalent word problems.
Even high school students may make persistent errors in
understanding and solving algebra equations, although they
are more accurate on word problems (Koedinger & Nathan,
2004). When all problems are difficult for most students,
diagrams can aid performance across problem complexity
and students’ math proficiency. Thus, even the simpler
single-reference equation problems used in this study were
likely challenging enough that students benefited from an
alternate concrete representation. Students also indicated
more frequent use of diagrams on more complex doublereference problems, suggesting that they believed diagrams
might be helpful on those problems.
Our results also support some explanations suggested in
the literature. First, diagrams may influence internal
representation. Our finding of a diagram benefit is
consistent with various cognitive models of problem
solving. These models generally posit that constructing
appropriate mental models of a problem is key to successful

17 (51)

15 (62)

32 (51)

38 (69)

5 (46)
15 (19)
19 (24)
13 ( - )

4 (67)
8 (32)
24 (27)
12 ( - )

problem solving (Johnson-Laird, 1983; Koedinger &
Nathan, 2004). Our results match their predictions of
increased accuracy and a trend toward use of more informal
strategies. By providing students with a pre-constructed
diagram, we may have removed some of the difficulty of
constructing an internal representation of the problem,. By
providing an additional external representation on paper, we
may also have reduced students’ working memory and
attention demands by offloading some cognitive processing
onto perceptual processing (e.g. Larkin & Simon, 1987).
Second, diagrams may facilitate informal reasoning.
Consistent with previous research, we found an indication
that students in the current study used more non-algebraic
strategies when concrete diagrams were present (Koedinger
& Nathan, 2004). Similar to how adding a concrete story
context can improve performance on arithmetic problems by
activating real-world knowledge of common operations and
quantitative relations (Carraher, Carraher, & Schliemann,
1985), adding a concrete diagram might improve children’s
performance on algebra equations by activating informal
strategies that do not rely on newer algebraic strategies that
students are in the process of learning.
Despite the positive contributions of the current study, we
are unable to provide detailed accounts of how students
used the diagrams. In order to develop a mechanistic
account of diagrammatic reasoning, future research should
investigate specific processes that problem-solvers engage
in when using a diagram. Do students iterate between
representations or fixate on the more concrete one?
Tracking participants’ eye movements may reveal diagram
elements that are particularly helpful, distracting, or
ignored.
Future research could also investigate potential trait by
treatment interactions, such as the influence of quantitative
reasoning, visual-spatial ability, or representation translation
skill on students’ use of diagrams. For instance, students of
different math ability may benefit from diagrams due to
different reasons. Higher-ability students, who are more
likely to spontaneously generate useful diagrams on their
own, may benefit because diagrams more closely matched
their own internal representation of the problem. However,
low-ability students may benefit because diagrams highlight

385

important information they would have otherwise ignored or
misinterpreted. Understanding how different students utilize
multiple representations can help educators personalize
instruction.
In summary, the current study extends previous research
of a diagram benefit in problem solving to a symbolic
domain. Providing novel diagrams enhanced students’
accuracy on difficult algebra equation problems independent
of the problem and student characteristics studied. Concrete
external representations may be more powerful than
previously leveraged, especially when combined with
symbolic problems.

Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983) Mental Models. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Kaminsky, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2008).
The advantage of abstract examples in learning math.
Science , 320, 454-455.
Koedinger, K. R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2008).
Trade-offs between grounded and abstract representtions:
Evidence from algebra problem solving. Cognitive
Science , 32, 366-397
Koedinger, K. R., & Nathan, M. J. (2004). The real story
behind story problems: Effects of representations on
quantitative reasoning. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 13(2), 129-164.
Koedinger, K. R., & Terao, A. (2002). A cognitive task
analysis of using pictures to support pre-algebraic
reasoning. In C. D. Schunn, & W. Gray (Ed.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 542-547). Nahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Larkin, J., & Simon, H. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth 10,000 words. Cognitive Science , 11,
65-99.
Lee, K., Khng, K. H., Ng, S. F., & Ng, J. (2013). Longer
bars for bigger numbers? Children's usage and
understanding of graphical representation of algebraic
problems. Frontline Learning Research , 1, 81-96.
Lee, K., Lim, Z. Y., Yeong, S., Ng, S.F., Venkatraman, V.,
& Chee, M. (2007). Strategic differences in algebraic
problem solving: Neuroanatomical correlates. Brain
Research, 1155, 163-171.
Lewis, A. B. (1989). Training students to represent
arithmetic word problems. Journal of Educational
Psychology , 79, 363-371.
Munez, D., Orrantia, J., & Rosales, J. (2013). The effect of
external representations on compare word problems:
Supporting mental model construction. The Journal of
Experimental Education , 81 (3), 337-355.
Murata, A. (2008). Mathematics teaching and learning as a
mediating process: The case of tape diagrams.
Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 10, 374-406.
Nathan, M. J. (2012). Rethinking formalisms in formal
education. Educational Psychologist, 47(2), 125–148.
Ng, S. F., & Lee, K. (2009). The model method: Singapore
children’s tool for representing and solving algebraic
word problems. Journal for Research in Mathematics
Education, 40(3), 282-313.
Payne, S. J., & Squibb, H. R. (1990). Algebra mal-rules and
cognitive accounts of error. Cognitive Science , 14, 445481.
Van Garderen, D., & Montague, M. (2003). Visual-spatial
representation, mathematical problem solving, and
students of varying abilities. Learning Disabilities
Research and Practice , 18 (4), 246-254.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a stipend from the
Vanderbilt Undergraduate Summer Research Program and
the Littlejohn Family. We would like to thank Joel Bezaire
and his students at the University School Nashville for
participating in the empirical study, and members of the
Children’s Learning Lab for their help with data coding.

References
Belenky, D., & Schalk, L. (2014). The effects of idealized
and grounded materials on learning, transfer, and interest:
An organizing framework for categorizing external
knowledge representations. Educational Psychology
Review , 27-50.
Booth, J. R., & Koedinger, K. R. (2012). Are diagrams
always helpful tools? Developmental and individual
differences in the effect of presentation format on student
problem solving. British Journal of Educational
Psychology , 82, 492-511
Carraher, T. N., Carraher, D. W., & Schliemann, A. D.
(1985). Mathematics in the streets and in schools. British
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 3, 21-29.
Edens, K., & Potter, E. (2008). How students "unpack" the
structure of a word problem: Graphic representations and
problem solving. School Science and Mathematics , 108
(5), 184-196.
Fyfe, E. R., McNeil, N. M., Son, J. Y., & Goldstone, R. L.
(2014). Concreteness fading in mathematics and science
instruction: A systematic review. Educational Psychology
Review , 26 (1), 9-25.
Harp, S. F., & Mayer, R. E. (1997). The role of interest in
learning from scientific text and illustrations: On the
distinctions between emotional interest and cognitive
interest. Journal of Educational Psychology , 89 (1), 92102.
Hegarty, M., & Kozhevnikov, M. (1999). Types of visualspatial representations and mathematical problem solving.
Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 (4), 684-689.
Jitendra A. K., Griffin C. C., Haria, P., Leh, J., Adams, A. &
Kaduvettoor, A. (2007). A comparison of single and
multiple strategy instruction on third-grade students’
mathematical problem solving. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 99(1), 115-127.

386

