Disambiguation Across the Senses: The Role of Discovery-Based Interference
Jenna L. Wall (jwall4@kent.edu)
Department of Psychological Sciences, 600 Hilltop Drive
Kent, OH 44242 USA

William E. Merriman (wmerrima@kent.edu)
Department of Psychological Sciences, 600 Hilltop Drive
Kent, OH 44242 USA

Abstract
When asked to find the referent of a novel label, children
typically select an object that they cannot already name (the
“disambiguation effect”; Merriman & Bowman, 1998).
However, when the task required cross-modal extension of a
label, children did not show this effect (Scofield, HernandezReif, & Keith, 2009). In Experiments 1 and 2, preschoolers
learned a label for a visual object, then examined it and a
novel object by touch. On the critical trials, children were
asked to decide which tactile object was the referent of a
novel label. Four-year-olds only showed the disambiguation
effect if, prior to the label test, they had identified the tactile
object that matched the visual training object. The results of
Experiment 3 suggest that the 4-year-olds expected to be
asked about the matching object, which interfered with their
tendency to disambiguate. This discovery-based interference
appears to attenuate the use of common word learning
strategies.
Keywords: word learning; novel word mapping; mutual
exclusivity; cross-modal perception; language learning
strategies; attention; discovery

Introduction
Infants as young as 16 months tend to map novel labels onto
novel, unnamed objects (Halberda, 2003; Markman,
Wasow, & Hansen, 2003; Mervis & Bertrand, 1994). For
example, if shown a familiar object (e.g., a cup) and an
unfamiliar object (e.g., a garlic press) and asked to pick the
“zav”, children typically choose the unfamiliar object. This
tendency, dubbed the “disambiguation” effect (Merriman &
Bowman, 1998), is robust by 2.5 years and has been central
for advancing our understanding of early word-learning
(Evey & Merriman, 1998; Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Bailey,
& Wenger, 1992; Markman & Wachtel, 1988).
Interestingly, the disambiguation effect appears to be less
robust when label extension is cross-modal. Scofield,
Hernandez-Reif, and Keith (2009; Experiment 2) taught 2to 5-year-olds a label for a visual object (e.g., “blicket”),
which was then presented along with a novel object in the
tactile modality (i.e., the objects could be touched but not
seen). On some trials, children were asked which tactile
object was the referent of the trained label (e.g., a “blicket”).
On other trials, they were asked which tactile object was the
referent of a novel label (e.g., a “tigg”). Previous research
has demonstrated that even pre-linguistic infants were able
to detect some visual-tactile shape matches (Hernandez-Reif
& Bahrick, 2001; Gottfried, Rose, & Bridger, 1977;

Meltzoff & Borton, 1979; see Scofield et al., 2009, for a
review). Therefore, Scofield et al. (09) argued that
preschoolers should have little difficulty disambiguating
across sensory modalities.
Children did not reliably select a novel tactile object,
however. In fact, they selected the already-nameable tactile
object more often than the novel one. This finding is
surprising given the robust disambiguation effect in noncross-modal contexts suggesting that other factors may
interfere with this common word-learning strategy.
Some theories suggest that the disambiguation effect will
only occur if a child retrieves a name for the familiar object
and notes that it differs from the novel label he or she is
asked to extend (Halberda, 2003, 2006; Grassmann,
Schulze, & Tomasello, 2009; Markman & Wachtel, 1988;
Merriman & Marazita, 1995). Thus, one explanation for not
disambiguating in cross-modal contexts is that preschoolers
failed to learn the initial object-label pairing.
To rule out this alternative explanation, Experiment 1
(modeled after Scofield et al., 2009; Experiment 2)
incorporated stronger label training procedures and, in one
condition, highly contrastive language to highlight the
difference between the trained and novel labels. To
foreshadow our results, children in Experiment 1 failed to
show the disambiguation effect despite our manipulations.
However, Experiment 1 yielded an unexpected finding that
suggested an additional explanation for children’s
performance. Some children selected the already-nameable
tactile object even before they were asked to extend a label.
This finding suggests that children may have anticipated
being asked about this object.
This observation led us to propose the discovery-based
interference hypothesis. Discovery of the cross-modal match
may have evoked a desire or expectation to talk about it.
Even infants show a tendency to point out the presence of a
previously shared object (Liebal, Carpenter, and Tomasello,
2010; Moll, Richter, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2008; Saylor
& Ganea, 2007). Alternatively, discovery of the cross-modal
match may have elicited a surprise reaction that interfered
with children’s ability to follow the experimenter’s request.
According to some theories, a common consequence of
surprise is disruption of ongoing processes and reallocation
of attention to the surprise-inducing stimulus (Roseman,
2013; Reisenzein, 2000). Any of these factors could have
disrupted the processes necessary for disambiguation. The
goal of Experiment 2 was to determine whether eliminating

2565

discovery-based interference would improve performance.
Finally, Experiment 3 provides further evidence that a
strong expectation to be asked about the match may have
attenuated children’s tendency to disambiguate across the
senses.

Experiment 1
Participants
The basic condition consisted of 11 3-year-olds (M = 43
months, range = 36-47 months; five boys) and 13 4-yearolds (M = 56 months, range = 52-59 months; seven boys).
The contrastive condition consisted of 15 3-year-olds (M =
43 months, range = 38-47 months; seven boys) and 17 4year-olds (M = 54 months, range = 48-58 months; nine
boys). An additional seven children were excluded from
data analysis due to failure to follow directions. All of the
children were recruited from preschools in middle- to upperclass regions of Northeast Ohio. Nearly all were Caucasian
and all were monolingual speakers of English. Each child
received a sticker for participating.

Materials
A white wooden box measuring 16 in X 17 in X 8.5 in was
used. One side was open so the experimenter could transfer
objects in and out of it, and the opposite side had two arm
holes cut into it. These were 3 inches in diameter and had
cotton sleeves attached to them. The side with the arm holes
faced the child so he or she could put his or her arms inside
the box without seeing inside (see Figure 1).
A different set of three unfamiliar objects (two of which
were identical to each other) was used on each of four trials.
These objects were small, easy to manipulate, and had
names the children did not know (e.g., a plastic t-joint). Six
nonsense words (e.g. zav, cobe, ferp) were used as either a
trained or novel label. None of these words was used on
more than one trial, and the order of trial type and novel
labels was counterbalanced across all children.

Figure 1. Stimuli for the Cross-Modal Label Extension task
in Experiments 1-3.

Procedure
The experimenter and child sat opposite of each other at a
small table, and the experimental box was introduced. As a
warm up, the child was asked to close his or her eyes while
the experimenter placed a soft, foam ball inside the box. The
child was then asked to place his or her arms through the
arm holes, pick up the object, and answer three questions:
“Is it hard or is it soft?”, “Is it big or is it small?”, and
finally, “What is it?” Each child was provided feedback and
shown the object afterward.
At the start of each of the four test trials, the experimenter
showed the child a novel object and labeled it three times
(e.g. “This is a zav. It’s a zav. You’re looking at a zav.”).
The child was prompted to repeat the name out loud. To
ensure that the child had learned the label for the object well
enough to retrieve it later, a distractor task that lasted
approximately 5 s followed. The object was removed from
sight and the child was asked to state how many fingers the
experimenter held up. The child did this for two finger
displays. The experimenter then placed the object back on
top of the box and asked the child what it was called. If the
child did not recall the label correctly, the experimenter
labeled it herself and then repeated the whole procedure
(beginning with, for example, “This is a zav. It’s a zav.
You’re looking at a zav”) until the child successfully
recalled the label. If the child did not recall the label after
three training and test cycles, the experimenter taught the
name one more time and then proceeded to the cross-modal
label test. Failure to meet this criterion was rare (10% of
trials).
Once the child demonstrated an ability to retrieve the
trained label, the training object was placed on top of the
box so that it remained visible to the child. The
experimenter instructed the child to close his or her eyes
while she placed two objects inside of the box. One was
identical to the training object (i.e. another “zav”) while the
other was a different object. The child was then instructed to
open his or her eyes, place his or her hands through the
sleeves, hold the objects that the experimenter placed in
each hand, and then indicate which one was the referent of a
label.
In the basic condition, the label request took the form:
“Do you know what a ___ is? One of these is a ___. Which
one is the ___?” On the two trained label trials, the trained
label filled the blanks in the form. On the two novel label
trials, a novel label filled these blanks. The form of the label
request was nearly identical in the contrastive condition,
except that on the two novel label trials, the first slot was
filled by the trained label to highlight the contrast between it
and the novel label (e.g., “Do you know what a zav is? One
of these is a tigg. Which one is the tigg?”). In both
conditions, the first and fourth trials involved trained label
tests for half of the participants. For the other participants,
the first and fourth trials involved novel label tests. Children
indicated their response to the test questions by shaking,
lifting, or extending one of the objects toward the
experimenter. The objects remained hidden until after

2566

children made their selection. Some children also made a
confirming statement (i.e., “this one”) while making their
selection. Minimal feedback was provided (e.g., “Ok.”)

Twenty-four 4-year-olds (M = 54 months; range = 49-59
months; 14 boys) were recruited from preschools similar to
those sampled in Experiment 1. All of the children were
monolingual speakers of English and nearly all were
Caucasian. Each child received a sticker for participating.

Results
Performance on the trained label trials was excellent (M
correct = 1.77, SD = .54; max = 2) and exceeded chance
levels, t(55) = 10.66, p = <.01. In contrast, performance on
the novel label trials was at chance (M correct = 1.02, SD =
.78; max = 2), p > .05. Because there were only three
possible values for performance (0, 1, 2 correct), a loglinear analysis was conducted. Performance did not vary by
age, condition, or age x condition, ps > .10 (see Figure 2).

Materials
The materials were identical to Experiment 1.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to Experiment 1 except every
child was asked to identify the cross-modal match before
being asked to select the referent of a label. That is, after
recalling the visual training object’s label (e.g.,”zav”) and
placing their hands inside of the box, children were asked,
“Which one is the same as that one [gazing at the visual
training object on top of the box]?”). One some trials,
children were then asked to extend the trained label (i.e.,
“Do you know what a zav is? One of these is a zav. Which
one is the zav?”). On others, children were asked to extend a
novel label (i.e., “Do you know what a tigg is? One of those
is a tigg. Which one is the tigg?”).

Results

Figure 2: Experiment 1 Performance by Age and Trial
Type.

Conclusions
After learning a label for a visual object, 3- and 4-year-olds
extended that label to its tactile counterpart rather than to a
novel object. When tested on a novel label, however,
children chose both objects equally. Although our
participants did not show a preference for the cross-modal
match on these trials (as they did in Scofield et al., 2009),
they still failed to show the disambiguation effect.
Interestingly, several 4-year-olds selected the cross-modal
match before they were asked to extend a label. This finding
suggests that older children may have wanted or expected to
talk about this object, which may have interfered with
processing the experimenter’s request on the novel label
trials.
In Experiment 2, this potential interference was
eliminated by giving children an opportunity to inform the
experimenter of their discovery of the cross-modal match.
On every trial, children were asked to indicate which tactile
object was the same as the visual object before they were
asked to extend a label. The rest of the procedure was
identical to Experiment 1. No 3-year-old spontaneously
commented on the cross-modal match in Experiment 1.
Therefore, only 4-year-olds were included in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
Participants

Four-year-olds’ performance on the trained label trials was
excellent (M = 1.71, SD = .62; max = 2), exceeded chance,
t(23) = 5.56, p < .01, and comparable to that of Experiment
1 (M for 4-year-olds = 1.80, SD = .48). Performance on the
novel label trials also exceeded chance (M = 1.83, SD = .48;
max = 2), t(23) = 8.48, p = < .01. This pattern differs
considerably from what was observed in Experiment 1 (see
Figure 1). A 2 (Experiment) X 3 (trials correct: 2, 1, 0)
Fisher’s Exact Probability test revealed that this difference
in performance is unlikely to occur by chance (p = .00068).

Conclusions
Our results support the discovery-based interference
hypothesis. In contrast to Experiment 1, 4-year-olds showed
a strong tendency to disambiguate on the novel label trials.
The only procedural difference was that, before being asked
to extend a label, children in the current experiment were
asked to identify the cross-modal match. This procedure was
intended to control for possible interference resulting from
discovery of the familiar, previously shared object. All
children discovered the cross-modal match and then had a
chance to communicate this discovery before the label test.
Although the results of Experiment 2 are consistent with
the idea that 4-year-olds were influenced by discoverybased interference, the data do not tell us whether this
interference was due to an expectation or desire to talk
about the cross-modal match or simply surprise at
discovering it. The purpose of Experiment 3 was to assess
the presence of an expectation. That is, upon discovering the
cross-modal match, will preschoolers report an expectation
to talk about it? A strong expectation may shift attention to
this object, leaving fewer resources available to process the
experimenter’s request.

2567

In a similar paradigm as Experiment 1 and 2, 3- and 4year-olds were asked a series of questions about what they
thought the experimenter might ask next. If children have an
expectation to talk about the cross-modal match, they were
expected to mention this object after at least one of the
questions.

Experiment 3
Participants
Twenty-six 3-year-olds (M = 42 months; range = 36-47
months; 11 boys) and 26 4-year-olds (M = 53 months; range
= 46-59 months; 16 boys) participated. All of the children
were recruited from preschools in middle- to upper-class
regions of Northeast Ohio. Nearly all were Caucasian and
all were monolingual speakers of English. Each child
received a sticker for participating.

Materials
The materials were identical to Experiment 1 except only
one of the unfamiliar object sets was used.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to Experiment 1 except instead
of asking children to indicate the referent of a label, children
were given approximately 5 s to make any spontaneous
comments about the objects. After these 5 s, children were
asked a series of questions about what they thought the
experiment might ask next. These questions proceeded from
general to specific (see Table 1). Any comments or actions
indicating one of the objects was recorded.

Results
Table 1 shows how often children referenced the crossmodal match after each question. On average, 4-year-olds
mentioned the match more often than 3-year-olds (M = 1.81,
SD = 1.13 and M = 1.04, SD = 1.00, respectively; max = 4),
t(50) = -2.60, p = .01. This shows that the older children had
a stronger expectation that they would be asked about the
match compared to the younger children.
Table 1: Number of Children Who Referenced the CrossModal Match After Each Prompt.
________________________________________________
Prompts
3-year-olds
4-year-olds
Spontaneous comments
0
3
“What do you think I’m
going to ask you?”

1

5

“Which one do you think
13
I’m going to ask you to pick?”

19

“Can you hand me one?”

20

13

Discussion
An important question in language development is how
children acquire new words. One common word-learning
strategy is to assume that novel labels refer to novel,
unnameable objects. This assumption helps children
“disambiguate” in situations where the referent is
ambiguous. However, children are less likely to use this
otherwise robust strategy when extending object labels
across sense modalities. We investigated the possibility that
discovery-based interference, an expectation or desire to
communicate their discovery of a previously shared object,
disrupts disambiguation. Our results provide two novel
findings.
First, strong label training procedures (i.e., training to
production) increased the likelihood that children
disambiguated. This finding is consistent with both the
Mutual Exclusivity (Markman & Wachtel, 1988; Merriman
& Bowman, 1989) and pragmatic accounts (Clark, 1990;
Diesendruck & Markson, 2001; Gathercole, 1989) of word
learning, which posit that children will only avoid mapping
a novel label onto a familiar object if he or she can retrieve
its known name. Preschoolers failed to disambiguate even
with the stronger training procedures, however, suggesting
that other factors influenced their behavior.
The second, and perhaps most intriguing, finding is the
presence of discovery-based interference. Experiment 2
provided compelling evidence that the discovery of a crossmodal match appeared to trigger an expectation to talk about
it, at least in 4-year-olds. Experiment 3 demonstrated that 4year-olds, but not 3-year-olds, expected the Experimenter to
ask them about the matching object rather than the novel
one. To the best of our knowledge, the current studies are
the first to demonstrate a task-specific expectation of this
sort in young children.
We argue that this expectation influenced children’s
tendency to disambiguate by shifting their attention to the
cross-modal match and away from the experimenter’s
request. With fewer resources available to fully comprehend
the request, children’s ability to carry out essential processes
necessary for successful disambiguation (i.e., retrieving the
familiar object’s label and noting it mismatches the novel
label) was disrupted.
Previous research has shown that infants will
spontaneously inform an adult upon detecting an object that
had been a focus of shared interest in a different context. In
a study by Liebal, Carpenter, and Tomasello (2010), 18months-olds played with a set of toys with one experimenter
and a different set of toys with a second experimenter.
Later, one of the experimenters led the infants to a room
where there was a picture of each type of toy. The majority
of infants spontaneously pointed towards the toy that they
and the accompanying experimenter had played with earlier
(see also Moll, Richter, Carpenter & Tomasello, 2008;
Saylor & Ganea, 2007). Similarly, Liszkowski, Carpenter,
and Tomasello (2007) found that 12-month-olds pointed
more towards an event that an experimenter had previously

2568

expressed interest in, even if the experimenter was already
aware that it was occurring.
Based on the studies mentioned above, even infants show
a tendency to point out the presence of a previously shared
object. It is unclear, then, why the 4-year-olds reported a
stronger expectation to talk about the cross-modal match in
Experiment 3 than the 3-year-olds. Perhaps the 3-year-olds
did not experience discovery-based interference because
they lacked an expectation or desire to communicate about
the match. They may have assumed that, because the
experimenter had visual access to the tactile objects as well
as the training object, she did not need to be informed of the
cross-modal match.
Perhaps only children with a more advanced theory of
mind (i.e., the 4-year-olds) may realize that the
experimenter does not know that they have made this
discovery, and so only these children may desire or expect
to communicate about it. Research on children’s
understanding of teaching supports this possibility. For
example, only after the fourth birthday do most children
understand that teachers sometimes ask for information that
they themselves already possess in order to determine if the
learner also possesses it (Ziv, Solomon, & Frye, 2008).
Perhaps 4-year-olds expected the experimenter to ask about
the cross-modal match in order to determine whether the
child had discovered it.
This finding seems counterintuitive. The results of the
current studies suggest that older children may fail to show
the disambiguation effect, a sophisticated word-learning
strategy, when the context involves making a discovery.
Instead, based on a strong pragmatic expectation, these
children may adopt a different strategy that is arguably even
more sophisticated, yet detrimental to their performance.
Future research should investigate which factor(s) influence
this expectation and whether different types of discoveries
promote this expectation more than others.
It is important to note that typical tests of disambiguation
(i.e., non-cross-modal ones) do not evoke discovery-based
interference because children never make a discovery. For
example, in some of these studies (e.g., Markman &
Wachtel, 1989; Merriman & Bowman, 1989), no label was
trained at the beginning of a trial; rather, an exemplar of a
highly familiar label (e.g., a shoe) and a novel object were
presented and the child was asked to select the referent of a
novel label. So, at no point did participants discover that one
of the choice objects matched the object they just learned a
name for. In other studies (e.g., Diesendruck & Markson,
2001; Suanda & Namy, 2013), a label was first trained for
an unfamiliar object, then the child was asked to decide
whether this object or a novel object was the referent of a
novel label. However, the training object remained in view
throughout the trial, and thus, was never discovered again.
Our lab is currently investigating whether this
interference is unique to a cross-modal context, or if it is
more robust. For example, if children were to discover that
one of two visual objects matches a visual object they just
learned a name for, will this non cross-modal discovery

undermine their tendency to disambiguate? This prediction
may only be supported if the experimenter’s view of the
choice objects is blocked. Otherwise, children may assume
that the experimenter knows they have made the discovery,
and would thus have no reason to communicate or expect to
be asked about it. Future research will need to determine
whether discovery-based interference is unique to wordlearning, or if it affects performance on other types of tasks,
as well.
Overall, the current studies demonstrate the complexity of
language learning. Both lexical and pragmatic cues help
young children decipher the meaning of new words. When
pitted against one another, however, children sometimes
follow a pragmatic cue even when it leads to an inaccurate
response (Grassmann & Tomasello, 2010). Thus, under
some conditions, pragmatics may attenuate the use and
effectiveness of other word learning strategies. We are the
first to provide evidence that the disambiguation effect, a
common word-learning strategy, can be disrupted by an
expectation to communicate about the discovery of a
previously shared object.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the children and parents who volunteered
to participate in these studies. We also thank the
participating preschools from the Kent and surrounding
areas. Our work would not be possible without their
support.

References
Clark, E. V. (1990). On the pragmatics of contrast. Journal
of Child Language, 17, 417–431.
Diesendruck, G., & Markson, L. (2001). Children’s
avoidance of lexical overlap: A pragmatic account.
Developmental Psychology, 37, 630–641.
Evey, J. A., & Merriman, W. E. (1998). The prevalence and
the weakness of an early name mapping preference.
Journal of Child Language, 25, 121-147.
Gathercole, V.C. (1989) Contrast: A semantic constraint?
Journal of Child Language, 16, 685-702.
Golinkoff, R. M, Hirsh-Pasek, K., Bailey, L. M., & Wenger,
N. R. (1992). Young children and adults use lexical
principles to learn new nouns. Developmental
Psychology, 28, 99-108.
Gottfried, A. W., Rose, S.A., & Bridger, W. H. (1977).
Cross modal transfer in young infants. Child
Development, 48, 118-123.
Grassmann, S., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Young children
follow pointing over words in interpreting acts of
reference. Developmental Science, 13, 252-263.
Grassmann, S., Schulze, C., & Tomasello, M. (2009). A
pragmatic perspective on mutual exclusivity. Presentation
at the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in
Child Development, Denver, CO.
Halberda, J. (2003). The development of a word-learning
strategy. Cognition, 87, B23-B34.
Halberda, J. (2006). Is this a dax which I see before me?

2569

Use of the logical arguments disjunctive syllogism
supports world-learning in children and adults. Cognitive
Psychology, 53, 310-344.
Hernandez-Reif, M., & Bahrick, L. E. (2001). The
development of visual-tactual perception of objects:
Amodal relations provide the basis for learning arbitrary
relations. Infancy, 2, 51-72.
Liebal, K., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Infants’
use of shared experience in declarative pointing. Infancy,
15, 545-556.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2007).
Pointing out new news, old news, and absent referents at
12 months of age. Developmental Science, 10, F1-F7.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s use
of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meaning of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121–157.
Markman, E.M., Wasow, J. L., & Hansen, M. B. (2003).
Use of mutual exclusivity assumption by young
word learners. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 241-275.
Meltzoff, A. N., & Borton, R. W. (1979). Intersensory
matching by human neonates. Nature, 282, 403-404.
Merriman, W. E., & Bowman, L. L. (1989). The mutual
exclusivity bias in children’s word learning. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 54 (3–
4, SerialNumberNo.220).
Merriman, W. E., & Marazita, J. M. (1995). The effect of
hearing similar-sounding words on young 2-year-olds’
disambiguation of novel noun reference. Developmental
Psychology, 31, 973-984.
Mervis, C. B., & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the
novel name – nameless category (N3C) principle. Child
Development, 65, 1646-1662.
Moll, H., Richter, N., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M.
(2008). Fourteen-month-olds know what “we” have
shared in a special way. Infancy, 13, 90-101.
Reisenzein, R. (2000). The subjective experience of
surprise. In H. Bless & J. P. Forgas (Eds.), The message
within: The role of subjective experience in social
cognition and behavior (pp. 262-279). Philadelphia, PA:
Psychology Press.
Roseman, I. J. (2013). Appraisal in the motion system:
Coherence in strategies for coping. Emotion Review, 5,
141-149.
Saylor, M. M., & Ganea, P. (2007). Infants interpret
ambiguous requests for absent objects. Developmental
Psychology, 43, 696-704.
Scofield, J., Hernandez-Reif, M., & Keith, A. B. (2009).
Preschool children’s multimodal word learning. Journal
of Cognition and Development, 10, 3.06-333.
Suanda, S. H., & Namy, L. L. (2013). Young word learners’
interpretations of words and symbolic gestures within the
context of ambiguous reference. Child Development, 84,
143-153.

2570

