Does the Frequency of Pedagogical Agent Intervention Relate to Learners’ SelfReported Boredom while using Multiagent Intelligent Tutoring Systems?
Nicholas Mudrick (nvmudric@ncsu.edu)
North Carolina State University, Department of Psychology, 2310 Stinson Drive, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
Roger Azevedo (razeved@ncsu.edu)
North Carolina State University, Department of Psychology, 2310 Stinson Drive, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
Michelle Taub (mtaub@ncsu.edu)
North Carolina State University, Department of Psychology, 2310 Stinson Drive, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
François Bouchet (francois.bouchet@lip6.fr)
Université Pierre et Marie Curie - LIP6, BP 169, 4 place Jussieu, 75252 Paris Cedex 05, France
Abstract
Pedagogical agents (PAs) have the ability to scaffold and
regulate students’ learning about complex topics while using
intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs). Research on ITSs
predominantly focuses on the impact that these systems have
on overall learning, while the specific components of humanITS interaction, such as student-PA dialogue within the
system, are given little attention. One hundred undergraduate
students interacted with MetaTutor, a multiagent hypermedia
ITS, to learn about the human circulatory system. Data from
these interactions were drawn from questionnaires and logfiles to determine the extent to which a specific agent from
MetaTutor, Sam the Strategizer, impacted students’ overall
emotions while using the system. Results indicated that Sam
negatively impacted students’ experiences of enjoyment, in
relation to the other agents of MetaTutor, and the frequency
of Sam’s interactions with students significantly predicted
their reports of boredom while using the system. Implications
for the design of affect-sensitive multiagent ITSs are
discussed.
Keywords: affect; metacognition; self-regulated learning;
intelligent tutoring systems; pedagogical agents; self-reports

Introduction
Research on multiagent intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs)
has traditionally focused on their impact on learning and
performance (Azevedo & Aleven, 2013). The incorporation
of pedagogical agents (PAs) within ITSs has been
demonstrated to be beneficial in the promotion of students’
effective use of various cognitive, affective, metacognitive,
and motivational (CAMM) processes while learning about
complex topics (Azevedo et al., 2013; D’Mello & Graesser,
2012a; Kim & Wei, 2011; Kramer & Bente, 2010; Lusk &
Atkinson, 2007). Researchers include PAs within ITSs in an
attempt to facilitate students’ self-regulatory learning (SRL)
processes. Specifically, SRL is based on the premise that
successful learning involves students’ ability to accurately
regulate their cognitive and metacognitive processes
through planning, monitoring, and using learning strategies
(Winne & Azevedo, 2014). It is a fundamental educational
construct that has been shown to be effective in students’
ability to learn (Azevedo et al., 2013; Winne & Hadwin,
2008). As such, the impact of PAs on SRL processes has
been studied extensively (Azevedo et al., 2013; Kinnebrew

et al., 2013; Veletsianos & Russell, 2014). For PAs to be
successful, there is a key question to be addressed first—
that is, the impact PAs have on learners’ emotions.
Specifically, it is imperative to focus on the impact of
agents’ prompting and feedback on students’ emotions as
well as how these prompts and feedback may interfere with
the ability to self-regulate (by deploying SRL processes)
and overall learning.
We have begun examining the impact of PAs on students’
emotions during learning with an ITS using MetaTutor.
MetaTutor is an intelligent multiagent hypermedia-based
learning environment, designed to promote the effective use
of SRL processes as students learn about complex science
topics (Azevedo et al. 2010, 2013). MetaTutor uses four
PAs designed to externally regulate and foster students’
cognitive (e.g., summarizing) and metacognitive (e.g.,
judgment of learning) SRL processes while learning about
various human body systems. Fundamentally, the aim of
MetaTutor is to facilitate the acquisition, use, and transfer of
SRL processes by enhancing learning gains and
performance across various science topics. Each of the four
embedded PAs represents a specific component of SRL and
is embedded within MetaTutor, including cognitive and
metacognitive processes: Gavin the Guide assists the
student in navigating through the learning environment;
Pam the Planner aids in the creation of subgoals and prior
knowledge activation (planning); Mary the Monitor helps
monitor progress toward the established subgoals and
prompts the use of metacognitive monitoring strategies,
such as content evaluation; and Sam the Strategizer
facilitates the selection and use of cognitive learning
strategies, such as summarizing and taking notes. The
inclusion of these PAs is an attempt to encourage the
deployment of SRL processes, which have been shown to be
effective for learning and performance.
The majority of past research with ITSs has focused
predominantly on students’ cognitive and metacognitive
processes while interacting with these PAs (Azevedo et al.,
2013; Kinnebrew et al., 2013). Other research has focused
on the impact of students’ affective states and motivational
processes while using multiagent ITSs, but to a smaller
extent (Craig et al., 2004; D’Mello & Graesser, 2011; Kort
et al., 2001). Findings have demonstrated that affective
states of engagement significantly and positively impact

1661

learning (Baker et al., 2010; Craig et al., 2004; Woolf,
2009), whereas affective states such as boredom have been
demonstrated as deleterious to students’ overall learning
gains (Baker et al., 2010; D’Mello et al., 2014; D’Mello &
Graesser; 2012b; Mudrick et al., 2014). Particularly, the
negative affective state of boredom has been shown to
negatively correlate with students’ overall learning gains
(Baker et al., 2010; Craig et al., 2004; D’Mello & Graesser,
2011, 2012b; Mudrick et al., 2014; Schutz & Pekrun, 2007).
The ability of ITSs to elicit emotions has been studied
extensively. However, little attention has been paid to the
PAs within these systems and their abilities to differentially
provoke and impact students’ affective responses. Previous
investigations have demonstrated that agent-directed
affective responses, specifically negative affect, have a
deleterious impact on students’ overall learning gains
(Mudrick et al., 2014). As such, it is crucial to understand
the complex interactions among emotions, SRL process
deployment, and PAs for effective learning and training.
Past research with MetaTutor has indicated that one of the
four PAs, Sam the Strategizer, provokes the strongest
negative affect in students, compared to the other PAs
(Mudrick et al., 2014). As such, we hypothesize that Sam’s
presence while interacting with the student is what promotes
these negative emotional reactions. Because he prompts
students to use cognitive learning strategies, he interacts
with the student more than any of the other three PAs.
Therefore, we compared the frequency of Sam’s
interventions with the second most prevalent agent of
MetaTutor, Mary the Monitor, and the subsequent affective
impact his presence provokes in students.
In this study, we address the following questions: (1)
What is the overall impact of Sam the Strategizer, in relation
to the other PAs, on students’ affective responses during
learning with MetaTutor? (2) How do these emotions relate
to student- and PA-initiated cognitive strategy use while
using MetaTutor?

Method
Participants
One hundred undergraduate students (Mage = 21 years, SD =
3.2) recruited from three major North American universities
participated in this 2-day study. Participants were
compensated up to $40, at a rate of $10/hour.

Materials
The participants interacted with MetaTutor (Azevedo et al.,
2013) for both sessions. During each session, we collected
multichannel data related to CAMM processes. These
included log-files, a physiological measure of arousal (i.e.,
GSR bracelet), self-report questionnaires of emotions and
motivation, videos of participants’ facial expressions of
emotions, screen recordings of student-system interactions,
eye-tracking data, and audio recordings of each participant’s
interactions with MetaTutor.

MetaTutor and Procedure
Within the version of MetaTutor used for this study, there
are 47 pages of text and diagrams that cover various aspects
of the human circulatory system (e.g., blood components,
malfunctions, etc.). The role of the four PAs in MetaTutor
will be discussed in more depth below.
Participants were asked to participate for a total of two
sessions. The first session lasted 30–45 minutes, the second
was completed over a 3-hour period, and the participants
were required to complete both sessions within 3 days of
each other. During the initial session, participants filled out
a consent form and were given a description of the study.
They were then instructed to begin their interaction with the
environment and complete a series of self-report
questionnaires that assessed demographic information,
achievement emotions, and emotional regulation strategies.
Lastly, the participants completed a 30-item pretest
questionnaire covering their prior knowledge of the human
circulatory system and were compensated $5 for the
completion of this session.
During the second session, participants started their
interactions with the learning environment and chose two
out of seven predetermined subgoals that covered various
components of the human circulatory system, for which
Pam the Planner was programmed to recognize and lead the
student to choose. Once the participants set their subgoals
with the help of Pam, Gavin the Guide introduced the
system by presenting videos that portrayed the various
elements of the system interface, as well as how to interact
and navigate through the environment while using SRL
processes. Then, Pam the Planner prompted again and
facilitated the students in the activation of their prior
knowledge regarding the current subgoal they set to
complete. Finally, the participants were allowed to interact
with the system and engage in various SRL processes (e.g.,
summarizing and taking notes) and metacognitively monitor
and judge their learning (e.g., monitor their current progress
toward their specific subgoals) through clicking the SRL
palette presented to the right of the interface. Throughout
learning with MetaTutor, the participants were presented
with a variety of self-report questionnaires, such as the
Emotions and Values Questionnaire (EV), which asks the
students to self-report the emotions they are currently
experiencing, The EV was presented every 14 minutes
(Harley et al., 2015). Upon completion of the overall
learning session, the participants were presented with a 30item posttest and a series of questionnaires, such as the EV,
as well as the Agent Reaction Inventory (ARI; a modified
version of Baylor’s [2011] Agent Persona Inventory) that
assessed their overall emotional reactions to the four PAs.
The participants were then debriefed, thanked, and
compensated.

1662

its relevancy for those subgoals, judge their learning (both
for the page presented and overall), and assess how well
they feel they know the information. As such, the number of
metacognitive process prompts contributes more interaction
between the students and Mary. Lastly, Sam the Strategizer
supports the students in summarizing the content they read,
to take notes on the content, coordinate the informational
sources (text and diagram), and reread, if needed. The
cognitive strategies prompted by Sam contribute to a
notable amount of time interacting with the students.

Figure 1: The MetaTutor interface. The SRL palette is
highlighted.
Two conditions were tested in this study, the prompt and
feedback condition and the control condition. Within the
control condition, participants were allowed to navigate
through the learning environment with minimal agent
intervention, scaffolding, or feedback. They could deploy
various SRL processes by clicking on the SRL palette, yet
they were not prompted by the agents to do so if in this
condition. Participants assigned to the prompt and feedback
condition were provided with prompts for the use of various
SRL processes and scaffolding, in addition to receiving
adaptive feedback from the four PAs. The agents intervene
based on a series of system-initiated production rules related
to the student’s performance on the various cognitive and
metacognitive tasks of MetaTutor. Participants in this
condition were also free to use the SRL palette to selfinitiate SRL processes. Ultimately, this serves to create a
dialogue with the students as they engage in SRL processes
while learning about the human circulatory system. As the
purpose of this study was to examine how the PAs impacted
students’ affective reactions on a whole, the conditions were
not considered.
As previously discussed, three of the four agents
(excluding Gavin the Guide) are responsible for distinct
aspects of cognitive and metacognitive SRL processes.
Their varied presence within the system is based on the
success of one-to-one human tutoring and its ability to
provide adaptive, supportive scaffolding and guidance of
cognitive and metacognitive skills (Azevedo & Aleven,
2013; VanLehn, 2011). Pam the Planner assists the students
in the activation of prior knowledge, in addition to helping
establish the subgoals the participants are to complete for
the duration of the session. For these reasons, Pam is not as
present, as she helps with the initial interactions throughout
the participants’ session with the MetaTutor learning
environment. Mary the Monitor embodies the metacognitive
components associated with SRL process usage, prompting
the students to monitor their progress toward their
established subgoals, evaluate the content on the page and

Figure 2: The four pedagogical agents in MetaTutor.

Data Sources, Coding, and Scoring
For the purposes of this paper, the questionnaire assessing
the participants’ emotional reactions to specific agents and
their likeability (the ARI) was used. Specifically, the items
covering the learner-centered emotions (D’Mello &
Graesser, 2012a) of enjoyment, frustration, boredom,
confusion, curiosity, and neutral for each of the specific PAs
(for example, SAM made me feel bored and MARY made me
feel that I am enjoying myself) were extracted from the ARI.
In addition, log-files provided both PA- and studentinitiated SRL strategy frequencies. The items from the ARI
were correlated to determine the overall affective impact
that these agents elicited from participants. Then, regression
analyses using both PA- and student-initiated SRL process
frequencies, obtained from the log-files and the emotions
mentioned above, were conducted to determine the extent to
which these emotions were predicted by the amount of
student- and PA-initiated strategy use while engaging with
MetaTutor.

Results
Research Question 1: What is the overall impact of
Sam the Strategizer, in relation to the other PAs, on

1663

students’ affective responses during learning with
MetaTutor?
To determine the agent that induced the strongest affective
responses during learning with MetaTutor, correlations were
conducted with items from the ARI. Results indicated that
the affective states directed toward the agents, such as
enjoyment for Gavin, Mary, Pam, and Sam, were all highly
correlated. The item Gavin made me feel that I am enjoying
myself was positively correlated with the items addressing
enjoyment for each of the other three agents, Pam (r = .66, p
< .001), Mary (r = .55, p < .001), and Sam (r = .43, p <
.001). These correlations were not limited to positive
learning-centered emotions, as evidenced by high
correlations across the ARI item addressing frustration. Sam
made me feel frustrated correlated strongly with frustration
directed at the other three agents, Gavin (r = .25, p < .001),
Pam (r = .56, p < .001), and Mary (r = .58, p < .001).
However, within-agent correlations demonstrated a different
trend. More specifically, correlations within agent-directed
affect for Sam the Strategizer indicated the strongest and
most consistently negative correlations amongst the agentspecific directed emotions. See Table 1 for a summary of
the correlations among emotions directed toward Sam the
Strategizer.
Table 1: Correlations among emotions directed toward Sam the Strategizer.
Enjoyment
Curiosity
Neutral
Boredom
Frustration
Confusion

Enjoyment Curiosity Neutral Boredom Frustration Confusion
--0.38**
--0.27*
0.82
--0.22*
0.01
0.13
--–0.41**
–0.003 –0.30*
0.33**
--–0.26*
0.20* –0.23*
0.29*
0.39**
---

**p < .001 level.
*p < .05 level.

Research Question 2: How do these emotions relate
to student- and PA-initiated cognitive strategy use
while using MetaTutor?
To determine the extent of SRL strategy prompts, both PAand student-initiated, during the overall learning session, a
chi-square analysis was conducted with the two most
prevalent agents within MetaTutor: Mary the Monitor and
Sam the Strategizer. The outcome of this analysis indicated
a significant difference between the amounts of PA-initiated
SRL prompting, feedback, and guidance (χ2(1) = 55.82, p <
.001). Sam’s prompts occurred significantly more frequently
than Mary’s, occurring on average 17.9 times and 13.7
times per student, respectively, over the 3-hour period that
comprised the second experimental session.
Subsequently, a regression analysis was conducted to
determine the extent to which the prompts of SRL processes
Sam was responsible for (summarizing, taking notes,
coordinating informational sources, and rereading) predicted
these negative emotion ratings, specifically boredom. The
affective state of boredom was chosen due to its deleterious
impact on overall learning. Results from this analysis
indicated that the overall model was significant and
predicted 5.7% of the variance (R2 = .057, F(1, 97) = 5.85, p

= .017). Boredom directed toward Sam was significantly
predicted by the frequency of student- and Sam-initiated
SRL processes (β = .24, p = .017).

Discussion
The results from this study demonstrate the affective
influence that PAs can have on students during learning
with ITSs. Sam the Strategizer ultimately impacted students
in a negative way. The frequency of Sam-initiated and
student-initiated SRL prompts by Sam was found to be
significantly predictive of boredom when using MetaTutor.
It is important to note that the frequency of SRL prompts by
Sam was significantly higher than those covering the
metacognitive components, for which Mary was
responsible. A possible explanation for the relationship
found between the frequency of Sam’s prompts to the
students’ self-reports of boredom could be that the students
are simply being overprompted (Bouchet et al., 2013).
It seems as though this overprompting may interfere with
the students’ agency, and therefore limit their ability to selfregulate. This is an important consideration, as a
fundamental premise behind the inclusion of PAs in ITSs is
their perceived capacity in facilitating the students’ CAMM
processes during learning and training.
However, it is also important to consider not only the
SRL strategies that Sam is responsible for prompting the
students with, but also the system-based rules that evaluate
the quality of the students’ overall summary. It is possible
that the students simply do not want to engage in the
strategies of summarizing, taking notes, coordinating
informational sources, or rereading, as prompted by Sam.
As such, future studies should tease apart the affective
responses to the PA from the prompted strategy or process.
By analyzing the role of boredom in this manner, we can
expand on the information-processing model of SRL that
focuses exclusively on cognitive and metacognitive SRL
processes (Winne & Hadwin, 2008).
Furthermore, the natural language processing measure,
which the system uses to assess and evaluate the content of
the summaries that Sam prompts the student to make, could
be responsible for this outcome. MetaTutor gauges the
quality of the student’s summary by recognizing specific
key words related to the content of the page the student is
currently reading, in addition to limiting a “good” summary
to approximately three sentences. The student is informed at
the beginning of the session, as well as when Sam
reintroduces the summarization component, that a “good”
summary is limited to these requirements. As such, it is
possible that the student’s summary was “good” and took
note of the various components related to the specific
context of the page, yet either did not include the key words
of the page or contained too many sentences to be deemed
concise. As shown by Table 1, Sam, overall, significantly
impacted the students’ enjoyment in a negative way through
his induction of both frustration and boredom. Future
analyses regarding this topic should include measures of

1664

engagement and frustration as possible predictors of overall
learning strategy use and, ultimately, learning gains.
We have seen that boredom is detrimental to learning and
engagement, but this study reveals that it is also related to
the frequency of various SRL strategies the PAs within an
ITS prompted and modeled for the students. . These
findings can be partially explained when situated within the
dynamics of affective states model of D’Mello and Graesser
(2012a). Their model proposes that students’ affective states
will fluctuate when they experience contradictions,
incongruities, obstacles to growth, and/or other impasses
while learning with advanced learning technologies (ALTs).
Specifically, students begin in a state of engagement/flow as
they pursue the superordinate goal of mastering the
information, and when they are interrupted (e.g., when Sam
the Strategizer prompts the students to summarize the
presented material), they become frustrated. Prolonged
frustration may then transition into boredom, with students
ultimately disengaging from the learning process (D’Mello
& Graesser, 2012a). Other research with ALTs suggests that
these interruptions from a tutor or PA that block goals can
be potential antecedents that lead to a student’s experience
of frustration (D’Mello et al., 2006; Kapoor et al., 2007).
Ultimately, it seems that when Sam the Strategizer prompts
students to engage in cognitive SRL strategies, students’
superordinate goal of mastering the material is blocked.
Consistently prompting the students to engage in these
strategies at such a high frequency then prolongs the initial
state of frustration that culminates in high self-reports of
boredom. Transitioning from students’ self-reports of
boredom back to a state of engagement/flow could be
promoted by a more sophisticated student model (Woolf,
2009) that would provide Sam the information needed to
adapt the frequency of prompting cognitive strategies. In
sum, our results have significant implications for the
conceptualization and measurement of the impact of
external regulating agents (e.g., PAs) on students’ learning,
as well as the design of PAs in ITSs.
The design of PAs that assist students in the effective
deployment of CAMM processes and positive learning
outcomes must pay close attention to the level of interaction
between the PA and the student. As shown here, affect is a
significant component to the human-PA dialogue, indicating
the necessity for the future design of affect-sensitive
multiagent ITSs. Furthermore, overprompting the processes
that are understood to assist students in learning and training
could have a damaging outcome on students’ engagement
and positive affect and, consequently, the effectiveness of
the ITS paradigm. Future research should examine the
temporality of agent-based prompting to examine if there
are key affective thresholds (i.e., overly prompting within a
short amount of time) that can lead to frustration or
boredom, as caused by prompts in close temporal proximity
and over the learning session. Additionally, subsequent
research should consider the inclusion of synchronous
multichannel facial expressions as well as physiological and
self-report data capture as students engage with PAs and

ITSs in order to determine specific and representative data
patterns of human-PA emotional interactivity. This will
ultimately allow for the design of online, real-time feedback
mechanisms from the student into the system to provide a
more adaptive and versatile learning environment to future
students.
One limitation in this study is the lack of differentiating
the analyses by condition. The purpose for not doing so in
this study was to analyze the overall affective impact the
PAs had on all learners who interacted with MetaTutor. As
such, it is necessary for future research to examine the
differences in affective responses between the two
experimental conditions. The use of self-reports also limits
the findings of this study, as this only provided l learners’
post hoc perceptions of their affective responses toward
Sam. Future studies should examine the impact of PAs in
real time, using facial expressions from emotion recognition
software, to examine the actual affective impact PAs have
as learners interact with ITSs. This will allow us to pinpoint
the key components of the PA-learner interaction that can
result in a negative affective response and detract from their
learning outcomes.
As one of the fundamental goals of ITSs is to facilitate
students’ overall learning (e.g., by promoting the effective
use of SRL strategies), it is imperative to understand the
interplay among boredom (and affect as a whole), the role of
PAs, and the promotion and deployment of SRL strategies
and processes as students engage with ITSs. The results
presented in this study have provided a first step toward a
better understanding of such interactions, and provided
immediate results to improve MetaTutor. However, deeper
analyses (by both the authors and the ITS community) will
be needed to reach a clearer understanding of this difficult
topic.

Acknowledgements
The research presented in this article has been supported by
funding from the National Science Foundation (DRL
1431552) awarded to the second author.

References
Azevedo, R., & Aleven, V. (2013). Metacognition and
learning technologies: An overview of the current
interdisciplinary research. In R. Azevedo & V. Aleven
(Eds.), International handbook of metacognition and
learning technologies (pp. 1–16). Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Springer.
Azevedo, R., Harley, J., Trevors, G., Duffy, M., FeyziBehnagh, R., Bouchet, F., & Landis, R. S. (2013). Using
trace data to examine the complex roles of cognitive,
metacognitive, and emotional self-regulatory processes
during learning with multi-agent systems. In R. Azevedo
& V. Aleven (Eds.), International handbook of
metacognition and learning technologies (pp. 427–445).
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer.

1665

Azevedo, R., Johnson, A., Chauncey, A., & Burkett, C.
(2010). Self-regulated learning with MetaTutor:
Advancing the science of learning with MetaCognitive
tools. In M. S. Khine & I. M. Saleh (Eds.), New science of
learning: Computers, cognition, and collaboration in
education (pp. 225–247). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Baker, R. S., D’Mello, S. K., Rodrigo, M. M. T., &
Graesser, A. C. (2010). Better to be frustrated than bored:
The incidence, persistence, and impact of learners’
cognitive–affective states during interactions with three
different
computer-based
learning
environments. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 68(4), 223–241.
Baylor, A. L. (2011). The design of motivational agents and
avatars. Educational Technology Research and
Development, 59(2), 291–300.
Bouchet, F., Harley, J. M., & Azevedo, R. (2013). Impact of
different pedagogical agents’ adaptive self-regulated
prompting strategies on learning with MetaTutor. In H. C.
Lane, K. Yacef, J. Mostow, & P. Pavlik (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education, AIED 2013, Vol. 7926 (pp.
815–819). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Craig, S., Graesser, A., Sullins, J., & Gholson, B. (2004).
Affect and learning: An exploratory look into the role of
affect in learning with AutoTutor. Journal of Educational
Media, 29(3), 241–250.
D’Mello, S., Craig, S., Sullins, J., & Graesser, A. (2006).
Predicting affective states expressed through an emotealoud procedure from AutoTutor’s mixed-initiative
dialogue. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
in Education, 16(1), 3–28.
D’Mello, S., & Graesser, A. (2011). The half-life of
cognitive-affective states during complex learning.
Cognition & Emotion, 25(7), 1299–1308.
D’Mello, S., & Graesser, A. (2012a). Dynamics of affective
states during complex learning. Learning and Instruction,
22(2), 145–157.
D’Mello, S., & Graesser, A. (2012b). Emotions during
learning with AutoTutor. In P. Durlach & A. Lesgold
(Eds.), Adaptive technologies for training and education
(pp. 117–139). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press.
D’Mello, S. K., Lehman, B., Pekrun, R., & Graesser, A. C.
(2014). Confusion can be beneficial for learning.
Learning and Instruction, 29(1), 153–170.
Harley, J., Bouchet, F., Hussain, M. S., Azevedo, R., &
Calvo, R. (2015). A multi-componential analysis of
emotions during complex learning with an intelligent
multi-agent system. Computers in Human Behavior, 48,
615-625.
Kapoor, A., Burleson, B., & Picard, R. (2007). Automatic
prediction of frustration. International Journal of HumanComputer Studies, 65(8), 724–736.
Kim, Y., & Wei, Q. (2011). The impact of learner attributes
and learner choice in an agent-based environment.
Computers in Education, 56, 505–514.

Kinnebrew, J., Biswas, G., Sulcer, B., & Taylor, R. (2013).
Investigating self-regulated learning in teachable agent
environments. In R. Azevedo & V. Aleven (Eds.),
International handbook of metacognition and learning
technologies
(pp.
451–470).
Amsterdam,
The
Netherlands: Springer.
Kort, B., Reilly, R., & Picard, R. W. (2001). An affective
model of interplay between emotions and learning:
Reengineering educational pedagogy—Building a
learning companion. In T. Okamoto, R. Hartley, Kinshuk,
& J. P. Klus (Eds.), Proceedings IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (pp. 43–
46). Madison, WI: IEEE.
Kramer, N. C., & Bente, G. (2010). Personalize e-learning:
The social effects of pedagogical agents. Educational
Psychology Review, 22, 71–87.
Lusk, M., & Atkinson, R. (2007). Animated pedagogical
agents: Does their degree of embodiment impact learning
from static or animated worked examples? Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 21, 747–764.
Mudrick, N., Azevedo, R., Taub, M., Feyzi, R., & Bouchet,
F. (2014). A study of subjective emotions, self-regulatory
processes, and learning gains: Are pedagogical agents
effective in fostering learning? In J. L. Polman et al.
(Eds.), Learning and becoming in practice: The
International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS)
2014, Volume 1 (pp. 309–317). Boulder, CO:
International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Schutz, P. A., & Pekrun, R. E. (2007). Emotion in
education. Burlington, MA: Elsevier.
VanLehn, K. (2011). The relative effectiveness of human
tutoring, intelligent tutoring systems, and other tutoring
systems. Educational Psychologist, 46(4), 197–221.
Veletsianos, G., & Russell, S. R. (2014). Pedagogical
agents. In J. M. Spencer, M. D. Merrill, J. Elen, & M. J.
Bishop (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational
communications and technology (pp. 759–769). New
York, NY: Springer.
Winne, P. H., & Hadwin, A. F. (2008). The weave of
motivation and self-regulated learning. In D. H. Schunk &
B. J. Zimmerman (Eds.), Motivation and self-regulated
learning: Theory, research and applications (pp. 298–
314). New York, NY: Erlbaum.
Winne, P. H., & Azevedo, R. (2014). Metacognition. In K.
Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning
sciences (2nd ed.) (pp. 63-–87). Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Woolf, B. (2009). Building intelligent interactive tutors.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Morgan Kaufmann.

1666

