Effect of heaviness on the cognitive evaluation process
Keiga Abe (keiga.abe@gmail.com)
Department of Education, 1-1 Takakuwa-Nishi Yanaizu-Cho Gifu-Shi
Gifu, Japan

Heaviness and high-level cognition

Abstract

This paper focuses on the sense of heaviness, because sense
of heaviness is related to body state. For example, when we
hold a heavy object, we feel heaviness, change our posture,
and grow fatigued. These physical changes may alter cognition.
Seno, Abe, & Kiyokawa (2013) examined the effects of
heaviness on visually-induced illusory self-motion perception, also know as ”vection.” They hypothesized that heavier
items would inhibit vection because they make locomotion
difficult. They found that wearing heavy clogs made locomotion difficult and inhibited vection, suggesting that cognition
can alter vection strength. Bhalla & Proffitt (2008) examined
perception under various physical conditions. They suggested
that physical states affect people’s judgments about whether
they will be able to go up a slope or path. They showed that
people estimate uphill distance and steepness as being longer
and steeper when they are holding a heavy object and growing
fatigued.
In haptic priming studies, ”heavy” is used as a metaphor
for ”important” or ”serious.” For example, Jostmann, Lakens,
& Schubert (2009) showed that our abstract concept of importance is affected by heaviness. They asked participants to
judge importance in various situations while holding either a
heavy or light clipboard. Results indicated heaviness makes
people invest more cognitive effort when engaging in abstract
thinking. Another study showed that curriculum vitae presented on heavier clipboards were judged to be more important than those presented on lighter clipboards (Ackerman,
Nocera, & Bargh, 2010). These studies suggest that heaviness
is associated with importance and seriousness. For example,
we usually say ”a heavy penalty,” ”heavy responsibility,” and
”put more weight on.” It is thought that the sensory experience of heaviness activates these metaphorical concepts during haptic priming.

The aim of this study was to clarify how the sense of heaviness
changes our cognition. According to recent studies in cognitive science, intelligent human behaviors ranging from perception to inference are not closed mental processes; rather, they
are affected by body and action (Wilson, 2002; Gibbs, 2005;
Proffitt, 2006). In previous studies, the sense of heaviness
activated concepts metaphorically related to heaviness, and
changed impressions accordingly. However, previous studies
have not distinguished between subjective heaviness and physical weight. The purpose of this study was to clarify whether
changes in impressions are due to subjective heaviness or physical weight. To examine this issue, a psychological experiment
using a tasting task was conducted. The results confirmed that
subjective heaviness influences evaluations of price and value.
Keywords: Embodied cognition; Size-weight illusion; Haptic
priming.

Previous Studies
Embodied cognition literature
Research on embodied cognition suggests that mental activity is driven by physical body state, posture, and sensorymotor coordination. Perception can be modulated by bodily
actions. For example, viewing visual stimuli between one’s
legs changes visual perception compared to when such stimuli are viewed normally (Higashiyama & Adachi, 2006; Higashiyama & Toga, 2011).
Bodily feedback from physical action can also change affective states and thoughts. Cacioppo, Priester, & Berntson
(1993) suggested that arm extension gives rise to bodily feedback associated with avoiding negative stimuli, and arm flexion gives rise to bodily feedback associated with approaching
positive stimuli. Friedman & Forster (2000, 2002) showed
that arm extension and flexion bias participants toward different processing styles, which influences creative thinking. The
authors manipulated the extent to which non-affective bodily
feedback was associated with either positive or negative hedonic states, and then examined the effects of this feedback
on cognitive processes related to creative insight. In the experimental social psychology literature, it has been suggested
that tactile sensations influence consumer behavior and social
attitudes. For example, Krishna & Morrin (2008) showed that
the perception of bottle hardness affected the evaluation of
natural water. Kay, Wheeler, Bargh, & Ross (2004) showed
that the tactile sensation of hardness made participants appear
more strict and stable, less emotional, and decreased negotiation flexibility. Embodied cognition research suggests that
mental activity is driven by physical body state, posture, and
sensory-motor coordination.

Hypothesis of this study
These previous studies have partially clarified the effects of
heaviness on high-level cognition. Heaviness leads to longer
and steeper estimates of distance and slope, respectively.
Sense of heaviness can also change subjective impressions
and social attitudes toward other people. Previous haptic
priming research found that sensory input activates metaphorical concepts.
However, it is not clear whether subjective impressions are
influenced by subjective heaviness or physical weight. In this
study, this issue was examined by addressing an estimation
task. If the effects are due to the amount of the physical
load, it may be considered that physical/implicit processes

37

drink and evaluate them.” Participants were not informed that
in fact all cups contained the same natural water until after
the experiment. The three cups of water differed in the size
of the cup and the quantity of water (Figure 1). The small
cup (3 oz) contained 80 g of water. The medium cup (9 oz)
contained 40 g of water. The large cup (16 oz) contained 80
g of water. Participants were only told about the quantity of
water in the medium cup. The large cup contained the same
amount of water as the small cup, but because of the difference in cup size, it was expected that participants would think
that the large cup was lighter than the small one.

Procedure
A two-factor within-subjects design was used in this experiment. The experiment was divided into three steps. First,
participants evaluated the cups of water, before they actually
drank, in order to test the effect of visual differences in cup
size on participants’ evaluation. Second, we verified that participants experienced the size-weight illusion. Third, the taste
test was conducted. After that, the taste and value of the water
were evaluated. In order to avoid the possibility that participants guessed the purpose of this experiment, we told them:
”To make these cups easy to distinguish, we prepared three
sizes of cups.”

Figure 1: The three cups of water in the experiment
which are separate from the subjective view of the subject exert effects on the inference. Conversely, if they are due to the
amount of the subjective load, it may be considered that the
subjective view of the subject and explicit processes exert the
effects on the inference.
As a means of examining these amounts of physical and
subjective loads separately, the ”size-weight illusion” (Charpentier, 1891) was used in this study. This illusion is the phenomenon that, if the weights are the same, the larger object
is sensed as being lighter. Utilizing this illusion, estimation
tasks under conditions of being subject to different subjective loads while being subject to the same physical load were
conducted to examine the effects of the physical and objective
amount of the physical load.

Pre-test evaluation Participants first evaluated the cups of
water, before they actually drank from them, to test the effect
of visual differences in cup size on evaluation. Participants
were asked to evaluate how good tasting each cup of water
looked, and how valuable each was, using a 101-point scale
(100 = good, 0 = bad). Then, they were asked to estimate the
price per 2 L of water.

Experiment
Quantity estimation task After the evaluation task, participants were handed the medium cup. The experimenter told
the participants that the medium cup contained 40 g of water.
Participants were then asked to estimate the quantity of water
in the other cups to determine whether participants experienced the size-weight illusion for the small and large cups.
Smaller quantity estimations for the large, compared to the
small, cup, indicate a size-weight illusion.

In this experiment, the effect of subjective heaviness on value
judgment was examined using a water evaluation task. Participants drank water and evaluated its taste, value, and price.
To examine the effect of differences in subjective heaviness,
the size-weight illusion was used. Participants were asked to
evaluate three cups of water. Two of the cups were the same
physical weight, but their subjective heaviness differed due
to the size-weight illusion. If subjective weight affects participants’ evaluations, there will be a significant difference in
evaluations between the cups of water.

Post-test evaluation After the quantity estimation task,
participants were asked to drink from the cups of water and
evaluate the tastes. Participants were told to take a sip from
each cup, and that they were not allowed to re-taste from any
cup. They were not allowed to re-taste the water because this
might change the weight of the cup and the quantity of water,
which might affect their evaluations. Participants evaluated
the water for taste and value. Finally, they decided the price
per 2 L of water. If subjective heaviness affected evaluation,
water in the small cup would be evaluated as better than the
water in the large cup. The order that participants drank each
cup of water was randomized to avoid order effects.

Method
Participants
Twenty college students participated in the experiment. The
IRB approval has been obtained.

Task
All participants were asked to drink three cups of water and
evaluate them. The experimenter told participants: ”There are
three cups of water here. These correspond to any of the following: tap water, natural water, and deep-sea water. Please

38

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Pre-test

*RRG

7DVWHVFRUH

4XDQWLW\RIZDWHU

 J

/DUJH

0HGLXP
6L]HRIFXSV

6PDOO

Post-test

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
%DG

Large

Medium

Small

6L]HRIFXSV

Figure 2: Means and standard errors the quantity estimation
task

Figure 3: Means and standard errors of the taste evaluation
task

Debriefing After the experiment, the researcher asked participants to describe the purpose of the experiment in order to
determine if participants detected the aim of the experiment.
Then, the experimenter explained the aim of the experiment
to them.

3UHWHVW

*RRG

3RVWWHVW

9DOXH6FRUH

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Results
According to the answers in the debriefing session, no participants determined the aim of the experiment.First, to check
whether participants experienced the size-weight illusion,
quantity estimations were examined. Figure 2 shows the
mean quantity estimates. A one-way ANOVA revealed a
main effect of size (F(2, 38) = 31.773, p < .01, partialη2 =
.626). Multiple comparisons with the Bonferroni method revealed a significant difference between each cup size (largesmall: p < .001; large-medium:p < .001; small-medium:
p < .001). The quantity of water in the small and large cups
was physically the same, but participants thought that their
quantities differed. This confirms that participants experienced a size-weight illusion.

%DG

/DUJH

0HGLXP

6PDOO

6L]HRI&XSV

Figure 4: Means and standard errors of the value evaluation
task
main effect of cup size (F(2, 38) = 1.261, p = .295, n.s.). A
simple main effect test with Bonferroni method revealed there
were no significant differences in value evaluation during the
pre-test (F(2, 18) = .372, p = .695, n.s.). This result suggests
that the visual differences between the cups did not affect participants’ evaluations. In contrast, there was a significant difference in post-test value evaluations (F(2, 18) = 4.141, p =
.033, η2 = .315). A simple main effect test revealed, with the
Bonferroni method, that the large cup was rated significantly
lower in value than the medium cup (p = .041). There was
a marginally significant difference between large and small
cups (p = .080).

Taste ratings Figure 3 shows the mean taste ratings. A twoway ANOVA revealed no significant interactions (F(2, 38) =
.361, p = .695), but did reveal a marginally significant
main effect of pre- vs. post-test (F(1, 19) = 4.016, p =
.060, partialη2 = .174), and a significant main effect of cup
size (F(2, 38) = 3.356, p = .045, partialη2 = .150). A simple main effect test using the Bonferroni method revealed that
there was a marginally significant difference between pre-test
and post-test taste evaluation in the medium size cup condition (p = .066).

Price decisions Figure 5 shows the mean water price estimates. A two-way ANOVA revealed a marginally significant interaction (F(2, 38) = 3.066, p = .058, partialη2 =
.139), and a marginally significant main effect of cup size
(F(2, 38) = 2.687, p = .08, partialη2 = .124). A simple
main effect test revealed that there were no significant dif-

Value evaluation Figure 4 shows the mean value ratings.
A two-way ANOVA revealed a marginally significant interaction (F(2, 38) = 3.251, p = .050, partialη2 = .146), and
a significant main effect of pre- vs. post-test (F(1, 19) =
4.464, p = .048, partialη2 = .190). There was no significant

39

3UHWHVW

3ULFH

㸦<HQ㸧

tion of each cup, because the price decision is open-ended. In
contrast, there were no significant differences in taste evaluations, perhaps because the taste of water does not metaphorically relate to heaviness. We do not express the taste of water
with abstract concept of heaviness.

3RVWWHVW

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Conclusions and future directions

/DUJH

0HGLXP

This paper examined whether subjective heaviness affects
evaluations of value and price judgments. Differences in subjective heaviness affected participants’ evaluation of value,
even though there was no difference in physical weight between the large and small cups. Subjective heaviness likely
activated concepts metaphorically associated with value, as in
haptic priming.
Future work should examine whether how heavy objects
are carried affects cognition. Previous haptic priming studies
differ in how participants carried objects. In Bhalla & Proffitt
(1999), participants carried a heavy backpack on their backs,
but in Ackerman et al. (2010), participants were handed a
heavy clipboard.
Responsibility, pressure, and expectations are often associated with heaviness on one’s back. For example, the phrase
”carry life’s burdens on one’s shoulder” indicates a responsibility for someone’s life. In contrast, acquirement, chance,
and gain are associated with heaviness in the hands. For example, the phrase ”to grab at the chance” means taking a favorable opportunity. Thus, experiencing weight in different
body parts may activate different metaphorical concepts.

6PDOO

6L]HRIFXSV

Figure 5: Means and standard errors of the price decision task
ferences in price judgments during the pre-test (F(2, 18) =
1.334, p = .288, n.s.). This result suggests that the visual differences between cups did not affect participants’ price decisions. In contrast, there was a significant difference in price
judgments in the post-test condition (F(2, 18) = 3.760, p =
.043, partialη2 = .295). A simple main effect test with the
Bonferroni method revealed that the water in the small cup
was given a significantly higher price than the water in the
medium (p = .046) and large (p = .036) cups. The price
of the water in the small cup was judged to be significantly
higher in the post-test than in the pre-test.

Discussion

References

The results of this experiment support the hypothesis that subjective heaviness affects evaluations. There was a significant
interaction and a main effect of pre- vs. post-test for value
evaluations. The price and value of the water in the small cup
were rated significantly higher than these of the large cup in
the post-test evaluation. These results indicate that subjective
heaviness information changed the evaluation of value.
In the quantity estimation task, participants estimated the
weight of the small cup to be heavier than that of the large
cup. Therefore, participants experienced the size-weight illusion. Participants subjectively thought that the water in the
large size cup was lighter than that in the small size cup.
There was a significant interaction and a main effect of prevs. post-test for value evaluations. The price and value of
the water in the small cup was rated significantly higher than
that of the large cup in the post-test evaluation. These results indicate that subjective heaviness information changed
the evaluation of value. However, in the value evaluation, the
water in the small cup was not significantly higher than that
of the medium cup. It is possible that, because participants
performed the value evaluation using a 101 scale, it was difficult to differentiate the rating of small the cup from that of
medium cup, which had been already highly evaluated. On
the other hand, in the price decision task, evaluation of the
water in the small cup was evaluated as the most expensive.
It is hypothesized that it is easy to differentiate the evalua-

Ackerman, J. M., Nocera, C. C., & Bargh, J. A. (2010). Incidental haptic sensations influence social judgements and
decisions. Science, 25, 1712–1715.
Bhalla, M., & Proffitt, D. R. (1999). Visual-motor recalibration in geographical slant perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
25, 1076–1096.
Cacioppo, J., Priester, J., & Berntson, G. (1993). Rudimentary determinations of attitudes. ii: Arm flexion and extension have differential effect of attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 5–17.
Charpentier, A. (1891). Analyse experimentale: De quelques
elements de la sensation de poids. Arch Physiol Norm
Pathol, 3, 122-135.
Friedman, R. S., & Forster, J. (2000). The effects of approach
and avoidance motor actions on the elements of creative
insight. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79,
477-492.
Friedman, R. S., & Forster, J. (2002). The influence of approach and avoidance motor actions on creative cognition.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 41-55.
Gibbs, R. W. J. (2005). Embodiment and cognitive science.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Higashiyama, A., & Adachi, K. (2006). Perceived size and
perceived distance of targets viewed from between the legs:

40

Evidence for proprioceptive theory. Vision Research, 46,
3961–3976.
Higashiyama, A., & Toga, M. (2011). Brightness and image
definition of pictures viewed from between the legs. Attent.
Percept. Psychophys, 73, 144–159.
Jostmann, N., Lakens, D., & W., S. T. (2009). Weight as
an embodiment of importance. Psychological Science, 20,
1169-1174.
Kay, A. C., Wheeler, S. C., Bargh, J. A., & Ross, L. (2004).
Material priming: The influence of mundane physical objects on situational construal and competitive behavioral
choice. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 95, 83-95.
Krishna, A., & Morrin, M. (2008). Does touch affect taste?
the perceptual transfer of product container haptic cues.
Journal of Consumer Research, 34, 807-818.
Proffitt, D. R. (2006). Embodied perception and the economy
of action. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1, 110–
122.
Seno, T., Abe, K., & Kiyokawa, S. (2013). Wearing heavy
iron clogs can inhibit vecton. Multisensory Research, 26,
569-580.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9, 625–636.

41

