Embodied cognition and passive processing: What hand-tracking tells us about
syntactic processing in L1 and L2 speakers of English
Scott A. Crossley (scrossley@gsu.edu)
YouJin Kim (ykim39@gsu.edu)
Georgia State University, Department of Applied Linguistics/ESL, Suite 1500, 25 Park Place
Atlanta, GA 30302 USA

Tiffany Lester (tiffanylester88@gmail.com)
Brenau University, Department of Psychology
Gainesville, GA 3050 USA

Samuel Clark (sclark@itesm.mx)
ITESM – San Luis Potosi Campus, Department of Humanities and Language Department, Avenida Eugenio Garza 300
San Luis Potosi, SLP 78215 Mexico
Abstract

and active structures. The main purpose of the study was to
compare processing of passive and active constructions
between L1 and L2 speakers of English by using traditional
on-line mechanisms such as response time in conjunction
with newer on-line mechanisms that measure motor
movement. We presume that passives will take longer to
process and demonstrate differences in motor responses for
both L1 and L2 speakers and that this effect will be greater
for L2 speakers.

In the current study, hand motions captured by a mousetracking system were used to index listener’s cognitive
processes while making commitments to different choice
alternatives during the processing of English passive and
active structures. Fifty-seven second language (L2) speakers
and 19 first language (L1) speakers of English carried out an
aural forced-choice picture identification task comprised of 75
items. The findings indicate that although L1 participants
have quicker response times for both active and passive
structures than L2 participants, both L1 and L2 participants
demonstrate similar difficulties in processing passive
constructions.

Language and Cognition
In traditional research, language has often been viewed as a
discrete-symbolic architecture that contains elements of
representation, formalism, and rule-based transformations.
(i.e., the manipulation of symbols following explicit rules;
Chomsky,1965). Other language learning theories such as
usage-based approaches hold that linguistic patterns in the
input (i.e., form-meaning mappings) afford acquisition
(Ellis, 2012). One problem with such approaches is that
they lack a device to ground language representations in the
physical world.
The need to physically ground representations implies
that there is more to cognition than only mental and
linguistic representations of knowledge. Because cognition
involves repeated interplay with the environment, cognition
itself is theorized to be grounded (Anderson, 2003) and to
integrate a variety of information sources in parallel
(Freeman, Dale, & Farmer, 2011). Such theories fall under
the umbrella term of embodied cognition. Embodied
cognition is based on the notion that cognition exploits
environmental interactions to simplify and advance
cognitive tasks (Anderson, 2003; Glenberg & Robertson,
1997; Lakoff, 1987). One approach to investigate language
processing is through an embodied cognition approach,
which examines motor responses such as hand-motions as a
reaction to language stimuli. Such responses have been
shown to be continuously and temporally updated by
perceptual and cognitive processing such as that found in
language processing (Freeman & Ambady, 2012; Tipper,

Keywords: Syntactic processing; second language
acquisition, embodied cognition.

Introduction
Assessing syntactic processing in first language (L1) and
second language (L2) speakers is an important approach to
understanding how speakers cognitively structure language.
The majority of previous research on language processing
and cognition has focused on off-line or indirect
assessments of language processing that primarily
investigate language processing as a lateral mechanism that
involves a discrete-symbolic architecture. In contrast to this
approach, we use an embodied cognition experimental
design to compares how L1 and L2 speakers process
syntactic structures. Such an approach allows us to examine
how cognitive structures in L1 and L2 speakers act in
parallel and evolve over short time spans.
Traditional theories of cognition have viewed motor
processing as the end-result of cognitive processing.
However, recent research demonstrates that action dynamics
are not the aftermath of cognition but rather a requisite of
cognition (Anderson, 2003). Thus, tracking the dynamics of
body movement can provide evidence for cognitive
processing. In the current study, we used hand motions
captured by a mouse-tracking system to index listener’s
cognitive processes while making commitments to different
choice alternatives during the processing of English passive

495

Howard, & Houghton, 1998).

delivered using a passive sentence (e.g., A chair is scratched
by a cat.). Although they intend to express the same
meaning, the two constructions involve different mappings
of thematic roles to grammatical functions and different
constituent structures. Two possible reasons why speakers
face challenges with processing passives compared to
actives are because passives involve more complex
constituent structure (i.e., the inclusion of an additional
auxiliary verb and a by-phrase) and they require noncanonical mapping of thematic roles such as agents
(Messenger, Branigan, & McLean, 2012).
Previous researchers in the domain of L1 and L2
acquisition research have used structural priming
approaches to examine the processing and production of
passive structures. Bencini and Valian (2008), for example,
examined the effect of structural priming on children’s
comprehension of passives. They found that while passive
priming led to greater production of passive constructions
than exposure to active constructions, it did not facilitate
greater comprehension of passive constructions. Other
studies have also examined structural priming in children
and found that by age nine, children have mastered both the
syntactic and thematic dimensions of passives (Marchman,
Bates, Burkardt & Good, 1991; Messenger, Branigan, and
McLean, 2012). For L2 learners, research shows that
syntactic priming facilitates the production of passives (Kim
& McDonough, 2008). In sum, although research has
examined the processing and development of passives, few
researchers have investigated how adult L1 and L2 speakers
of English process passive structures compared to active
structures, especially from an embodied cognition
perspective.

Language Processing and Embodied Cognition
Automatic language processing can be elicited through
various experimental methods. Generally, these methods
prompt participants to respond to language stimuli as
quickly as possible using response time (RT) measures (see
Segalowitz and Trofimovich, 2012 for review). Motor
responses, especially those found in hand motions, can also
be an important component of measuring cognitive
processing, especially language processing. These responses
not only provide an accessible method for investigating
cognitive processing, but they are unlike the majority of
traditional language research methods found in L1 and L2
research which focus on off-line or indirect observations
(Marinis, 2003). Motor responses also differ from
traditional and more recent on-line methods such as
measuring RTs or collecting eye-tracking data because they
can provide strong evidence that language processing is
continuous and dynamic as well as evidence that it occurs at
multiple levels in parallel (Freeman et al., 2011).
Recent studies have successfully used mouse-tracking
experiments to examine participants’ processing of
linguistic input. For instance, Spivey, Grosjean, and
Knoblich (2005) used mouse-tracking software to assess
phonological awareness, finding that spoken words activate
multiple lexical terms while, concurrently, the language
processing mechanism continually updated the phonetic
representation of the word. Recent studies using mousetracking technology to examine syntactic processing have
been undertaken by Farmer, Anderson, and Spivy (2007)
and Dale and Duran (2011). These studies support the
notion that partially active syntactic constructions compete
with each other over time, that constructions are influenced
by visual, contextual, and linguistic factors (Farmer et al.,
2007) and that constructions can involve rapid shifts in
cognitive dynamics (Dale & Duran, 2011).

Method
The purpose of the study is to examine how tracking the
dynamics of body movement can provide evidence for
cognitive processing in L1 and L2 speakers of English. We
used hand motions captured by a mouse-tracking system to
continuously index listener’s commitments to different
choice alternatives during the processing of English passive
and active structures. Such an approach allows us to use
online data collection to investigate language processing
using an action-dynamics approach (tracking the dynamics
of body movement). Furthermore, we examined whether L2
speakers’ English proficiency impacts their processing of
active and passive constructions. The current study was
guided by the following research question: Are there any
differences in the processing of active and passive
constructions between native and non-native speakers of
English with two proficiency levels?

Syntactic Processing: English Passives
Our interest in this study is to assess the potential for motor
responses to provide insight into the processing of passive
structures by L1 and L2 speakers of English. The target
structures of our study are English passive and active
constructions. The development of passives in L1 and L2
speakers has been explored in previous studies from a
variety of perspectives because the form and meaning
mapping in passive constructions is a complex phenomenon.
In passive constructions, the patient serves the grammatical
subject followed by auxiliary be, a lexical verb in the past
participle form, and optional by-phrase with the agent. In a
passive construction, the patient role is mapped to sentence
subject. On the other hand, in active constructions, subject
(agent) + verb constructions follow the regular syntactic
order of English. In this case, the agent role is mapped to the
sentence subject. For instance, a picture of a cat scratching a
chair can be described using an active sentence (e.g., A cat
scratches a chair.), whereas the same message can be

Participants
A total of 57 non-native speakers (NNS) of English (24
females and 33 males) and 19 native speakers (NS) of
English participated in the study. Of those NS participants
that completed the post-experiment survey, 10 were female
and 4 were male. All NS participants were undergraduate

496

Apparatus and Procedure

students who were enrolled at a major southeastern
university in the US and received class credit in a freshman
Psychology course for participating in the experiment. All
participants had normal or corrected to normal vision. NS
participants ranged in age from 19 to 33 and had an average
grade point average of 3.37 (for those that completed the
post-experiment survey). All NNS participants were native
speakers of Spanish and were enrolled at the Instituto
Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey
(ITESM) campus in San Luis Potosi, Mexico studying at
either the high school or college level. While Spanish does
have a passive structure that corresponds to English,
passives are less common in Spanish than in English
because Spanish has a range of structures available to
mystify the agent (Blanco-Gomez, 2002). All NNS
participants had normal or corrected to normal vision. The
NNS participants ranged in age from 15 to 24. All NNS
participants had taken a paper-based institutional TOEFL
one month before the data collection. The average paperbased TOEFL score for the participants was 519. Based on
the TOEFL scores, NNS participants were further divided
into two proficiency groups: low and high (see the results
section).

Materials and Study Design
For this experiment, we used a within subjects comparison
design with an aural forced-choice picture identification task.
The task contained 75 items in the form of complete
sentences: 30 target items (15 passive constructions and 15
active constructions) and 45 distractors (15 relative clause
constructions, 15 dative constructions, and 15 prepositional
phrases of location constructions) (see Appendix A for the
stimuli list). Since our main interest is comparing passive to
active constructions, the relative, dative, and prepositional
were treated as filler constructions. The verbs and nouns
used in the passive and active items were checked for
occurrence on the General Service List (West, 1953;
adapted by Baumann & Culligan, 1995) to increase the
likelihood that the learners would be familiar with their
meaning and use (http://www.newgeneralservicelist.org/). In
order to ensure participants’ familiarity of words, we gave
vocabulary tests using the list of nouns and verbs in the
language stimuli to a similar group of NNS participants.
Any words that were found unfamiliar were eliminated.
For each item, participants listened to a sentence (e.g.,
The boy is pushed by his sister.) and had to select the picture
that corresponded to its correct meaning from two pictures.
Participants could begin moving the mouse at the onset of
the sentence reading. The passive and active targets
involved pictures of reversible events. For example, the
passive construction the boy is pushed by his sister was
paired with pictures of a girl pushing a boy and a boy
pushing a girl. Similarly, the active construction the bus hits
the motorcycle was paired with pictures of a bus hitting a
motorcycle and a motorcycle hitting a bus. All pictures were
piloted with similar groups of NNS participants, and the
stimuli which caused any confusion were modified.

497

We used MouseTracker software (Freeman & Ambady,
2010) to collect hand motion data. MouseTracker
continuously catalogs participants’ commitments to two
choice alternatives during a behavioral response to language
stimuli. The hand motion data can provide real-time traces
of the mind’s cognitive processes including language
processing (Freeman, Dale, & Farmer, 2011). From
MouseTracker, we specifically collected response time (RT)
data, accuracy data, and motor response data related to
maximum deviation (MD), and area under the curve (AUC)
for correct decisions. RTs in milliseconds were collected to
assess the time it took for participants to make decisions.
Accuracy data recorded whether or not the participants’
decisions were correct (a dichotomous yes/no decision). MD
and AUC data examine whether mouse trajectories for one
condition travel closer to an unselected alternative relative
to another condition (i.e., the spatial attraction of the
alternative choice). For both MD and AUC measures,
MouseTracker first computes an idealized response
trajectory (a straight line from the start to the endpoint for
the correct selection). MD is calculated as the largest
perpendicular deviation between the idealized trajectory and
the actual trajectory while the AUC is the geometric area
between the actual trajectory and the idealized trajectory
(Freeman & Ambady, 2010).
Participants were first given instructions on how to
interact with the software and told they were free to use
either their left or their right-hand. They were then given
eight practice trials to familiarize themselves with the task
on a computer. Each trial contained a start button at the
bottom center of the screen and a picture in the upper left
and upper right of the screen. When the participants clicked
the start button, a sentence that matched one of the pictures
was presented aurally. Participants then moved the mouse to
choose the picture that they thought best represented the
sentence they heard. Once the mouse reached the picture,
the trial stopped. Participants were asked to begin mouse
movements early and were warned if their mouse
movements started 1000 ms after onset of the stimuli. If a
response was not made within 2000 ms, the trial was
discarded. Following training, the participants were tested
on the 75 stimuli in the stimuli list (the 15 passive, active,
relative clause, dative, and prepositional constructions). The
presentation of the stimuli and the presentation of the
pictures were randomized and counterbalanced across
participants. Display resolution was set to 1280 x 800.the
last two decades, the scope of L2 processing research

Data Analysis
The data was first checked to assess participant response
accuracy in the experiment to assess randomness. We set a
cut off for inclusion into the analysis of 75% accuracy in
selections across the passive and active structures (based on
a Chi-square). This led to the removal of 11 NNS
participants and three NS participants. We also assessed
item difficulty for the passive and active structures for NNS

Table 1
Descriptive statistics for active and passive responses: Mean (standard deviation)
Index
Structure
Low proficiency NNS (n = 21)
High proficiency NNS (n = 25)
NS (n =16)
Response time
Active
3.412 (0.087)
3.373 (0.097)
3.298 (0.085)
logarithmic
Passive
3.461 (0.089)
3.430 (0.090)
3.386 (0.076)
Maximum
Active
0.417 (0.020)
0.430 (0.218)
0.392 (0.145)
Deviation
Passive
0.474 (0.207)
0.487 (0.211)
0.471 (0.162)
Area under the
Active
0.647 (0.515)
0.969 (1.039)
0.558 (0.339)
Curve
Passive
0.741 (0.552)
1.143 (1.160)
0.795 (0.579)
and NS participants separately. We set accuracy for
comparisons demonstrated that both low and high
individual items at 75% or greater for inclusion. For the
proficiency NNS participants had significantly slower RTs
NNS participants, this led to the removal of one item from
than NS participants for active structures (p < .001), but
the passive stimuli. For the NS participants, this led to the
were not significantly different than one another. Pairwise
removal of three items from the passive stimuli. The
comparisons also demonstrated that low proficiency NNS
remaining data were then transformed using logarithmic
participants had slower RTs than high proficiency NNS
formulas (logarithms to the base of 10; Field, 2005; Larsonparticipants and NS participants (p < .050) for passive
Hall & Herrington, 2010) to correct for outliers. Those
structures, but that high proficiency NNS participants and
outliers that remained after transformation (as identified in
NS participants did not statistically differ in the RT times
box plots) were removed.
for passive structures (see Table 1 for descriptive statistics
For the final data, the NNS participants were split into
for these results).
high (n = 25) and low (n= 21) proficiency categories based
Maximum Deviation (MD)
on the mean TOEFL score for the group (M = 519). Withinsubjects analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were used to
In order to measure the maximum attraction toward the
investigate main effects between syntactic structure and
unselected alternative (i.e., the attraction to the active
participants’ response times, MD, and AUC and interactions
interpretation of a passive sentence), we examined the
based on language proficiency (low level NNS, high level
maximum deviation of the curve. There was a significant
NNS, and NS) for correct answers only. Multivariate
main effect of syntactic structure on participants’ MD, F(1,
analyses of variance (MANOVAs) were used to assess
59) = 22.078, p < .001, ηp2 = .272, indicating that mouse
differences in active and passive structures among language
trajectories deviated toward the unselected alternative to a
proficiencies for response times, MD, and AUC for correct
greater degree in the passive structures as compared to the
answers only.
active structures. For MD, there was not a significant
interaction between syntactic structure and language
Results
proficiency, F(1, 59) = 0.257,
p > .050. Pairwise
comparisons revealed no differences between low
Response Time (RT)
proficiency NNS participants, high proficiency NNS
participants, and NS participants overall MDs.
In order to assess speed of processing active and passive
A between subjects MANOVA reported no significant
constructions, we examined the participants’ RTs. First, a
differences between participant language proficiency levels
within subjects ANOVA was conducted to determine the
for active structures, F(2, 59) = 0.188, p > .050 and for
effect of syntactic structure on RT. The results showed that
passive structures, F(2, 59) = 0.042, p > .050. Pairwise
there was a significant main effect of syntactic structure on
comparisons revealed no differences between low
participant response time, F(1, 59) = 166.630, p < .001, ηp2
proficiency NNS participants, high proficiency NNS
= .688, indicating that active structures had a faster RT than
participants, and NS participants for either active or passive
passive structures. For RTs, there was a significant
MDs (see Table 1 for descriptive statistics for these results).
interaction between syntactic structure and language
proficiency, F(1, 59) = 5.059, p < .010, ηp2 = .146,
Area Under the Curve (AUC)
indicating differences in RTs based on language
proficiency. Pairwise comparisons revealed that low
In order to measure the overall attraction toward the
proficiency and high proficiency NNS participants’ overall
unselected alternative, we examined the AUC. There was a
response times were significantly slower than NS
significant main effect of syntactic structure on participants’
participants’ response times (p < .050).
AUC, F(1, 59) = 17.019, p < .001, ηp2 = .224, indicating
In order to examine whether participants’ proficiency level
that all participants had a greater overall attraction to the
played a role in their processing of two different structures,
unselected alternative in the passive structures as compared
a between subjects MANOVA was conducted. The results
to the active structures. For AUC, there was not a significant
reported a significant differences between participant
interaction between syntactic structure and language
language proficiency levels for active structures, F(2, 59) =
proficiency, F(1, 59) = 0.955,
p > .050. Pairwise
7.306, p < .010, ηp2 = .199, and for passive structures,
comparisons revealed no differences between low
F(2, 59) = 3.433, p < .050, ηp2 = .097. Pairwise

498

proficiency NNS participants’, high proficiency NNS
participants’, and NS participants’ overall AUC.
A between subjects MANOVA reported no significant
differences in the AUC between participant language
proficiency levels for active structures, F(2, 59) = 1.802, p
> .050 and for passive structures, F(2, 59) = 1.479, p >
.050. Pairwise comparisons revealed no differences between
low proficiency NNS participants, high proficiency NNS
participants, and NS participants for either active or passive
AUC (see Table 1 for descriptive statistics for these results).

passive transformation that places the object noun phrase in
the subject position. This finding is in line with previous L1
and L2 research on passive constructions (e.g., Bencini &
Valian, 2008). The RT results also indicate that NNS at both
the high and low proficiency levels were slower to respond
to active constructions when compared to NS. This finding
likely demonstrates that NNS have yet to reach the
processing fluency of NS. However, in terms of passive
constructions, low proficiency NNS demonstrated slower
RTs than high proficiency NNS and NS. Tangential support
for this finding can be found in Kim and McDonough
(2008). Their research indicated that high-level L2 learners
produced more passives during structural priming activities
than low-level L2 learners. Thus, it appears that there may
be differences between high and low L2 learners in both
passive priming and processing. High proficiency NNS and
NS did not exhibit differences in RTs for the passive
constructions. This may indicate that passive constructions
impede automatic processing by NS, slowing down
processing to such a degree that NS RTs are similar to that
of high proficiency NNS (i.e., passives slow down
processing in both groups to an equal degree).

Discussion
In the current study, we demonstrated how passive
constructions in English are processed differently than
active structures among NS and NNS participants using RTs
and hand motions captured by a mouse-tracking system. The
system continuously indexed listener’s commitments to
different choice alternatives during the processing of
English passive and active structures. This is a novel
approach that affords the collection of information that
cannot be obtained using traditional behavioral and
assessment measures such as RTs and accuracy on
comprehension tests, which have been predominantly used
in psycholinguistic oriented second language acquisition
(SLA) research.
To summarize the findings, as reported in our withinsubjects ANOVAs, our participants processed active
constructions faster than passive constructions based on
their RTs, which supports previous research that has
demonstrated the challenges of mapping thematic roles in
passive constructions (Messenger, Granigan, & McLean,
2012). Additionally, NNS RTs were slower than NS RTs
for both constructions regardless of NNS proficiency level.
Results also showed that there were main effects for
construction types on participants’ MDs and AUCs,
demonstrating that mouse trajectories for both L1 and L2
participants deviated toward the unselected alternative to a
greater degree in the passive as compared to the active
structures. This suggests that both NS and NNS participants
performed similarly.
Our MANOVA analyses looked at between-subjects
differences for language proficiency levels for both active
and passive constructions. Active construction RTs were
slower for both low and high proficiency NNS as compared
to NS, but no difference was found between the two NNS
groups. For passives, low proficiency NNS were slower
than high proficiency NNS and NS, but high proficiency
NNS and NS were not different. There were no significant
differences in either MD or AUC based on condition
between low proficiency NNS, high proficiency NNS, and
NS.

Maximum Deviation and Area Under the Curve
Results
MD and AUC measures, which examine the spatial
attraction of the alternative choice (in this case, initially
processing a passive sentence as an active sentence),
indicated that passive constructions interrupt cognitive
activity in language processing. The results show that
mouse trajectories for passive constructions deviated toward
the unselected alternative (i.e., the active structure) to a
greater degree than the unselected alternative in active
structures (i.e., the passive structure). This finding indicates
that participants initially process the object noun phrase in
the passive construction as the subject noun phrase. For
instance, in the sentence, the boy is pushed by his sister,
participants initially move the mouse toward the incorrect
picture that shows the boy pushing his sister and not the
correct picture that shows the sister pushing the boy. Such
findings provide evidence for the inherent difficulty in
processing passive constructions as compared to active
constructions. Intriguingly, we see no differences in either
the MD or AUC results as a function of language
proficiency. Thus, regardless of proficiency level with
English, passive constructions cause cognitive processing
difficulty in terms of comprehension. It may be the case that
similar mappings between English and Spanish for the
passive construction allow Spanish speakers to process
passives in a manner similar to that of native speakers (in
terms of motor responses). However, since passives are less
frequent in Spanish than in English, recognizing and
responding to passive constructions may take longer for
Spanish participants (as evidenced by the differences in RTs
between NS and NNS participants) because the they have
not adapted to the statistical regularities found in English
input (Fine, Jaeger, Farmer, & Qian, 2013).

Response Time Results
The RT results suggest that passive constructions take
longer to process than active constructions. Such a result
likely indicates that participants had a more difficult time
defining the agent and patient in the sentence because of the

499

Conclusion

Farmer, T. A., Anderson, S. E., & Spivey, M. J. (2007).
Gradiency and visual context in syntactic garden-paths.
Journal of Memory & Language, 57, 570-595.
Fine, A. B., Jaeger, T. F., Farmer, T. A., & Qian, T. (2013).
Rapid
expectation
adaptation
during
syntactic
comprehension. PLoS ONE, 8, e77661.
Freeman, J. B., & Ambady, N. (2010). MouseTracker:
Software for studying real-time mental processing using a
computer mouse-tracking method, Behavior Research
Methods, 42 (1), 226-241.
Freeman, J. B., Dale, R., & Farmer, T. A. (2011). Hand in
motion reveals mind in motion. Frontiers in Psychology,
2, 59. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00059
Field, A. (2005). Discovering statistics using SPSS. London:
Sage Publications.
Glenberg, A. M., & Robertson, D. A. (2000). Symbol
grounding and meaning: A comparison of highdimensional and embodied theories of meaning. Journal
of Memory & Language, 43, 379-401.
Kim, Y., & McDonough, K. (2008). Learners' production of
passives during syntactic priming activities. Applied
Linguistics, 29, 149-154.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things:
What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Larson-Hall & Herrington, R. (2010). Improving data
analysis in second language acquisition by utilizing
modern developments in applied statistics. Applied
Linguistics, 31(3), 368-390.
Marinis, T. (2003-b). Psycholinguistic techniques in second
language acquisition research. Second Language
Research 19 (2), 144-161.
Marchman, V., Bates, E., Burkardt, A. & Good, A. (1991).
Functional constraints of the acquisition of the passive :
Toward a model of the competence to perform. First
Language, 11, 65–92.
Messenger, K., Branigan, H., & McLean, J. (2012). Is
children’s acquisition of the passive a staged process?
Evidence from six and nine year olds’ production of
passives, Journal of Child Language, 39, 991-1016, DOI:
10.1017/S0305000911000377
Segalowitz, N., & Trofimovich, P. (2011). Second language
processing. In S. Gass & A. Mackey (Eds.), Handbook of
second language acquisition (pp. 179-192). New York:
Routledge.
Spivey, M. J., Grosjean, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005).
Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102,
10393-10398.
Tipper, S. P., Howard, L. A., & Houghton, G. (1998).
Action-based mechanisms of attention. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society, 353, 1385-1393.
West, M. (1953). A General Service List of English Words,
London: Longman.

The findings of the current study provide important
methodological and theoretical implications for language
processing and acquisition by examining the processing of
English passives by L2 low and high-level learners of
English and L1 speakers of English. Taking a novel
approach to explore language processing (i.e., a dynamic,
embodied cognition approach), the current study provided
additional insights into the processing of passive and active
constructions and how hand motions can be used to index
listeners’ cognitive processes. Specifically, the findings
demonstrate differences and similarities between L1 and L2
participants such that L1 participants are faster at
responding to passive and active stimuli when compared to
L1 participants. However, both groups of participants show
similar difficulties in processing passive constructions as
compared to active structures.
The limitations of the current study include the sample
size, the focus on a single pool of L2 learners, and the lack
of concurrent validity to support the findings and their
interpretations. Thus, future research is warranted to
investigate language processing with a larger population of
L2 learners from a variety of L1 backgrounds. Future
research using other online processing methods should also
be conducted to provide concurrent validity for this study.
Such studies could use event-related brain potential
measures to provide extra information about real time
processing of passive and active constructions or use eyetracking data to investigate syntactic processing. In addition,
future research using hand tracking methods to focus on a
variety of other syntactic structures in various target
languages that address learner variables such as language
aptitude, language analytic skills, and working memory
would help provide support for theories of syntactic
processing and acquisition in L1 and L2 populations.

References
Anderson, M. L. (2003). Embodied cognition: A field guide.
Artificial Intelligence, 149, 91-130.
Bencini, G., & Valian, V. (2008). Abstract sentence
representation in 3-year-olds: Evidence from language
production and comprehension. Journal of Memory and
Language, 59, 97–113.
Blanco-Gomez, M. L. (2002). Hiding the agent in English
and Spanish newspaper articles. In J. Marin Arrese (Ed.).
Conceptualization of events in newspaper discourse. 9-30,
Madrid: Universidad Complutense.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dale, R., & Duran, N. D. (2011). The cognitive dynamics of
negated sentence verification. Cognitive Science, 35, 983996.
Ellis, N. C. (2012). What can we count in language, and
what counts in language acquisition, cognition, and use?
In S.T. Gries & D. S. Divjak (Eds.) Frequency effects in
language learning and processing (Vol. 1). (pp. 7-34).
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter

500

