Evaluating contingencies by a dual system of learning the structure and the
parameters of the environment
Tamas J. Madarasz, Joseph E. LeDoux (tamas, joseph.ledoux)@nyu.edu
Center for Neural Science, NYU, 4 Washington Place, New York, NY 11201 USA

Joshua P. Johansen (johans@brain.riken.jp)
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa Wako-shi Saitama, Japan 351-0198
Abstract
How does the brain identify stimuli that are relevant for predicting important events and how does it distinguish spurious
relationships from truly predictive ones? We examined two
contrasting theoretical frameworks: in the first, learning proceeds by considering a fixed hypothesis of the environment’s
statistical structure (the set of predictive and causal relationships) and adjusting strength parameters for these relationships
to optimize predictions. In contrast, the second approach directly assesses ambiguity in predictive relationships by evaluating multiple hypothesis of the environment’s statistical structure. We compared these frameworks in an animal model of
aversive conditioning, allowing us to also manipulate the underlying brain systems. We show that when facing novel predictive stimuli, rats initially adopt a structure learning strategy,
but switch to updating parameters during subsequent learning.
Keywords: Bayesian modeling; Animal cognition; Representation; Causal Reasoning

Introduction
To enhance their chance of survival human and nonhuman
animals learn to make predictions based on sensory cues in
their environment. However, it is not clear how they identify
stimuli that are relevant for specific predictions, or how they
distinguish predictive relationships from coincidence when
evidence about the relationship is ambiguous. How subjects
evaluate this type of ambiguity is a central question both in
the field of classical conditioning (where predominantly animal subjects learn to predict impending threats or rewards
from experience), and in studies of human causal learning,
with previous research identifying many important parallel
phenomena between two the fields.
Established accounts of classical conditioning (e.g.
Rescorla & Wagner, 1972, for an overview see Pearce and
Bouton, 2001), as well as some Bayesian accounts of causal
judgments (e.g Holyoak & Cheng, 2011) have characterized
the learning process in these tasks in terms of subjects fitting
parameters in a fixed generative (or discriminative) model
of the environment, with different cues competing with each
other to predict important outcomes. Such parameter learning or cue competition approaches don’t explicitly distinguish
ambiguity in the environment’s statistical structure (the set
of all predictive and causal relationships), and uncertainty
about the strength of established associations (e.g. the probability with which an outcome follows a cue). Instead they
assume that subjects either have inherent knowledge about
which variables matter for a specific task or prediction, or
that they learn relationships between all the environmental

variables, potentially having to fit a very large number of parameters in complex real-world environments.
A drawback of such a learning strategy is that when the
structure of the environment is not known in advance (e.g.
when encountering novel stimuli), and inability to quickly
distinguish spurious from predictive relationships can lead
to incorrect predictions, especially when the sampling from
the environment is limited, or when a large number of environmental variables are present. Falsely assuming predictive relationships can lead to overfitting (so-called datafragmentation, Koller & Friedman 2009), by having to explain a combinatorially large space of stimulus interactions
based on a limited number of observations. This in turn can
lead to poor generalization for future predictions.
A contrasting approach is to directly evaluate competing
models of the environment’s statistical structure based on
the evidence sampled from the environment. Since structure
learning also considers sparser sets of statistical dependencies between variables, it will often lead to better predictions
when some variables in the environment do not in fact correlate. Such a structure learning model for causal learning was
introduced by Griffith & Tenenbaum (2005), and has proven
successful in characterizing a broad range of causal judgements by humans. In subsequent work Lu et al. (2008) have
also argued that strength and structure queries elicit causal
judgments that are empirically and theoretically distinguishable, depending on the wording of the queries, with strength
or structure learning models providing better fits respectively.
In this paper we contrasted these two learning strategies in
an implicit learning task, using animal subjects in an aversive
conditioning paradigm. We show that neither strategy alone
gives a good account of animal behavior, and instead find that
when presented with novel stimuli, animals initially pursue a
structure learning strategy, followed by a switch to parameter learning on subsequent conditioning episodes. We focus
on a simple example of an ambiguous cue-outcome relationship that arises when an outcome occurs both in the presence
and absence of a sensory cue, the so-called degraded contingency effect (Rescorla, 1968). In the first part of the paper
we show that cue competition, a characteristic of associative
and Bayesian parameter learning models, is not required to
learn a reduced cue-outcome contingency between a novel
predictive stimulus and salient outcome. Instead, in accordance with a structure learning account, we find that changes
in the strengths of different associations are dissociable. In

1464

Context A

our third experiment we explore a wider range of conditioning phenomena and perform quantitative model comparison
to show that a structure learning approach better explains
the data than a variety of (Bayesian and associative) parameter learning models. Finally, in Experiment 4 we show that
learning in a subsequent conditioning session is explained by
switching to parameter learning, using the distribution over
structures learned during initial exposure to the stimuli.

Conditioning

24 hours

Conditioning protocols:

Context A

Context B

Context memory test

Tone memory test

2 hours

or

or

Tone memory test

Context memory test

Context B

Context A

P = Tone-shock pairing

U = Unsignalled shock (shock alone)

Control I:

P

P

P

Control II:

PPP

Intermixed:

UUPUUUUUPUUUPUU

Pairings First:

PPPUUUUUUUUUUUU

100% tone-shock contingency

Experiment 1
Intermixing unsignaled outcomes with outcomes signaled by
a discrete sensory cue in classical conditioning experiments
is known to lead to reduced behavioral responding to the cue
during subsequent memory tests. This reduction has been interpreted as a sign of competition between learning an association to the conditioning Context (the static conditioning chamber that is continually present during the conditioning phase of the experiment), and the discrete predictive cue
(also referred to as conditioned stimulus, or CS). In particular, in an aversive (or fear) conditioning setting, a strong association formed between the conditioning context and the
shock outcome (also called the unconditioned stimulus, or
US) is claimed to reduce subsequent learning of the toneshock association. Alternatively, a strong contextual association has been proposed to be competing with the tone-CS at
the time of memory expression (Stout & Miller, 2007). We
first wanted to determine whether predictions of the cue competition models were supported when ambiguity in the ability of a given cue to predict the outcome was high. To test
this we examined the relationship between Context and Tone
memory strengths, while also varying the order of tone shock
pairings and unsignaled shock USs.

20% tone-shock contingency

Tone memory

percent freezing

percent freezing

*
Control Control Inter- Pairings
I
II mixed First

Control Control Inter- Pairings
I
II
mixed First

Figure 1: Reduced Tone-shock contingency results in reduced
Tone memory, irrespective of trial order and with or without
contextual learning or changes in Context memory strength.

pairings consisted of a presentation of the Tone stimulus,
with the last pip coterminating with the footshock. Unisgnaled foothsocks meant the arrival of a footshock without
prior warning.

Method
Subjects 79 male Sprague-Dawley rats (Hilltop) weighing
275-300g on arrival, individually housed on a 12h light/dark
cycle, and given food and water ad libitum.
Materials and Stimuli Animals were fear conditioned in a
sound-isolating conditioning chamber (Context A). The two
predictive stimuli were a 30s, 5kHz auditory conditioned
stimulus (the Tone),consisting of thirty consecutive auditory
pips with pips at 1HZ, and the conditioning chamber (Context). The predicted outcome (or US) was a 1s, 1mA footshock. Tests for contextual fear memory strength were conducted in the original conditioning chamber, Context A. Tests
for the Tone fear memory were conducted in a different chamber (Context B, different shape, size, lighting and odor from
Context A). Memory strength was evaluated by scoring rats’
freezing behavior during the tests, with freezing defined as
the cessation of all bodily movement with the exception of
respiration-related movement.
Procedure Each animal was taken to the conditioning
room, and placed into the conditioning chamber, where it was
given a series of signaled and unsignaled footshocks with random intertrial intervals (ITIs) of around 2min. Tone-shock

Context memory

*

During conditioning (Fig. 1), animals were given either
three massed tone-shock pairings before, or three spaced pairings intermixed with 12 unsignaled shocks (Pairings first and
Intermixed groups respectively, all with 20% contingency).
Control I and II animals were given three CS-US pairings
only (100% contingency). The Control I training protocol
was identical to the Intermixed group, with the three CS-US
pairings spaced, but with all UUS omitted. The control II
group received massed CS-US pairings identical to the Pairings First group, with the subsequent UUSs omitted, and conditioning terminated after the third CS-US pairing (see Figure
1, middle). Contextual and tone-evoked freezing was measured 24h later. Context memory tests consisted of 5min
spent in Context A, and the test for Tone memory consisted
of 5 presentations of the 30s Tone stimulus in Context B, with
presentations separated by random ITIs of around 2min. The
two tests were separated by 2 hours, and the order varied. Total time spent freezing during the 5 tone presentations, and
during the context test were calculated and are represented
as percentage of total time spent freezing (divided by 2.5min
and 5min respectively). Error bars represent standard errors.

1465

Tone memory
*

Vehicle

APV

*
percent freezing

We found that animals showed similar low levels of toneevoked freezing in both reduced contingency conditions (Fig.
1, bottom left), with a two-way ANOVA showing significant
main effect for contingency (p < 0.0001). Animals were
therefore sensitive to the ambiguity of the CS-US relationship, and demonstrated the ability to integrate contingency information irrespective of the temporal order of training trials,
contradicting a traditional cue competition based contextual
blocking account of contingency degradation. Further, we
observed a reduction in Tone memory strength between the
Pairings First and Control II groups without a corresponding
change in Context memory strength (Fig. 1, bottom right),
suggesting that a simple give-and-take between the different
associations at the time of memory expression also fails to
account for contingency learning.

Context memory

*
percent freezing

Results and Discussion

Control Pairings Control Pairings
II
Firs
II
First

Vehicle

APV

Control Pairings Control Pairings
II
First
II
First

Figure 2: Hippocampal APV injections impair the acquisition
of contextual aversive memories, but have no effect on learning the reduced tone-shock contingency. A two-way ANOVA
on the Context memory data showed main effect for drug
(p < 0.01). A two-way ANOVA on the Tone memory data
showed a main effect for contingency, (p < 0.01). No interactions were significant.

Experiment 2
To better understand the influence of contextual associations
on learning the tone-shock contingency, and to directly test
for cue competition during learning and/or retrieval, we tested
if animals were sensitive to the reduced tone-shock contingency even in the absence of learning any contextual associations. We therefore infused the NMDA-receptor antagonist
APV into the dorsal hippocampus (DH) prior to conditioning,
a manipulation known to block the formation of contextual
memories (Kim, DeCola, Landeira-Fernandez & Fanselow,
2011).

Methods
Subjets 36 adult male rats similar to those in Exp. 1.
Materials and Stimuli We dissolved the NMDA-receptor
antagonist APV in saline. and infused this mixture into the
dorsal hippocampus. Stimuli and materials during conditioning and testing were identical to Exp. 1.
Procedure Prior to the conditioning session, animals received either APV and saline, or saline only injections.
Around half of the animals in both drug conditions were then
trained using the Pairings First training protocol, and the rest
of the animals with the CTL II protocol. Conditioning and
testing proceeded as in Exp.1.

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 shows that APV infusions significantly impaired
contextual learning as expected, but had no effect on learning the Tone-shock contingency, providing further evidence
against cue competition as a sufficient or necessary mechanism for contingency learning.

Models
In this section we give details of the models formalizing the
different (structure vs. parameter) learning strategies, using the representational formalism of Bayesian networks. To

generate predictions for animal behavior, the models have to
specify the functional form by which concurrently present
cues are combined to predict an outcome. Here we use the
so-called noisy-OR generating function, corresponding to the
assumption that different cues predict an outcome independently of each other. We also explored simulations with a rectified linear function (typical of traditional associative models), but this choice did not affect the conclusions in the paper,
though it slightly worsened the fit of each type of model.
Using these generating functions, a parameter learning
model needs to introduce extra variables to be able to explain the findings in Experiment 2. Similarly to the original
causal learning models, we therefore introduced an additional
’Background’ variable. This Background variable represents
the sum of all unobservable or unspecified influences in the
environment (and in particular on the US occurrence), and
might in principle allow parameter learning to account for the
results of Exp. 2. We can formulate our Structure Learning
Model (SLM) both with, or without a Background variable,
achieving similar model fits in both cases. Having the Background variable that is always assumed to have a predictive
connection to the US obviates the need to specify a prior distribution for the probability of US occurrence when all the
predictive stimuli are absent, leading to a simpler and perhaps
more principled model.

Structure Learning Model (SLM)
SLM learns a posterior probability distribution over the different possible constellations of predictive relationships in the
environment (represented by the different graph structures in
Fig. 3), given observations during conditioning. During retrieval, the strength of an association is evaluated by calculating the posterior probability of a connection (a direct edge,
or path in the graph) between the corresponding cue and outcome, using a model-averaging procedure.
We calculated the posterior distribution over different

1466

Bayesian network structures, without assuming or learning
specific parameter values ωi for the edges. We considered the
six possible graph structures Gi ∈ G that can lead to different
predictions about the US. In Graphs 1 and 2, leaving out, or
adding the edge Context → Tone is irrelevant when making
predictions about the US, we therefore considered only one
of each of these pairs of functionally equivalent graphs (the
one with no C → T edge)
By Bayes’ rule, the posterior probability of each graph is
given by

Learning both structure and parameters (PSLM)
Learning a full posterior over the Bayesian network representations included first learning a distribution over the graph
structures as in SLM, and then learning a posterior distribution for the parameters present for each structure, similarly
to PLM. For each graph, predictions are calculated using the
posterior mean edge parameters, and these predictions are
then averaged, weighed by the posterior probability of each
graph.

Associative models
P(Gi |D) ∝

Z
ω|Gi

We also included in the model comparison two advanced
associative cue competition models that extend the classical Rescorla-Wagner model to include more complex interactions between stimuli. Van Hamme and Wasserman’s
(1994) extension (HW-RW) implements cue competition during learning, while in the sometimes competing retrieval
model (SOCR) cues compete during performance (Stout &
Miller, 2007), with the two models using different strategies
to capture covariance information in the cue-outcome relationships. These models can’t account for the results from
Experiment 2, but it was important to see if they could account for the purely behavioral results that didn’t involve neural manipulations.

P(Gi ) · P(ωGi |Gi ) · P(D|Gi , ω|Gi )dω|Gi

where priors over the edge parameters ω1 ,...ω4 were uniform
and independent. P(G1 ), the prior probability of graph 1,was
a free parameter, with the other graphs having equal priors
1)
. Since the conditioned stimuli are largely
P(Gi,i>1 ) = 1−ρ(G
5
neutral at the beginning of experiments, this corresponds to
P(G1 ) being close to 1. The posterior probability of an edge
from the Tone to the US,

∑ P(Gi |D) · I(T →US∈Gi )
Gi

determined the strength of the Tone-shock association (where
I is the indicator function). Context-US association was determined by the posterior probability of an edge from Context to the US or, when no direct edge exists, , the probability
of an indirect path, weighed by an estimated strength of the
Context-Tone connection.

Experiment 3

∑ P(Gi |D) · I(C→US∈Gi ) + γ · P(G4 |D)
Gi

of trials with Tone
where γ = α · number
for a constant α that we fit.
total number of trials

Parameter learning Model (PLM)
PLM predicts behavioral responses based on learning the posterior mean of the edge parameters ω in the maximally connected graph (Graph 6), starting from some prior distributions
over the edge parameters. For maximum flexibility of this
model, these priors were allowed to be independent and to be
different for each edge, but were assumed to be fixed before
conditioning begins, so that they are shared by animals across
all conditioning protocols. For parameter ω j,k (for the edge
Xi → X j ) using the joint prior over we have
ω̂ j,k = E(ω j,k |D, G6 ) =

Z

ω j,k · P(ω) · P(D|G6 , ω)dω

ω|G6

The model predicts that freezing responses are explained
by the probability of a shock calculated given the stimulus
present during testing, using standard probabilistic inference
in Graph 6 with parameters ω̂. We restrict the priors for the
edge parameters to come from a Beta distribution, fitting the
model thus means finding a pair of parameters for each of
the four prior beta distributions (8 parameters in total), such
that they best explain the behavioral data across all training
protocols.

To enable model fitting and comparison we collected further
behavioral data in a manner similar to Exp. 1, but using varied numbers of tone-shock pairings and unsignaled shocks,
allowing us to test which models can simultaneously explain
behavioral phenomena under different conditions of ambiguity. In particular, when USs arrive only in the presence of the
Tone (i.e. only tone-shock pairings are given), the association
between Context and US is itself highly ambiguous: it is not
clear whether predictive power should be attributed to just the
Context, or just the Tone, or both. We fitted our models using
the combined behavioral results from Experiments 1 and 3,
and used the best-fit parameters for each model to predict the
results of the brain manipulation in Exp. 2.

Methods
Subjets 117 adult male rats similar to those in Exp. 1.
Materials and Stimuli
cal to those in Exp. 1.

Materials and Stimuli were identi-

Procedure Animals were conditioned using different sequences of tone-shock pairings and unsignaled shocks, as detailed in Fig. 4.
Results and Discussion SLM provided a better quantitative fit than PLM or the associative cue competition models, while also using fewer free parameters (Table 1 and successfully accounted for standard learning curves as well as
contingency evaluations under ambiguity, including the effects of contingency degradation and the u-shaped learning
curve for the context memory strength during overshadowing

1467

Graph 1

B

∑

Model
averaging

B

T

C
ω1

Graph 2

C
ω1

US

ω2

Graph 3

T

B

C
ω1

US

Graph 4

B

T

US

ω3

C
ω1

Graph 5

ω4

B

T

US

ω3

C
ω1

ω2

Graph 6

B

T

US

ω3

C
ω1

ω2

ω4

US

B=Background
C=Context
T=Tone CS
US=Shock US

T

ω3

0

+

p(G2|D)

+

0

+

γ*p(G4|D) +

p(G5|D)

+

p(G6|D)

~

Context-US
association

0

+

0

+

p(G3|D)

+

p(G4|D)

+

p(G5|D)

+

p(G6|D)

~

CS-US
association

Figure 3: The graph structures used in the Structure Learning Model (with the Background term). PLM uses graph 6 to learn
the four edge parameters.

Context memory
Context
learning
curve

IMX = Intermixed condition
P = Tone-shock pairing
U = Unsignalled shock
E = Unreinforced Context

I

II

IV

2 3 6 10 15
2U
3U
p
2U+1E 3U+1E

Tone
learning
curve

Contingency
degradation

VI

V

Hippocampus
NMDA
blocakde

VII

3P+
3P+
0 3 6 9 12 IMX 12U+ 2 3 6 10 15 0 3 6 9 12 IMX 12U+ 3P 3P+
U
3P
p
U
3P
12U

3P 3P+
12U

+
APV

percent freezing

Structure
learning

III

Contingency
degradation

percent freezing

2 3 6 10 15
U

Data

Partially
Overreinforced shadwoing
context of Context

Tone memory

Figure 4: Behavioral data and model fit for SLM.
(Fig.4 I,II,III). In addition, SLM but not PLM or the associative models, successfully predicted the effects of hippocampal manipulations. The fixed structure models all failed to explain the behavioral data, both because the memory strengths
didn’t covary according to a cue competition principle, and
because these interactions were different under the different
ambiguity conditions. While it might be possible to extend
the associative models to better fit our dataset by adding further model parameters and variables, it is unlikely that this
would lead to a principled and general framework for how
animals evaluate ambiguity. In contrast SLM was robust
to changes in specific components of the model, and provided low error both using an alternative formulation with no
’Background’ variable (MSE = 15.39), or using a rectified
additive generating function (MSE = 16.64), suggesting that
it is the principle of evaluating different models of the environment that enables it to match observed behavior. SPLM

provided a similar fit to SLM , but performed worse according to measures controlling for extra model parameters, such
as adjusted R-squared. SLM thus provided the best fit for the
behavioral data and predicted the effects of neural manipulations on learning, suggesting a close correspondence between
structure learning and the strategies animals use to resolve
ambiguity.

Experiment 4
In the final experiment we examined how animals adopt their
learning strategy if conditioning sessions are distributed over
time, in particular if trials carrying information about the reduced tone-shock contingency are separated in time from the
full contingency trials.

Methods
Subjets 51 adult male rats similar to those in Exp. 1.

1468

Table 1: Comparison of Model fits

Model

SLM
SPLM
PLM
SOCR
HW-RW

MSE

13.44
12.61
20.80
28.26
67.06

s.d. of
MSE
the MSE Experiment 2
(% freezing squared)
0.02
0.24
0.29
-

34.03
18.29
245.64
245.58
848.88

structure, using a uniform prior over the edge parameters in
both cases. SSPL is thus similar to SPLM, but uses separate datasets (conditioning trials) for evaluating the different
structures, and for learning parameters.

Model
Parameters

Conclusion
We showed using a combination of behavioral, neural and
modeling techniques that animals use a structure learning
strategy and evaluate different statistical models of their environment when encountering novel stimuli. Further, we
demonstrated that once a distribution over these models is
learned, they refine this representation by updating parameters in these statistical models. Further important questions
include exploring the exact circumstances under which one or
the other approach (or a mixture of the two) is preferentially
recruited, and in particular understanding what changes in the
environment can lead to reevaluating the statistical structure
once it’s already learnt. This could lead to a better understanding of the complex mechanisms involved in memory updating, and in particular inform new ways in which aversive
associations might be permanently extinguished.

2
9
8
5
8

Materials and Stimuli Identical to Exp.1.
Procedure Conditioning and Testing was distributed over 3
days. On Day1 CTL II+Exposure and Delayed Degradation
groups received the CTL II conditioning protocol, Pairings
First group was conditioned as before. On Day 2, the Delayed
Degradation group received 12 unsignaledd shocks, and the
CTL II+Exposure group was exposed to Context A for and
identical length of time. Animals in the Pairings First group
weren‘t conditioned on Day 2. On Day 3, all animals were
tested as in Exp. 1.

References

Results and Discussion

percent freezing

SSPL

percent freezing

Data

CTL II

Pairings
First

Delayed
Degradation

CTL II

Pairings
First

Delayed
Degradation

Figure 5: Data and Simulation for delayed contingency
degradation
Whereas unsignaled shocks delivered within the same session decreased Tone memory strength as before (one-way
ANOVA with Bonferroni correction, p < 0.5), the same number of unsignaled shocks delivered 24h after tone-shock pairings were given had now such effect. SLM and SPLM cannot
account for this difference as their representation of these two
conditioning protocols is essentially identical. However, the
difference in the resulting memory strengths is well-predicted
by a model in which animals switch from a structure learning
strategy on initial encounter with the stimuli, to a parameter updating strategy on later exposures. The Switching form
Structure to Parameter Learning model (SSPL) assumes that
in the first session animals learn a distribution over possible
graphical models as in SLM (therefore producing identical
predictions to SLM for our previous data), and in the second session they only update the edge parameters for each

Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51(4),
334-384.
Holyoak, K. J., & Cheng, P. W. (2011). Causal learning and
inference as a rational process: the new synthesis. Annual
Review of Psychology, 62, 135-163.
Kim, J. J., DeCola, J. P., Landeira-Fernandez, J., & Fanselow,
M. S. (1991). N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist
APV blocks acquisition but not expression of fear
conditioning. Behavioral Neuroscience, 105, 126-133.
Koller, D., & Friedman, N. (2009). Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques.
Lu, H., Yuille, A. L., Liljeholm, M., Cheng, P. W., &
Holyoak, K. J. (2008). Bayesian generic priors for causal
learning. Psychological Review, 115, 955-984
Pearce, J. M., & Bouton, M. E. (2001). Theories of associative learning in animals. Annual Review of Psychology, 52,
111-139.
Rescorla, R. a. (1968). Probability of shock in the presence
and absence of CS in fear conditioning. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 66(1), 1-5.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In Classical Conditioning II Current Research and Theory (Vol. 21)
Stout, S. C., & Miller, R. R. (2007). Sometimes-competing
retrieval (SOCR): a formalization of the comparator hypothesis. Psychological Review, 114(3), 759?783.
Van Hamme, L. J., & Wasserman, E. A. (1994). Cue Competition in Causality Judgments: The Role of Nonpresentation of Compound Stimulus Elements. Learning and
Motivation, 25, 127-151.

1469

