Examining the Bilingual Advantage on Conflict Resolution Tasks: A Meta-Analysis
Seamus Donnelly (sdonnelly@gc.cuny.edu)
Patricia J. Brooks (pbrooks1@gc.cuny.edu)
Bruce D. Homer (bhomer@gc.cuny.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, City University of New York Graduate Center
New York, New York, 10016, USA
Abstract

Many studies have tested the prediction that bilinguals
exhibit smaller interference costs than monolinguals. In a
literature review, Hilchey and Klein (2011) noted that the
bilingual advantage on interference costs was mixed.
However, they also noted that many studies observed a
bilingual advantage on global RTs, that is, the average RT
across both congruent and incongruent trials. Global RTs in
conflict resolution tasks are often thought to reflect the cost
of monitoring, searching for and identifying cues that that
signal the need for changes in inhibitory control. Some
authors have speculated (e.g., Costa et al., 2009) that this
system detects conflict created when lexical items from both
languages are activated. Others have argued that living in a
multilingual environment might tax the monitoring system
because socio-linguistic cues for which language to speak
may compete (Hernandez et al., 2013). If either of these
claims is true, bilinguals may engage the monitoring system
to a greater extent than monolinguals during regular
language use.
However, several recent studies have failed to replicate
the bilingual advantage on global RTs: Some researchers
have observed a bilingual advantage on interference cost,
but not global RTs (e.g., Luk, De Sa & Bialystok; Yang,
Yang & Lust, 2011), whereas others have observed no
bilingual advantage on either global RTs or interference cost
(e.g., Paap & Greenberg, 2013; Antón et al., 2014).
Two recent reviews on the aforementioned studies reach
different conclusions about the bilingual advantage on
conflicting resolution tasks. First, after noting the many
non-replications of the bilingual advantage on global RTs,
Hilchey, Saint-Aubin, & Klein (2015) suggest that the
bilingual advantage may be due to correlated background
variables. Second, Valian (2015) argues that the bilingual
advantage may be real, but that, given the number of other
variables and experiences that engage mechanisms of
executive control, its individual impact may often be
obscured.
Both of these interpretations suggest that an important
next step is to compare monolinguals and bilinguals from
diverse social and linguistic backgrounds, so that the effects
of correlated background variables may wash out. A single
empirical study of this sort would prove very difficult to
conduct. However, given the large number of studies from
many different labs that have been conducted on this topic,
meta-analysis would be especially elucidating. An
additional benefit of meta-analysis is the ability to
systematically model the effects of potential moderator

A great deal of research has compared monolingual and
bilinguals on conflict resolution tasks, with inconsistent
findings: Some studies reveal a bilingual advantage on global
RTs, some reveal a bilingual advantage on interference cost,
and some show no advantage. We report a meta-analysis of
73 comparisons (N = 5538), with estimates of global RTs and
interference cost for each study. Results revealed a
moderately significant effect size that was not moderated by
type of cost (global RT or interference cost) or task. Age
interacted with type of cost, showing a pattern difficult to
reconcile with theories of bilingualism and executive control.
Additionally there was a significant main effect of lab, which
might be due to sociolinguistic differences in samples, data
treatment and methodology, or Hawthorne effects.
Keywords: bilingual advantage; inhibitory
monitoring; conflict resolution tasks; meta-analysis

control;

Introduction
There is widespread agreement that during language use,
lexical representations from both of a bilingual’s languages
are active (Kroll, Dussais, Bogulski & Kroff, 2012). For
example, bilinguals name cognates more quickly than
matched non-cognates (van Hell & Djikstra, 2002). Some
researchers have speculated that these representations
compete for selection (Kroll et al., 2012). Green (1998)
proposed that competition between these two sets of
representations is resolved by a domain-general inhibitory
control mechanism. One prediction from this proposal is
that bilinguals’ regular engagement of this mechanism
strengthens it, leading to smaller interference costs on
conflict resolution tasks.
Examples of conflict resolution tasks include the Simon,
Flanker and Stroop tasks. All three tasks contain trials with
and without distracting information (incongruent and
congruent trials, respectively). For example, in the Simon
task, participants see colored squares, which appear on
either the right or left hand side of the screen. One color is
assigned a left-key response and the other is assigned a
right-key response. It is assumed that both the color of the
square and its location elicit separate responses and that
when these responses differ (i.e. on incongruent trials) they
compete. The difference in reaction time (RT) between
congruent and incongruent trials, called the interference
cost, is assumed to reflect the extra time needed to engage a
domain-general inhibitory mechanism to suppress the nontarget response. Smaller interference costs are assumed to
reflect superior inhibitory control.

596

variables, including the measure of cost (i.e. the dependent
variable (DV): global RT vs interference cost).
Three additional moderator variables are especially
relevant to this meta-analysis. First, although the Simon,
Stroop and Flanker tasks are often interpreted as reflecting
the same construct, they are often uncorrelated (see Paap &
Sawi, 2014, for an overview). If these three tasks reflect
different constructs, then the bilingual advantage (on global
RTs or interference cost) might materialize on some but not
other tasks.
A second important moderator variable is age of
participants. Studies of the bilingual advantage have
included participants as young as two and a half (Bialystok
et al., 2010) and as old as seventy (Bialystok et al., 2004).
Given the developmental trajectory of executive control,
Bialystok et al (2004) argued that the bilingual advantage
might be more pronounced among children and older adults
than younger adults, for whom executive control is at peak
levels. While there is some evidence for this claim (e.g.
Engel de Abreu et al., 2011), other authors have failed to
observe a bilingual advantage amongst children (e.g. Antón
et al., 2014) and older adults (Kirk et al., 2014).
A third important moderator, research group, is important
for two reasons. First, different research groups likely have
access to different populations of bilinguals. Second,
different research groups may differ in their administration
of tasks and analysis of data. For example, different labs
define and handle outliers differently. This is especially
important since empirical and theoretical work on RT
distributions suggests that changes in task demands often
affect the tail as well as mean of the distribution (Tse &
Altarriba, 2012).
The present meta-analysis aimed to answer two questions:
(1) whether there is a reliable bilingual advantage on the
global RTs or the interference cost of interference control
tasks; and (2) whether this advantage is moderated by task,
age, or research group.

true: the age at which they began learning their second
language is equal to or less than one half their age at the
time of testing; the participants report near equal proficiency
in their languages; the participants report native or nearnative attainment in their second language; the participants
report using each of their two languages in at least forty
percent of their daily activities; the participants report using
both languages at home; the participants report using one
language at home and one language at school (with the
exception of children who are recently enrolled in
immersion programs).
B) Study includes at least one monolingual group. A group
will be defined as monolingual if they have had only
minimal exposure to a second language, e.g., through a
foreign language class at school.
C) Participants are at least five years old and without
psychological impairment. This analysis therefore excludes
many of the studies on the potentially beneficial effect of
bilingualism on dementia.
D) It contains RT data from at least one conflict resolution
task, such as the Flanker, Simon, or Stroop tasks. A conflict
resolution task was defined as follows: Participants are
asked to make a judgment about a visually presented
stimulus; a second, non-target cue was systematically varied
across trials; on some trials the non-target cue elicited a
different response than the target cue; on other trials the
non-target cue elicited the same response as the target cue.
Tasks were not included if they contained an
unconventionally small number of trials of either type.

Data Reduction
This study used a three-level meta-analysis to model
dependence between global RTs and interference cost. To
do so, other forms of dependence between the effect sizes
within studies needed to be eliminated. The following
strategies and assumptions were employed to eliminate
dependence. It was assumed that there was no dependence
between separate studies within the same paper. It was
assumed that there was no dependence between
comparisons of different groups in the same study; for
example, studies that report on bilingual-monolingual
comparisons for two age groups contributed independent
effect sizes to the meta-analysis. If a study reported on
multiple blocks for one task, the first block was selected for
the effect size. If a study reported on multiple bilingual
groups and a single monolingual group, or multiple
monolingual groups and a single bilingual group, the
multiple groups were averaged into a single group. Finally,
if a study reported multiple conflict resolution tasks, each
task contributed independent effect sizes. This can be
justified as multiple studies have failed to find consistent
correlations between conflict resolution tasks (Paap &
Greenberg, 2013; Paap & Sawi, 2014).

Method
Literature Search and Inclusion Criteria
PsycINFO and other databases were searched periodically
until January 2015. Search terms included some
combination of Bilingualism and Executive Control,
Executive Function or Inhibition. Additionally, the
references sections of recent review papers and a recent
meta-analysis on this topic (de Bruin, Treccani & Della
Salla, 2015) were consulted. A total of 39 studies, with 73
comparisons and 5538 participants met the following
criteria:
A) Study includes at least one bilingual group. Because
different studies have used different measures as indicators
of bilingualism (e.g., age of onset, frequency of use, and
overall proficiency), it is impossible to identify a single
definition of bilingualism. Therefore, a group of participants
will be designated as bilingual if any of the following are

597

Results

Moderator Coding
This study included four moderator variables. DV (i.e., type
of cost) was coded as a factor with two levels, global RT
and interference cost. Age was coded as factor variable with
three levels: children were participants less than 18 years
old; younger adults were participants between 18 and 60
years old; and older adults were participants above 60 years
old. Task was coded as a factor variable with the following
levels: Simon included the classic Simon task and the
Simon Arrows task; Flanker included the Flanker task and
the Attentional Networks Test; Stroop included color-letter
Stroop tasks; and Other included all other tasks. The lab
variable was coded according to the corresponding author
on each study. All authors who were the corresponding
author on at least four comparisons were treated as separate
levels on the lab variable. All authors who were
corresponding author on fewer than four comparisons were
grouped into the Other level. There were six levels of the
lab variable (5 labs and Other).

Prior to running the three-level meta-analysis, traditional
random-effects meta-analyses with no moderators were
conducted and forest plots were produced in order to
visualize variation in effect sizes across studies. Effect sizes
for global RTs are shown in Figure 1, and for interference
cost in Figure 2. Before accounting for the dependence
between effect sizes, or including any moderators, the
average effect size for global RTs was d = .43 (CI: .19 –
.67) and the average effect size for interference cost was d =
.29 (CI: .13 – .49).
Several three-level meta-analyses of increasing
complexity were then fit. First, the Null Model, with no
moderator variables estimated the pooled effect size for
global RTs and interference cost. The model yielded an
effect size of d = .39 (CI: .19 – .59), and, consistent with
Figures 1 and 2, suggested significant heterogeneity of
effect sizes, Q(145) = 885.918, p < .001. Both within- and
between-cluster standard deviations significantly differed
from zero, τ2within = .11, p < .001, τ2between = .38, p < .001.
Second, to test whether effect sizes varied according to DV
(global RTs vs interference cost), Model 1 included DV as a
moderator. Surprisingly, including DV as a moderator did
not improve fit according to the likelihood ratio test (p =
.52). However, because DV was a theoretically important
variable, it was included in subsequent models testing the
effects of other moderators.
Third, a series of models including task, age, and research
group as moderators was fit to the data. For each moderator
two models were fit: An additive model, testing just the
effect of the moderator on the pooled effect size, and an
interaction model, testing whether the moderator affected
global RTs and interference cost differently. Each model
was compared to both the Null Model and Model 1
according to the likelihood ratio statistic. Key results are
presented in Table 1. For task, neither the additive model
nor the interaction model improved fit relative to the Null
Model or Model 1. For age, the additive model did not
improve fit; however, the interaction model fit significantly
better than both the Null Model and Model 1.
To determine the source of the interaction, the two
interaction coefficients were examined. The interaction
between DV and the Older Adult group was positive and
statistically significant (B = .47, Z = 2.29, p = .02. The
interaction between DV and the Child group was nonsignificant (B = -.27, Z = -1.77, p = .08). To facilitate
interpretation of these interactions, three separate metaanalyses of the children, younger adults and older adults
were conducted. Amongst younger adults, DV did not
significantly moderate effect size (B = -.03, Z = -.31, p =
.76). Amongst children, the effect of DV was negative and
marginally significant (B = -.42, Z = -1.86, p = .06),
suggesting that the effect on global RTs tended to be larger
than that on interference cost. Amongst older adults, the
positive effect of DV was statistically significant (B = .47, Z

Effect Size Calculation
Many studies report the means and standard deviations of
congruent and incongruent trials separately. In order to
calculate effect sizes for global RTs and interference cost,
the correlation between congruent and incongruent trials
was needed for estimating standard deviations. As these
correlations are typically not reported, they were imputed. A
random-effects meta-analysis of the correlations between
congruent and incongruent trials from several interference
control tasks was conducted. Correlation coefficients were
then simulated from this model.
Two studies (Namazi & Thordardottir, 2010; Gathercole
et al., 2014) reported means but no standard deviations.
Standard deviations were simulated from linear models with
the mean RT as a predictor variable. This approach is
defensible because both theoretical and empirical work
indicates that the standard deviation of an RT distribution is
a linear function of its mean (Wagenmakers & Brown,
2007).

Model
As global RTs and interference cost are dependent, a threelevel meta-analysis was conducted using the metasem
package in R (Cheung, 2013). Unlike traditional random
effects meta-analysis, which decomposes effect size
variance into two types, three-level meta-analysis
decomposes variance into three sources: sampling error,
within-cluster variance, and between-cluster variance.
Clusters were defined as comparisons between one group of
monolinguals and one group of bilinguals on a specific task.
So if a study reported on monolinguals and bilinguals of two
different age groups, two clusters were included for that
study. Each cluster contained two effect sizes, one for the
interference cost and one for the global RTs. All other
moderator variables varied between comparisons.

598

Figure 1: Forest Plot for Global RTs

Figure 2: Forest Plot for Interference Costs

= 3.31, p < .001), and indicated larger effect sizes for
interference costs than global RTs. Both the additive model
and interaction model for research group improved fit
relative to both the Null Model and Model 1. According to a
likelihood ratio test, the additive and interaction models did
not differ significantly from one another (p = .09),
suggesting that the effect of lab is consistent across both
global RTs and interference costs. Examination of the
forests plots revealed several outlier effect sizes that might
have contributed to lab effects. To test this possibility a
sensitivity analysis was conducted: 72 three-level metaanalyses with additive effects of DV and Research Group
were fit to data. Each model dropped one of the
comparisons. Every model fit significantly better than the
Null Model (max p-value = .002; min R2 = .34), indicating
that the results cannot be attributed to a single outlier.

However, DV had different effects for the three age groups.
Amongst older adults, effect sizes were significantly larger
for interference cost than global RTs; amongst younger
adults, there was no significant difference between the two
costs; and amongst children, there was a trend in the
opposite direction, with larger effect sizes for global RTs
than for interference cost. The reason for this pattern of
results is unclear, as there is no model of language control in
bilinguals that predicts different advantages at different
developmental periods. It is possible that this pattern could
be an artifact of calculating interference costs as additive
rather than multiplicative effects.
The effect of lab was large, robust, and did not interact
with DV. We offer three possible explanations for the lab
effect. First, it might stem from sociolinguistic differences
of subject pools across the different universities (e.g.,
immigrant status) that might affect the degree to which
executive control is recruited and subsequently
strengthened. Second, there may be differences in methods
across labs, e.g., in the treatment of outliers of RT
distributions. At least one study has found evidence of a
bilingual advantage in the tail of RT distributions (Tse &
Altarriba, 2012, but see Duñabeitia et al., 2014). If this
phenomenon is common, variation in outlier removal
strategies would lead to different findings across labs. There
was not sufficient information about outlier handling to
include this as a moderator. Third is the possibility of
Hawthorne effects. Whether lifelong bilingualism
strengthens executive control is a hotly debated question
that has received a great deal of public attention. It is
plausible that participants might be aware of the
researcher’s hypothesis prior to entering their lab, which
could bias results.

Discussion
The present study had two aims: 1) to test the reliability of
the bilingual advantage on global RTs and interference costs
from conflict resolution tasks; 2) to test whether effect sizes
to test whether effect sizes are moderated by age, task and
lab. The overall effect size from the Null Model was
moderate and statistically significant, suggesting a reliable
bilingual advantage.
However, while another meta-analysis of bilingual
advantages in cognition found evidence of publication bias
(de Bruin et al., 2014), it should be noted that we did not
assess publication bias and included only published studies.
This was unexpected because global RTs and interference
costs are generally thought to reflect different cognitive
constructs, namely monitoring and inhibitory control.

599

Within
Cluster
Variance

Between
Cluster
Variance

R2 Within

R2 Between

AIC

P -value
(Null)

Null
Cost

.11
.11

.65
.65

.00
.00

.00
.00

95.39
96.79

.44

Cost + Task
Cost * Task
Cost + Age

.11
.10
.11

.62
.63
.65

.00
.07
.00

.05
.04
.00

100.60
102.72
100.19

.60
.46
.75

Cost * Age

.08

.00

.26

.00

93.56

.04

.02

Cost + Lab

.11

.42

.00

.36

83.07

<.001

<.001

Cost * Lab

.08

.43

.26

.36

83.41

<.001

<.001

Model

P- Value
(Cost)

.53
.43
.74

Table 1: Summaries of Moderator Variables
The observed pattern of results is inconsistent with existing
models of bilingual language control and does not provide
conclusive evidence for or against the bilingual advantage
on conflict resolution tasks. This is, in part, due to limitation
with the present study and the existing literature. First, the
present study did not include socio-linguistic variables, such
as age of onset of bilingualism and frequency of use as
moderators. Future work will include these variables.
Second, most of the existing literature has treated
bilingualism as a one-dimensional, categorical variable:
participants are either bilingual or monolingual. A more
fruitful approach might be to identify specific dimensions of
bilingual experience that recruit executive control and look
for individual differences therein (Kroll & Bialystok, 2013).
Future modeling work on bilingual lexical development and
lexical access should to clarify the role of executive control
in bilingual language management and suggest more
specific hypotheses about where and when to expect a
bilingual advantage.

Bialystok, E., & DePape, A. (2009). Musical expertise,
bilingualism, and executive functioning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: HPP, 35(2), 565-574.
Bialystok, E. (2010). Global-local and trail-making tasks by
monolingual and bilingual children: Beyond inhibition.
Developmental Psychology, 46(1), 93-105.
Billig, J. D., & Scholl, A. P. (2011). The impact of
bilingualism and aging on inhibitory control and working
memory. Organon, 26(51).
Blumenfeld, H. K., & Marian, V. (2011). Bilingualism
influences inhibitory control in auditory comprehension.
Cognition, 118(2), 245-257.
Blumenfeld, H. K., & Marian, V. (2014). Cognitive control
in bilinguals: Advantages in Stimulus–Stimulus
inhibition. Bilingualism: L&C, 17(3), 610-629.
Calvo, A., & Bialystok, E. (2014). Independent effects of
bilingualism and socioeconomic status on language ability
and executive functioning. Cognition, 130(3), 278-288.
Cheung M. Modeling dependent effect sizes with three-level
meta-analyses: A structural equation modeling approach.
Psychological
Methods
[serial
online].
June
2014;19(2):211-229
Coderre, E. L., van Heuven, W. B., & Conklin, K. (2013).
The timing and magnitude of Stroop interference and
facilitation in monolinguals and bilinguals. Bilingualism:
Language & Cognition, 16(2), 420-441.
Costa, A., Hernández, M., & Sebastián-Gallés, N. (2008).
Bilingualism aids conflict resolution: Evidence from the
ANT task. Cognition, 106(1), 59-86.
Costa, A., Hernández, M., Costa-Faidella, J., & SebastiánGallés, N. (2009). On the bilingual advantage in conflict
processing: Now you see it, now you don’t. Cognition,
113(2), 135-149.
de Bruin, A., Treccani, B., & Della Sala, S. (2015).
Cognitive advantage in bilingualism An example of
publication bias? Psychological Science, 26(1), 99-107.
Duñabeitia, J. A. et al. (2014). The inhibitory advantage in
bilingual children revisited: Myth or reality?
Experimental Psychology, 61(3), 234-251.
Emmorey, K., Luk, G., Pyers, J. E., & Bialystok, E. (2008).
The source of enhanced cognitive control in bilinguals:
Evidence from bimodal bilinguals. Psychological Science,
19(12), 1201-1206.

References
Abutalebi, J., Della Rosa, P. A., Green, D. W., Hernandez,
M., Scifo, P., Keim, R., & ... Costa, A. (2012).
Bilinguatism tunes the anterior cingulate cortex for
conflict monitoring. Cerebral Cortex, 22(9), 2076-2086.
Antón E, Duñabeitia J, et al. (2014). Is there a bilingual
advantage in the ANT task? Evidence from children.
Frontiers In Psychology [serial online]. May 7, 2014.
Bialystok E, Craik F, Klein R, Viswanathan M. (2014).
Bilingualism, aging, and cognitive control: Evidence from
the Simon task. Psychology & Aging 19(2), 290-303.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I., Grady, C., Chau, W., Ishii, R.,
Gunji, A., & Pantev, C. (2005). Effect of bilingualism on
cognitive control in the Simon task: Evidence from MEG.
Neuroimage, 24(1), 40-49.
Bialystok, E. (2006). Effect of bilingualism and computer
video game experience on the Simon task. Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology/Revue Canadienne
De Psychologie Expérimentale, 60(1), 68-79.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F., & Luk, G. (2008). Cognitive control
and lexical access in younger and older bilinguals.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 34(4), 859-873.

600

Engel de Abreu, P. J., et al. (2012). Bilingualism enriches
the poor: Enhanced cognitive control in low-income
minority children. Psychological Science, 23(11), 13641371.
Gathercole, V.C.M et al. (2014). Does language dominance
affect cognitive performance in bilinguals? Lifespan
evidence from preschoolers through older adults on card
sorting, Simon, and metalinguistic tasks. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5.
Heidlmayr, K., et al. (2014). Successive bilingualism and
executive functions: The effect of second language use on
inhibitory control in a behavioural Stroop Colour Word
task. Bilingualism: L&C, 17(3), 630-645.
Hernández, M., Martin, C., Barceló, F., & Costa, A. (2013).
Where is the bilingual advantage in task-switching?
Journal of Memory & Language, 69(3), 257-276.
Hilchey M, & Klein R. (2011). Are there bilingual
advantages on nonlinguistic interference tasks?
Implications for the plasticity of executive control
processes. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18(4), 625–
658
Hilchey, M. D., Saint-Aubin, J., & Klein, R. M. (2015).
Does bilingual exercise enhance cognitive fitness in nonlinguistic executive processing tasks. Cambridge
Handbook of Bilingual Processing. Cambridge: CUP.
Kirk, N. W., Fiala, L., Scott-Brown, K. C., & Kempe, V.
(2014). No evidence for reduced Simon cost in elderly
bilinguals and bidialectals. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 26(6), 640-648.
Kroll, J. F., & Bialystok, E. (2013). Understanding the
consequences of bilingualism for language processing and
cognition. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5),
Kroll, J. F., Dussias, P. E., Bogulski, C. A., & Kroff, J.
(2012). Juggling two languages in one mind: What
bilinguals tell us about language processing and its
consequences for cognition. The psychology of learning
and motivation (pp. 229-262). San Diego, CA: Elsevier.
Luk, G., DeSa, E., & Bialystok, E. (2011). Is there a relation
between onset age of bilingualism and enhancement of
cognitive control? Bilingualism: L&C, 14(4), 488-495.
Luk, G., Anderson, J. E., Craik, F. M., Grady, C., &
Bialystok, E. (2010). Distinct neural correlates for two
types of inhibition in bilinguals: Response inhibition
versus interference suppression. Brain & Cognition,
74(3), 347-357.
Martin-Rhee, M. M., & Bialystok, E. (2008). The
development of two types of inhibitory control in
monolingual and bilingual children. Bilingualism:
Language & Cognition, 11(1), 81-93.
Marzecová, A., Asanowicz, D., Krivá, L., & Wodniecka, Z.
(2013). The effects of bilingualism on efficiency and
lateralization of attentional networks. Bilingualism:
Language & Cognition, 16(3), 608-623.
Morales, J., Calvo, A., & Bialystok, E. (2013). Working
memory development in monolingual and bilingual
children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
114(2), 187-202.

Morton, J. B., & Harper, S. N. (2007). What did Simon say?
Revisiting the bilingual advantage. Developmental
Science, 10(6), 719-726.
Namazi, M., & Thordardottir, E. (2010). A working
memory, not bilingual advantage, in controlled attention.
International Journal of Bilingual Education &
Bilingualism, 13(5), 597-616.
Paap, K. R., & Greenberg, Z. I. (2013). There is no coherent
evidence for a bilingual advantage in executive
processing. Cognitive Psychology, 66(2), 232-258
Paap, K. R., & Sawi, O. (2014). Bilingual advantages in
executive functioning: problems with convergent validity,
discriminant validity and the identification of theoretical
constructs. Frontiers in Psychology, 5.
Pelham, S. D., & Abrams, L. (2014). Cognitive advantages
and disadvantages in early and late bilinguals. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: LMC, 40(2), 313-325.
Poarch, G. J., & van Hell, J. G. (2012). Executive functions
and inhibitory control in multilingual children: Evidence
from second-language learners, bilinguals, and trilinguals.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 113(4), 535551.
Rubio-Fernández, P., & Glucksberg, S. (2012). Reasoning
about other people's beliefs: Bilinguals have an
advantage. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, And Cognition, 38(1), 211-217.
Salvatierra, J. L., & Rosselli, M. (2011). The effect of
bilingualism and age on inhibitory control. International
Journal of Bilingualism, 15(1), 26-37.
Schroeder, S., & Marian, V. (2012). A bilingual advantage
for episodic memory in older adults. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 24(5), 591-601.
Tao et al. (2011). The efficiency of attentional networks in
early and late bilinguals: the role of age of acquisition.
Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
Tse C, Altarriba J. (2012) The effects of first- and secondlanguage proficiency on conflict resolution and goal
maintenance in bilinguals: Evidence from reaction time
distributional analyses in a Stroop task. Bilingualism:
Language And Cognition. 15(3):663-676
Valian, V. (2015). Bilingualism and cognition.
Bilingualism: Language & Cognition, 18(1), 3-24.
van Hell, J. G., & Dijkstra, T. (2002). Foreign language
knowledge can influence native language performance in
exclusively native contexts. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 9(4), 780-789.
Wagenmakers, E., & Brown, S. (2007). On the linear
relation between the mean and the standard deviation of a
response time distribution. Psychological Review, 114(3),
830-841
Yang, S., Yang, H. J., & Lust, B. (2011). Early childhood
bilingualism leads to advances in executive attention:
Dissociating culture and language. Bilingualism:
Language & Cognition, 14(3), 412-422.
Yudes C., Macizo, P., & Bajo, T. (2011). The influence of
expertise in simultaneous interpreting on non-verbal
executive processes. Frontiers in Psychology, 2.

601

