Expertise modulates hemispheric asymmetry in holistic processing: Evidence from
Chinese character processing
Harry K. S. Chung (h1171972@hku.hk)
Jacklyn C. Y. Leung (jacklynl@hku.hk)
Janet H. Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong
691 Jockey Club Tower, Centennial Campus, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong S.A.R.

face from two faces that differ only by one feature (e.g.,
Peter vs. Peter with John’s mouth), or identify the isolated
facial feature that belongs to that studied face (e.g., Peter’s
mouth vs. John’s mouth). It was shown that participants
performed better when identifying features in the whole face
condition than in the isolated feature condition, suggesting
faces are represented as an undifferentiated whole rather
than composition of parts. While the part-whole task is a
memory task, the composite task involves less memory retrieval and relies more on perceptual judgments. In the
composite task, participants are presented with two composite faces and are asked to judge whether the top halves of
the two faces are the same or different. In general, participants report two identical top halves to look different when
they are combined with two different bottom halves. Nonetheless, the illusion fades when the top and bottom halves
are spatially separated (Figure 1; see Rossion, 2013, for a
review). This task thus measures HP as failure of selective
attention to parts. It suggests that participants tend to process faces as a whole, and thus getting interference from the
unattended halves. Here we will measure HP using the
complete composite paradigm that has been commonly used
in many recent studies (e.g., Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009; Richler,
Bukach, & Gauthier, 2009; Richler, Cheung, & Gauthier,
2011; Wong, Palmeri, & Gauthier, 2009).

Abstract
Holistic processing (HP) has been proposed to be a characteristic of right hemisphere (RH) processing. Here we test this
claim using the divided visual field paradigm with Chinese
character stimuli. HP is assessed through the composite paradigm, which is commonly used in perceptual expertise research. We found that in novice Chinese readers, a standard
HP pattern emerged only in the left visual field/RH but not in
the right visual field/left hemisphere, consistent with the analytic/holistic hemispheric dichotomy in the literature. However, in expert Chinese readers, neither visual field showed the
HP pattern, consistent with the finding that reduced HP is an
expertise maker for Chinese character recognition. Thus, the
RH does not always employ holistic processing; it depends on
the perceivers’ experience with the stimuli. This is the first
study demonstrating that expertise with a visual object type
can modulate hemispheric difference in HP.
Keywords: holistic processing; Chinese character processing;
hemispheric asymmetry

Introduction
In the past few decades, it has been proposed that our left
and right hemisphere process information in qualitatively
different styles, which is also known as the “analytic/holistic
processing dichotomy” (Cohen, 1973; Hillger & Koenig,
1991; Levy-Agresti & Sperry, 1968; Rossion et al., 2000). It
hypothesizes that our left hemisphere (LH) tends to process
information analytically whereas our right hemisphere (RH)
tends to process information in a more holistic manner. Researchers have spent years in examining the analytic/holistic
processing dichotomy. One simple and efficient way to
compare between hemispheres is the use of the divided visual field methodology, in which a stimulus is presented to
only one visual field so that it is initially received and processed by the contralateral hemisphere (see e.g., Bourne,
2006).
To test the analytic/holistic dichotomy, one can measure
holistic processing (HP) and compare its magnitude across
the two hemispheres. Various paradigms have been developed to measure HP. The part-whole task and the composite
task, in particular, are the two most common methods for
assessing HP particularly in the face perception literature
(Piepers & Robbins, 2012). The part-whole task is a twoalternative forced choice recognition task (Tanaka & Farah,
1993). This task requires participants to first study a face
(e.g., “This is Peter”), and then to either identify the studied

Figure 1: The composite face illusion. a) Participants perceive 5 identical top halves as being different when they are
aligned with 5 distinct bottom halves; b) Participants perceive the top halves as being the same when the distinct
bottom halves are spatially misaligned with the top halves
(taken from Rossion, 2013).
To examine the relationship between RH lateralization
and HP as assessed in the composite paradigm, Ramon and
Rossion (2011) presented faces either in the left visual field

399

(LVF/RH) or in the right visual field (RVF/LH) in the composite paradigm. They found a higher level of HP in the
LVF compared with the RVF, suggesting a RH dominance
in HP for faces. This result is consistent with the analytic/holistic dichotomy between the two hemispheres.
In addition to behavioral data, neuroimaging studies also
provided converging evidence supporting the RH’s role in
HP. For example, in Rossion et al.’s (2000) study, participants were asked to perform a delayed-matching task on
either faces or houses during PET scanning. They found that
the right FFA was more activated when matching whole
faces than isolated face features while the reversed pattern
was found in the left FFA. Nevertheless, this effect seemed
to be specific to faces but not in houses.
While it is widely believed that HP is lateralized to the
RH, this hypothesis has been challenged by some recent
studies. For instance, Hsiao and Cottrell (2009) found that
Chinese expert readers showed reduced HP and increased
RH lateralization for Chinese characters (as indicated by a
stronger left side bias in perceiving Chinese characters) as
compared with novice readers. This result suggested that
RH lateralization and HP may not always go together. In a
computational modeling study of face recognition, Galmar
and Hsiao (2013) showed that when the face recognition
task relied purely on configural information, there was a
strong positive correlation between HP and RH lateralization; however, a negative correlation between the two processes was found when the task relied purely on featural
information. Thus, HP may not necessarily be a property of
RH processing. Rather, their relationship may be influenced
by task requirements.
The above claim was also supported by a study investigating callosotomy patients who had disconnected hemisphere after surgery (split brain patients; Trope, Rozin, Nelson, & Gur, 1992). These patients were asked to perform
similarity judgments with triads of stimuli in which one pair
matched on a criterial attribute (analytic) and another pair
showed a family resemblance structure (holistic). It was
found that the RH had a stronger bias to judge based on the
criterial attribute (analytic). However, when they were engaged in a concept formation task, both analytic and holistic
processing strategies were seen in the RH. Their results revealed that the RH could use either analytical or holistic
processing, depending on the nature of the task. Consistent
with this finding, a recent fMRI study showed that neural
populations in the right FFA seemed to be capable of both
analytic and holistic processing (Harris & Aguirre, 2010).
While some previous studies have suggested that the relationship between RH and HP processing may depend on
task requirements, it remains unclear whether it also depends on the perceivers’ experience with the stimuli. Thus,
here we aim to test the hypothesis that RH lateralization and
HP do not always go together; it depends on the perceivers’
experience with the stimuli. We chose Chinese characters as
the stimuli because Chinese characters allow us to examine
the modulation effect of expertise by comparing between
Chinese expert readers and novices (non-Chinese readers),

which could be relatively difficult to investigate with face
stimuli. Also, despite the fact that Chinese characters share
many properties with faces, configural information was
shown to be important for face processing but not for character processing (Ge, Wang, McCleery, & Lee, 2006),
whereas featural information is important for both. Thus,
according to Galmar and Hsiao (2013), the relationship between RH lateralization and HP in character processing may
be different from face processing.
We hypothesize that according to the analytic/holistic dichotomy between the two hemispheres proposed in the literature, a HP pattern may be observed in the RH but not in the
LH in non-Chinese readers. In contrast, based on Hsiao and
Cottrell’s finding (2009) showing reduced HP among Chinese expert readers, and Galmar and Hsiao’s (2013) modeling study suggesting that HP and RH may be separate processes that do not always go together, depending on the task
demands, we predict that the expertise in Chinese character
recognition may modulate the relationship between HP and
RH lateralization such that Chinese expert readers may not
show HP in either the RH or the LH.

Method
Here we implemented the composite task for assessing HP
effects. In the composite task, two stimuli were presented
briefly and sequentially. Participants were asked to pay attention to either the top or the bottom halves of the two
stimuli and judge whether they were the same or different.
In congruent trials, the attended and the unattended halves
elicited identical responses (i.e., both are the same or both
are different). In incongruent trials, the attended and the
unattended halves elicited conflicting responses. If participants processed the stimuli holistically, then they would get
interference from the unattended halves in incongruent trials
but not in congruent trials, resulting in performance difference between congruent and incongruent trials. This effect
should be diminished when the two halves were spatially
misaligned since perceptual grouping became difficult.
Therefore, HP was typically indicated by the interaction
between congruency and alignment. Indeed, recent research
has suggested that this interaction between congruency and
misalignment is particularly sensitive to expertise driven
and perceptually focused HP (Richler et al., 2009; Richler et
al., 2011; Rossion, 2013; Wong et al., 2009). Here in order
to examine lateralization effects, in each composite task trial,
we presented the first character either in the LVF, RVF, or
center randomly. To ensure characters presented in all locations were perceived with similar visual acuity, characters in
the center condition were presented in either the upper or
the lower visual field, and at each of the four locations, the
edge of the attended halves was 2.2˚ of visual angle away
from screen center (at a 60 cm viewing distance; Figure 2).

400

Figure 3: Illustration of the stimulus pairs. a) The halves to
be attended are in grey; this example illustrates attending to
bottom trials. b) Examples of misaligned trials.
Figure 2: Illustration of a trial sequence

Design

Participants
Twenty-four Chinese expert readers (18 females, 6 males)
and 24 non-Chinese readers (novices; 19 females, 5 males)
were recruited at the University of Hong Kong. All Chinese
expert readers were native Chinese speakers/readers; they
had passed public examinations in Chinese Language and
obtained grade E or above; whereas all novices received no
training and had no experience in learning Chinese language.
The two groups were similar in age (experts: M = 19.33, SE
= .437; novices: M = 20.63, SE = .567). All participants
were right-handed according to the Edinburgh Handedness
Inventory (Oldfield, 1971), and had normal or corrected-tonormal vision.

Materials
The stimuli consisted of 192 pairs of Chinese characters. All
characters had a top-bottom configuration that could be horizontally separated into two halves. The pairs were equally
distributed into each of the four conditions illustrated in
Figure 3a. Characters were carefully selected such that each
pair of attended halves appeared in one congruent and one
incongruent trial. A 3 pixel wide red line was added in the
middle of each character to avoid ambiguity in defining the
top and bottom halves. All characters were existing characters within a medium to high frequency range (Research
Centre for Humanities Computing, n.d.). The frequency and
the number of strokes of the characters did not differ significantly between congruent trials and incongruent trials (frequency: t(382) = -.29, n.s.; number of strokes: t(382) = -.559,
n.s.). All characters were displayed in Ming font. The width
of the characters was about 1.5˚ of visual angle (viewing
distance: 60 cm). To avoid possible ceiling effects, the contrast level of the characters was adjusted using Adobe Photoshop CS6 (adjusted to lightness of 90). For the misaligned
condition, the unattended half of each character was moved
either to the right or left so that one side was aligned with
the center of the attended half (Figure 3b).

The study contained a between-subjects variable: expertise
(expert vs. novice); and three within-subjects variables: visual field (left vs. center vs. right), alignment (aligned vs.
misaligned), and congruency (congruent vs. incongruent).
The dependent variable was discrimination sensitivity
measured by A'1, which is a bias-free nonparametric measure of sensitivity.

Procedure
The experiment consisted of 384 trials. They were blocked
by alignment (aligned or misaligned) and attended part (attend to top halves or attend to bottom halves), resulting in 4
blocks with 96 trials in each block. The block order was
counterbalanced across participants. Participants’ eye
movement was monitored by an Eyelink 1000 eye tracker.
Each trial proceeded only if participants were accurately
fixating at the screen center. Such monitoring could ensure
that the stimuli were presented in the desired visual field
locations. After the center fixation was ensured, two characters were then presented sequentially: the first character was
presented in one of the four different locations for 150 ms
(LVF, RVF, center upper visual field, or center lower visual
field), whereas the second character was always presented at
the center of the screen for 150 ms. Each character was followed by a backward mask. Participants were asked to
judge whether the top halves (or bottom halves, depending
on the given block) of the two characters were the same or
different with a Cedrus response box (see Figure 2 for an
illustration of a trial sequence). Six practice trials were given to participants prior to each block in order to get them
familiar with the task.

1

A' is calculated as follows:

where H and F represent hit rate and false alarm rate respectively.

401

disappeared when the stimuli were misaligned, t(23) = 1.622, p = .118. Hence, misalignment reduced the congruency effect only in the LVF but not in the RVF, suggesting
that a reliable HP effect was observed only in the LVF but
not in the RVF. The expert group, in contrast, did not show
any significant interaction (the interaction among visual
field, alignment, and congruency was insignificant, F(1, 23)
= .972, n.s.): specifically, the alignment by congruency interaction was insignificant in either the LVF (F(1, 23) =
1.145, n.s.) or the RVF (F(1, 23) = .047, n.s.). Thus, RH
lateralization in HP was observed only in novices but not in
experts.

Results
The analysis consisted of two parts. The first part focused
on examining the overall picture of participants’ performance by comparing across all three visual field conditions.
The second part, in contrast, was central to the research
question: it examined whether there was any hemispheric
difference in HP, by comparing just between the LVF and
RVF conditions. Figure 4 illustrated participants’ performance in A' for all conditions.

Analysis with all visual field conditions
A mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed a main
effect of visual field, F(2, 92) = 34.428, p < .001, p2 = .428;
and a main effect of congruency, F(1, 46) = 59.168, p
< .001, p2 = .563. In general, participants performed worse
in the center condition than in the LVF or the RVF condition (both adjusted by Bonferroni, p < .001). Also, their performance was worse in incongruent trials than in congruent
trials (adjusted by Bonferroni, p < .001). In addition, there
was a marginal three-way interaction between expertise,
alignment, and congruency, F(1, 46) = 3.528, p = .067, p2
= .071. There was also a marginal interaction between expertise, visual field, alignment, and congruency was found,
F(2, 92) = 2.606, p = .079, p2 = .054. This marginal fourway interaction indicated that the HP effect in the three visual fields might differ between the groups. When the data
was split by visual field, an interaction between expertise,
alignment, and congruency was significant only in the LVF
condition (F(1, 46) = 10.21, p = .003, p2 = .182), but not in
the center (F(1, 46) = .194, n.s.) or the RVF condition (F(1,
46) = .146, n.s.). In order words, expertise modulates HP
effect in the LVF. Further analyses in the following section
will examine how HP effects emerged in the LVF and RVF
differently between the two groups.

Comparison between LVF vs. RVF
Here we focused on comparing the LVF and RVF conditions so as to tap into hemispheric lateralization effects.
When we directly compared the LVF and RVF condition,
the four-way interaction between expertise, visual field,
alignment, and congruency was significant, F(1, 46) = 6.589,
p = .014, p2 = .125.2 To understand this four-way interaction, further analyses were done separately on expert and
novice group. For the novice group, there was a significant
interaction between visual field, alignment, and congruency,
F(1, 23) = 5.629, p = .026, p2 = .197: an alignment by congruency interaction was found in the LVF, F(1, 23) =
10.213, p = .004, p2 = .308, but not in the RVF, F(1, 23)
= .238, p = .631, p2 = .01. As revealed by paired samples ttests, novices’ performance in the LVF was better in congruent trials than in incongruent trials when the stimuli were
aligned, t(23) = -4.977, p < .001, and this congruency effect
2 Note however that, in the response time data, this four-way interaction was insignificant, F(1, 46) = 1.229, n.s..

402

Figure 4: Discrimination performance for the composite task.
a) Expert group. b) Novice group. Error bars represent 1 SE.

Discussion
Here we assessed HP through the composite task and examined hemispheric lateralization of HP using the divided visual field paradigm with Chinese character stimuli. Through
comparing Chinese expert readers and non-Chinese readers
(novices), using Chinese character stimuli allowed us to
examine modulation effects of expertise on the relationship
between RH lateralization and HP.

Our results showed that RH lateralization for HP was observed only in novices but not in experts. In novices, their
LVF/RH showed a typical HP pattern (as indicated by the
significant interaction between congruency and alignment),
whereas such pattern was absent in the RVF/LH. This is
consistent with the analytic/holistic hemispheric dichotomy
proposed in the literature (e.g., Cohen, 1973; Hillger &
Koenig, 1991; Levy-Agresti & Sperry, 1968). Based on our
results, it suggests that the RH’s role in HP is unlikely to be
specific to face processing, but also to other types of visual
stimuli, such as Chinese characters. Note however that in
contrast to face processing, here our novices’ HP on Chinese characters was not driven by experience or expertise.
Thus, it suggests the RH’s natural role/default mode is to
process information in a holistic manner.
In contrast, while the RH seems to be the more holistic
hemisphere in novices, no hemispheric difference was observed in expert Chinese readers. More specifically, Chinese
readers showed no HP in either the LVF/RH or RVF/LH.
Thus, our results revealed a modulation effect of expertise
on the lateralization of HP. Nonetheless, this modulation
effect of expertise seems to depend on the type of the stimuli. In a training study, Gauthier and Tarr (2002) trained participants to recognize a novel artificial object type (greebles)
with both behavioral and neurological measures recorded.
They found that increase in HP after training was positively
correlated with increased activation in the right FFA, while
no such correlation was found in the left FFA. Thus, HP in
greeble expertise seemed to be associated with RH lateralization. Similarly, in face recognition, holistic face processing seems to be associated with RH processing (Ramon
& Rossion, 2011). In contrast, in our results with Chinese
character stimuli, expertise seems to reduce HP in the RH.
This difference may be due to the nature of the recognition
task. According to Gauthier and Tarr (1997), configural
information is crucial for expert-level object (and face)
recognition. In contrast, configural information is less important in Chinese character processing (Ge et al., 2006).
Galmar and Hsiao’s (2013) modeling work suggests that the
relationship between HP and RH lateralization may depend
on whether the recognition task demands more featural or
configural processing. Thus, this difference between object/face and Chinese character recognition in their reliance
on configural information may explain the differential effect
of expertise on the relationship between RH lateralization
and HP.
The different modulation effects of expertise between
greebles/faces and Chinese characters may also be related
the nature of the expertise. Unlike face or object recognition
(i.e., greebles), expert Chinese readers are also experts in
writing Chinese characters. Recent research has shown that
the reduced HP observed in Chinese character expertise is
related to readers’ writing rather than reading ability; writing experience hones analytic processing, which enhances
the ability to separate and identify individual character
components (Tso, Au, & Hsiao, 2014). More specifically,
Tso et al. (2014) observed an inverted-U shape curve in HP

in learning to read Chinese characters: as compared with
novices who showed a weak HP effect, intermediate readers
without much writing experience were more holistic,
whereas expert readers who excelled in both reading and
writing became less holistic. This result suggests that both
holistic and analytic processing abilities may be important
for mastering visual object recognition. A similar reduced
HP effect was also observed among individuals who had
extensive face drawing experience (Zhou, Cheng, Zhang, &
Wong, 2012). Our results here further suggest that expert
Chinese readers’ experience in both reading and writing
Chinese characters may have modulated the relationship
between HP and RH lateralization, consistent with previous
findings (Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009; Tso et al., 2014). Future
work will investigate whether face drawing artists who have
expertise in both recognizing and drawing faces will show
similar modulation effects as reported here.
Our results here, together with several previous behavioral and modeling studies (e.g., Galmar & Hsiao, 2013; Hsiao
& Cottrell, 2009; Tso et al., 2014), suggest that HP is not
always a property of RH processing. Rather, their relationship may be more flexible than they were previously
thought. This speculation is consistent with some recent
brain imaging studies. For example, by examining adaptation responses in the perception of whole faces and face
parts in an fMRI study, Harris and Aguirre (2010) found
that neural populations in the right FFA seemed capable of
representing both individual features and their integration
into a face gestalt; in contrast, the left FFA consistently
showed a part-based pattern of neural tuning across all experiments. Similarly, in our results, HP was absent in the
RVF/LH in both novices and experts, whereas the RH lateralization for HP was modulated by expertise. These results
are also consistent with Trope et al.’s (1992) study with split
brain patients. All together, these results suggest that the RH
and HP do not always go together, depending on the nature
of the task and the perceivers’ experience with the stimuli.
In line with the past literature on Chinese character perception (e.g., Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009; Tso et al., 2014), here
we showed that a typical HP pattern was observed only in
novices but not in experts. Note that experts were still getting interference from the unattended parts, as indicated by
the significant congruency effects across all conditions.
However, the congruency effect was not reduced by misalignment, suggesting that the congruency effect was not due
to perceptual integration of parts (as observed in faces and
other objects of expertise). Rather, the congruency effect
observed in experts could arise merely due to response interference from the irrelevant halves not related to perceptual
grouping. Similar effects were also observed in a previous
study with Chinese characters using a similar design (Wong
et al., 2012), and a recent study examining HP effects in
speech perception of Cantonese syllables (Liu & Hsiao,
2014). The congruency effect observed in experts might also
be due to their lexical knowledge of the characters, which
lead to automatic integration of lexical representations of
the components even when the two halves of the characters

403

were perceptually separated. Further work will examine this
possibility using non-existing characters such as pseudocharacters or non-characters.
In conclusion, here we provide the first behavioral evidence showing that the analytic/holistic hemispheric dichotomy between the two hemispheres can be modulated by
experience in visual recognition. More specifically, in Chinese character processing, while RH lateralization for HP
was observed in novices, results from experts showed no HP
effect in either hemisphere, suggesting that the RH may be
capable of both holistic and analytic processing, depending
on the perceivers’ experience with the stimuli. Thus, a clearcut analytic/holistic distinction may not be sufficient to describe information processing differences between the two
hemispheres.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (project code: HKU 745210H and HKU 758412H to J.
Hsiao).

References
Bourne, V. J. (2006). The divided visual field paradigm:
Methodological considerations. Laterality, 11, 373-393.
Cohen, G. (1973). Hemispheric differences in serial versus
parallel processing. J. Exp. Psychol., 97, 349.
Galmar, B., & Hsiao, J. H. (2013). Holistic processing is not
always a property of right hemisphere processing- Evidence from computational modeling of face recognition.
In M., Lee, A., Hirose, Z.-G., Hou, & R. M., Kil
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International Conference
on Neural Information Processing.
Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. J. (1997). Becoming a “Greeble”
expert: Exploring mechanisms for face recognition. Vision Res., 37, 1673-1682.
Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. J. (2002). Unraveling mechanisms
for expert object recognition: bridging brain activity and
behavior. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform., 28,
431.
Ge, L., Wang, Z., McCleery, J. P., & Lee, K. (2006). Activation of face expertise and the inversion effect. Psychol.
Sci., 17, 12-16.
Harris, A., & Aguirre, G. K. (2010). Neural tuning for face
wholes and parts in human fusiform gyrus revealed by
FMRI adaptation. J. Neurophysiol., 104, 336.
Hillger, L. A., & Koenig, O. (1991). Separable mechanisms
in face processing: Evidence from hemispheric specialization. J. Cogn. Neurosci., 3, 42–58.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cottrell, G. W. (2009). Not all expertise is
holistic, but it may be leftist: The case of Chinese character recognition. Psychol. Sci., 20, 455-463.
Levy-Agresti, J., & Sperry, R. W. (1968). Differential perceptual capacities in major and minor hemispheres. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 61, 1151.
Liu, T., & Hsiao, J. H. (2014). Holistic processing in speech
perception: Experts' and novices' processing of isolated
Cantonese syllables. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane,

404

& B. Scassellati, Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 869-874). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: The Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9, 97–113.
Piepers, D. W., & Robbins, R. A. (2012). A review and clarification of the terms “holistic,” “configural,” and “relational” in the face perception literature. Front. Psychol. 3,
1-11.
Ramon, M., & Rossion, B. (2011). Hemisphere-dependent
holistic processing of familiar faces. Brain. Cogn., 78, 713.
Research Centre for Humanities Computing. (n.d.). Chinese
Character Database: With Word-formations Phonologically Disambiguated According to the Cantonese Dialect.
Retrieved
April
2,
2014,
from
http://humanum.arts.cuhk.edu.hk/Lexis/lexi-can/
Richler, J. J., Bukach, C. M., Gauthier, I. (2009). Context
Influences Holistic Processing of Non-face Objects in the
Composite Task. Atten. Percept. Psychophys., 71, 530540.
Richler, J. J., Cheung, O. S., & Gauthier, I. (2011). Holistic
processing predicts face recognition. Psychol. Sci., 22,
464-471.
Rossion, B. (2013). The composite face illusion: A whole
window into our understanding of holistic face perception.
Vis. Cogn., 21, 139 - 253.
Rossion, B., Dricot, L., Devolder, A., Bodart, J., Crommelinck, M., Gelder, B. D., & Zoontjes, R. (2000). Hemispheric asymmetries for whole-based and part-based face
processing in the human fusiform gyrus. J. Cogn. NeuroSci., 12, 793-802.
Tanaka, J. W., & Farah, M. J. (1993). Parts and wholes in
face recognition. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. A., 46, 225-245.
Trope, I., Rozin, P., Nelson, D. K., & Gur, R. C. (1992).
Information processing in the separated hemispheres of
callosotomy patients: Does the analytic-holistic dichotomy hold?. Brain. Cogn., 19, 123-147.
Tso, R. V. Y., Au, T. K. F., & Hsiao, J. H. W. (2014). Perceptual Expertise Can Sensorimotor Experience Change
Holistic Processing and Left-Side Bias?. Psychol. Sci., 25,
1757-1767.
Wong, A. C. N., Bukach, C. M., Hsiao, J. H., Greenspon, E.,
Ahern, E., Duan, Y., & Lui, K. F. H. (2012). Holistic processing as a hallmark of perceptual expertise for non-face
categories including Chinese characters. J. Vision., 12, 15.
Wong, A. C. N., Palmeri, T. J., & Gauthier, I. (2009). Conditions for Facelike Expertise With Objects Becoming a
Ziggerin Expert—but Which Type?. Psychol. Sci., 20,
1108-1117.
Zhou, G., Cheng, Z., Zhang, X., & Wong, A. C. N. (2012).
Smaller holistic processing of faces associated with face
drawing experience. Psychon. B. Rev., 19, 157-162.

