Explaining Choice Behavior: The Intentional Selection Assumption
Kelley Durkin1, Leyla R. Caglar2, Elizabeth Bonawitz2, & Patrick Shafto1
(kelley.durkin@gmail.com; lcaglar@psychology.rutgers.edu; elizabeth.bonawitz@rutgers.edu; patrick.shafto@gmail.com)
1
Department of Mathematics & Computer Science; 2 Department of Psychology
Rutgers University – Newark; 101 Warren Street, Smith Hall; Newark, NJ 07102 USA

Abstract

To explain choice behavior, Duncan Luce (1959)
proposed the Luce choice rule, which captures the notion
that choice is systematically probabilistic and normative
(i.e., options maintain fixed utility). The Luce choice rule
suggests that the probability of each item is proportional to
its utility relative to the other presently available items;
items are selected in proportion to their weight.
However, empirical research has cast doubt on this
normative account (e.g. McFadden, 1977; Simonson &
Tversky, 1992; Tversky, 1972). For instance, consider our
newspaper subscription example. When only presented with
two options (the online and the joint print and online
subscriptions), people presumably saw higher utility in the
online subscription and chose it more often. However,
adding a print subscription at the same price as the joint
print and online subscription presumably increased the
perceived utility of print access, such that more people start
to choose the more expensive joint print and online option.
Based on this and numerous other phenomena, researchers
have argued that choice is not normative, but that utility
judgments are idiosyncratically affected by context and are
therefore not stable.
Subjective accounts of choice create a different set of
challenges. For example, they might suggest that people do
not have a stable concept of utility at all. However, without
a stable concept, it is unclear how to explain the degree of
systematicity observed in choice behavior. Thus, it remains
an open question how to explain the systematic variability
of choices, especially as a consequence of context.
Here we propose a novel factor, the “Intentional Selection
Assumption”, which may influence people’s choice
behavior. We suggest that when people are provided with a
set of options to choose among, they treat the set of options
as intentionally selected by a person with a specific question
in mind. That is, choosers may consider the goals and
beliefs of the individual presenting the options in order to
help resolve uncertainty about the relative importance of the
options’ features. This proposal provides a novel application
of recent research formalizing learning from others (Shafto,
Goodman, & Frank, 2012). It also provides new empirical
predictions pertaining to classic results in choice.
In what follows, we first detail how these social
assumptions shape choice behavior. We then present two
novel experiments that manipulate whether choice options
are provided intentionally or randomly. Our results
demonstrate that adults are sensitive to intentional selection,
providing support for the Intentional Selection Assumption.

How do people decide between several options presented to
them? Normative accounts suggest the utilities of options are
fixed, but subjective accounts suggest utilities depend on
context. In the current paper, we propose a novel model of
choice that may help reconcile these accounts. We propose
that choice behavior may depend on an “Intentional Selection
Assumption”: when people are presented with multiple
options, they assume the options were intentionally selected
by a person with specific questions in mind. Inferences about
the intentional selection of options inform the chooser about
the features that are intended to be most relevant. In this way,
context can affect the desirability of a particular option,
without requiring shifting utilities over features. Two
behavioral experiments support the claim that participants are
sensitive to intentional selection. We discuss the importance
of taking choosers’ assumptions about intentional selection
into account in future investigations of choice behavior.
Keywords: intentional selection; choice; computational
modeling

When people are presented with multiple options, how do
they choose among the possibilities? For example, consider
a choice about which newspaper medium to purchase: an
online subscription for $59 or a joint online and print
subscription for $125. When presented with these two
subscription options, people tend to choose the online
subscription. However, if a third print-only subscription
option is added for $125, people tend to choose the joint
online and print subscription for the same price (Ariely,
2010). What may explain this sudden shift in preferring the
online and print $125 option? There are many features you
could consider. You may consider which subscription is the
cheapest or most convenient. However, if you know that the
newspaper is presenting what they believe are all useful and
valuable subscription options, then you may impute
different meaning to the options. The newspaper’s
intentional choice to present multiple options that include
print access may affect one’s choice and the perceived
utility of print access.
The question of how people choose from a set of options
underpins a wide variety of disciplines including
psychology, economics, marketing, and computer science;
this interdisciplinary interest has resulted in a variety of
formal models of choice behavior (Luce, 1959; McFadden,
1977; Sutton & Barto, 1998; Thurstone, 1927; Yellot,
1977). Choice tasks also drive behavioral experiments and
survey research, implying a critical, but often overlooked,
role in linking theoretical questions to empirical data.

614

We conclude with a discussion of how our model may
provide a middle ground between past accounts of choice.

participants may believe that those particular options were
chosen for them because the presenter wanted to stress the
relative importance of particular features. If so, it would
suggest that the Intentional Selection Assumption may also
provide an explanation for people’s seemingly subjective
choice behavior.

Intentional Selection Assumption
Recent research has investigated the effects of intentional
selection on learning. This research suggests that learners
attend to what examples are and are not presented because
they assume examples are selected by another person for a
reason (Bonawitz, Shafto et al., 2011; Shafto & Goodman,
2008; Shafto, Goodman, & Griffiths, 2014). Shafto,
Goodman, and Frank (2012) have proposed a framework for
formalizing these sorts of social effects on learning.
Bonawitz, Shafto et al. (2011) have applied this approach to
explain children’s exploratory play. (See also Goodman,
Baker, & Tenenbaum (2009) on casual inference, Shafto,
Eaves, Navarro, and Perfors (2012) on epistemic trust, and
Frank and Goodman (2012) on communication). An
important contribution of this work is to focus on the
inferential affordances provided to the learner by leveraging
intuitive psychological reasoning. Because people’s actions
are goal-directed, rather than random, we can reason about
why they do things, and this has implications for the kind
and strength of inferences that can be drawn.
However, current theories of choice do not factor in the
importance of the intentional selection of examples. They
either do not mention the process by which options are
selected or explicitly assume that the presented options are
randomly sampled. Indeed, many models directly or
indirectly assume independence of irrelevant alternatives
(IIA) (Arrow, 1963). IIA states that eliminating some
alternatives should not affect the individual preferences
between remaining options. In other words, if option A is
preferred to option B, introducing a third option, C, should
not make B preferable to A. In this way, alternatives are
irrelevant to the choice between two options.
Empirical evidence suggests that human choice behavior
is not independent of the alternative options (e.g., Ariely,
2010; Simonson & Tversky, 1992, Tversky, 1972). One
classic example, related to the newspaper example presented
here, is known as the Compromise Effect (Simonson &
Tversky, 1992). In this task, participants chose between
cameras that varied in price and quality. When participants
chose between a high price, high quality camera and a low
price, low quality camera, each camera was selected about
the same number of times. When a third camera was added
to the set of options at either extreme (e.g., lower quality
and lower price), then the intermediate camera was chosen
more frequently than the previously equally favored one.
This effect of context on people’s choice behavior illustrates
that choice depends on more than normative weights of
options, which are assumed to be independent of each other.
We suggest that in these previous tasks, people may not
have assumed that the options were randomly sampled.
Previous experiments were often ambiguous about how the
options presented to choosers were selected. Participants
may have instead inferred that options were intentionally
selected by a person with a goal in mind. In particular,

Intentional Selection Model
Any set of options has a potentially infinite number of
features. So how might a chooser decide which features are
most relevant to consider in a particular context? We know,
for example, that a life raft is a better choice than a laptop if
you are drowning, and a laptop would be the preferred
choice for composing a paper, but options and contexts
often present greater uncertainty about the relevant features
to consider than this trivial example illustrates.
How might we alleviate uncertainty in choice? The
Intentional Selection Assumption depends on the notion that
participants are evaluating options as if those options were
chosen by someone with a goal in mind. This goal could be
to highlight the features that the participants should consider
relevant for making a particular choice. The evidence that a
participant is given to evaluate the likely goals of the
option-selector (and thus evaluate the likely relevant
features) is the set of options provided. Different sets of
options can thus highlight different intentions of the
selector, and in turn, highlight different features of
relevance. In this way, a change in the set of intentionally
selected options allows the chooser’s utilities of those
options to change. However, this does not require a
subjective assumption because the feature weights are not
changing from instance to instance. That is, in our approach,
utilities are stable over features, but the chooser may have
uncertainty about which features are relevant in the
particular context. The relevance serves as a contextdependent weight over features. The selected options
provide information as to which features are most relevant
to consider in a given context. As a result, the overall utility
of an item will depend on the relevant features that provide
said utility, and the inferences about which features are most
relevant will be context-dependent. Our approach can
therefore be seen as a middle ground between the normative
and subjective approaches.
A formal model capturing these notions is given in Shafto
and Bonawitz (in press), but we provide an intuitive account
of the implications of an Intentional Selection Assumption
here. Our approach begins with the idea that an option is a
composition of features, such that an option’s overall utility
is the sum over the weighted utilities of all possible features.
Our approach diverges from traditional models of choice
(e.g., Restle, 1961; Tversky, 1972) in that we propose that
an item’s utility is determined by the utility of its relevant
features. Therefore, the utility of an option is a function of
the weights of its features, each of which may or may not be
relevant in a given context. While Ariely (2000) has
proposed that relevance affects an item’s utility, this past

615

Current Experiments

model has not provided a thorough explanation for why that
may be.
An important challenge is specifying how feature
relevance is assessed. In our approach, feature relevance
depends on the full set of options selected, as well as an
inference about the intention of the questioner in providing
the examples. The chooser assumes that the observed
selection of options is chosen intentionally, with a specific
question in mind. The chooser, observing the selected items,
can reason about the intended question and use that
inference to constrain the uncertainty about which features
are relevant. The chooser will have uncertainty about the
intentions of the questioner. Thus, the probability of
relevance must take into account many possibilities.
How might we evaluate the probability of observing a set
of options given a particular hypothesis about relevance?
Intuitively, we might believe that in order to discern
relevant features, the ideal set of options would contrast in
utilities among those features. For instance, if the feature red
was relevant, to highlight this fact, a questioner would
prefer to select options that contrast along this feature,
leading to a set containing options that are red and options
that are not red. Similarly, in the case of a dimensional
feature, such as price, a questioner should choose options
that contrast (e.g., one high and one low) to emphasize the
variability. We test this intuition in Experiment 1.
Questioners are not limited to conveying information
about merely which features are relevant; the options can
also convey knowledge about the distribution of the objects.
If two examples are selected to contrast strongly along a
dimension, the selection of a third between those extremes
becomes an indicator of the middle of that distribution.
Thus, a set that spans a “representative” sample of utilities
over the features of relevance provides stronger support for
that relevance hypothesis than a set that does not distribute
evenly (Shafto et al., 2014; Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001).
For example, if two options are provided, one that costs less
and provides one service (e.g., $59 for an online
subscription) and one that costs more and provides two
services (e.g., $125 for a print & online subscription), it is
unclear which cost feature is most relevant. However the
addition of a third option (e.g., $125 for a print subscription)
provides information about representativeness. This
highlights the utility of a particular feature (e.g., print
access), suggesting it should receive a higher relevance
weight. Experiment 2 explores this prediction.
Importantly, in this proposed approach, the relevance of
each feature of an option can vary depending on context in
interesting ways. It depends on the full set of options
selected, as well as an inference about the intention of the
questioner in providing the examples. Thus, context plays a
role in helping the chooser infer which features are relevant,
and our model provides a quantitative way to explain past
context-dependent effects of choice behavior.

The current experiments aim to qualitatively illustrate that
intentional selection can be used to explain behavioral data
of choice. Experiment 1 examines how the intentional
selection assumption affects the inferences people make
about the beliefs of others. Experiment 2 examines how the
intentional selection assumption affects people’s choices
when presented with varying contexts and features of
options. In Experiment 2a and 2b, we included a baseline
control to replicate Ariely’s (2010) findings. In all
experiments we include a condition where options were
intentionally selected and a condition where options were
randomly or accidentally included. By comparing the
choices made when options are selected intentionally versus
accidentally, we can assess whether people’s choice
behavior is sensitive to the intentional selection assumption.

Experiment 1
Method
The experimental participants included 95 workers from
Amazon Mechanical Turk. We initially offered participants
$0.10 payment for completion of the two-minute study, but
then offered $0.50 pay to encourage recruitment. Twelve
participants failed to pass a simple attention check and were
consequently excluded from the analysis. The remaining 83
participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions: the random sampling condition (N=43) or the
intentional condition (N=40). In each condition participants
were asked to make a forced choice about a novel object
labeled Widget.
In the random sampling condition, participants were told
that a coin flip determines the shape (triangle or square) and
the color (blue or red) of the Widgets being produced in a
factory. Participants were told that Widget 1 is triangular
and blue, and that Widget 2 is square and red. Then
participants were told that Widget 3 is triangular but that the
text information about the color of Widget 3 was cut off.
Participants were asked to guess whether the color that the
machine generated for Widget 3 was blue or red.
In the intentional condition, participants were told that
their friend (who was visiting the Widget factory) was
sending a text message to ask which Widget they would like
to receive as a gift. The Widget choices presented in the text
were identical to the random sampling condition: Widget 1
(triangular and blue), Widget 2 (square and red), and for
Widget 3 the text was cut off after the word “triangular.”
Participants were asked to guess whether the color that the
friend was offering for Widget 3 was blue or red.

Results and Discussion
We first compared whether participants differed in their
blue-red choices by condition (Figure 1). A chi-square
revealed significant differences between conditions, χ2 (1,
N=83) = 11.62, p < .001. Consistent with our predictions, in
the intentional condition, participants selected “red”

616

100

80
Blue
Red

60
40
20
0
Intentional

Condition

Percent of Participants
Choosing Subscription Plan

Percent of Participants
Choosing Color

***

100

80

Figure 1: Exp. 1. Participants in the intentional condition were
more likely to choose “red” while participants in the random
condition were more likely to choose “blue”. Error bars represent
standard errors.

Online subscription
for $59

60

Print & online
subscription for $125

40

Print subscription for
$125

20
0
-20

Random

*

Intentional Accidental Control
Condition

Figure 2: Exp. 2a. Participants were more likely to choose the
print & online subscription option in the intentional condition than
other conditions. Error bars represent standard errors.

However, they were told that the website had accidentally
not been updated so the print-only subscription option was
not meant to be available (although they could still purchase
it now if they wished). In the control condition, participants
were presented just two options: the online subscription for
$59 or the online & print subscription for $125.

significantly more than predicted by chance (N selecting red
= 28 of 40; binomial, p < .01). Interestingly, in the random
sampling condition participants were more likely to choose
the “blue” choice than predicted by chance responding (N
selecting red = 14 of 43; binomial, p < .05).
The bias to choose “blue” in the random sampling
condition is consistent with previous research that suggests
that adults over attribute alternation to random events
(Reichenbach 1934/1939; see also Bar-Hillel & Wagenaar,
1991 for review). In our task participants were told that the
machine had produced one blue object and then one red
object, so the alternation account predicts the observed bias
for choosing blue for the final widget in the random
sampling condition. Importantly, our model of intentional
choice predicts that participants in the intentional condition
should believe their friend was intending to produce a
unique sample of options, and thus the final widget was
likely a red triangle (making it different from the other
offered blue triangle and also breaking the alternation bias).

Results and Discussion
The number of participants who chose each subscription
plan differed overall between conditions, χ2(4, N=106) =
9.56, p = .048, with participants in the intentional condition
being more likely to choose the print & online subscription
than the other conditions (Figure 2). Indeed, the intentional
and accidental conditions were significantly different from
one another even though the same subscription plans were
presented to both conditions, χ2(2, N=71) = 6.05, p = .049.
We used the ratio between the online choice and the joint
print and online choice in the control condition to assess
whether participants demonstrated similar preference in the
intentional and accidental conditions. In the control
condition, the preference of the online choice to the joint
print and online choice was 4:1. In the intentional condition,
there was a significant difference from this ratio, by
binomial test against .2, p = .042, suggesting that
participants in the intentional condition were using
additional information that all of these options were chosen
by the newspaper to evaluate the weights of the options.
These results replicate past experiments of choice, which
find a difference in participant responses when a third
option is presented. We argue that this difference is due to
an intentional selection assumption. To test this, however,
we must show that when intention is removed and a third
option is presented accidentally, this ‘third-option-effect’
goes away. Indeed, this is what we found; comparing the
accidental condition to the ratio given by the control group
revealed no differences, p = .360. Thus, when the
intentional selection assumption was removed the classic
context effects disappeared. The accidental condition likely
chose similarly to the control condition because they did not
see the print option as having added value even with the
print-only option presented. However, in the intentional

Experiment 2a
Method
112 workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk participated for
$0.50 payment. Six participants were dropped because they
failed to pass attention checks. The remaining 106
participants were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: the intentional condition (N=36), the accidental
condition (N=35), or the control condition (N=35).
Participants completed an online survey based on past
work on relativity of choices (see Ariely, 2010). Participants
were told that they needed to choose a type of subscription
plan to purchase to access a fictional newspaper. The
options presented differed depending on condition. In the
intentional condition, participants were presented
descriptions of an online subscription for $59, a print
subscription for $125, and a joint online and print
subscription for $125 and asked to choose one to purchase.
In the accidental condition, participants were presented with
the same three subscription plans and asked to choose one.

617

condition, there was a significant difference from this ratio,
p = .042, suggesting that, unlike the accidental condition,
participants in the intentional condition were using
additional information that all of these options were chosen
by the newspaper to evaluate the weights of the options.
Given these results, presenting options as either
intentionally or randomly selected changes the choices
people make. In particular, these results support the
intentional selection account. When participants believed
the print subscription was presented to them intentionally to
achieve the goals of the newspaper, this may have increased
the perceived utility of having print access compared to the
control condition. The perceived weight of the online
subscription compared to the joint print and online
subscriptions was also lower for participants in the
intentional condition. However, when participants believed
the print subscription was only provided accidentally, the
participants chose similarly to the control condition and did
not see as much utility in the print subscription.

Percent of Participants
Choosing Subscription Plan

100

*

80
60
40

Online subscription
for $99
Print & online
subscription for $125
Print subscription for
$125

20
0
-20

Intentional Accidental Control
Condition

Figure 3: Exp. 2b. Participants were more likely to choose the
print & online subscription option and less likely to choose the
online subscription option in the intentional condition than other
conditions. Error bars represent standard errors.

in the intentional condition were again using information
about intention to evaluate the weights of the options.
We also compared the importance ratings of the online
access and print access to the newspaper. There were no
significant differences between conditions in how important
online access was, F(2, 94) = 1.09, p = .341, ηp2 = .023.
However, there were significant differences between
conditions in how important print access was (M = 51.91,
SD = 38.05 for the intentional condition; M = 31.19, SD =
34.15 for the accidental condition; M = 32.18, SD = 26.50
for the control condition), F(2, 94) = 3.99, p = .022, ηp2
=.078. Consistent with the intentional selection model,
contrasts revealed that participants in the intentional
condition rated print access as more important than the
accidental and control conditions, F(1, 94) = 6.24, p = .014,
ηp2 = .062 and F(1, 94) = 5.74, p = .019, ηp2 = .058.
These findings suggest that assuming intentional selection
of options may have resulted in people making different
choices than when that intention was not present. It is
important to note that wanting to decrease dissonance with
their previous choice could also have influenced
participants’ ratings. Assuming intention may have
increased the perceived utility of print access compared to
the accidental and control conditions. Participants may have
considered the newspaper’s goal to maximize profits and
used that to evaluate the perceived utility of the presented
options. These findings, when compared with results from
Experiment 2a, also suggest that increasing the price of the
online subscription option decreased the relevance of the
price feature of that option, and thus it increased the
difference between the intentional and accidental conditions.
When price became a less relevant feature, participants
possibly attended more to the fact that someone was
intentionally selecting options and then inferred that it
meant there was an increased utility to having print access.

Experiment 2b
Method
100 workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk participated.
Three participants were dropped because they failed to pass
attention checks. The remaining 97 participants were
randomly assigned to the intentional condition (N=32), the
accidental condition (N=32), or the control condition
(N=33).
The subscription price for the online subscription was
changed from $59 to $99. This allowed us to test the
prediction that making the price feature of the options more
similar would increase the differences between the
intentional and accidental conditions. Also, after
participants chose a subscription plan, we asked them how
important it was for them to have online and print access to
the newspaper on a scale from 0 (Not important) to 100
(Extremely important).

Results and Discussion
Replicating Experiment 2a, the number of participants who
chose each subscription plan differed overall between
conditions, χ2(4, N=97) = 10.20, p = .037, with participants
in the intentional condition being more likely to choose the
joint print and online subscription and less likely to choose
the online subscription than the other conditions (Figure 3).
Indeed, the intentional and accidental conditions were
significantly different from one another even though the
same subscription plans were presented to both conditions,
χ2(2, N=64) = 7.64, p = .022.
The control condition provided an expected weight of
preference between the online choice and the joint print and
online choice (about 2:1). The accidental condition was not
significantly different from this weight, by binomial test
against .33, p = .259. However, in the intentional condition,
there was a significant difference from this weight, p = .002,
suggesting that, unlike the accidental condition, participants

General Discussion
Past models of choice have included normative approaches,
which assume all options have fixed utilities, and subjective
approaches, which assume utility is relative to the options
presented. For both approaches, there have been many
context-dependent empirical results that are difficult to

618

explain. One reason these effects may be hard to explain is
that people may be reasoning about the intentional selection,
or lack thereof, of the options, but past experiments have not
explicitly investigated this possibility.
We provided a novel account, the Intentional Selection
Assumption, and we are the first to account for the role of
intentional selection when making choices. We suggested
that participants may have a fixed notion of feature weight,
but that the relevance of features could be context
dependent. In particular, the set of options provided by an
intentional agent, with a goal in mind, could provide
information as to which features are most relevant to the
agent. The participants can then use this information about
what the agent sees as relevant combined with their
knowledge about the agent’s goals. If options are presented
randomly, the same inferences are not warranted.
The results from the current experiments suggest that the
intentional selection assumption guides people’s inferences
about feature relevance. Participants seem to consider the
goals and knowledge of the questioner and use the selected
set of options to inform this inference.
Our results showed that when participants were convinced
that options were randomly selected, previously observed
effects (e.g., the asymmetric dominance effect) were
nullified. This has important implications for explanations
of these effects. We suggest that models of choice behavior
must account for the intentional selection assumption, which
can explain these results. For instance, we replicated
Ariely’s (2010) finding that people are more likely to
choose the joint print and online subscription option than
the online option if they are also presented with a print
subscription of similar price. However, in the current
experiments, this was only true when all options were
assumed to be intentionally selected. When the print-only
option was presented accidentally, participants chose
similarly to the control condition that only saw two options.
Thus, the asymmetric dominance effect may rely on this
Intentional Selection Assumption.
There is a strong link in education between learning and
choice. When teachers present examples or multiple-choice
options, students may make inferences about which features
of concepts are important. This can affect the choices
students make in learning, as well as how they create
conceptual structures. Marketing and teaching will likely
entail different assumptions by the learners about the goals
of the selectors – with intentional deception being more
likely in marketing and helpfulness being an important goal
of teaching. Nonetheless, our model shows the importance
of considering the goals – whatever they may be – in models
of choice. Future empirical and modeling work should
investigate the important role intentional selection plays in
choice and learning.
The choice literature is vast, and there are many
interesting effects related to choice behavior. We have
developed an account based on the intentional selection
assumption and conducted a first qualitative test with a few
examples. However, these are only the first steps in

exploring this important interpretation of choice behavior;
we have presented just a few options for consideration.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by funding from the National
Science Foundation, CAREER grant DRL-1149116 to PS. 	  

References
Ariely, D. (2000). Controlling the information flow: Effects on
consumers’ decision making and preferences. J. of Consumer
Research, 27, 233-248.
Ariely, D. (2010). Predictably irrational: The hidden forces that
shape our decisions. New York: HarperCollins.
Arrow, K. J. (1963). Social choice and individual values. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Bar-Hillel, M., & Wagenaar, W. A. (1991). The perception of
randomness. Advances in Applied Mathematics, 12, 428-454.
Bonawitz, E. B., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D., Spelke,
E., & Schulz, L. (2011). The double-edged sword of pedagogy:
Teaching limits children's spontaneous exploration and
discovery. Cognition, 120, 322-330.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting pragmatic
reasoning in language games. Science, 336, 998.
Goodman, N. D., Baker, C. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Cause
and intent: Social reasoning in causal learning. Proceedings of
the 31st ann. conf. of the Cog. Sci. Soc. (pp.2759-2764).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Luce, R. D. (1959). Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley.
McFadden, D. (1977). Quantal choice analysis: A survey. Annals
of Economic and Social Measurement, 5, 363-390.
Reichenbach, H. (1934/1949). The theory of probability. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Restle, F. (1961). Psychology of judgment and choice. NY: Wiley.
Shafto, P., & Bonawitz, L. (in press). Choice among intentionally
selected options. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), Psychology of Learning
and Motivation (Vol. 63), New York: Academic Press.
Shafto, P., Eaves, B., Navarro, D. J., & Perfors, A. (2012).
Epistemic trust: Modeling children's reasoning about others'
knowledge and intent. Developmental Science, 15, 436-447.
Shafto, P., & Goodman, N. D. (2008). Teaching games: Statistical
sampling assumptions for pedagogical situations. Proceedings of
the 30th ann. conf. of the Cog. Sci. Soc. (pp.1632-1637).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2012). Learning from
others: The consequences of psychological reasoning for human
learning. Perspectives on Psych.l Sci., 7, 341-351.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N. D., & Griffiths, T. L. (2014). A rational
account of pedagogical reasoning: Teaching by, and learning
from, examples. Cognitive Psychology, 71, 55-89.
Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1992). Choice in context: Tradeoff
contrast and extremeness aversion. J. Mark. Res., 29, 281-295.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning: An
introduction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tenenbaum, J. B., & Griffiths, T. L. (2001). The rational basis of
representativeness. Proc. of the 23rd ann. conf. of the Cog. Sci.
Soc. (p.1036-1041). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Thurstone, L. L. (1927). A law of comparative judgment. Psych.
Rev., 34, 273-286.
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice.
Psych. Rev., 79, 281-299.
Yellot, J. I. (1977). The relationship between Luce's choice axiom,
Thurstone's theory of comparative judgment, and the double
exponential distribution. J. of Math. Psych., 15, 109-144.

619

