Exploring the processing costs of the exactly and at least readings of bare numerals
with event-related brain potentials
Maria Spychalska* (maria.spychalska@rub.de), Jarmo Kontinen* (jarmo.kontinen@rub.de),
Ira Noveck** (noveck@isc.cnrs.fr), Ludmila Rösch* (ludmila.roesch@rub.de), Markus Werning* (markus.werning@rub.de)
*Institute of Philosophy II, Ruhr University Bochum
**L2C2 CNRS Universit Lyon 1 - Institut des Sciences Cognitives
Abstract

Moreover, there are contexts in which numerals invite socalled at most readings. Thus, (2c) is usually interpreted that
if you have no more than two children, you do not qualify
for a tax refund. Yet, since it is questionable whether the at
most readings are at all available in unembedded contexts, in
our current study we only consider the exactly and at least
readings.

Bare numerals (e.g. two) seem to be ambiguous between two
readings: the exactly and the at least reading. We present an
ERP study that explores this issue. We show that the pattern
of the ERPs elicited by critical nouns in sentences with unembedded bare numerals depends on the participant’s choice
of the reading of the numeral. For those responders who consistently apply the exactly reading in their truth-value judgement, sentences that are true only under the at least reading
are associated with a sustained negativity effect compared to
sentences that are true also under the exactly reading. However, no such effect is evident for the responders who apply
the at least interpretation. We argue that this result falsifies
the exactly-theory of numerals and speaks in favor of the ambiguity account. Keywords: bare numerals; at least reading;
exactly reading; truth-value judgment; N400 effect; sustained
anterior negativity

Introduction
One might think that no linguistic expressions are more precise than numerical expressions. For instance, saying that
(1)

Two roses are red.

should leave no doubts regarding the number of red roses.
Yet, such sentences as (1), where a bare numeral (two) occurs
as a part of the quantifier phrase, seem to be ambiguous between various readings. Consider having a bouquet of five red
roses. Is then sentence (1) true or false? If two is interpreted
as exactly two (exactly reading), then (1) will be considered
false in the given scenario. However, two may be interpreted
as at least two (at least reading), in which case (1) will be
considered true if there are more than two red roses. Since
the at least reading implies only the lower bound for numerals, whereas the exactly reading implies both the lower and
the upper bound, the first one is often referred to as the weak
or one-sided reading and the latter is referred to as the strong
or two-sided reading.
The choice between these two readings seems to be also dependent on complex interactions between contextual factors
and linguistic structure. For instance, the preferred interpretation of sentence (2a) is that Anna has exactly two daughters,
not more. In contrast, the common understanding of (2b) is
that at least two essays are a condition for passing the course.
(2)

a. Anna has two daughters.
b. To pass the course one needs to write two essays.
c. If you have two children, you do not qualify for a
tax refund.

Up to date there is no agreement regarding the right semantic theory of bare numerals. According to the classical,
neogricean view the at least reading constitutes the basic and
literal meaning for numerals, whereas the exactly reading results from pragmatic strengthening by means of scalar implicature (Horn, 1992; Levinson, 2000; Schulz & Van Rooij,
2006). This strengthening is then similar as in the case of
the quantifier some, whose semantic existential meaning is
strengthened to some but not all. In short, the neogricean
approach assumes that numerals are scalar terms and can
be ordered on a linguistic scale according to their semantic
strength: hone, two, three, etc.i. Thus, sentence (1) literally means that there are at least two red roses, however, if
the speaker knew that there were more than two red roses
(e.g. three), then she should have provided a more informative statement with an appropriate stronger numeral (Maxim
of Quantity). Based on such reasoning, (1) is taken to imply
that there are not more than two red roses.
This standard view has been questioned on various
grounds. First, numerals allow the strong reading in syntactic environments in which scalar implicatures are generally
considered unavailable (e.g. downward entailing contexts)
(Horn, 1992; Breheny, 2008). Second, developmental data
suggest that children acquire the exactly reading of numerals
earlier that the standard scalar implicatures (Noveck, 2001;
Papafragou & Musolino, 2003; Hurewitz et al., 2006). Third,
whereas the cognitive load in computing the scalar implicature of some is larger than in computing the existential meaning (Bott & Noveck, 2004; Bott et al., 2012), the exactly reading of numerals seems to be less demanding compared to the
at least reading (Marty et al., 2013, 2014).
In the light of the shortcomings of the traditional view,
various other approaches have been proposed. According to
Carston (1988, 1998), numerals are underspecified and can be
interpreted under either the exactly, at least or at most reading, and the interpretation of a particular occurrence of a numeral is fully determined by context. Breheny (2008) argues
that the literal meaning of numerals is constituted by the exactly reading, whereas both the at least and at most readings

2260

are results of pragmatic processes. Accordingly, example
(2b) means that one needs to write exactly two essays to pass
the course but we arrive at the at least interpretation based on
additional contextual assumptions, e.g. that the usual requirements for passing a course presuppose only a minimum number of essays and do not put any constraints on the maximum
number. In a similar manner the at most interpretation of (2c)
is based on the interaction of the exactly meaning of two and
our knowledge of how the tax system works (Breheny, 2008;
Spector, 2013). Finally, according to this exactly-theory, the
at least reading in the case of unembedded numerals such
as (1) is a result of a pragmatic weakening mechanisms of the
strong reading: The domain of the quantifier can be implicitly
restricted, which means that (1) can be interpreted as Exactly
two roses that are P are red (where P is some contextually
assumed property), therefore, (1) turns out true if there are
three red roses.
In contrast, Geurts (2006) proposes, that numerals, when
used as quantifiers, are lexically ambiguous between two distinct lexical entries corresponding to the at least and exactly
readings. In this approach the exactly reading is still more
basic, whereas the at least lexical entry can be obtained by
a number of type-shifting operations. A different version of
the ambiguity account has been offered by Spector (2013).
Building on the grammatical account of scalar implicatures
by Chierchia et al. (2012), Spector argues that albeit numerals are not lexically ambiguous, they give rise to ambiguities
by means of interaction between the lexical entry and other
operators, such as the exhaustification operator (exh). Yet,
in unembedded contexts numerals are also argued to have a
strong preference for being in the scope of exh, thus inviting
the exactly reading.
In our study we tried to shed more light on this debate by
investigating the processing of sentences with bare numerals with event-related brain potentials. We tested which of
the two readings is more silent in unembedded contexts, such
as Two pictures contain stars, and how the choice of reading (measured by the intuitive truth-value judgments given by
the participants) modulates the ERPs evoked by critical nouns
downstream the quantifier phrase, when the choice of a particular reading of the numeral makes those nouns more or less
expected. We used a sentence-picture verification paradigm
and asked our subjects to evaluate sentences with bare numerals in scenarios in which they were true according to the
exactly reading, true according to the at least reading (but
false under the exactly reading), or false under both readings.
Based on the existing literature we expected that the critical at least cases should receive mixed truth-value judgments
(Marty et al., 2013, 2014), where their evaluation as false indicates the exactly interpretation, whereas the accepting response indicates the at least interpretation.

Experimental design
The experiment was conducted in German and had a form of
a sentence-picture verification task. Participants were asked

whether sentences of form (3) were true with respect to visual
scenarios consisting of sets of six pictures and depicting two
categories of objects (Xs and Ys) in different quantities.
(3)

N pictures contain X.

As the numeral N we used either three (drei) or four
(vier) in all experimental sentences. In each trial, subjects
(i) were first presented with the phrase containing the numeral Three/four pictures contain (Drei/Vier Bilder enthalten); (ii) next they saw a scenario; and (iii) finally they saw the
critical noun X (Figure (1)). They were asked to respond at
the end of each trial (after the final word disappeared) whether
the sentence was true with respect to the presented scenario.
ERPs were measured on the onset of the critical noun X.
Figure 1: Time-course of experimental trials.

There were six experimental conditions, determined by the
number of Xs presented in the scenario, i.e. the number of
objects that were mentioned at the end of the trial, and the
number of the non-mentioned objects (Ys). The number of
Xs determined the evaluation condition of the sentence and
was either smaller than the numeral N occurring in the sentence (FALSE condition), exactly N (EXACTLY condition),
or larger than N (AT LEAST condition). However, the nonmentioned alternative was also represented in the exactly, at
least or false way with respect to the numeral N and created
a context scenario for the sentence evaluation. For instance,
in condition EXACTLY-false the number of the mentioned objects X was exactly N and the number of the non-mentioned
objects Y was smaller then N. In total there are 3 × 3 possible combinations, however, we eliminated those conditions
in which both X and Y fell under the same evaluation. In the
end there were (i) two EXACTLY conditions: EXACTLY-at
least and EXACTLY-false; (ii) two AT LEAST conditions: AT
LEAST-exactly and AT LEAST-false; and (iii) two FALSE conditions FALSE-exactly and FALSE-at least. However, there
was no EXACTLY-exactly, AT LEAST-at least or FALSE-false
condition. Figure (2) presents all six conditions as combinations of scenario types and critical words: Two conditions are
always associated with one scenario type that is determined
by the combination of the mode (at least/exact/false) in which
both X and Y are represented in a picture with respect to given
numeral.
Our planned comparisons primarily involved contrasting
the respective evaluation conditions for the same scenario

2261

Figure 2: Six conditions as combinations of the numeral, scenario types and critical
words.

types: EXACTLY-at least with AT LEAST-exactly, AT LEASTfalse with FALSE-at least and EXACTLY-false with FALSEexactly. In this way we could reciprocally contrast the evaluation conditions while the context proceeding the critical noun
onset, i.e. the initial sentence phrase plus the scenario type,
was identical.
A conservative interpretation of the exactly-theory predicts that the ERPs for the AT LEAST-exactly cases should
be more negative in the N400 time-window compared to the
EXACTLY-at least cases across the tested population. Admittedly, one could argue that some participants might apply the
at least reading in their truth-value judgment due to the possibility of the pragmatic weakening mechanism. However,
even for those participants the AT LEAST-exactly condition
should be associated with a larger N400 than the EXACTLY-at
least condition, or at least we should observe some other ERP
effect (e.g. P600) indicating the relevant pragmatic processes
taking place. In contrast, if the at least reading is the literal
interpretation, as predicted by the neogricean approach, the
N400 ERPs for critical nouns in the AT LEAST-exactly and
EXACTLY-at least conditions should not differ, since from a
semantic point of view in both cases the evaluated sentences
are equally true. Yet, it is a known result that people tend
to base their truth-value judgments not only on the literal semantic meaning but often integrate the implicature into the
sentence’s truth-conditional content. Spychalska et al. (2014)
show that for such pragmatic responders N400 ERPs associated with underinformative some-sentences are larger than
those associated with informative sentences. However, this
result can be in fact taken as evidence against the traditional
gricean view on scalar implicatures and in favor of those theories in which scalar implicatures can be computed in par with
the compositional content of the sentence (e.g. Chierchia et
al., 2012). A similar result in the case of numerals, i.e. a
correlation between the behavioral truth-value judgments and
the ERP patterns, would not support neogricean approach, but
rather the lexical ambiguity view or the grammatical account
in which ambiguity is a result of the exhaustification operator.
The predictions of the ambiguity view are the following: If
numerals are ambiguous between the two readings, then the
participants’ choice of the reading of the numeral (reflected
in the truth-value judgments for the critical AT LEAST cases)
should correlate with the ERP patterns. This means that the

choice of the exactly reading should trigger a larger negativity
for the AT LEAST-exactly compared to the EXACTLY-at least
condition, whereas the choice of the at least reading should
result in a larger negativity for the FALSE-at least compared
to the AT LEAST-false cases.
Since in both versions of the ambiguity view the exactly
reading is still considered to be the preferred reading in unembedded contexts, one could argue that this preference should
leave a mark in the ERP pattern. Therefore, it makes it perhaps difficult to contrast the ambiguity view and the exactlytheory. However, one should note that under the bilateral
exactly-theory the at least reading is not a genuine reading.
Thus, one could argue that the exactly-theory has the following prediction: For those subjects for whom no pragmatic
weakening is evident (who respond according to the exactly
reading), we expect that the processing of the AT LEAST-false
and FALSE-at least cases should be alike. However, if the at
least reading is a genuine, just less preferred reading—as predicted by the ambiguity view, we should be able to observe
a mark in the ERPs indicating that the AT LEAST cases constitute a weaker violation than the FALSE cases also for the
“exact” responders.

Materials
We used 240 unique German nouns to construct two different
lists of 120 ordered pairs hn1 , n2 i. All words were used in
their plural form, were two-syllabic and had a length of 4 to
9 characters; compound nouns were excluded. The word frequency value was checked in the Wortschatz Leipzig corpus
(http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de/)1 , and was kept between 8
and 17 (moderate frequent words). All nouns denoted concrete objects, that are easy to identify in a picture and are
well-known to an average German speaker. The two lists
were fully exclusive with respect to the word-pairs. Thus,
each word occurred exactly once in each list (so twice in total), but was combined in each of the lists with a different
word. Within each pair the words were matched with respect to their length (maximal character difference was 4)
and frequency (maximal value difference was 4), as well
as for their semantic similarity value (LSA) (Landauer et
al., 1998). We estimated the LSA value based on the English translations of the singular German nouns by using the
http://lsa.colorado.edu/ server. The words were matched so
that the LSA values for all pairs did not exceed 0.3. In order
to eliminate heavy outliers we computed the standardized values (z-scores) and recombined the words in such a way that
at the end the z-scores for both lists were between −2.5 and
2.5.
A picture of a corresponding object was created for each
noun and for each pair of nouns using free clipart images as
well as Adobe Photosphop. For presenting the stimuli we
used NBS Presentationr Software. For each participant the
program generated a unique stimuli list in a pseudo-random
1 The frequency value v of a word w is equal to log of the quo2
tient of the frequency of the word “der” and the frequency of the
word w in corpus

2262

manner from the predefined conditions list, the two lists of
noun pairs and pictures database. There were 240 experimental trails (40 per condition) and 96 filler trials. The filler trails
used quantifiers all (alle), no (keine), two (zwei) or five (fünf )
and were created based on a set of 48 nouns, which were less
strictly controlled for frequency or length than the nouns used
in the experimental trails.

Participants
Forty-five (twenty-five woman) members of the RuhrUniversity Bochum were recruited for the experiment (age:
18-42, mean: 24.8 SD: 5.4). They were reimbursed for
their participation. All participants were monolingual German native speakers, had at least a secondary degree (German Abitur), normal or corrected to normal vision, no history
of psychological or neurological problems, and were righthanded. Two people were excluded from the EEG analysis
due to excessive noise in their EEG data.

Procedure
Upon arrival all our participants signed a written consent of
participation including a statement concerning their vision,
medication, neurological or psychiatric history. They filled in
the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory test and were screened
using the WAIS test for logic fluid intelligence, the digit span
working memory test and the AQ Questionnaire. Additionally they were also tested using a modified version of the
Reading Span Memory Test, German version (Noort et al.,
2008). The measurement was conducted in a dim, electrically and acoustically isolated cabin. Subjects were seated
in front of a computer screen and a response pad with two
designated buttons. The experiment started with a short instruction followed by an exercise session consisting of five
example trials. No feedback was given throughout the experiment and subjects were asked to follow their intuition in the
truth-value judgment task. The time-course of experimental
trials is presented in Figure (1).

EEG recording and data processing
EEG was recorded from 64 active electrodes held on the scalp
by an elastic cap, with a BrainAmp acticap EEG recording
system. AFz served as the ground electrode and FCz—as the
physical reference. Four electrodes (FT9, FT10, P09, PO10)
were reprogrammed and used for controlling both vertical
(above and below the right eye) and horizontal (on the right
and left temple) eye-movements (EOG electrodes). The EEG
was recorded with a sampling rate of 500 Hz and a low cut-off
filter of 0.01. Impedance was kept below 5kΩ.
The EEG data were processed using Brain Vision Analyzer 2.0 software. We applied an off-line high cut-off filter at 30 Hz, 12 dB/oct. Automatic raw data inspection rejected all trials with the absolute amplitude difference over
200µV /200ms, or with the activity lower than 0.5µV in intervals of at least 100ms. The maximum voltage step allowed was 50µV /ms. Eye blinks were corrected using an

independent component analysis. The data was off-line rereferenced to the average of linked mastoids comprising of
TP9 and TP10. Segments from 200ms pre-target onset until
1000ms post-onset were separately extracted and averaged for
every subject and every condition. Baseline correction used
the 200ms interval preceding the onset of the stimulus. All
segments with any remaining physical artifacts (including the
amplitude lower than −90µV or higher than 90µV ) were excluded before averaging. The minimum number of segments
that was preserved in each condition was 23 out of 40.

Results
Behavioral results
The analysis of truth-value judgements indicated that, for
both critical AT LEAST cases, i.e. AT LEAST-exactly and AT
LEAST-false, our participants were consistent in their choice
of either the exactly or the at least reading. Based on the
mean of the proportion of the exactly/at least readings in both
AT LEAST conditions, we divided our participants into two
groups of responders. Most participants (N = 30, 66.7%; two
were later excluded from the analysis due to noise in their
EEG) consistently said “false” to the AT LEAST cases, i.e.
applied the exactly reading of the numeral, and are henceforth referred to as strong readers (the proportion of exactly
readings varied between 88.46% and 100% in all AT LEAST
trails). The remaining responders (N = 15, 33.3%), who consistently said “true” to the AT LEAST cases, are called weak
readers (between 88.75% and 100% of the at least readings).
Accordingly, we defined accuracy for the AT LEAST cases
based on the response profile: the rejecting response was correct for the strong readers and the accepting response was
correct for the weak readers. The accuracy in all remaining
conditions was at the ceiling level. There were no significant
differences between the two groups in any of the measured
cognitive or personality tests.

EEG results
The visual inspection of grand averages allowed us to conclude that strong and weak readers obtained a different pattern of the ERP waveform. For the statistical analysis of the
EEG data we used the Matlab Fieldtrip package. We performed a non-parametric statistical procedure called clusterbased permutation test (Maris & Oostenveld, 2007). For each
subject the ERPs were averaged across trials in the compared
conditions, in the epoch of 0 − 1000 ms post-onset and for
all channels. The data-points (time × channel) between the
sets were compared by a two-tailed dependent t-test. The significantly different (α = 0.025) data-points were then clustered according to the time-spatial adjacency. The clusterlevel statistics were calculated by taking the sum over the tvalues for each cluster. The cluster-level p-values were evaluated with a Monte Carlo simulation: For each subject the
ERP averages were randomly swapped between the two conditions. The cluster-level statistics were computed again and
the maximum of the cluster-level statistics was taken as the

2263

Figure 3: The comparison of grand averages of all conditions, for weak readers (WR) and strong readers (SR). Topographical maps of the effects (difference curves of the compared
conditions) in all three comparisons in the time-windows of 350-450 ms and 550-750 ms. Each column presents one comparison.

test statistics. This procedure was repeated 10000 times and
the p-values of the observed cluster-level statistics were estimated as the proportion of permutations that resulted in a
higher test-statistics than the observed one.
For both groups the control comparison between falsity and
unambiguous truth, i.e. FALSE-exactly and EXACTLY-false
conditions, resulted in significant negativity effects. For the
strong readers the effect had a form of a sustained negativity lasting from around 282 till 788 ms post-onset2 , which
had first global and later frontal topographical distribution.
For the weak readers the negativity effect was only significant around the N400 time-window (286 − 438 ms), had a
global distribution and was followed by a marginally significant posteriorly distributed P600 (524 − 712 ms). (See Table
1 for the time-windows and p-values of all the observed significant clusters).
The main comparison between the experimental conditions
AT LEAST-exactly and EXACTLY-at least resulted in a sustained negativity effect for the strong readers (162 − 610
ms)—the effect was global around the N400 time-window
and extended as a sustained anterior negativity. For the weak
readers there were no significant effects for this contrast. A
contrastive result was obtained for the comparison between
FALSE-at least and AT LEAST-false conditions: Whereas the
2 The time window indicates the maximal latency of the respective cluster.

weak readers showed a significant (centro-posterior) N400
effect (362 − 446 ms), for the strong readers the observed
N400 cluster (400 − 492 ms) was only marginally significant
(p < .066).
To statistically explore the interaction between the applied
reading and the observed ERP effects, we calculated the difference curves for both groups in each of the comparisons.
These difference were averaged for each channel in time-bins
of 100 ms starting from 200 ms post-stimulus onset until 800
ms. We compared the averages in each 100 ms time-bin between the two groups with a cluster-based permutation test
that used an independent t-test and 10000 permutations for
the estimation of a p-value. For each 100 ms the analysis
produced as an output a cluster of channels where one group
had a more negative/positive effect in the given comparison
than the other one. The analysis revealed that the difference between the AT LEAST-exactly and EXACTLY-at least
conditions was more negative for the strong readers in three
consecutive time-windows: 200 − 300 ms (p = .024, clustering mainly on frontal and central channels), 300 − 400 ms
(p < .0001, globally), 400 − 500 ms (p = .009, most pronounced on fronto-central channels). However, there was no
significant between-group difference in the effect observed in
the comparison FALSE-at least and AT LEAST-false in any
of the time-windows. It is also interesting that the difference
between conditions FALSE-exactly and EXACTLY-false was

2264

Table 1: The positive and negative clusters for all comparisons, for weak and strong
readers. Marginally significant clusters are also reported. The empty spaces indicate the
lack of significant clusters. Additionally, the results of the permutation tests performed
on the whole group of subjects. (Abbreviations: at=at least, e=exactly, f=false.)

Strong
Readers

Neg. clusters

time (ms)
sig.
region

Weak
Readers

Neg. clusters

time (ms)
sig.
region
time(ms)
sig.
region
time (ms)
sig.
region

Pos. clusters
Both

Neg. clusters

Pos. clusters

AL-e vs. E-al
162 − 610
p < .0002
global
sust. anterior

188 − 570.
< .0005
global

time(ms)
sig.
region

F-e vs. E-f
282 − 788
p < .0001
global
sust. anterior
286 − 438
p < .016
global
524 − 712
p < .051
posterior
230 − 808
p < .0001
global
sust. frontal
516 − 790
p < .0442
posterior

F-al vs. AL-f
400 − 492
p < .066
centro-posterior
362 − 446
p < .049
centro-posterior

334 − 516
p < .0125
centro-posterior

more negative for the strong readers in the time-window of
400 − 500 ms on centro-parietal channels (p = .004), and
on the parietal sites in the time window of 500 − 600 ms
(p = .013).

Discussion
The results of our experiment support the ambiguity account
of bare numerals and speak against the exactly-theory. We
have shown that the pattern of the ERPs elicited by critical
nouns in sentences with unembedded bare numerals depends
on the participant’s choice of the reading of the numeral. In
the identical scenario type critical nouns in the AT LEAST
condition elicited a large N400 effect extending into a sustained anterior negativity when compared to critical nouns in
the EXACTLY condition only for those subjects who applied
the exactly reading in their truth-value judgement. In contrast,
those responders who applied the at least reading in their
truth-value judgment, there were no ERP differences in this
comparison. This result speaks against the bilateral exactly
semantics of numerals. If the literal meaning was constituted
by the exactly reading, we would expect some ERP effect for
the AT LEAST-exactly vs. EXACTLY-at least comparison also
for those participants who responded according to the at least
reading, signalling the necessary pragmatic weakening mechanisms.
The result for the FALSE-at least vs. AT LEAST-false comparison can be also taken in favor of the ambiguity view and
against the bilateral exactly semantics. The exactly-theory
does not predict why the strong readers should show any
N400 effect in this case—it does not explain why the strong
readers’ expectations for critical nouns in the AT LEAST
cases should differ with respect to the unambiguously FALSE
cases. However, we have observed that even for the strong
readers there was a marginally significant N400 effect. Moreover, there were no significant differences between the strong
and weak readers in the size of the effect in this comparison
in any of the consecutive 100 ms time-windows. Thus, independently of the applied reading the AT LEAST cases elicited
smaller N400 ERPs than the FALSE cases.
Our experiment provides evidence that in spite of the predominant character of the exactly reading in unembedded
cases, the at least reading cannot be considered only a result of a pragmatic process. This is an important empirical

result for the debate regarding the semantics of numerals.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Stiftung Mercator Foundation.

References
Bott, L., Bailey, M., Todd, & Grodner, D. (2012, January). Distinguishing speed from accuracy in scalar implicatures. Journal of
Memory and Language, 66(1), 123-142.
Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar implicatures. Journal
of Memory and Language, 51(3), 437-457.
Breheny, R. (2008). A new look at the semantics and pragmatics
of numerically quantifed noun phrases. Journal of Semantics, 25,
93-140.
Carston, R. (1988). Implicature, explicature, and truth-theoretic
semantics. In R. Kempson (Ed.), Mental representations: The
interface between language and reality, (p. 155-181). Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Carston, R. (1998). Informativeness, relevance and scalar implicature. In R. Carston & S. Uchida (Eds.), Relevance theory: Applications and implications (p. 179-236). Benjamins, John.
Chierchia, G., Fox, D., & Spector, B. (2012). The grammatical view
of scalar implicatures and the relationship between semantics and
pragmatics. In P. Portner, C. Maienborn, & K. von Heusinger
(Eds.), An international handbook of natural language meaning.
Mouton de Gruyter.
Geurts, B. (2006). Take ”five”: the meaning and use of a number
word. In S. Vogeleer & L. Tasmowski (Eds.), Non-definiteness
and plurality (p. 311-329). Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.
Horn, L. R. (1992). Proceedings from the second conference on
semantics and linguistic theory. In C. Barker & D. Dowty (Eds.),
Working papers in linguistics salt ii (p. 163-192). The Ohio State
University.
Hurewitz, F., Papafragou, A., Gleitman, L., & Gelman, R. (2006).
Asymmetries in the acquisition of numbers and quantifiers. Language learning and development, 2(2), 77-96.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). Introduction to
latent semantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259-284.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory of generalized conversational implicature. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
Maris, E., & Oostenveld, R. (2007). Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG- and MEG-data. Journal of Neuroscience Methods,
164(1), 177-190.
Marty, P., Chemla, E., & Spector, B. (2013). Interpreting numerals
and scalar items under memory load. Lingua, 133, 152-163.
Marty, P., Chemla, E., & Spector, B. (2014). Phantom readings:
the case of modified numerals. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, ahead-of-print, 1-16.
Noort, M. Van den, Bosch, P., Haverkort, M., & Hugdahl, K. (2008).
A standard computerized version of the reading span test in different languages. European Journal of Psychological Assessment,
24(1), 35-42.
Noveck, I. (2001). When children are more logical than adults:
Experimental investigations of scalar implicature. Cognition, 78
(2), 165-188.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar implicatures: experiments at the semanticspragmatics interface. Cognition, 86 (3),
253-282.
Schulz, K., & Van Rooij, R. (2006). Pragmatic meaning and nonmonotonic reasoning: The case of exhaustive interpretation. Linguistics and Philosophy, 29, 205-250.
Spector, B. (2013). Bare numerals and scalar implicatures. In Language and linguistics compass. Wiley Online Library.
Spychalska, M., Kontinen, J., & Werning, M. (2014). Electrophysiology of pragmatic processing: Exploring the processing cost
of the scalar implicature in the truth-value judgment task. In
P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th annual conference of the cognitive science
society. austin, tx: Cognitive science society.

2265

