Exploring the Concept of Utility: Are Separate Value Functions required for Risky
and Inter-temporal Choice?
Ash Luckman (a.luckman@unsw.edu.au)
Chris Donkin (c.donkin@unsw.edu.au)
Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

Abstract
Utility based models are common in both the risky and intertemporal choice literatures. Recently there have been efforts to
formulate models of choices which involve both risks and
time delays. An important question then is whether the
concept of utility is the same for risky and inter-temporal
choices. We address this question by fitting versions of two
popular utility based models, Cumulative Prospect Theory for
risky choice, and Hyperbolic Discounting for inter-temporal
choice, to data from three experiments which involved both
choice types. The models were fit assuming either the same
concept of utility for both, by way of a common value
function, or different utilities with separate value functions.
Our results show that while many participants seem to require
the flexibility of different value functions, an approximately
equal number do not suggesting they may have a single
concept of utility. Furthermore for both choice types value
functions were concave.
Keywords: Risky, Inter-temporal, Utility, Choice.

Introduction
Behavior in both risky choices and inter-temporal choices
are often explained by way of utility based models. These
models, such as Cumulative Prospect Theory (CPT) for
risky choice or Hyperbolic Discounting for inter-temporal
choice, involve the calculation and comparison of utilities
across the different options present in choice. In Cumulative
Prospect Theory, for gambles with a single non-zero
outcome, this is done by first transforming the objective
outcomes into utilities, by way of a value function. This
utility is then multiplied by a decision weight, which is a
function of an outcome’s probability of occurrence, to
determine the utility of that gamble. Similarly in Hyperbolic
Discounting objective outcomes are transformed by a value
function, before being multiplied by a discount rate, based
on their delay until receipt. The question that we address in
this paper is whether a single concept of utility, and thus a
single value function can account for both risky and intertemporal choices.
Answering this question would add to a growing body of
research that has attempted to understand how risky and

inter-temporal choice relate to each other. This research has
generally focused on the similarities between behavior in
risky and inter-temporal choice and attempted to explain
both choice types within the same framework (Green &
Myerson, 2004; Prelec & Loewenstein, 1991; Weber &
Chapman, 2005). This endeavour would be greatly aided by
understanding whether there is a common value function
and therefore a single concept of utility underlying both
choice types.
As a practical consideration determining whether risky
and inter-temporal choices involve the same value function
is particularly important for attempts to model choices
which involve both risks and time delays (Baucells &
Heukamp, 2012; Vanderveldt, Green & Myerson, 2014). A
common value function would greatly simplify the process
of developing such a model, as it would be reasonable to
assume that the same valuation of outcomes would occur in
choices with both risks and delays.
Recent work by Abdellaoui and colleagues (2013) would
suggest that there is not a single concept of utility. In two
experiments they find that value functions for risky choices
are concave, while value functions for inter-temporal
choices are closer to linear. This matches the literature on
CPT and Hyperbolic Discounting, with concave value
functions often found when using the former, and linear
value functions often assumed, but not tested in the latter
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Kirby, 1997; Kirby &
Marakovic, 1995; Rachlin, Raineri & Cross, 1991; Stott,
2006; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992).
In the Abdellaoui et al. (2013) experiments they did not
assume any particular forms for the various functions used,
except the value function, instead estimating the concavity
of the value function free of a particular model of risky or
inter-temporal choice. While this method is informative it
does not allow a comparison of individuals, nor an
assessment of whether this extra parameter is necessary to
account adequately for the data. In this paper we fit
particular versions of CPT and Hyperbolic Discounting to
risky and inter-temporal choice data. Importantly we fit two
different combinations of these models. In the separate
value model we fit CPT and Hyperbolic Discounting
separately to their respective choice types, with separate

1440

value function parameters estimated for each choice type. In
the common value model we again fit each model to its
respective choice type, but estimate a single value function
parameter for both choice types.

Cumulative Prospect Theory
CPT contains three main functions, a value function, a
decision weight function and when dealing with choice data,
a choice function (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Stott, 2006;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1992). In the literature various
formulations of each function are used. Stott (2006)
compared combinations of these formulations and found
that a power function for the value function (Equation 1), a
single parameter decision weight function proposed by
Prelec (1998) (Equation 2), and a logit choice function
(Equation 3) provided good fits across a range of data sets.
We follow Stott’s lead and use this particular combination.
𝑣(𝑥) = 𝑥 𝑎
𝑤(𝑝) = 𝑒

(Eq. 1)

−(− ln 𝑝)𝑟

𝑉(𝑔) = 𝑤(𝑝) × 𝑣(𝑥)
1
𝑃(𝑔1 , 𝑔2 ) =
−𝜀(𝑉(𝑔1 )−𝑉(𝑔2 ))
1+𝑒

(Eq. 2)
(Eq. 3)

Where x is the outcome amount and p is its probability. ε, r
and a are free parameters estimated from the data.

Hyperbolic Discounting
As the basic hyperbolic discounting model uses restrictive
assumptions regarding the value function, we use a modified
version (see Doyle, 2013 for other modifications).
Generally, as its name suggests, the basic model involves a
hyperbolic discount rate (Equation 4), and an identity
function for the value function (Kirby, 1997; Kirby &
Marakovic, 1995; Rachlin, Raineri & Cross, 1991).
Following the lead of Dai and Busemeyer (2014) and to
allow a common value function for risk and delay, we use a
power function, rather than identity function, as we did in
risky choice (Equation 1). This reduces to the identity
function when a is 1. As we are dealing with choice data we
also use the logit choice function here (Equation 3).
𝑑(𝑡) = 1/(1 + ℎ × 𝑡)
𝑉(𝑔) = 𝑑(𝑡) × 𝑣(𝑥)

(Eq. 4)

Where x is the outcome amount and t is the amount of time
until the amount is received. h is a free parameter estimated
from the data.

Method
Participants
21 adults recruited from flyers on the UNSW campus and
on the UNSW careers website participated in Experiment 1.
They were reimbursed $10 for approximately 30 min
participation. Participants in Experiments 2 (n=20) and 3
(n=60) were first year undergraduate students at UNSW
who received course credit for their participation.

Materials and Procedure
Each participant completed 10 blocks of risky choices, and
10 blocks of inter-temporal choices. All choices were
presented on a computer screen, with participants asked to
select the option they preferred. All risky choices were a
choice between receiving $50 for certain, or receiving a
greater amount, $X, with some probability, p. Similarly all
inter-temporal choices were between receiving $50 now, or
a greater amount, $X, at some time delay, t, expressed in
months. The value of X changed between blocks, with the
10 values being $55, $60, $65, $75, $90, $110, $140, $200,
$330 and $1000.
Each risky block contained 7 choices, with the
probability, p, of receiving the risky amount varying on each
choice based on the previous choices in that block,
according to a bisection titration method (Weber &
Chapman, 2005). In this method when the participant
chooses the risky option the value of p decreases on the next
choice, increasing the risk. In particular, p takes a value
halfway between its current value, and the highest p for
which the certain $50 was chosen rather than the risky
amount. Similarly, if the certain $50 was chosen, the value
of p would increase on the next trial by the same method.
This process was terminated when the current and previous
value of p were within 0.01 of each other. The upper and
lower bounds for p were set at 1 and 0, with p=0.5 on the
first choice of each block.
A similar titration method was used in the inter-temporal
blocks, with the length of the delay, t, changing for each
choice, and the titration terminating when the current and
previous values were within 0.5 of a month. The upper and
lower bounds for the delay were set at 96 and 0 months. The
upper delay of 96 months was chosen based on pilot testing.
The first choice therefore always involved a 48 month delay.
Unlike the risky choices the number of inter-temporal
choices in a block varied from 7 to 8, due to rounding in the
titration method.
In Experiment 1 participants completed all blocks of one
choice type before moving on to the next. In Experiments 2
and 3 risky and inter-temporal blocks alternated. Whether
risky or inter-temporal choice was presented first was
counterbalanced across participants.

1441

Analyses
Two models were fit to each participant’s data using
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE):
Common Model
In this model the same value function (Equation 2) and
choice functions (Equation 3) were used for the risky and
inter-temporal choices. Therefore a single a and single ε
parameter were estimated for each participant.
Separate Model
In this model risky and inter-temporal choices were fit
completely separately. Different value functions were used
for risky choice and inter-temporal choice, resulting in two
value parameters, ar for risky choice and ai for intertemporal choice. Similarly there were two choice scaling
parameters εr and εi as separate choice functions were also
used. Unlike the common model this means behavior in the
inter-temporal choices had no influence on parameter
estimation for risky choice, and vice versa.
The fits of the two models were compared using Bayesian
Information Criteria (BIC) which takes into account both
the fit of the model, as a log likelihood, and the complexity
of the model, in its number of parameters. The common
model had four parameters, a, h, r, ε, while the separate
model had six, ar, ai, h, r, εr, εi.
Using BIC to compare fits is a winner takes all approach,
as each model is either the best fitting or not, with no
consideration given to how much better a given model fits.
In this sense it can be somewhat misleading if both models
have very similar BIC values for many participants. In order
to account for uncertainty in the degree to which a model is
preferred, we calculated BIC weights (Wagenmakers &
Farrell, 2004). These weights can be transformed to
approximate the probability that a given model generated
the observed data (given the set of models being compared).
In what follows, we will report the probability that the
Common model is best fitting, with the probability that the
Separate model is best simply being the complement. That
is, participants for whom the Common model fits best will
have wBICs closer to 1, while scores closer to 0 indicate
that the Separate model is fitting better. Scores near 0.5
suggest both are equally probable.

Results

log likelihood of 0 corresponds to a model which performs
no better than chance, while large log likelihood values
indicate that the model is fitting the data better. As all
values are above zero both models performed better than
chance for all participants.

Figure 1: Log Likelihood for the fit of each model for each
participant. Squares are values for the Separate Model,
triangles are the Common Model. Grey points are
participants best fit by the Common Model, Black points
those best fit by the Separate Model. All log likelihoods are
plotted as the difference between the fit of the model and
that of a chance model where for each choice a probability
of 0.5 is placed on each option being chosen.

Comparing the models, approximately equal numbers of
participants were best fit by each model type according to
BIC. In Experiment 1, 10 out of 21 participants had lower
BIC values for the Common model than the Separate model.
A similar pattern emerges in Experiment 2, with 10 out of
20 participants best fit by each model. In Experiment 3 a
slight majority, 36 out of 60, are best fit by the Common
model. 1 This suggests that there may be large individual
differences in whether people have the same or separate
value functions for risky and inter-temporal choice. It would

Model Fits
Figure 1 shows the log likelihood for the two models for
each participant. For the purposes of the figure all log
likelihoods were calculated as the difference between the
maximum log likelihood for the model and the log
likelihoods obtained from a model which assigns a
probability of 0.5 to each option in each choice. Therefore a

1

Two intermediate models were also fit to the data. The common
value only model had the same value function, but separate choice
functions, while the separate value only model had separate value
functions, but the same choice function. According to BIC only 12
and 15 participants respectively were best fit by these models. For
this reason the analysis has focused on the two extreme versions.

1442

appear that approximately equal proportions of participants
do and do not require separate value functions.
These two groups can also be seen in Figure 1. For those
participants marked in grey, indicating that the Common
model had lower BIC values, the triangles and squares are
almost overlapping. That is, when the Common and
Separate models provide equivalent fits to the data, the
simpler model is preferred. For those where the Separate
model fit better, marked in black, the triangles tend to be
much lower than the squares. This suggests that the extra
complexity of the Separate model is warranted by the data.
Finally, since grey and black points are interspersed across
the range of log likelihoods, it appears that the simple model
is not only preferred when neither can account for the data
well.

outliers. All other participants had a parameters of less than
3, and so we excluded two individuals from Experiment 2
and one from Experiment 3 who’s a values for intertemporal choices were 7.7, 18.4, and 47.1. This leaves 98
participants for analysis.

BIC Weights
Figure 2 shows the model probabilities, as calculated from
BIC weights, for each participant in each of the three
experiments. Most participants cluster at either end of the
scale, suggesting that one model was generally fitting much
better than the other. This means that our weighted BIC
results are very similar to the winner takes all BIC
comparison, and again suggest that many participants do not
benefit from allowing separate value functions. In all three
experiments the mean wBIC was close to 0.5, with values of
0.47, 0.51, and 0.58 respectively.

Figure 2: Model probabilities, as calculated from BIC
weights, for each participant in each Experiment. Scores of
1 indicate a probability of 1 that the common model is the
best fitting of the two. Scores of 0 indicate a probability of 1
that the separate model is the best fitting. The plus sign is
the mean wBIC for that experiment.

Value function Parameters
A histogram of the values of the power coefficient of the
value function, a, across all individuals revealed three clear

Figure 3: Dots show the estimated values of a from the
Separate model for risky and Inter-temporal choices for each
participant. Grey points are participants best fit by the
Common Model, Black points those best fit by the Separate
Model. Separate figures are presented for each Experiment.
The crosses show the single value of a estimated for both
choice types from the Common model.

1443

The circles in Figure 3 show the values of a for risky
choices and for inter-temporal choices when they were
estimated separately for each individual. A common
assumption in hyperbolic discounting models is that the
value function is linear. However, relatively few values of
our estimated a values fall around 1. From the work of
Abdellaoui and colleagues (2013) we would expect values
of a to be 1 or greater for inter-temporal choice, and less
than 1 for risky choice (i.e., indicating a concave value
function for risk). From Figure 3 it is clear that we find the
latter, but not the former, with ai varying considerably.
Across all three experiments 96 participants had a values
less than 1 for risky choice and 80 for inter-temporal
choices respectively. For risky choices ar was significantly
less than 1 (M=0.37) on average (t(97)= 24.10, p<0.0001).
Similarly, and in contrast to Abdellaoui and colleagues’
findings, ai was also significantly less than 1 on average
(M=0.57) for Inter-temporal choice (t(97)= 6.91, p<0.0001).
We also find value functions are concave for the Common
model. The crosses in Figure 3 show the values of a
estimated by the common model. All values were less than
1, and therefore a was significantly lower than 1 on average
(M=0.37, t(97)= 26.41, p<0.0001).

Discussion
Overall our results suggest a rather complicated relationship
between utility in risky choice and utility in inter-temporal
choice. Unlike Abdellaoui and colleagues (2013) who find
evidence suggesting that utility is domain specific, we find
that many individuals do not require this assumption in
order to fit their data. Rather, many individuals can be fit
equally well by models which assume a single concept of
utility for both choice types. This suggests that there may be
large individual differences in how people approach these
two choice types, with some people employing the same
concept of utility for both, and others applying different
concepts.
The consequence of this is that people may be
approaching the two choice types in quite distinct ways. For
those with a common concept they may view the two choice
types as quite similar, and apply a similar process to both.
This may account for some of the similarities observed in
behavior in risky choices and inter-temporal choices (Prelec
& Loewenstein, 1991). In contrast those with separate utility
concepts may view the choice types as quite distinct or
unrelated, leading to their application of different value
functions in the two contexts.
This difference has important implications for any attempt
to develop a model that can account for behavior in risky
choices, inter-temporal choices and choices which involve
both. For the roughly half of our participants who do not
need separate value functions, this may be quite

straightforward. For those with separate value functions it is
much more complicated as not only would any model need
to allow different value functions for risk and delay but also
some way of addressing the issue of utility for an outcome
that is both risky and delayed. This could require a third
concept of utility for these types of choices, essentially
requiring three separate models, and three distinct
approaches for the three choice types. Alternatively it could
require risky and delayed utilities to be combined in a
similar fashion to that proposed by Abdellaoui (2013) with
consecutive transformations by each value function. The
psychological plausibility of the latter approach is
debatable, although there is some evidence that people
process risks and delays sequentially (Onculler & Onay,
2009). Future research is needed to resolve which of these
approaches is more successful.
Regarding the shape of the value function we did not find
the value function to be linear for inter-temporal choices.
While there was clearly more variability in the a parameter
for inter-temporal choice, than for risky choice, it was still
less than 1, suggesting a concave value function. This was
the case both overall and for the majority of individuals.
This would suggest that even if there are different concepts
of utility for risk and delay it is a difference in the degree of
diminishing sensitivity in most cases rather than a complete
absence of diminishing sensitivity for inter-temporal
choices. This suggests some consistency in the ways in
which outcomes are valued in risky and inter-temporal
contexts.
Relatively little research has examined the value function
in inter-temporal choice, with many assuming it is linear.
The difference between our results and those found by
Abdellaoui et al. could be due to methodological issues,
such as our use of multiple delay lengths, a different form
for the value function and the specific discount function.
These questions await future research.
So far we have assumed that participants are actually
calculating and comparing the utilities of each option when
making their choice. An alternative and potentially more
parsimonious account of our data may be that we find this
mixture of evidence for our two models because the
assumption of utility comparison is wrong. It may be that
participants are performing this task in a completely
different way, such as by directly comparing attribute
values, e.g. probabilities, delays and amounts, across
options, or to distributions of these attributes in memory
(Stewart, Chater & Brown, 2006; Vlaev et al., 2011). A
variety of these attribute based models have been proposed,
and they suggest quite different processes to those assumed
in our models. For example in Scholten and Read’s (2010)
trade off model individuals directly compare attributes
across options in inter-temporal choice, trading off the gain
in outcome amount with the loss of time of receipt, rather

1444

than comparing the utilities of each option. A similar
process could occur for risky choices. If this where the case
it would suggest that our two models merely provide a
descriptive fit to the data and, as neither captures the process
people are using to make their choice, we cannot distinguish
between them. An investigation of these types of models is
beyond the scope of this paper but given our failure to find
clear support for a single or separate value function, in the
interests of parsimony and psychological plausibility, future
research would benefit from considering attribute
comparison based models of choice that may be able to
explain the behavior of all participants.

Conclusion
When assuming a utility comparison based model of choice,
for the majority of participants in our study utility was
concave for both risky and inter-temporal choice, although
not necessarily by the same amount. Furthermore, although
more than half of our participants were best fit by a model
assuming a common value function for the two choice
types, the remainder required a model that assumed separate
functions. Thus any attempt to explain both choice types in
a single model would therefore need to allow for this
difference among participants, or perhaps abandon the
assumption of utility based comparisons.

Acknowledgments
BRN was supported by an Australian Research Council
Future Fellowship (FT110100151) and Discovery Project
(DP140101145). CD was supported by an Australian
Research Council DECRA Fellowship (DE130100129). AL
was supported by a UNSW PhD Scholarship.

References
Abdellaoui, M., Bleichrodt, H., l'Haridon, O., & Paraschiv,
C. (2013). Is There One Unifying Concept of Utility? An
Experimental Comparison of Utility Under Risk and
Utility Over Time. Management Science, 59(9), 21532169. doi: DOI 10.1287/mnsc.1120.1690
Baucells, M., & Heukamp, F. H. (2012). Probability and
Time Trade-Off. Management Science, 58(4), 831-842.
doi: DOI 10.1287/mnsc.1110.1450
Dai, J., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2014). A probabilistic,
dynamic, and attribute-wise model of intertemporal
choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
143, 1489-1514.
Doyle, J.R. (2013). Survey of time preference, delay
discounting models. Judgement and Decision Making,
8(2), 116-135
Green, L., & Myerson, J. (2004). A Discounting Framework
for Choice With Delayed and Probabilistic Rewards.
Psychological
Bulletin,
130(5),
769-792.
doi:
10.1037/0033-2909.130.5.769

Kirby, K. N. (1997). Bidding on the future: Evidence
against normative discounting of delayed rewards.
Journal of Experimental Psychology-General, 126(1), 5470. doi: Doi 10.1037/0096-3445.126.1.54
Kirby, K. N., & Marakovic, N. N. (1995). Modeling Myopic
Decisions - Evidence for Hyperbolic Delay-Discounting
within-Subjects and Amounts. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 64(1), 22-30. doi: DOI
10.1006/obhd.1995.1086
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect Theory: an
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263291.
Onculer, A. & Onay, S. (2009). How do we evaluate future
gambles? Experimental evidence on path dependency in
risky intertemporal choice. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 22, 280-300. doi: 10.1002/bdm.626
Prelec, D. (1998). The probability weighting function.
Econometrica, 66(3), 497-527.
Prelec, D., & Loewenstein, G. (1991). Decision Making
over Time and under Uncertainty: A Common Approach.
Management Science, 37(7), 770-786. doi: DOI
10.1287/mnsc.37.7.770
Rachlin, H., Raineri, A., & Cross, D. (1991). Subjective
Probability and Delay. Journal Of The Experimental
Analysis Of Behavior,
55(2), 233-244. doi:
10.1901/jeab.1991.55-233
Scholten, M., & Read, D. (2010) The psychology of
intertemporal tradeoffs. Psychologicl Review, 17(3), 925944
Stewart, N., Chater, N., & Brown, G. D. (2006). Decision
by sampling. Cognitive Psychology, 53(1), 1-26. doi:
10.1016/j.cogpsych.2005.10.003
Stott, H. P. (2006). Cumulative prospect theory’s functional
menagerie. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 32, 101-130.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in Prospect
Theory: Cumulative Representation of Uncertainty.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5(4), 297-323. doi: Doi
10.1007/Bf00122574
Vanderveldt, A., Green, L., & Myerson, J. (2014).
Discounting of Monetary Rewards That Are Both Delayed
and Probabilistic: Delay and Probability Combine
Mulitplicatively, Not Additively. Journal of Experimental
Psychology:
Learning
Memory
and
Cognition.Doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000029
Vlaev, I., Chater, N., Stewart, N., & Brown, G. D. A.
(2011). Does the brain calculate value? Trends in
Cognitive
Sciences,
15,
546–554.
doi:
10.1016/j.tics.2011.09.008
Wagenmakers, E.-J., & Farrell, S. (2004). AIC model
selection using Akaike weights. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11, 192-196.
Weber, B. J., & Chapman, G. B. (2005). The combined
effects of risk and time on choice: Does uncertainty
eliminate the immediacy effect? Does delay eliminate the
certainty effect? Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision
Processes,
96(2),
104-118.
doi:
10.1016/j.obhdp.2005.01.001

1445

