Explaining Injustice in Speech: Individualistic vs. Structural Explanation
Saray Ayala (saray@sfsu.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 1600 Holloway Avenue
San Francisco, CA 94132 USA
Nadya Vasilyeva (Vasilyeva@Berkeley.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
Implicit bias has recently gained much attention in
scholarly attempts to understand and explain different
forms of social injustice by identifying causally
relevant mental states in individual’ minds. Here we
question the explanatory power of implicit bias in a
particular type of injustice, testimonial injustice, and
more generally in what we call speech injustice.
Testimonial injustice occurs when the audience deflates
a speaker’s credibility due to the speaker’s perceived
social identity (Fricker, 2007). We identify two
drawbacks of a widely accepted explanation attributing
testimonial injustice to prejudices (e.g. implicit bias) in
the mind of the hearer, and argue that further
understanding of this phenomenon can be gained from a
structural explanation that appeals to discursive
conventions and interlocutors’ positions in the
communicative exchange.

involved. Miranda Fricker appeals to prejudices in the
hearer that “will tend surreptitiously to inflate or deflate
the credibility afforded the speaker” (Ibid. p.17), and
specifies that “[T]he main type of prejudice (…) that
tracks people in this way is prejudice relating to social
identity” (Ibid. 27). This biased mind explanation, tracing
particular episodes or patterns of injustice to bias in
individuals’ minds against speaker’s social identity, is
favored by all the psychological and philosophical
literature drawing upon empirical research on implicit
bias. A tacit assumption in at least some accounts of
social injustice that appeal to implicit bias is that in the
absence of implicit bias, the injustice would be reduced,
or would not even happen.
Our goal in this work is not to question the existence or
significance of implicit bias, but its explanatory power.2
Explanations of injustice invoking implicit biases in
individuals’ minds could appropriately account for the
phenomenon only in a society where interactions among
individuals are not governed by unjust conventions or
norms. If, however, the behavior is governed by
conventions that program for and are sufficient to produce
unjust treatment regardless of idiosyncrasies of individual
attitudes, then biased-mind explanations alone can’t
adequately account for the contrast between just and
unjust societies.
In this paper we outline ways in which structural
explanations identifying higher-level social constraints on
behavior address an important gap in our understanding of
the phenomenon of social injustice. We spell out a
structural explanation of testimonial injustice appealing to
factors such as the discursive conventions that operate in
the communicative exchange, and the positions that
speaker and hearer(s) occupy in that communicative
framework.3 We identify two drawbacks of the biased
mind explanation. First, it does not specify what happens

Keywords: structural explanation, testimonial injustice,
performative force, implicit bias, discursive injustice,
social norms, norm-conforming behavior.

1. Deficiencies of an individualistic
explanation
Imagine an all-men conversation about how to properly
distribute the weight in the wooden structure of a house.
A woman intervenes and proposes a solution. One
interlocutor responds: “this is not home décor, this is
serious work”. This is an example of testimonial injustice,
a subcategory of epistemic injustice (Fricker 2007).
Through epistemic injustice, an individual is wronged in
their capacity as a knower. In cases of testimonial
injustice, an individual is wronged specifically in their
capacity as a giver of knowledge, as happens to the
woman in the example above.1 In line with a recent trend
in several disciplines focused on implicit bias as the key
for the explanation of different forms of social injustice, a
widely accepted explanation of testimonial injustice refers
to the (explicit or implicit) attitudes of the individuals

2

Our goal and motivation are similar to Haslanger’s (2015b).
She also argues that explanations of social injustice in terms of
implicit bias are limited, and defends structural explanations
instead. While she addresses social injustice in general, we focus
on a specific type of injustice and offer some details of what a
structural explanation of this type of injustice would look like.
3
José Medina (2013) expands on Fricker’s account of
testimonial injustice, and points out the need of a less
individualistic approach to it. His account nevertheless differs
from the one we offer here.

1

Not all cases of differential attribution of credibility are
cases of testimonial injustice, e.g., granting less credibility to a
child than to an adult in a conversation about indexicals or law
maximizes the communicative value of the conversation without
disempowering any of the interlocutors.

130

with the speaker’s words in cases of testimonial injustice;
second, it only partially situates the individual in social
reality. We discuss each of these drawbacks in detail
below, and defend a structural explanation of testimonial
injustice and of a broader form of injustice that we call
speech injustice, which we define below.

discursive subspace” (Kukla, 2014, p. 9). Entreaties come
from outside the discursive game and are masked or direct
requests: “Can I play too?”. They do not count as (proper)
contributions. If an utterance intended as a proper
contribution is instead taken as an entreaty, this prevents
the audience from evaluating its content in the same way
that a proper contribution would be, for it only counts as a
request to be part of the conversation. This suggests a
possible way in which the non-native’s credibility might
be undermined: their intervention is not given uptake as a
proper contribution to the discussion, but is rather treated
as an entreaty, and so the lack of audience engagement is
better seen as a response not to its content, but to its
(perceived) performative force. If not recognized as a
proper contribution to the conversation, there is no fact of
the matter about whether or not the non-native’s comment
is worth engaging. This analysis of testimonial injustice
as a distortion of the performative force clearly shows that
it wrongs the speaker not only as a giver of knowledge,
but also as a doer. When the force of a speech act is
distorted in the aforementioned sense, speakers are
prevented to do with their words what they intended to.
Thus this principle captures a broader kind of injustice,
beyond the epistemic kind. Let’s call it speech injustice.
Like discursive injustice as defined by Kukla (2004),
speech injustice happens when a speaker’s social position
trumps the performative force of their speech acts, and
they are prevented from doing with their words what they
intended to; instead, their words bring about a different
action, usually one that enhances a disadvantage, creates
it and/or contributes to its perpetuation. Examples of
speech injustice include assertions that are given uptake
as expressives, or commands that are taken as requests.7
Speech injustice differs from the phenomenon Kukla
identifies in one important aspect: it is governed by
conventions. While Kukla is not sympathetic with the
idea that the discursive incapacity she is describing is a
systematic phenomenon governed by conventions,8 we
emphasize that speech injustice feeds off discursive
conventions. Our defense of a structural explanation of
speech injustice in Section 2 captures exactly this idea.

1.1. What happens to the words?
The biased mind explanation does not tell us what
happens with the speaker’s words when their credibility is
deflated. When a woman tries to assert something but her
audience does not grant her the appropriate credibility,
what is it that she gets to do with her words? We claim
that Rebecca Kukla’s notion of discursive injustice
provides an answer (Kukla, 2014).4 Discursive injustice
occurs when a speaker’s speech act is not given the
appropriate uptake, in a way that disempowers the
speaker. The performative force of the intended speech
act gets distorted and the action that the speaker intended
to bring about fails, and a different action occurs,5 usually
one that enhances a disadvantage, creates it and/or
contributes to its perpetuation.6 This distortion cannot be
attributed to a failure of the speaker to use an appropriate
locution.
Let’s consider an example of testimonial injustice and
analyze it with the tools of discursive injustice: a nonnative speaker of English is attending an academic talk in
an English-speaking country. The non-native speaker
makes a contribution to the discussion (without any major
deviations from standard English grammar and
pronunciation that would interfere with comprehensibility
of the intervention) but nobody engages with it.
Eventually a native speaker raises the same point and this
time people engage in a lively discussion.
In the example, a non-native speaker tries to make a
proper contribution to a conversation, but fails to do so.
There is plenty of research showing that non-native
speakers are given less credibility than native speakers
(Brown, Giles & Thakerar, 1985; Giles, 1973). Their
perceived identity as a non-native speaker deflates their
credibility. How does this happen? In general, when we
make a contribution to a conversation, we assume that we
are proper participants in that conversation, members of
the discursive game that is being played. Our audience,
however, might not consider us as such. The notion of
entreaty helps understand this. Kukla describes entreaties
as speech acts that are spoken “in order to be granted
status as a speaker with normative standing within a

1.2. Social situatedness
The second drawback of the biased mind explanation is
that it does not appropriately situate the individual in their
social reality. We draw on distributed and extended
cognition research in the philosophy of mind (Menary,
2010; Sutton, 2010; Gallaguer, 2013) and defend a fullbodied situatedness, according to which the agent is in
constant interaction with what is outside of their skin,
continuously outsourcing to external (material and
abstract) resources, be they technological aids or social
norms. Although the biased mind explanation capitalizes
on implicit biases and prejudices acquired by an
individual from the society, it nevertheless isolates the

4
Kukla (2014) does not introduce discursive injustice as the
mechanism of testimonial injustice, but as an independent
phenomenon.
5
An extreme case of discursive injustice is Rae Langton’s
illocutionary silence, in which the speaker does not get to
perform any action (Langton, 1993).
6
The notion of discursive injustice is based on an important
(and widely accepted) assumption according to which
audience’s uptake determines what one gets to do with their
words (see Austin, 1962).

7
8

131

See Kukla (2014) for several examples.
See Kukla (2004), especially p. 448 and footnote 7.

individual from the social reality during the real time of
the episode of injustice. A complete account of hearers’
situatedness in the social reality must consider not only
their attitudes and beliefs, even if they are a result of their
exposure to social factors, but also the social factors
themselves that, at that moment and in that space, are
guiding their interpretation of speaker’s words. Appealing
exclusively to what is inside the agents’ mind presents
them isolated from the social dynamics and the structural
forces that shape their behavior in that moment in
important ways.
Once we situate the agent in this full-bodied sense, we
need to pay attention to how environmental factors are not
only facilitating (by providing norms as guides) but also
constraining agents’ behavior. When taking part in a
conversation or any other social practice, we are part of a
social structure. We draw on Sally Haslanger’s notion of
social structures as networks of social relations that are
themselves constituted by practices (Haslanger, 2015a).
These practices locate us in different positions in the
structure, that Haslanger calls nodes. From each node, a
limited range of possibilities is available (i.e. possible
actions to choose from). Someone occupying the node of
mother/spouse in a heterosexual relationship in a
community with no affordable childcare, and with a male
spouse earning a significantly higher salary due to a
gender wage gap, has at their disposition a very limited
range of possible actions from which to choose when a
baby arrives. When the child-bearer decides to quit their
job, this decision does not come from an unconstrained
decision-making process that straightforwardly reflects
their individual’s preferences.9
Conversations, qua structured social interactions,
situate interlocutors within nodes that afford limited
ranges of actions. The affordances of each position within
a conversation (e.g., speaker, hearer) are adjusted in virtue
of membership in intersecting social categories, more or
less salient. For example, a homeless person has a very
limited range of actions they can do with their words
when addressing a passerby. In an interview to apply for a
visa to enter the United States, the status of authority and
epistemic privilege of the interviewer, and the burden of
proof of a lack of malicious intent lying upon the
interviewee together reduce the range of possible speech
acts the latter can perform. This range shrinks or expands
depending on the combination of different dimensions of
social location the person embodies (race, gender,
socioeconomic status, level of education, immigration
status, country of origin, etc.). For example, a citizen of
the United States who tells an immigrant “Speak English,
you are in the United States” would be enacting
discrimination. If the speaker is however a homeless
citizen and the addressee a middle-class immigrant, the
speech act has a different force.

The biased mind explanation leaves aside all these
structural constrains. In doing so, it paints a very limited
picture of the factors governing speech injustice. We next
argue that some of those structural factors better explain
this kind of injustice.

2. Structural explanation
We mentioned above that the social position of an
interlocutor in the broader social structure in which the
conversational exchange is situated constrains the range
of possible things this person can do with their words.
There might be several structural factors playing an
explanatory role for each particular social position, or in
Haslanger’s terms, for each node, and there are therefore
different focuses a structural explanation can take. Here
we don’t provide a general analysis of what a structural
explanation should look like in order for it to be
satisfactory.10 Our much more modest goal is to point out
one type of structural factor that plays an explanatory role
in speech injustice. And that is the conventions governing
discourse. Conventions can be difficult to individuate and
define. For our purposes, it is enough to say that there are
conventional norms about what counts as a speech act of a
particular type in a given context,11 together with
conventional ways to invoke those norms (e.g. particular
words and gestures). In general we easily recognize, by
interpreting words and gestures in any given
conversational context, what are the conventions that our
interlocutor is invoking, and we let those guide our
interpretation of (the force of) their speech acts. We
humans are in general very sensitive to norms; we are
pretty good, from an early age, at detecting them,
conforming to them right away, and punishing others for
not doing so (Tomasello 2009).
We claim that our ordinary discursive interactions are
governed by conventions that systematically distort the
speech capacities of people perceived as occupying
certain social positions. The existence of these
conventions makes speech injustice a feature of wellfunctioning, although unjust, discursive exchanges. That
is, speech injustice is not the result of occasional
misinterpretation of some people’s speech acts, but a
systematic phenomenon resulting from conventions.
Importantly, it is not the result of unskilled listeners who,
due to (implicit) biases against speakers’ identity, do not
appropriately apply the relevant discursive conventions to
that speaker’s intervention. It is rather the unfortunate

10
See Haslanger (2015b) for an analysis of three ways in
which structures can be explanatory in accounting for social
injustice.
11
Very roughly, conventions are regularities we observe,
upon which we agree either explicitly or implicitly, and which
we deploy either consciously or unconsciously, and through
which we organize and coordinate our behavior. Contrary to
Lewis’ traditional account (Lewis, 1969), and like many others,
we don’t take conventions to require common knowledge nor to
be advantageous on all occasions (see e.g. Gilbert, 2008).

9
See Haslanger (2015a) for a detailed analysis of this
example, originally in Cudd (2006).

132

result of perfectly skilled listeners who are appropriately
applying the conventions operative in their communities.
If we are right, people follow unjust conventions and
we don’t do anything about it. Could there be any other
reason for that, apart from moral laziness? Yes. People
are often wrong about the conventions they follow. Let us
introduce a distinction that will help unpack this point.

standard formula is not enough, for their speech act won’t
be recognized as an act of refusal. They don’t get to
deploy the manifest convention C. Importantly, the gap
between the manifest and the operative convention is not
transparent to inhabitants of Twin Earth. Similarly to this
fictional example, it can be the case that our ordinary
discursive interactions are governed by operative identityconstrained conventions systematically distorting some
speakers’ speech acts.
It is clear now how the phenomenon we identify as
speech injustice is different from the one Kukla identifies.
She discards the possibility that the distortion of speaker’s
performative force is the result of some rules or
conventions governing the conversational exchange.
Referring to the resulting discursive incapacity, she says
“If these effects were sufficiently regular they would
become stable conventions in their own right, which
could be managed and deployed in the normal way, even
if they were politically unfortunate” (Ibid., p. 448). She
assumes that the existence of (operative) conventions
warrantees interlocutor’s awareness of them, and
subsequent capacity to deploy them in a controlled
manner. However, once we acknowledge the possibility
of operative conventions that might escape interlocutors’
awareness, the existence of these conventions does not
guarantee that speakers’ will be able to manage and
control their deployment.
Now, how does the existence of identity-constrained
conventions help make the case for a structural
explanation of speech injustice? One could say that even
if we grant the existence of these conventions, they only
work through the minds of the individuals, and so an
explanation needs to appeal after all to individuals’
mental states. But as we explain below, we don’t need to
posit any specific mental state (in particular, implicit bias
against speaker’s perceived social identity) to explain the
behavior of hearers who conform to (operative)
conventions.

2.1. Operative vs. Manifest conventions
We are sometimes mistaken about the concepts we
apply. We might take ourselves to be applying a concept
(the manifest concept) that does not actually coincide with
the concept we apply in practice (the operative concept,
see Haslanger, 2006). For example,
“Consider the term “parent”. It is common, at least
in the United States, to address primary school
memos to “Parents”, to hold a “Parent Night” or
“Parent Breakfast” at certain points during the
school year, to have “Parent– Teacher Conferences”
to discuss student progress, and so on. However, in
practice the term “parent” in these contexts is meant
to include the primary caregivers of the student,
whether they be biological parents, step-parents,
legal guardians, grandparents, aunts, uncles, older
siblings, informal substitute parents, etc.”
(Haslanger, 2006, p. 99).
Even if the manifest concept used is the notion of
immediate progenitor, the operative concept here is the
notion of primary caregiver. If one only focuses on the
manifest concept, they could be wrong about the concept
they think to be applying.
Similarly, our intuitions about which discursive
conventions operate in our linguistic communities might
be wrong. Sometimes the mistake is easy to notice. On
other occasions, however, we might not realize the error.
Let’s consider a fictional example: there is a universe
with two planets, Earth and Twin Earth, inhabited by
people who have antennae. On both planets there is the
same manifest convention C about refusal of a sexual
approach, let’s say “to reject a sexual approach a person
has to perform the standard formula of refusal, which is
saying, by assertion, presupposition or implicature, ‘no’”.
As it happens, on Twin Earth there is a subpopulation,
let’s call them antenna-movers, whose “no”, when
intended to refuse a sexual approach, does not get the
uptake corresponding to a refusal, unless they utter it
while moving their antennae. If they do not move their
antennae, their “no” is interpreted in some other way.
Thus the operative convention for refusal differs across
the planets; on Twin Earth it depends on the perceived
antenna-moving status of the speaker. We could define
convention C* as a function of convention C plus
speakers’ perceived identity. On Twin Earth, the manifest
convention for refusal (C) is a generally applicable
convention, independent of identity. The operative
convention (C*) is, however, constrained by the perceived
identity of the speaker. For an antenna-mover on Twin
Earth to successfully refuse a sexual approach, the

2.2. Norm-conforming behavior
When we observe a behavior, the status of the behavior
in relation to norms determines the extent to which that
behavior can serve as a cue to the agent’s mental states.
Prescriptive norms give an agent enough of a reason to
behave in accordance to them, and so only when someone
behaves in a way that violates a norm, people go on to
attribute to the agent some (other) reason to act that way,
such as a norm-conflicting mental state (Uttich &
Lombrozo, 2010). That is, the existence of a norm that
prescribes a particular behavior in a given context can be
seen as enough of a reason to exhibit that behavior in that
context (no extra reason is required). To borrow an
example from Uttich & Lombrozo, an explanation of why
a person is wearing a graduation gown at a beach on a hot
day (violating the norm) will need to invoke that person’s
mental states as reasons for the behavior (perhaps this
person likes the gown, or believes the gown makes them
look smart, etc.). In contrast, to explain why a person is

133

individual agents.14 This stability makes structural
explanations better at providing an understanding of
speech injustice as a systematic social phenomenon.
Finally,
we
emphasize
the
importance
of
acknowledging structural factors for practical reasons.The
presence of implicit bias only makes a difference to the
phenomenon of speech injustice when there are no
operative conventions systematically distorting speech
acts. Effective interventions against speech injustice will
have to take into account both individuals’ minds and the
conventions that constrain individuals’ behavior.

wearing a graduation gown at a graduation ceremony
(adhering to the norm) it is not necessary to postulate a
corresponding mental state. An explanation of a normconforming behavior does not have to invoke any mental
state about the content of the norm - other than a general
disposition to conform to it.12 In fact, Uttich and
Lombrozo suggest that is rational to follow such normbased approach to explanation, for it affords accurate
generalization and prediction about related cases.
Knobe (2007) showed that after observing people
encouraging kissing between gay partners or interracial
sex, subjects attributed intentions to them more often than
to those who encouraged kissing between partners of
different sexes or sex between partners of the same race.
Although the original interpretation of this result appealed
to unconscious bias against homosexual kissing and
interracial sex, a different explanation seems to be better
in accounting for these and other results.13 Richard Holton
proposes that we don’t need to postulate such prejudices
in order to explain subjects’ attributions of intentions to
the gay-kissing and interracial-sex fans. Subjects’
awareness of social norms condemning those behaviors is
enough (Holton, 2010). If gay-kissing and interracial-sex
are seen as violating accepted social norms, those who
engage in these activities or show sympathy for them will
be seen as necessarily having some reason to do it. Those
who conform to the norms don’t need any extra reason
(i.e. any specific mental state) for their heterosexual
kissing and same-race sex preferences. In line with
Holton’s interpretation of Knobe (2007)’s results, we
claim that we do not need to postulate implicit bias in
hearers’ minds in order to explain speech injustice; the
existence of (unjust) social norms governing speech
interactions is enough to explain this phenomenon.

3. Concluding remarks and directions for
future research
We identified two deficiencies of the individualistic,
biased mind explanation according to which testimonial
injustice results from bias in the hearer’s mind. We
proposed that the first deficiency can be addressed with
the notion of discursive injustice that appeals to distortion
of performative force. This move revealed a kind of
injustice that goes beyond the epistemic kind; we called
this broader kind speech injustice.
To address the second drawback of insufficient
situatedness in the social reality we brought to the scene
the structural explanation. This explanation accounts for
speech injustice in terms of unjust conventions that
constrain interlocutors’ behavior and the positions
interlocutors take at any given conversation. We favor
structural explanation of speech injustice for its stability
and practical relevance, but we emphasize that it is
compatible with the existence of implicit bias in hearers’
minds. An important direction of future research will be
to consider how structural and individual-level factors discursive conventions operating in communicative
frameworks and individuals’ attitudes - interact in
episodes of speech injustice, each party making the most
of the other. For example, identity-constrained discursive
conventions might become more powerful through
individuals’ implicit or explicit identity-prejudices; and
more interestingly, individuals’ attitudes might come to
existence, and later be reinforced, through individuals
conforming to unjust conventions in their discursive
practices.

2.2. What do we gain from identifying structural
factors?
We argued that a structural explanation overcomes at
least one of the drawbacks we identified in the
individualistic explanation, i.e. the lack of situatedness.
Moreover, a structural explanation is more stable. There
are subtleties in prejudices and implicit bias that surely
vary from one individual to the other, which make an
explanation of any single episode of speech injustice to be
limited to that episode. On the contrary a structural
explanation, even though constrained by the cultural
context and by eventual variations in discursive
conventions, is more stable across individual episodes and

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Ásta Sveinsdóttir and Andrea Ploder
for helpful suggestions on a previous draft. We thank
attendees at the Hypatia Society meeting at University of
California Irvine, the San Francisco Bay Area Workshop
on Feminism and Philosophy at San Francisco State
University, and the Berkeley Social Ontology Group at
University of California Berkeley for comments on earlier
versions of this work.

12
We have to distinguish between (merely) following a norm
and intentionally following it (see Holton, 2010). The latter
might involve adjusting our behavior as to fit the norm, which
would probably require beliefs about the content of the norm.
13
Similar results from many other studies puzzled
researchers. See Holton (2010) on why an explanation appealing
to norm-conforming behavior accounts better for those results.

14

See Haslanger (2015a) for more on why a structural
explanation is in general more stable than an individualistic
explanation.

134

References
Austin, J. L. 1962. How to do things with words, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Brown, B. L., Giles, H., & Thakerar, J. N. 1985. Speaker
evaluations as a function of speech rate, accent and
context. Language and Communication, 5:207–220.
Dretske, F. 1988. Explaining Behavior: Reasons in a
World of Causes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fricker, M. 2007. Epistemic Injustice: Power and the
Ethics of Knowing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallaguer, S. 2013. The Socially Extended Mind.
Cognitive Systems Research 25-26:4-12.
Gilbert, M. 2008. Social Convention Revisited. Topoi
27:5–16.
Giles, H. 1973. Communication effectiveness as a
function of accented speech. Speech Monographs 40;
330–331.
Haslanger, S. 2015a. What is a (Social) Structural
Explanation? Philosophical Studies 172.
Haslanger, S. 2015b. Social Structure, Narrative, and
Explanation. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 45 (1):115.
Haslanger, S. 2006. Philosophical Analysis and Social
Kinds: What Good are Our Intuitions? Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society, Sup. Vol. 80:89– 118.
Holton, R. 2010. Norms and the Knobe Effect. Analysis
70 (3):417-424.
Keller, E. F. 2010. The Mirage of a Space Between
Nature and Nurture. Durham, NC: Durham University
Press.
Knobe, J. 2007. Reason Explanation in Folk Psychology.
Midwest Studies in Philosophy 31:90-107.
Kukla, R. 2014. Performative Force, Convention, and
Discursive Injustice. Hypatia 29 (2)
Langton, R.1993. Speech Acts and Unspeakable Acts,
Philosophy & Public Affairs 22: 293-330.
Lewis, D. 1969. Convention: A Philosophical Study.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Medina, J. 2013. The Epistemology of Resistance: Gender
and Racial Oppression, Epistemic Injustice, and
Resistance Imaginations. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Menary, R. (ed.) 2010. The Extended Mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Sutton, J. 2010. Exograms and interdisciplinarity: history,
the extended mind, and the civilizing process. In
Menary, R. (ed.), The Extended Mind, MA: MIT Press.
Tomasello, M. 2009. Why We Cooperate. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Uttich, K. & Lombrozo, T. 2010. Norms inform mental
state ascriptions: a rational explanation for the sideeffect effect. Cognition 116:87-100.

135

