Eye Movement Pattern in Face Recognition is Associated with Cognitive Decline in
the Elderly
Cynthia Y.H. Chan (cynchan@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Antoni B. Chan (abchan@cityu.edu.hk)
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Hong Kong

Tatia M.C. Lee (tmclee@hku.hk)
Laboratory of Neuropsychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Janet H. Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Abstract

ertheless, it remains unclear why aging is particularly associated with an increased false alarm rate in face recognition.
Previous research has shown that eye movement is related
to underlying cognitive processes. Eye movement behavior,
such as fixation location and duration, changes as the task,
level of difficulty, or stimulus type change (Rayner, 1978).
In face recognition, Hsiao and Cottrell (2008) found that
two eye fixations were sufficient to recognize a face and the
accuracy would not be further improved by allocating more
fixations. The two fixations were just around the center of
the nose, demonstrating the preferred viewing location phenomenon in face recognition (cf. Rayner, 1978). This location is also shown to be the optimal viewing location for
recognizing a face (Hsiao & Liu, 2012). These results suggest that eye movements in cognitive tasks have functional
roles in respect of the cognitive task at hand.
However, aging people were shown to have different or
atypical eye movements as compared with young adults. For
example, healthy older adults fixated more than young
adults on the lower half of a face (Wong, Cronin-Golomb,
& Neargarder, 2005). Patients with Alzheimer’s disease
were reported to have less efficient eye movements in facial
expression identification (Ogrocki, Hills & Strauss, 2000)
and reduced exploratory eye movements on novel images
(Daffner, Scinto, Weintraub, Guinessey, & Mesulam, 1992).
These atypical eye movement patterns may be reflecting
related cognitive deficits/decline in older adults. Nevertheless, the link between particular eye movement patterns
and cognitive performance in the elderly remains unclear.

The present study investigated the relationship between eye
movement pattern in face recognition and cognitive performance during natural aging through modeling and comparing
eye movement of young (18-24 years) and older (65-81 years)
adults using Hidden Markov Model (HMM) based approach.
Young adults recognized faces better than older adults, particularly when measured by the false alarm rate. Older adults’
recognition performance, on the other hand, correlated with
their cognitive status assessed by the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). Eye movement analysis with HMM revealed two different strategies, namely “analytic” and “holistic”. Participants using the analytic strategy had better recognition performance (particularly in the false alarm rate) than
those using the holistic strategy. Significantly more young
adults adopted the analytic strategy; whereas more older
adults adopted the holistic strategy. Interestingly, older adults
with lower cognitive status were associated with higher likelihood of using the holistic strategy. These results suggest an
association between holistic eye movement patterns and cognitive decline in the elderly.
Keywords: eye movement; aging; face recognition; holistic
processing; cognitive ability; Hidden Markov Model (HMM).

Introduction
A large amount of research has studied the effect of age on
face recognition and revealed that young adults recognize
faces better than older adults (Fulton & Bartlett, 1991;
Grady, McIntosh, Horwitz, & Rapoport, 2000; Lamont,
Stewart-Williams, & Podd, 2005). The differences are suggested to be due to declines in cognitive ability and spatial
vision in the elderly (Lott, Haegerstrom-Portnoy, Schneck,
& Brabyn, 2005). Lamont et al. (2005) conducted a face
recognition experiment with three age groups (18-39 years,
60-75 years and 76-96 years), and concluded that face
recognition performance declined with age, in which the
oldest group performed the worst. The deficits in face
recognition with age were seemingly in consequence of high
false alarm rates, instead of low hit rates, produced by older
adults (Crook & Larrabee, 1992; Lamont et al., 2005). Nev-

Hidden Markov Model for Eye Movement Analysis
To examine the association between eye movement patterns
and cognitive performance in the elderly, methods for identifying and summarizing individual eye movement patterns
in both spatial (fixation locations) and temporal (transitions
between fixations) dimensions are required. Nevertheless,
most of the current eye movement data analysis methods
primarily focus on spatial information such as using predefined regions of interest (ROIs). ROI analysis allows easy

321

comparisons on fixation duration and number of fixations in
different ROIs. However, it involves subjective definitions
of the ROIs and thus is subject to experiment bias. For example, eyes can be defined as two separate ROIs (Barton,
Radcliffe, Cherkasova, Edelman, & Intriligator, 2006) or a
single ROI (Henderson, Williams, & Falk, 2005). In addition, predefined ROIs are not able to reflect individual differences in ROI choices. More recent eye movement analysis has addressed the problem of subjective ROIs by directly
generating ROIs from data. For instance, a fixation heat map
is created by plotting the location of fixations and smoothing them with a Gaussian function. Two heat maps can be
compared by testing statistically difference between the two
maps pixel by pixel (Caldara & Miellet, 2011).
Nevertheless, both of the aforementioned approaches
purely focused on spatial information of eye movements
without considering temporal information. Some have proposed to use the string-editing method to describe a scan
path. A stimulus is divided into several ROIs, each of which
is labeled with a letter. Eye movement is then described by a
string of letters according to the ROIs visited. Two strings
can be compared by computing their Levenshtein distance,
which is the number of changes (insertions, deletions and/or
substitutions) between two strings (Goldberg & Helfman,
2010). Nonetheless, Levenshtein distance does not precisely
reflect the differences in transition between two scan paths.
For example, LEAD and HEAD differ in the first character
and HEAT and HEAD differ in the last character. However,
the Levenshtein distances of both cases are also 1. Another
method to examine temporal information is to compare fixation maps at different times (Caldara & Miellet, 2011). For
example, the difference between the maps of the first and
second fixations can tell us how distributions of fixations
change over time. However, these difference maps do not
reflect exact transitions between regions, and the resulting
different regions are usually scattered and hard to be interpreted.
In view of these drawbacks, Chuk, Chan, and Hsiao
(2014) recently proposed a Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
based approach to analyze eye movement data. First, an
HMM is estimated to represent the eye fixation sequences of
an individual. An HMM contains a number of hidden states,
and each state represents a different ROI of a face. The fixation locations in each ROI are modeled as a Gaussian distribution. A set of prior probabilities models the initial hidden
state (i.e., fixation), while the transition probabilities model
the movement from one ROI to another. The HMM parameters are estimated from the individual's eye movements using a variational Bayesian approach, which automatically
determines the number of ROIs. Second, a group of individuals' HMMs can be clustered into subgroups via the variational hierarchical EM algorithm (VHEM; Coviello, Chan,
& Lanckriet, 2014), and each subgroup can be portrayed by
a representative HMM. In this way, common eye fixation
strategies among individuals can be discovered from the
group data. In addition, the level at which an individuals'
eye fixations belongs to a certain HMM (e.g. a representa-

tive HMM of a subgroup) is calculated as the log-likelihood
of the individuals' fixation sequences under the given
HMM.
Thus, the HMM-based approach is particularly suitable
for examining individual differences in eye movements and
their association with cognitive performances. Here we used
this approach to examine the association between eye
movement pattern in face recognition and cognitive performance in the elderly. We recruited young and older adults to
perform in a standard face recognition memory task while
their eye movements were recorded. The HMM-based approach allows us to (1) model eye movements of each individual with an HMM and summarize individual HMMs into
representative group HMMs to reveal general patterns in
each group, (2) cluster the individual HMMs according to
their similarities to discover common patterns, (3) compare
recognition performance between people with different eye
movement patterns and examine the difference between the
two age groups, and (4) examine the association between
individual eye movement patterns and their cognitive performance.

Method
Participants
Sixty-eight Chinese participants were divided into two age
groups, including 34 young adults aged from 18 to 24
(M=20, SD=2) and 34 older adults aged from 65 to 81
(M=69, SD=8). They all reported right-handedness and with
normal or corrected to normal vision. The young adults
were recruited from University of Hong Kong and the older
adults were recruited mainly from elderly centers. Cognitive
functioning of all older participants was assessed using the
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) Hong Kong version (Wong et al., 2009) and they were all within the normal
range, with scores 22 or above out of 30 (i.e., healthy older
adults with no cognitive impairment). Informed consent was
collected from each participant; the research protocol was
approved by the Ethics Review Board at University of Hong
Kong.

Materials and Apparatus
Forty Chinese face images were used. They were all frontal
view in grayscale, with standardized distances between the
eyes and the mouth, and with similar distance between the
eyes (less than 0.5 visual degree differences from the average distance). Each face image was cropped according to
the original shape of the face such that only the face (without hair) was visible. Eye movements were recorded with
Eyelink 1000 eye-tracking system, which was connected to
a 17” monitor and a response box. The screen resolution
was set to 1024 x 768 pixels and a chinrest was positioned
approximately 60 cm in front of the screen.

Procedure
Participants sat in front of a computer with their head resting on a chinrest such that the eye level of the participants

322

Face Recognition Strategy Used

was about the mid-level of the screen. Participants’ right eye
was tracked throughout the experiment and 9-point calibration was conducted prior to the start of the experiment. In
the study phase, participants were instructed to view and
remember 20 human face images one at a time at the rate of
5 seconds each. The face was displayed either at the upper
center or at the lower center (i.e., 30% upward or downward
from the center) of the screen randomly. Participants had to
fixate at a cross “x” located at the screen center prior to the
presentation of the next image. In the test phase, participants
were displayed with 40 face images one at a time, with 20
old images and 20 new images, and asked to judge if they
saw the face in the study phase or not. Their responses were
recorded via a response box.

In order to identify the strategies used by the young and
older participants, we first trained one HMM for each participant, as discussed previously. We then learned the representative HMM for young adults by using VHEM to group

Result
Behavioral Performance
The MoCA scores, used for assessing the cognitive ability
of the older participants, were between 22 and 30; the mean
score was 26.94 with an SD of 1.77. Thus, none of the older
participants showed indication of cognitive impairment (>=
22 out of 30, Wong et al., 2009).

2.5

	  	  	  *	  

Figure 2: The summary HMMs of young and older adults
and the corresponding transition probability matrices.

Older Adults

d'

1.5

Young Adults

0.5
-0.5 Young Adults Older Adults
Young Adults

80	  

Older Adults

Percentage (%)

100	  
60	  

	  	  	  *	  

40	  
20	  
0	  
Hit Rate

False Alarm Rate

Figure 1: Face recognition performance for young and older
adults (* p< .05).
Face recognition performance was measured with the discrimination sensitivity measure d’, hit rate, and false alarm
rate (Figure 1). Independent t-test showed that the d’ of
young adults was significantly higher than that of older
adults, t(66) = 2.53, p = .01. The false alarm rate of young
adults was also significantly lower than that of older adults,
t(66) = -2.58, p = .01. However, the hit rate between the two
groups showed no significant difference, t(66) = .741, n.s.
This result was consistent with previous studies (Crook &
Larrabee, 1992).

Figure 3: The representative HMMs of the two subgroups,
analytic and holistic strategies, and the corresponding transition probability matrices.
their HMMs into 1 cluster, and similarly for older adults. As
shown in Figure 2, each HMM included three ROIs as indicated with different colors. The overlapping area of two or
more ROIs means that the fixations around that area have
similar probabilities of belonging to those ROIs. The prior

323

values in the matrices represented the probability that an
initial eye fixation located at each of the ROIs. The rest of
the matrix represents the transition probabilities among the
three Gaussian components. For example, in the young
adults’ matrix, the prior value to the red ROI is 0.20 and the
probability of changing the eye movement from the green to
the blue ROI is 0.09. It could be observed that the ROIs of
the older adults’ summary HMM were concentrated at the
center of the face, with some engagement around the eye
region. However, the ROIs of the young adults’ summary
HMM were more clearly located at different facial features,
including the left eye (blue), right eye (red), and nose/mouth
(green).
Next, we grouped all the young and older participants’
HMMs and applied VHEM to cluster the HMMs into two
subgroups (Figure 3). It can be observed that the ROIs of
the representative HMM on the bottom were more condensed at the vertical and central location of the face with
less engagement on individual features of the face. People
using this eye movement pattern are likely to process the
face as a whole without detailed encoding of individual features and therefore, here we term it the holistic strategy. In
contrast, the ROIs of the representative HMM on the top
were more separately located at different areas of the face,
indicating more engagement of facial features such as the
left eye (red), the right eye (blue) and nose/mouth (green),
as compared with the holistic strategy. People using this eye
movement pattern are likely to have detailed encoding of
individual facial features, and thus here we term it the analytic strategy. Both strategies had their prior fixation mostly
located around the face center, which was also regarded as
the most preferred viewing location (Hsiao & Cottrell,
2008). However, the subsequent scan paths of the two strategies were quite different. For examples, in the analytic
strategy, after viewing the face center (prior prob. = .44),
people tended to transit the eye movement to the right eye
(prob. = .44), then stayed at this ROI a while (prob. = .56) or
transited to the left eye (prob. = .26). In contrast, in the holistic strategy, after viewing the face center (prior prob. =
.56), the eye movements stayed around the same ROI (prob.
= .44) or moved upward a bit to the upper nose (prob. =
.55), or occasionally transited to forehead area (prob. = .11).
We also used VHEM to calculate the probabilities of each
participant’s HMM belonging to the two strategies, and
classify the participants into the analytic or holistic group
accordingly. As shown in Table 1, significantly more young
adults used the analytic strategy and more older adults used
the holistic strategy, X(2) = 4.77, p = .03 (Chi-square test).

Relationship between Strategy and Recognition
Performance/Cognitive Status
To examine the relationship between eye movement strategy
and recognition performance, we compared the performance
between the holistic and analytic groups with age group as a
covariate using ANCOVA. The analytic strategy yielded a
higher d’, F(65, 1) = 4.20, p < .05, and lower false alarm
rate, F(65, 1) = 6.21, p = .02, than the holistic strategy.
However, the hit rate was not affected by the use of the analytic or holistic strategies, F(65, 1) = .12, p = .73. The result
suggested that the analytic strategy was a more effective
strategy in face recognition. In addition, we observed a positive correlation between the log-likelihood of one’s eye
movement being classified as the holistic strategy and false
alarm rate in young adults, r(34) = .35, p = .05 (Figure 4,
top; this correlation was not significant in older adults, r(34)
= .23, p = .18, possibly because of a ceiling effect, i.e., they
generally all had a high false alarm rate). In other words, the
more holistic strategy a young adult used, the more likely
he/she encountered a false alarm situation. This suggested
an association between the holistic eye movement strategy
and false alarms in face recognition.

Holistic Log-Likelihood

-5

Analytic subgroup
Holistic subgroup

Holistic Log-Likelihood

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

-15
-20
-25
-30
-35

r(34) = .35, p = .05
False Alarm Rate (%) of Young Adults

-22
-24

21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30

-26
-28
-30
-32
-34

r(34) = -.40, p = .02
Cognitive (MoCA) Scores of Older Adults

Figure 4: Correlation of false alarm rate and loglikelihood of being classified as using the holistic strategy in
young adults (top) and correlation of cognitive status and
log-likelihood of being classified as using the holistic strategy in older adults (bottom).

Table 1: The number of young and older adults belonging
to the analytic and holistic subgroups.
No. of young
adults
22
12

-10

No. of older
adults
13
21

For older adults, we also examined the correlations among
their MoCA scores, log-likelihoods of their eye movements
being classified as the holistic/analytic strategy, and face
recognition performance. We found that the MoCA score

324

was correlated with the strategy used. More specifically the
lower the MoCA score was, the more likely the eye movement pattern was classified as holistic, r(34) = -.40, p = .02
(Figure 4, bottom). Concerning the face recognition performance, the MoCA score was positively correlated with hit
rate, r(34) = .34, p = .05, and marginally correlated with d’,
r(34) = .30, p = .08. However, it did not correlate with false
alarm rate, r(34) = .06, p = .75. Age of older adults showed
no significant correlation with any of the strategies used, d’,
hit rate, and false alarm rate. This suggested cognitive status
in older adults was associated with eye movement pattern
and face recognition performance.

as the eyes are not foveated, leading to insufficient encoding
of distinctive facial features for distinguishing studied faces
from new faces and thereby resulting in a higher false alarm
rate. As shown in Figure 3, the ROIs of the holistic HMM
were centrally located with less engagement in featural processing. Thus, featural information of the studied faces
might be more easily confused with new faces. In contrast,
the ROIs of the analytic HMM were located on distinctive
facial features and consequently promoted more featural
processing to support face recognition, resulting in a smaller
false alarm rate. Thus, eye movement strategies may affect
the effectiveness of the encoding process and consequently
affect recognition performance. Our results suggest that
analytic strategies are more effective in reducing the false
alarm rate as well as the recognition performance.
We also found that young adults were more likely to use
an analytic strategy while older adults were more likely to
use a holistic strategy. In addition, in the older group, people
with lower cognitive status had higher likelihood of being
classified as using holistic strategy. Thus, one’s cognitive
status may be a critical variable affecting the use of eye
movement strategies. It is possible that the decreased cognitive status lowered the cognitive resources such as processing speed (Kail & Salthouse, 1994) and impaired executive functions (Grady, 2002), which may influence abilities
to plan eye movements for face recognition. Grady (2002)
carried out a meta-analysis to examine age-related differences in face recognition via neuroimaging studies, and
concluded that the prefrontal cortex was involved in face
recognition and the activation of the prefrontal cortex was
higher in older adults than in young adults in performing
face recognition. In addition, the activation in the prefrontal
cortex of older adults was higher when the task required
more cognitive load, suggesting that the increased activation
in the prefrontal lobe was an indication of greater demands
on the executive functions. In other words, decreased cognitive status may be highly associated with decreased executive functions, and our data suggested it is reflected in participants’ (holistic) eye movement patterns.
Yarbus (1965) showed that people exhibited different eye
movements at the same target image depending on what
they expected to see. It suggests that our planning ability, as
part of our executive functions, is essential for effectively
encoding necessary information in cognitive tasks. By comparing the two strategies discovered in the current study, the
analytic strategy may require more cognitive resources and
involve more sophisticated eye movement planning – in
addition to potentially viewing the whole faces from a central fixation, participants formed ROIs on distinctive facial
features and had more diverse and effortful scan paths over
these ROIs when processing faces. In contrast, the holistic
strategy involved less planning by simply looking around
the center of faces (potentially getting a holistic view of the
face), with less switching among ROIs, suggesting less featural processing. In short, people with lower cognitive status, may have less effective executive functioning in planning eye movements for encoding faces, and consequently

Discussion
The current study aimed at investigating eye movement patterns of young and older adults in face recognition and their
association with cognitive performances. We first observed
that the face recognition performance of young adults was
higher than that of older adults. Although there was no difference found in the hit rate between the two age groups, the
false alarm rate was significantly higher in the older group
than in the younger group, suggesting that lower accuracy
observed in older adults could be attributed to the confusion
of the new faces from the old faces. Similar results were
also reported in previous research (e.g. Crook & Larrabee,
1992; Fulton & Bartlett, 1991). Our further analysis showed
that older adults’ d’ and hit rate significantly decreased with
their cognitive status as measured by the MoCA, but not
their age. This result is inline with what reported in previous
research showing that face recognition impairment was associated with cognitive status decline (Lott et. al., 2005).
To understand the association between eye movement and
cognitive performances, we used an HMM-based approach
(Chuk et al., 2014) to describe and compare individual eye
movement patterns. We discovered two distinct eye movement strategies that differed in both the spatial and temporal
perspectives by clustering all participants’ HMMs into two
subgroups according to their similarities – analytic and holistic strategies. Between the two strategies, we found that
face recognition performance was better in the analytic
group than in the holistic group. In addition, among young
adults, the higher the likelihood of their eye movement pattern being classified as a holistic pattern was, the higher
their false alarm rate was. This result suggests the association of holistic eye movement patterns and high false alarm
rates. Concerning the nature of false alarms, Davies, Shepherd, and Ellis (1979) revealed that increasing the degree of
similarity between the studied and new faces also increased
the false alarm rate. In other words, the false alarm rate
could be reduced by carefully encoding the studied faces
that were helpful in distinguishing the studied face from the
new faces that may possibly look similar to the studied faces. As proposed by Lamont et al. (2005), participants should
have sufficient distinctive facial features available in
memory to make a judgment. Accordingly, the association
between holistic patterns and high false alarm rates may be
because in holistic strategies, important facial features such

325

are more likely to adopt a simpler, holistic strategy in viewing faces.
Our results suggested associations among cognitive status, recognition performance, and eye movement pattern.
This result has very important implications on ways to improve the elderly’s quality of life. For example, this association suggests the potential use of eye movements to detect
early signs of cognitive decline and neurodegenerative
changes in the elderly. Possible training/intervention programs on eye movement planning may be used to enhance
their cognitive performance. Future work will examine these
possibilities with a larger older adult sample including those
with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s patients.

Daffner, K. R., Scinto, L. F. M., Weintraub, S., Guinessey,
J. E., & Mesulam, M. M. (1992). Diminished curiosity in
patients with probable Alzheimer's disease as measured
by exploratory eye movements. Neurology, 42, 320.
Davies, G. M., Shepherd, J. W., & Ellis, H. D. (1979). Similarity effects in facial recognition. Am. J. Psychol., 92,
507-523.
Fulton, A., & Bartlett, J. C. (1991). Young and old faces in
young and old heads: The factor of age in face recognition. Psychol. Aging, 6, 623-630.
Goldberg, J. H. & Helfman, J. I. (2010). Scanpath clustering
and aggregation. Proceedings of the 2010 Symposium on
Eye-Tracking Research & Applications, 227-234.
Grady, C. L. (2002). Age-related differences in face processing: a meta-analysis of three functional neuroimaging
experiments. Can. J. Exp. Psychol., 56, 208.
Grady, C. L., McIntosh, R. A., Horwitz, B., & Rapoport, S.
I. (2000). Age-related changes in the neural correlates of
degraded and nondegraded face processing. Cogn. Neuropsychol., 17, 165-186.
Henderson, J. M., Williams, C. C., & Falk, R. J. (2005). Eye
movements are functional during face learning. Mem.
Cognition, 33, 98-106.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cottrell, G. W. (2008). Two fixations suffice
in face recognition. Psychol. Sci., 9, 998-1006.
Hsiao, J. H., & Liu, T. T. (2012). The optimal viewing position in face recognition. J. Vision, 12:22, 1-9.
Kail, R., & Salthouse, T. A. (1994). Processing speed as a
mental capacity. Acta Psychol., 86, 199-225.
Lamont, A. C., Stewart-Williams, S., & Podd, J. (2005).
Face recognition and aging: Effects of target age and
memory load. Mem. Cognition, 33, 1017-1024.
Lott, L. A., Haegerstrom-Portnoy, G., Schneck, M. E., &
Brabyn, J. A. (2005). Face recognition in the elderly. Optometry Vision Sci., 82, 874-881.
Ogrocki, P. K., Hills, A. C., & Strauss, M. E. (2000). Visual
exploration of facial emotion by healthy older adults and
patients with Alzheimer disease. Cogn. Behav. Neurol.,
13, 271-278.
Rayner, K. (1978). Eye movements in reading and information processing. Psychol. Bull., 85, 618.
Wong, B., Cronin-Golomb, A., & Neargarder, S. (2005).
Patterns of visual scanning as predictors of emotion identification in normal aging. Neuropsychology, 19, 739–
749.
Wong, A, Xiong, Y. Y., Kwan, P. W., Chan, A. Y., Lam,
W. W., Wang, K., Chu, W. C., Nyenhuis, D. L., Nasreddine, Z., Wong, L. K., Mok, V. C. (2009). The validity,
reliability and clinical utility of the Hong Kong Montreal
Cognitive Assessment (HK-MoCA) in patients with cerebral small vessel disease. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn., 28, 8187.
Yarbus, A. L., (1965). Role of eye movements in the visual
process. Oxford, England: Nauka.

Conclusion
In summary, through analyzing eye movement data with
our HMM-based approach, we revealed several important
effects that are able to enhance our understanding of the
mechanism underlying behavioral differences in face recognition between young and older adults. We found that young
adults tend to use an analytic strategy whilst older adults
tend to use a holistic strategy. In addition, holistic strategies
in face recognition are associated with higher false alarm
rates and lower cognitive status, whereas analytic strategies
yielded a higher face recognition performance than holistic
strategies. These findings were not possible with traditional
eye movement analysis methods that do not take individual
differences in both temporal and spatial dimensions of eye
movements into account.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mr. Tim Chuk for his technical support in using
the HMM-based model, and Ms. Alison Hui in data collection. We are also grateful to the Research Grant Council of
Hong Kong (project code 17402814 to J.H. Hsiao and
CityU 110513 to A.B. Chan) and Health and Health Services Research Fund (#09100911 to Tatia M. C. Lee).

References
Barton, J. J. S., Radcliffe, N., Cherkasova, M. V., Edelman,
J., & Intriligator, J. M. (2006). Information processing
during face recognition: the effects of familiarity, inversion, and morphing on scanning fixations. Perception, 35,
1089-1105.
Caldara, R. & Miellet, S. (2011). iMap: a novel method for
statistical fixation mapping of eye movement data. Behav.
Res. Methods, 43, 864-878.
Chuk, T., Chan, A. B., & Hsiao, J. H. (2014). Understanding eye movements in face recognition using hidden Markov models. J. Vision, 14, 8.
Coviello, E., Chan, A. B., & Lanckriet, G. R. G. (2014).
Clustering hidden Markov models with variational HEM.
J. Mach. Learn. Res., 15, 697-747.
Crook, T. H., & Larrabee, G. J. (1992). Changes in face
recognition memory across the adult life span. J. Gerontol., 47, 138-141.

326

