Eye-tracking situated language comprehension: Immediate actor gaze versus
recent action events
Dato Abashidze (dabashidze@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Pia Knoeferle (knoeferl@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Maria Nella Carminati (mcarmina@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de)
Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Center, Department of Linguistics
Bielefeld University, Germany
Abstract

gaze to objects which typically precedes mention of the objects. Following a speaker’s gaze is beneficial for the listener
since it permits him to anticipate which object the speaker
will mention next (Hanna & Brennan, 2007; Knoeferle &
Kreysa, 2012; Staudte, Crocker, Heloir, & Kipp, 2014).
How precisely do listeners rely on the many available linguistic and extralinguistic cues? Existing account of situated language comprehension predict a rapid interplay of
language comprehension, (visual) attenion, and visual context effects (e.g., Altmann & Kamide, 2009; Knoeferle &
Crocker, 2007). In the absence of specific evidence to the
contrary, it would be tempting to predict that the various cues
are all on a par in contributing toward comprehension (all
else being equal). Alternatively, some cues and / or worldlanguage relations may be preferred over others. Determining
the relative contribution of different cues and world-language
relations is an important step in understanding situated language comprehension (Knoeferle, Urbach, & Kutas, 2014)

Previous visual world eye-tracking studies have shown that
when a sentential verb can refer (via tense information on the
verb and on a following time adverb) to either a recent and
a future action event performed by an actor, people inspected
the target of the recent event more often than the (different)
target of the future event. This ’recent event preference’ replicated even when the frequency of future events within the experiment greatly exceeded the frequency of recent events (e.g.,
75% vs 25%). The recent event preference may arise because
the past action is situation-immediate and thus more relevant at
the particular point in time when the sentence is processed (at
that point participants have seen the past action performed and
will not see the future action until after the sentence). If the
situation-immediate relevance of a cue is responsible for the
recent event preference, then we should be able to “overwrite”
the effect of the recent action with another situation-immediate
cue. Accordingly, two current eye-tracking experiments pitted
the recent event preference against a situation-immediate cue,
the shift in the actor’s gaze to the target object. Given that interlocutors’ gaze has been shown to be a powerful cue in guiding
listeners’ attention to objects in the visual context, we hypothesized that the actor’s gaze to the future target should rapidly
guide a listener’s attention to it. Analyses revealed indeed that
listeners’ visual attention was rapidly guided to the target by
the actor’s gaze; crucially the gaze cue was particularly helpful
in guiding looks to the future target. Importantly, however, we
still replicated the overall preference to look at the recent target
regardless of tense and gaze; and even for future gaze conditions, the preference was not immediately reversed, suggesting
it is surprisingly robust in competition with a situation-specific
future-biasing cue.
Keywords: Sentence comprehension, recent-event preference,
actor gaze, eye tracking, visual world

The recent-event preference vs. frequency biases
Consider, for instance, a series of visual-world studies which
recorded comprehenders eye gaze in a scene as they listened to spoken utterances (Abashidze, Knoeferle, Carminati, & Essig, 2011; Knoeferle, Carminati, Abashidze, & Essig, 2011). These studies all pitted two world-language relations agains one another, viz. relating a verb to recentlyinspected action and its target compared with using the verb
to anticipate the target of a plausible future action. In the visual world study of Knoeferle et al. (2011) participants saw
an actor sitting in front of a table with two objects. First
the actor performed an action on one object (e.g., sugaring
strawberries) and then participants heard either (Der Versuchsleiter zuckerte kürzlich die Erdbeeren, ’The experimenter recently sugared the strawberries’) or (Der Versuchsleiter zuckert demnächst die Pfannkuchen, ’The experimenter will soon
sugar the pancakes’). After the sentence had ended, participants saw the actor performing the same action on the other
object (i.e. sugaring pancakes). Analyses of participants’
gaze record during sentence comprehension showed a predominant preference of rapidly inspecting the target of the
recent event (i.e. strawberries) during and after the verb. This
preference emerged even when the verb was in the present
tense and the adverb in the future sentence (denoting a future event), and it lasted well into the object noun phrase.

Introduction
Our immediate environment contains many extralinguistic
cues that we exploit for understanding language. The information present in the visual context has been shown to provide powerful cues in guiding visual attention while we process language. This rapid and to some extent predictive interplay between language and visual context is reflected in the
fact that people tend to gaze at objects as they are mentioned
(Spivey, Tanenhaus, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 2002; Tanenhaus,
Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995) and often even
anticipate their mention (Altmann & Kamide, 1999). For
instance, case marking and verb meaning can rapidly guide
a listener’s visual attention, permitting her to predict what
will happen next (e.g. Kamide, Altmann, & Haywood, 2003;
Knoeferle & Crocker, 2007). In addition, listeners tend to
rapidly rely on extralinguistic cues such as a speaker’s eye

31

In further experiments Abashidze, Carminati, and Knoeferle
(2014) used the same critical stimuli and design but increased
the frequency with which during the experiment participants
saw future events (in association with a future sentence) relative to recent events (88% vs. 12% of trials). Even with this
strong frequency bias in favour of the future target, the overall
preference to inspect the recent event target replicated. However the frequency bias did modulate participants’ visual attention in that the preferential inspection of the future event
target started much earlier (by 1000 ms) than when recent and
future events were equally frequent in the experiment.

recent (vs. future) events are anchored more firmly first in
working and then in short-term memory, participants should
be better at recalling the target of the recent (vs. future)
events. In addition in the gated test in Experiment 2 we might
replicate the higher recall of past (vs. future) tense sentences.
Alternatively, the gaze cue has a strong influence on visual
attention and the anchoring of events in working and shortterm memory. If so, then we should see better recall for the
future than recent event target.

Experiments 1 and 2: Methods
Participants

Gaze as a situation-specific cue

Thirty-two native speakers of German (aged 19 to 32, all students of Bielefeld University) with normal or corrected-tonormal vision received 6 Euros each for their participation.
All gave informed consent.

Perhaps the short-term frequency bias, while modulating visual attention, did not override the recent-event preference
because the most recent cue in the context takes precedence.
Indeed, recency effects are well documented in research on
memory and cognition (Glanzer & Cunitz, 1966) and on visual attention (Zelinsky, Loschky, & Dickinson, 2011).
One situation-specific cue which has been shown to rapidly
guide a listener’s visual attention to upcoming, future objects is the gaze of an interactant. For example a study by
Hanna and Brennan (2007) showed that listeners followed
the speaker’s gaze shifts to the target before it had been mentioned (for the robustness of this finding across different settings see also Staudte et al., 2014; Macdonald & Tatler, 2013;
Knoeferle & Kreysa, 2012). If comprehenders incrementally update their visual anticipation based on recent and /
or situation-immediate cues, then showing the actor shift his
gaze to the future action target during the verb should replace
the recent action as the most recent, situation-immediate cue.

Materials and design
We used the experimental items (N=24) from Abashidze et
al. (2014, see Table 1). All critical sentences had the structure NP-V-ADV-NP and two male native German speakers
recorded them. The experimental sentences were always
about two objects and presented in two tense conditions. In
one condition, the verb was in the present tense with a time
adverb (demnächst, ’soon’) indicating the future (Table 1a).
In the other condition , the verb was in the simple past, and
the following time adverb (kürzlich, ’recently’) also indicated
the past (Table 1b). Only German regular verbs appeared in
the critical sentences to ensure the verb was tense-ambiguous
up to but excluding the word-final phoneme which disambiguated towards the simple past in the past tense condition.
As can be seen from Table 1, there were two sentences
for each tense condition; this counterbalancing ensured that
each object was once the target of a past and once of a future
event. In turn, this ensured that visual and other characteristics of any given post-verbal target object contributed equally
to each critical condition. The words in a sentence were
matched for spoken syllables and lemma frequency within an
item (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & Gulikers, 1995).
For every item we recorded two videos (Mduration =5015
ms) showing a person sitting at a table in front of two objects (e.g. cucumbers and tomatoes, one on the left and one
on the right). The first video showed the person performing
an action on one object (e.g., flavoring cucumbers, Fig. 1-1)
and the second showed the person performing the same action
on the other object (e.g., flavoring tomatoes, Fig. 1-3). The
position of the target objects (right vs. left) was counterbalanced across items. In addition, we created a short gaze video
for each experimental item (for about 3-4 seconds, depending
on sentence length). The video showed the actor shifting his
gaze to an appropriate object (e.g., in the future condition the
actor would shift gaze to the tomatoes, see Fig. 1, 2a).
The tense factor (see Table 1, 1a vs. 1b) was crossed with
actor gaze (target-directed vs. straight ahead, see Figure 1),
resulting in four experimental conditions. For the gaze condi-

The present experiments Given that an interactant’s gaze
has been shown to be a powerful situation-immediate cue in
guiding listener’s attention to soon-to-be-mentioned objects,
two eye-tracking studies pitted object-directed gaze against
the recent-event preference. These studies assessed to what
extent an actor’s gaze towards the (recent or future) action
target influences listeners’ visual attention. Can the gaze towards the future object overcome the preferred inspection of
the recent event target? Between the experiments, we varied when the actor shifted his gaze (either during the verb or
slightly earlier at verb onset) to also examine the effects of
cue onset. We used the design from Knoeferle et al. (2011,
Experiment 2), described above, with the factor tense (past
vs. future) and we added gaze (to the target object vs. straight
ahead) as a factor. The presence of gaze should trigger earlier and more frequent looks to the appropriate target objects
(recent and future). Crucially, if the gaze cue overrides the
recent-event preference, it should have a stronger influence in
sentences with future than past tense meaning (i.e. tense x
gaze interaction).
After the eye-tracking part participants completed a memory test (Expt 1) and a gated memory test (Expt 2). Abashidze
et al. (2014) reported better recall of recent target objects. If
in the memory test for Experiment 1 we replicate this, and

32

gazed at the target object and in the other half he did not. The
second factor was the tense: in 50% of trials the sentence was
in the past tense and in other 50% of trials in the future tense
see Table 1 for counterbalancing. The resulting 8 lists used
a Latin square design; each list contained every critical item
in only one condition and all fillers. Each participant saw an
individually pseudo-randomized version of one of the eight
experimental lists. A gaze detection pretest (N=20) confirmed
that participants were able to quickly detect the gaze shift.

Table 1: Example experimental sentences. The indices (’)
indicate counterbalancing versions.
Tense Condition &
counterbalancing
1a future tense

1a’ future tense

1b past tense

1b’ past tense

Sentences
Der Versuchsleiter würzt demnächst
die Tomaten
’The experimenter will soon flavor
the tomatoes’
Der Versuchsleiter würzt demnächst
die Gurken
’The experimenter will soon flavor
the cucumbers’
Der Versuchsleiter würzte kürzlich
die Gurken
’The experimenter recently flavored
the cucumbers’
Der Versuchsleiter würzte kürzlich
die Tomaten
’The experimenter recently flavored
the tomatoes’

Figure 2: An example of a display for the memory test, Expt
1 and Sequence of stages in the gated test, Expt 2
Expt 1

$%&'(#+#

Expt 2

$%&'(#)#

!"#

$%&'(#*#

!"#$%"#&'()&*"+,"#$-.#/$0$
1+,2$34)"$"56"#+7"8,"#$9:;<#$0=$

!"#$%"#&'()&*"+,"#$-.#/,"$>"#:?"$0$
34)"$"56"#+7"8,"#$9:;<#"?$#"("8,*@$0=$$

!"#$%"#&'()&*"+,"#$-.#/$0$
1+,2$34)"$"56"#+7"8,"#$9:;<#$0=$

!"#$%"#&'()&*"+,"#$-.#/,$?"78A()&,$0$
34)"$"56"#+7"8,"#$9:;<#&$&<<8$0=$$

Procedure
tion we used the videos showing the actor shifting gaze to the
target object (i.e., see Fig. 1, 2a). For the no-gaze condition
we created a snapshot from the last frame of the first video
showing the actor in a static position performing no action
and looking straight ahead (i.e., see Fig. 1, 2b). Examples of
the videos and the snapshot associated with the experimental
sentences in Table 1 are shown in Figure 1 (1-3).

For the eye-tracking experiment, participants were calibrated,
and after a successful 9-point calibration of the eye tracker,
the experiment started. Participants were told to inspect the
scenes and to listen carefully to the sentences. On a given
trial, a participant first saw a video of a person performing one
action (e.g., flavoring the cucumbers, see Fig. 1, 1) and then a
static picture (the last frame of the video) appeared. After 700
ms, the sentence started, and in the gaze condition the actor
started to shift his eye gaze to the target object 480 ms after
the verb onset in Experiment 1 and at verb onset in Experiment 2. In the no-gaze condition the static picture remained
on the screen until 700 ms after the end of the sentence (see
Fig. 1, 2b). 700 ms after the sentence had ended, participants
saw a video of the actor performing the second action (e.g.,
flavoring the tomatoes, see Fig. 1, 3). Post-experiment, participants took part in a simple memory test in Experiment 1
and a gated memory test in Experiment 2. Finally, they were
debriefed. Each experiment lasted approximately 50-55 minutes with a break after 25-30 minutes.

Figure 1: Sequence of events of a typical experimental trial

Memory tests
For the memory test in Experiment 1, we created two snapshots of the first and second video of each experimental item,
i.e., showing the experimenter performing one of the two actions (see Fig. 2, Expt 1). The two snapshots associated with
each item were combined into one display and shown to participants. Two versions were created in which the respective
location of the two pictures was counterbalanced. Above the
picture, one of two questions appeared:
(a) Welche Aktion wurde VOR dem Satz durchgeführt?
”Which action was performed before the sentence?”
(b) Welche Aktion wurde NACH dem Satz durchgeführt?

While we used the same 24 experimental sentences/videos
in Experiments 1 and 2, the onset of the actor’s gaze shift
differed: In Experiment 1 this shift occurred on average 480
ms after the onset of the verb and in Experiment 2 it occurred
at verb onset. Once he had shifted attention to the target,
the actor continued to fixate it until the end of the sentence.
In addition to the 24 experimental items we created 36 filler
sentences. These ensured that participants were exposed to a
range of other sentence structures and actions.
Actor gaze was one factor: in half of the trials the actor

33

”Which action was performed after the sentence?”
Participants responded with a button press (e.g., if they
thought that flavoring tomatoes was correct they would press
the right side button for the image in Fig. 2, Expt 1).
In Experiment 2 participants took a gated memory test
which provided more detailed insights into recall of sentence
content on a per-constituent basis. Figure 2 (Expt 2) shows
an example sentence as presented in the memory test in a 3stage procedure. At the first stage, participants saw only the
first noun phrase and the verb stem and had to verbally complete the verb tense. The second stage added the temporal
adverb, and they had to recall the second noun phrase. If they
were unable to do so, they received a further prompt at the
third stage and had to select the correct referent out of three
objects. Two of these were from that sentence trial and the
third was a distractor from another filler item.

tense (past vs. future). We assessed the recent-event preference in two ways (see Knoeferle et al., 2011). First, we
tested the significance of the intercept overall (a positive intercept indicates a preference to inspect the recent action target). Second, we assessed significance of the intercept by
condition (assessing effects of gaze and tense on the inspection preference).
Figure 3: Mean log gaze probability ratios (ln (P(recent target/P(future target))) by condition from verb onset for Expts
1 and 2
ln(P(recent	  target)/P(future	  target))	  

3.5	  

Experiment 1 and 2: Analyses and results
Eye tracking We defined a period of interest from the onset of the verb until the offset of the post-verbal object noun
phrase. The measure of interest was fixations to the recent
and future target objects (the cucumbers and the tomatoes)
in the gaze and no-gaze conditions. We first computed gaze
probabilities to the two target objects in each successive 20
ms time slots. Because looks to these two entities are not
linearly independent (more looks to one object imply fewer
looks to the other, and vice-versa), we computed mean log
gaze probability ratios for the recent relative to the future target (ln (P (recent target)/P (future target))). A score of zero
indicates that both targets are fixated equally frequently; a
positive score reflects a preference for looking at the recent
target over the future target, and a negative ratio indicates the
opposite (see Abashidze et al., 2014; Knoeferle et al., 2011).
We used the log-gaze probability ratio to plot the time
course from verb onset (Figure 3). In Figure 3 the blue lines
indicate the recent condition (sentence in the past tense) and
the green lines indicate the future condition (sentence in the
future tense). The dotted lines indicate the gaze condition
and the solid lines indicate the no-gaze condition. As can
been seen in these graphs the gaze cue had an early influence
on target inspection (dotted lines), but only in the future condition. In Experiment 1 participants started to preferentially
inspect the future target (negative ratio) in the future condition approximately 400 ms after the gaze shift. However in
Experiment 2 where the gaze shift occurred at the verb onset,
ratios hover around 0 from a very early stage, suggesting the
recent-event preference was eliminated. By contrast, in the
past-tense condition, the gaze manipulation did not affect the
distribution of attention until the end of the verb region (Expt
1) and until towards the end of the adverb region (Expt 2, see
blue lines. Fig 3a-b).
For the inferential analyses, the dependent variable was the
mean log gaze probability ratio averaged over the word regions (Verb, Adverb, NP2) by participants and by items, and
the independent variables were gaze (gaze vs. no gaze) and

a	  

Preference	  for	  recent	  event	  target	  

2.5	  

Average	  gaze	  shiC	  

1.5	  

recent	  -­‐	  Gaze	  

0.5	  

recent	  -­‐	  No	  Gaze	  
0	  

-­‐0.5	  

200	  

400	  

600	  

800	  

1000	   1200	   1400	   1600	   1800	   2000	   2200	   2400	   2600	   2800	   3000	   3200	  

future	  -­‐	  Gaze	  
future	  -­‐	  No	  Gaze	  

-­‐1.5	  

-­‐2.5	  

-­‐3.5	  

ln(P(recent	  target)/P(future	  target))	  	  

3.5	  

2.5	  

1.5	  

b	  
Gaze	  shiC	  at	  verb	  
onset	  
recent	  -­‐	  Gaze	  

0.5	  

recent	  -­‐	  No	  Gaze	  
-­‐0.5	  

0	  

200	  

400	  

600	  

800	  

1000	   1200	   1400	   1600	   1800	   2000	   2200	   2400	   2600	   2800	   3000	   3200	  

future	  -­‐	  Gaze	  
future	  -­‐	  No	  Gaze	  

-­‐1.5	  

-­‐2.5	  

Preference	  for	  future	  event	  target	  

Verb	  onset	  0	  ms	  
-­‐3.5	  

Adv	  onset	  1148	  ms	  

NP2	  onset	  2480	  ms	  

NP2	  oﬀset	  3190	  ms	  

Time	  in	  ms	  

Mixed effects ANOVAs (by participants and items) showed
the grand mean (i.e., the mean of all conditions) was positive in all regions in both experiments, showing an overall
preference for the recent target (significant intercept in all the
ANOVAs by region in both experiments). Thus, the current
experiments replicated the overall preference to look at the
recent object independent of gaze cue and tense up to the
very last sentential region. By contrast, pairwise comparisons
revealed that gaze (vs. no gaze) enhanced looks to the future target (p < .05) in the future conditions in Expt 1 and
2 in the Verb and Adverb regions, suggesting a mitigation
of the recent-event preference in the future tense gaze condition. With regard to the manipulated factors, a significant
effect of tense (all ps < .05) emerged in both experiments,
suggesting a reduction of the recent-event preference in the
future compared with the past tense condition. In addition,
the gaze effect was fully significant in the Verb region in both
experiments (in the adverb region by participants in Expt 1).
There was a Gaze x Tense interaction in all three regions in
Experiment 1, whereas in Experiment 2 the interaction was
significant by items at the verb and NP2 and marginal at the
adverb (p < .07) regions.
Experiment 1: Memory test We calculated the percentage of correct answers by condition for participants and items
separately. Figure 4a shows the average percentages (by participant) with 76% of correctly answered questions. The

34

Percentage	  of	  correct	  answers	  

100	  

Percentage	  of	  correct	  answers	  	  

graph shows that participants were more accurate in recognizing the future (78%) than the recent (74%) target objects.
In logistic linear mixed effect (LME) analyses the effect of
target object was significant, the effect of gaze was marginal
with worse accuracy for gaze than no gaze conditions. There
was a marginal interaction between object and gaze such that
gaze had a stronger effect for future than past tense sentences.
Figure 4: Percentage of correct answers by object and tense
(Expt 1); by tense and gaze (Expt 2)

100	  

While participants overall preferred to inspect the recent
event target (as indexed by reliable positive intercepts), replicating the recent event preference (Abashidze et al., 2014;
Knoeferle et al., 2011), the immediate gaze cue clearly affected participants’ visual inspection in the future tense condition. The eye-tracking results in Experiment 1 did show a
rapid gaze cue effect especially in the future tense conditions
during which participants started to inspect the future target
already at the end of the verb, 450 ms after the gaze cue onset (see green dotted line, Fig. 3a). This effect continued
until the end of the sentence. By contrast, in the no-gaze future condition participants preferentially inspected the recent
event target until the middle of the adverb region. The timing
of the gaze shift in relation to verb onset also affected mainly
the future tense condition: in Expt 2 where the shift coincided
with verb onset, the future target was looked at more and earlier than when it occurred 450 ms after verb onset (Exp 1). In
fact, looks to the past and future target were balanced within
100 ms from the gaze shift in Expt 2 (see also for relevant
related results, Friesen & Kingstone, 1998).
In the past tense conditions, the gaze effect was less pronounced and less immediate than in the future tense sentences. However, a better way to characterize this is that the
inspection of the recent target during the verb was already so
robust that the additional gaze cue did not lead to a further enhancement of looks to the recent target. Unlike in the future
conditions, it was only towards the end of the verb region (in
Expt 1) and in the middle of the adverb (in Expt 2) that gaze
triggered more looks to the recent target in the gaze condition
than in the no-gaze condition (see blue lines Fig 3a, b), this
difference lasting until the end of the sentence.
Since gaze strongly cues the mention of upcoming objects,
we might have expected a more immediate and full reversal
of the recent-event preference at least in the future sentences.
However, even the very early effect of gaze in the future condition in Expt 2 (Fig. 3b, green dotted line) did not lead to
a sudden reversal of fixation preferences towards the future
target; in fact for the first 1400 ms the log ratio hovers around
zero, suggesting strong competition from the recent target.
The post-experiment memory test in Experiment 1 did not
completely agree with the eye-gaze data (recall was better for
future than past targets, against the recent event preference).
While gaze (vs no-gaze) was beneficial in enhancing attention to future targets, it did not enhance target recall (Fig. 4
a) but was, in fact, detrimental. Perhaps gaze is only used ’on
the fly’ with short-lived effects on cognitive processes (see
Knoeferle & Kreysa, 2012). In the gated memory-test (Experiment 2), past sentences were recalled better than future
ones (in agreement with the recent event preference, Fig. 4
b). This provides some evidence for the view that past sentences anchor an event better in memory than future ones.
We can compare our findings with the results of experiments for which the design and frequency distribution was the
same as for the no-gaze condition of the current experiments:
In Experiment 2 by Knoeferle et al. (2011), the preference to

a	  

90	  
80	  
70	  
60	  
50	  
40	  

Past	  

30	  

Future	  

20	  
10	  
0	  

Gaze	  

No	  Gaze	  

Gaze	  

Future	  object	  

No	  Gaze	  

Recent	  object	  

b	  

90	  
80	  
70	  
60	  
50	  
40	  

Past	  

30	  

Future	  

20	  
10	  
0	  

gaze	  

no	  gaze	  
1	  

gaze	  

no	  gaze	  
2	  

gaze	  

no	  gaze	  
3	  

Experiment 2: Gated memory test We calculated the percentage of correct answers by conditions for participants and
items separately. The average percentages (by participant)
are displayed in Figure 4b. Participants overall correctly answered 64% of the questions from all three stages. They were
more accurate at stage one (59%) than two (43%), and accuracy was highest at stage three (with 90%) (see Fig. 4b, stages
1, 2 and 3). The LME analyses for stage 3 showed an effect
of tense (p < .003, higher accuracy for past than future tense
conditions) and of gaze (p < .01, higher accuracy without
than with gaze), in the absence of an interaction.

Discussion
The current studies tested the recent-event preference
(Abashidze et al., 2011; Knoeferle & Crocker, 2007; Knoeferle et al., 2011; Abashidze et al., 2014) by pitting it against
another situation-immediate cue (the actor’s gaze). We assessed whether the recent-event preference replicates overall
and whether participants would follow the actor’s gaze to the
future action target, thus effectively eliminating their preference to inspect the recent action target when the verb was
ambiguous between referring to a recent action (and its target
object) and a future action (and its different target object)

35

look at the recent object persisted until approximately 3000
ms after verb onset (when the ratio became negative). In the
current experiments we instead see a considerably earlier reversal of the preference with the log ratio becoming negative
at 1800 ms (Expt 1) and 2000 ms (Expt 2). Thus the fact that
the actor gazed at the targets in some trials, seems to have led
to an earlier shift of attention to the future target even in the
no-gaze future condition of the current experiments.
Compared with a strong short-term frequency bias towards future events (Abashidze et al., 2014), the situationimmediate gaze cue had an earlier effect on the recent-event
preference. When the actor shifted gaze towards the future
target object, participants followed his gaze from 450 ms (in
Exp 1) and from 100 ms (in Expt 2) after its onset (see Fig 3,
no clear recent-event preference and log-gaze probability ratios hover around zero). By contrast, in the absence of a gaze
cue when future events were more frequent than past ones (75
to 88%), participants’ log-gaze probability ratio approached
zero only approximately 1900ms after verb onset.
The present findings clearly shows that a situationimmediate cue modulated the recent-event preference earlier
in the sentence than a short-term frequency bias towards future events. However, even gaze did not immediately reverse
the preference, speaking to its robustness. The conflicting
memory-test results suggest we need further experiments to
assess the functional contribution of this attention preference.
It could reflect an epistemic bias whereby a recent event dominates attention more than assertions about a future event.
While a past event can generally be verified, a future one cannot until it has actually occurred, and until then it is uncertain if it will happen (e.g. Staub & Clifton, 2011; MacFarlane, 2003). Another possibility is that it reflects attention
to whichever object representation is most highly activated in
working memory.

Baayen, R., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
celex lexical database philadelphia: University of pennsylvania. Linguistic Data Consortium.
Friesen, C. K., & Kingstone, A. (1998). The eyes have it!
reflexive orienting is triggered by nonpredictive gaze. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5(3), 490–495.
Glanzer, M., & Cunitz, A. R. (1966). Two storage mechanisms in free recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 5(4), 351–360.
Hanna, J. E., & Brennan, S. E. (2007). Speakers eye gaze
disambiguates referring expressions early during face-toface conversation. JML, 57(4), 596–615.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G. T. M., & Haywood, S. (2003). The
time course of prediction in incremental sentence processing. JML, 49, 133–156.
Knoeferle, P., Carminati, M. N., Abashidze, D., & Essig, K.
(2011). Preferential inspection of recent real-world events
over future events: evidence from eye tracking during spoken sentence comprehension. Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
Knoeferle, P., & Crocker, M. W. (2007). The influence of
recent scene events on spoken comprehension: evidence
from eye-movements. JML, 75, 519–543.
Knoeferle, P., & Kreysa, H. (2012). Can speaker gaze modulate syntactic structuring and thematic role assignment during spoken sentence comprehension? Frontiers in Psy, 3.
Knoeferle, P., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2014). Different mechanisms for role relations versus verb–action congruence effects: Evidence from ERPs in picture–sentence
verification. Acta Psychologica, 152, 133–148.
Macdonald, R. G., & Tatler, B. W. (2013). Do as eye say:
Gaze cueing and language in a real-world social interaction. Journal of Vision, 13(4), 6.
MacFarlane, J. (2003). Future contingents and relative truth.
The Philosophical Quarterly, 53(212), 321–336.
Spivey, M. J., Tanenhaus, M. K., Eberhard, K. M., & Sedivy,
J. C. (2002). Eye movements and spoken language comprehension: Effects of visual context on syntactic ambiguity
resolution. Cognitive Psychology, 45(4), 447–481.
Staub, A., & Clifton, C., Jr. (2011). Processing effects of
an indeterminate future: Evidence from self-paced reading.
University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers in Linguistics, 38, 131–140.
Staudte, M., Crocker, M. W., Heloir, A., & Kipp, M. (2014).
The influence of speaker gaze on listener comprehension:
Contrasting visual versus intentional accounts. Cognition,
133(1), 317–328.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 632–634.
Zelinsky, G. J., Loschky, L. C., & Dickinson, C. A. (2011).
Do object refixations during scene viewing indicate rehearsal in visual working memory? Memory & Cognition,
39(4), 600–613.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Center 277 and the SFB 673 “Alignment
in Communication” (German Research Foundation, DFG).

References
Abashidze, D., Carminati, M. N., & Knoeferle, P. (2014).
How robust is the recent event preference? In Proceedings of the 36th Aannual Meating of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Abashidze, D., Knoeferle, P., Carminati, M. N., & Essig, K.
(2011). The role of recent real-world versus future events
in the comprehension of referentially ambiguous sentences:
Evidence from eye tracking. In European Perspectives on
Cognitive Science: Proceedings of the EuroCogSci.
Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of subsequent reference. Cognition, 73(3), 247–264.
Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (2009). Discourse-mediation of
the mapping between language and the visual world: Eye
movements and mental representation. Cogn, 111, 55-71.

36

