Frequency Effects in Morpheme Segmentation
Sara Finley (finleysr@plu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Pacific Lutheran University
Tacoma WA, 98447, USA
Abstract

phonological form of the input to find morpheme
boundaries in complex words (Goldsmith, 2006).
In their experiments, Finley and Newport (2010, 2011)
showed that learners were able to extract morphological
regularities from trisyllabic words where the first two
syllables were a stem and the final syllable was a suffix.
Results demonstrated that learners segment complex words
into their component parts through mere exposure, and
minimal training. However, the highly controlled statistics
of the words in these experiments (e.g., all suffixes were
equally frequent across stems) do not reflect the variable
frequencies of morphological information found in natural
language. The present study addresses how learners may use
variable frequencies of affixes to parse the morphological
information of the language.
Previous research has suggested that type frequency (the
number of words containing a morpheme) is more important
in determining productivity of an affix than token frequency
(the frequency of the word containing the type) (Albright,
2002; Bybee, 1995). For example, Ernestus and Baayen
(2003) showed that Dutch speakers chose past tense variants
based on similarity to existing words in the lexicon
proportionally to the number of similar items, rather than
frequency. While there is some work on how type and token
frequency may affect morphological learning (Albright,
2002; Ellis & Schmidt, 1998), this research has focused on
the learnability of irregular morphological patterns, rather
than segmentation of the morphemes themselves.
There are several reasons why it is important to study
human morphological learning at the stage of morpheme
segmentation. First, there are many reasons to believe that
learning about the morphological patterns of one’s language
occurs relatively early, even before the child has acquired
the meaning of the semantic classes that the morphemes
may represent (Jusczyk, 2000). Second, because
phonological factors play an important role in morphology
(Albright, 2002), it is important to understand how learners
acquire both form independently of meaning.

The present study explores the effects of frequency in
learning to parse novel morphological patterns. In two
experiments, suffixes were divided into three classes: high,
medium and low frequency, based on the proportion of stems
in the input that each suffix attached to (high frequency =
12/12, medium frequency = 6/12, and low frequency = 2/12).
In Experiment 1, learners were better at segmenting words
containing high frequency suffixes compared to low
frequency suffixes, even when the stems were novel. In
Experiment 2, token frequency was controlled for across all
three suffix frequency classes, but learners were still better at
segmenting high frequency suffixes, even when words
containing high frequency suffixes were less frequent. These
results suggest that learners are sensitive to the frequency
distributions of the morphemes in their language, supporting
work suggesting that a Zipfian distribution may be ideal for
language learning.
Keywords: statistical learning; type frequency; morpheme
segmentation.

Introduction
Morphology is the study of how form and meaning are
combined to form complex words. A word like running is
composed of two morphemes: run and –ing. In order to
understand the meaning of a complex morphological word
like running, the language user must be able to break the
word apart into its constituent morphemes, a process
referred to as morpheme segmentation. The problem of
morpheme segmentation, while seemingly simple, could
easily pose problems for the learner. First, many words
partially overlap in phonological form without being
morphologically related (e.g., canned and bend both end in
the sounds /nd/ but only canned is morphologically
complex). The present study extends previous research on
how learners make use of distributional information to
segment complex words (Finley & Newport, 2010, 2011).
Specifically, this study manipulates the type and token
frequency of affixes to better understand how lexical
statistics can affect morpheme segmentation.

Zipfian Distributions
As noted above, one reason that type frequency may play a
larger role in morphological productivity than token
frequency may be due to the overall distribution of different
types of morphological patterns. Zipf’s Law (Zipf, 1935)
states that the number of tokens increases as a function of
type frequency: there are a few high frequency
words/morphemes, and a very large number of low
frequency words/morphemes. The high frequency
morphemes may be easier to learn than lower frequency
morphemes because the combination of a small number of

Background
Previous research has shown that even though spurious
phonological regularities could easily lead the learner astray
when segmenting complex words, both adult and child
learners are nonetheless sensitive to these distributional
regularities (Finley & Newport, 2010, 2011). This research
is in line with computational models of morpheme
segmentation that make use of statistical regularities of the

704

morphemes appearing in many words may help these high
frequency morphemes ‘stand out’ from the many lower
frequency morphemes. A Zipfian distribution may therefore
be optimal for creating a learning environment in which a
few morphemes are learned very fast, and this early learning
serves to bootstrap the learning of lower frequency
morphemes (Bortfeld, Morganm, Golinkoff, & Rathbun,
2005).
Previous research has shown that learners make use of
Zipfian distributions in word segmentation (Kurumada,
Meylan, & Frank, 2013), and verb constructions (Ellis &
Donnell, 2012). While Zipfian distributions have been
assumed to play an important role in language acquisition, it
is important to understand that the assumption of Zipfian
distributions may be a simplification of more complex
statistical patterns in the language (Piantadosi, 2014).
However, recent computational models of morphology
learning have shown a benefit for Zipfian distributions
(Chan & Lignos, 2010), suggesting that the optimal lexicon
for language learning may follow a Zipfian distribution,
potentially explaining why such distributions tend to be
stable and common across languages.

half of the stems), and an even larger number of suffixes
were highly infrequent (appearing with only two stems).

Method
Participants All participants were adult monolingual native
English speakers. Forty-eight participants were recruited
from the Elmhurst College community. Participants were
given course credit for participation. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of two languages (A and B,
differing only in vocabulary) and one of two test conditions
(Stem Parsing and Suffix Parsing), for a total of four distinct
training and test conditions, with 12 participants in each
condition.
Design The experiment was designed to test the ability of
adult learners to parse morphologically complex words with
a varying distribution of the frequency of suffixes. The
language contained all properties of a suffixing language
with a suffix concatenated to a stem. Stems were all of the
shape CVCV and suffixes were all of the shape CV, creating
tri-syllabic words of the form CVCVCV (where C is a
consonant and V is a vowel). Consonants were drawn from
the set [p, t, k, b, d, g, m, n, s, v, z, f], and vowels were
drawn from the set [a, e, i, o, u]. Care was taken so that all
the words satisfied English phonotactics, but did not overlap
with real English words. To ensure that the results were not
due to any unforeseen peculiarity of the stimuli, we created
two languages (Language A and Language B) with the same
properties, but different sets of stems and suffixes. Each
language had 12 stems and 20 suffixes.

The Present Study
In order to better understand how learners make use of affix
frequency in morpheme segmentation, the present study
builds on work by Finley and Newport (2010, 2011), who
found that learners easily segment stems and affixes from an
evenly distributed lexicon. The present study makes use of a
frequency distribution for suffixes in which there are a few
suffixes that appear with many stems (high frequency),
more suffixes that appear with several stems (medium
frequency), and many suffixes that appear with only a few
stems (low frequency). Participants were tested on their
ability to segment complex lexical items for both familiar
and novel words. If learners are sensitive to the type
frequency of the suffixes, learners will be better able to
segment complex words for high frequency suffixes, even
when the learner has never encountered that word before. In
Experiment 1, only type frequency was manipulated, and in
Experiment 2, token frequency was controlled for so that
words containing morphemes with a high type frequency
had a low token frequency, and words containing
morphemes with a low type frequency had a high token
frequency. Previewing results, participants showed greater
accuracy for segmentation of words containing the high
(type) frequency suffixes compared to the low frequency
suffixes, and this effect remained when token frequency was
controlled for (Experiment 2).

Table 1: Exposure Phase Statistics.
Experiment

Suffix
Type

Number
Stems

Number
Suffixes

Times
Repeated

High
Med
Low

12
6
2

2
6
12

5
5
5

High
Med
Low

12
6
2

2
4
12

2
4
12

Exp 1

Exp 2

Stems were paired with a varying number of suffixes for
the training phase based on the assigned frequency of the
suffix. There were two high frequency suffixes, each paired
with all 12 stems (e.g., /basomi/, /basobu/, /vegubu/, etc.).
There were six medium frequency suffixes, each paired with
six of the 12 stems (e.g., /basodo/, /basoke/, /vegupe/, etc.).
There were 12 low frequency suffixes, each paired with two
stems (e.g., /basoze/, /veguki/, /veguma/, etc.). Each of the
12 stems was paired with seven suffixes, creating a total of
84 affixed forms for presentation during training phase. The
Stem+suffix concatenations were counterbalanced so that to
avoid patterned restrictions, which set of stems went with
which affixes (in other words, we did not create categories

Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment 1 was to explore the ability of adult
learners to parse stems and suffixes into constituent parts
using only distributional information. The distribution of
affixes varied such that a small selection suffixes were
highly frequent (appearing with all possible stems), a larger
selection of affixes were relatively frequent (appearing with

705

or sub-categories with the affixed forms). The general
statistics of training items can be found in Table 1.
Participants heard each item in the training set five times
during exposure in randomized blocks (participants heard all
84 items before hearing the same set again in a different
random order). The words were presented as isolated
utterances (i.e., not as part of a larger speech stream). All
phases of the experiment were run in Psyscope X (Cohen,
MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993).
Following exposure, participants were given a twoalternative forced-choice test for their ability to parse
morphemes. There were two different between-subjects test
conditions: Novel Stem/Suffix (Table 2) and Suffix Parsing
(Table 3), each representing different groups of participants.
The items in the Novel Stem/Suffix condition were designed
to test whether participants could parse novel words
containing a novel suffix or a novel stem. The Novel Suffix
(ABQ) test items probed whether learners would accept a
novel suffix as a part of the language, requiring learners to
have familiarity with the stems; it is expected that if
participants have learned the general Stem+Suffix affixation
pattern, that learners will accept a stem with a novel affix
(AB-Q, where Q represents a syllable not heard in training,
and AB refers to a familiar stem) more often than the
ungrammatical scrambled counterpart (AQB).

item (AXB). There were two types of these items, based on
the frequency of the suffix: Medium and Low. Because all
stems appeared with each of the High Frequency suffixes, it
was impossible to have Novel items for High Frequency
suffixes. If participants learned the Stem+Suffix structure of
the language, they should choose both the ABX and ABY
items significantly above chance, compared to items that
contain familiar syllables, but do not conform to the
Stem+Affix pattern. In addition, it was expected that
learners will show more accurate responses to items
containing high frequency suffixes compared to low
frequency suffixes.
Table 3: Examples of Suffix Parsing Exposure Stimuli,
Language A.

Table 2: Examples of Novel Stem/Novel Suffix Test
Stimuli, Language A.
Grammatical
(ABQ/CDX)
befada
ditipa

Ungrammatical
(AQB/CXD)
bedafa
dipati

CDXHigh

basomi
mekimi

bamiso
memike

CDXMed

vopina
zikuna

vonapi
zinaku

CDXLow

tenoki
basovu

tekino
bavuso

ABQ

ABXHigh

Grammatical
(ABX/ABY)
befabu
guvami

Ungrammatical
(AXB)
bebufa
gumiva

ABXMed-

veguna
kovefu

venagu
kofuve

ABXLow

fibago
koveki

figoba
kokive

ABYMed

nidefu
mubefu

difupi
befufa

ABYLow

mubego
befape

nigode
vepegu

Stimuli All stimuli were recorded in a sound-attenuated
booth by an adult female native English speaker. While the
speaker was aware that the stimuli were to be used for an
artificial grammar learning study, the speaker was unaware
of the hypothesis of the study. Tokens were individually
recorded. Each token was spoken four times in list format.
A single token was chosen from the second or third element
of the set in order to keep the prosody as uniform as
possible. The first and last elements were avoided to avoid
the intonation of first and last elements in a list. The speaker
was told to speak each word as clearly and accurately as
possible (without reducing vowels). Stress was placed on
the final syllable. All stimuli were normalized to 70dB in
Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2015).

The Novel Stem (CDX) test items probed whether learners
could recognize a novel stem containing a familiar suffix
(CDX) compared to its scrambled counterpart (CXD). Items
were separated for High, Medium and Low frequency
suffixes. It is expected that learners will be more likely to
select a novel stem when it contains a high frequency suffix
compared to a low frequency suffix.
The Suffix Parsing Items tested whether learners had
parsed the affixes into separate units from the stems.
Familiar (ABX) items compared a word heard in training to
its scrambled counterpart (ABX vs. AXB). There were three
types of these items based on the frequency of the suffix:
High, Medium and Low. Novel (ABY) items compared new
stem-affix combination (ABY) with a scrambled familiar

Procedure Participants were told that they would be
listening to words from a language they had never heard
before and that their task was to listen to the way the novel
language sounded, but that they need not try and memorize
the forms. Following the exposure phase, participants were
told that they would hear two words, one belonging to the
language they heard, and the other not belonging to the
language. If they believed the first word belonged to the
language, they were to press the ‘a’ key; if they believed the

706

Proportion Grammatical Responses

second word belonged to the language, they were to press
the ‘l’ key. Participants were told to respond as quickly and
accurately as possible, but no time limit was given for
responses. The experiment took approximately 20 minutes
to complete.

Results

Proportion Grammatical Responses

All analyses were performed separately for the Novel
Stems/Suffix tests and the Suffix Parsing tests, and
combined the data from Languages A and B.

1

Exp2

0.5

0

1

Novel Items

Figure 2: Suffix Parsing (Means and Standard Errors).

Exp2

Participants scored above chance on the Familiar (ABX)
Items, for High (mean = 0.75, t(23) = 7.55, p < 0.001),
Medium (mean = 0.68, t(23) = 4.95, p < 0.001), but only
marginally for Low (mean = 0.50, t(23) = 2.49, p = 0.063)
frequency suffixes. To test the hypothesis that learners were
more accurate on items containing high-frequency suffixes,
a within-subjects ANOVA was performed comparing high
frequency suffixes to low and medium frequency suffixes.
The comparison between high and low suffixes was
significant, F(1, 23) = 9.62, p = 0.005, while the comparison
between the high and medium frequency suffixes was not
significant F(1, 23) = 2.24, p = 0.15. These results support
the hypothesis that high frequency suffixes are more easily
recognized in familiar items even when the familiar items
were heard the same number of times.
The Novel (ABY) items were significantly different from
chance for medium frequency suffixes (mean = 0.61, t(23) =
2.95, p = 0.021), but not for low frequency suffixes (mean =
0.56, t(23) = 1.47, p = 0.48), but there was no significant
difference between medium and low frequency suffixes for
these items (t(23) = 0.94, p = 0.36). The results partially
support the hypothesis that frequency affects parsing of
novel items, as only medium frequency items were
significant from chance, but there was no significant
difference between medium and low frequency items.

0.5

0
Med Freq

High Freq Med Freq Low Freq Med Freq Low Freq
Familiar Items

Exp1

High Freq

Exp1

Low Freq

Novel Stem (CDX) Items
Test Item

Figure 1: Novel Stem (Means and Standard Errors).
Novel Stems and Suffixes Each of the means for the StemParsing Items were compared to chance (50%) via
Bonferroni corrected one-sample t-tests. The Novel Suffix
Items (ABQ vs. AQB), with a mean of 0.54, t(23 )= 0.96, p
= 0.35, were not significantly greater than chance. However,
as expected, the Novel Stem Items (CDX vs. CXD) were
only significantly different from chance for the high
frequency suffixes, with a mean of 0.65, t(23) = 4.95, p <
0.001. The medium (mean = 0.55, t(23) = 1.14, p = 0.26)
and the low (mean = 0.52, t(23) = 0.44, p = 0.66) frequency
suffixes were not significantly different from chance,
supporting the hypothesis that learners parse suffixes
containing high frequency items more easily than low
frequency items. To verify this hypothesis, a within-subjects
ANOVA compared high frequency suffixes to low
frequency suffixes, and high frequency suffixes to medium
frequency suffixes. The comparison between high and low
suffixes was significant, F(1, 23) = 8.44, p = 0.008, while
the comparison between the high and medium frequency
suffixes was only marginally significant F(1, 23) = 3.50, p =
0.074, generally supporting the hypothesis that learners are
more likely to parse a novel suffix if it contains a high
frequency suffix.

Discussion
Experiment 1 demonstrated that frequency distribution plays
an important role in morpheme segmentation, particularly
for novel items. While learners failed to show evidence of
learning the twelve stem items, learners did show evidence
of more accurate responses for items containing novel stems
when the frequency of the novel suffix was higher. This
suggests that learners are sensitive to the frequency of the
suffix. Participants in Experiment 1 heard each suffix the
same number of times, but because the type frequency of
high frequency suffixes was higher, learners heard more
high frequency suffixes. Because it is unclear whether the
type frequency or the token frequency produced the results
in Experiment 1, Experiment 2 controlled for token
frequency. If learners are responding to type frequency,

Suffix Parsing Results for Suffix Parsing Test Items appear
in Figure 2. Each of the means for the Suffix Parsing Items
were compared to chance (50%) via Bonferroni corrected
one sample t-tests.

707

learners should still perform better on high frequency items
compared to low frequency items.

were compared to chance (50%) via Bonferroni corrected
one sample t-tests. Participants scored above chance on the
Familiar (ABX) Items, for High (mean = 0.75, t(14) = 5.29,
p < 0.001), Medium (mean = 0.69, t(14) = 5.00, p < 0.001),
and Low (mean = 0.52, t(14) = 0.68, p = 0.51) frequency
suffixes. To verify that learners were better able to
recognize words containing familiar items stems with a high
frequency suffix, a within-subjects ANOVA was performed
with contrasts comparing high frequency suffixes to low and
medium frequency suffixes. The comparison between high
and low suffixes was significant, F(1, 14) = 21, p < 0.001,
while the comparison between the high and medium
frequency suffixes was not significant F(1, 11) = 1.21, p =
0.29. These results support the hypothesis that high
frequency suffixes are more easily recognized in familiar
items even when the familiar items were heard the same
number of times.
The novel items (with familiar stems, ABY vs. AXB)
were significantly different from chance for medium
frequency suffixes (mean = 0.63, t(14) = 3.41, p = 0.008),
but not for low frequency suffixes (mean = 0.54, t(14) =
0.84, p = 0.42), but there was only a marginally significant
difference between medium and low frequency suffixes for
these items (t(14) = 1.83, p = 0.088). The results are in line
with the Experiment 1, as participants actually did
numerically better on the novel items for low frequency
stems.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 extends the results of Experiment 1 by
controlling for type and token frequency: token frequency of
the suffixes was equal, while type frequency was
manipulated in the same way as Experiment 1. It is expected
that learners will show a similar pattern of results as
Experiment 1; learners will show more accurate responses
on items containing high frequency suffixes compared to
low frequency suffixes.

Participants
All thirty one participants were adults who were fluent
English speakers recruited from the psychology subject pool
at Pacific Lutheran University, a small liberal arts college in
Western Washington, USA. No participants had any
previous experience with a vowel harmony system, natural
or artificial, nor did they participate in Experiments 1 or 2.

Design
The design of Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment 1
except that the learners heard each of the various
morphological endings the same number of times (24). In
order to achieve this, the number of stems appearing with
each suffix was varied slightly (as in Table 1). For example,
each high frequency suffix was paired with all twelve stems.
These were repeated twice each, meaning that each high
frequency suffix was heard 24 times in the training set,
across 12 tokens. The low frequency suffixes, on the other
hand, were only paired with two stems, but were repeated
12 times each, meaning that the low frequency suffixes were
heard 24 times across two tokens.

Discussion
Experiment 2 showed a similar pattern of results as
Experiment 1 for familiar items; learners were better at
parsing complex words that contained high frequency words
compared to low frequency words. However, learners in
Experiment 2 did not show any ability to segment words
containing novel stems. It may be that hearing the same
lexical items so many times changed the learner’s focus
from the structure of the language to the specific lexical
items in the language, making it more difficult to respond to
items containing novel stems. It is possible that having high
frequency suffixes with low token frequency is an unnatural
statistical pattern for languages, making it harder to learn;
more training, or more statistical power may be needed to
find traces of learning under these unnatural circumstances.
Note, however, that there were no overall differences for
CDX items when comparing Experiment 1 to Experiment 2,
F(1,38) = 1.86, p = 0.18 (with no effect of frequency,
F(2,76) = 1.70, p = 0.19, and no interaction F(2,76) = 1.09,
p = 0.34).

Results
All analyses were performed separately for the Novel Stems
and Suffixes tests and the Suffix Parsing tests.
Novel Stems and Suffixes Each of the means for the StemParsing Items were compared to chance (50%) via
Bonferroni corrected one-sample t-tests. The Novel Suffix
(ABQ), Items with a mean of 0.59, t(15) = 1.67, p = 0.11,
were not significantly greater than chance. The Novel Stem
Items (CDX) were not significantly different from chance
for either the high (mean= 0.52, t(15) = 0.29, p = 0.77),
medium (mean = 0.53, t(15) = 0.77, p = 0.45) or the low
frequency suffixes, (mean = 0.50, t(15) = 0, p = 1.0),
suggesting that participants failed to extend the pattern to
novel stems in this experiment. A within-subjects ANOVA
was compared high frequency suffixes to low and medium
frequency suffixes. Neither comparison was significant
(F<1 for both comparisons).

Discussion and Conclusions
The present study demonstrated the effects of frequency on
morpheme segmentation. When presented with CVCVCV
words with a two syllable stem followed by a monosyllabic
suffix, with suffixes that followed a pseudo-Zipfian
distribution: two high frequency suffixes, six medium
frequency suffixes and twelve low frequency suffixes, but
even distribution of stems. Learners were better at

Suffix Parsing Results for Suffix Parsing Test Items appear
in Figure 2. Each of the means for the Suffix Parsing Items

708

recognizing lexical items that followed the morphological
structure when the suffix was of high frequency, even if the
items were novel. These results held for familiar items, even
when the type frequency was accounted for. This provides
evidence that type frequency is more important for
morpheme segmentation than token frequency, in line with
previous discussions of morphological processing (Albright,
2002).
In the present study, medium frequency suffixes showed
an intermediate level of response between high and low
frequency suffixes, but because many of the comparisons
with the medium frequency suffixes did not reach
significance, it is unclear exactly how learners responded to
these suffixes. Future research will work to understand more
precisely how learners respond to various levels of
frequency of suffixes, which may integrate nicely with a
probability-based computational algorithm (Goldwater,
Griffiths, & Johnson, 2009).
Finley and Newport (2010; 2011) showed that learners
can parse novel affixes with familiar stems, but learners in
the present study did not fare better than chance on the ABQ
items, suggesting that learners in the present study may not
have fully learned the Stem+Suffix grammar, or the nature
of the stems. It is possible that the high frequency of the
suffixes may have drawn participants’ attention away from
the stems and towards the suffixes. Future research will
work to better understand how stems are parsed. For
example, future research could add two layers of complexity
to the present paradigm: manipulation of frequency of
stems, as well as manipulation of the types of affixes that
affix to a particular stem. While the present research only
scratches the surface at how frequency affects morpheme
segmentation, there is a great potential to use the present
paradigm for creating a better understanding of how the
distributional patterns found in language interface with the
language learner.
Finally, the present set of experiments was performed on
adults. Because Finley and Newport (2010; 2011) found
similar results when comparing adults to children, it is
expected that children may show similar patterns of
preference to items containing high-frequency suffixes.

Bortfeld, H., Morganm, J. L., Golinkoff, R. M., & Rathbun,
K. (2005). Mommy and me: Familiar names help launch
babies into speech-stream segmentation. Psychological
Science, 16, 298–304. doi:10.1111/j.09567976.2005.01531.x
Bybee, J. (1995). Regular morphology and the lexicon.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 10(5), 425–455.
Chan, E., & Lignos, C. (2010). Investigating the relationship
between linguistic representation and computation
through an unsupervised model of human morphology
learning. Research on Language and Computation, 8,
209–238.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25, 257–
271.
Ellis, N. C., & Donnell, M. B. O. (2012). Statistical
construction learning  : Does a Zipfian problem space
ensure robust language learning? In J. Rebuchat & J. J.
Williams (Eds.), Statistical learning and language
acquisition.
Ellis, N. C., & Schmidt, R. (1998). Rules or Associations in
the Acquisition of Morphology? The Frequency by
Regularity Interaction in Human and PDP Learning of
Morphosyntax. Language and Cognitive Processes, 13(23), 307–336.
Ernestus, M., & Baayen, H. (2003). Predicting the
unpredictable: Interpreting neutralized segments in Dutch.
Language, 79, 5–38.
Finley, S., & Newport, E. (2010). Morpheme segmentation
from distributional information. In J. Chandleee, K.
Franich, K. Iserman, & K. L. (Eds.), BUCLD 34
Proceedings Supplement, online. Boston: BUCLD.
Finley, S., & Newport, E. N. (2011). Morpheme
segmentation in school-aged children. In A. Fine (Ed.),
Rochester working papers in the language sciences.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goldsmith, J. (2006). An algorithm for the unsupervised
learning of morphology. Computational Linguistics,
12(4), 353–371.
Goldwater, S., Griffiths, T. L., & Johnson, M. (2009). A
Bayesian framework for word segmentation: exploring
the effects of context. Cognition, 112, 21–54.
Jusczyk, P. W. (2000). The discovery of spoken language.
Cambdridge: MIT Press.
Kurumada, C., Meylan, S. C., & Frank, M. C. (2013).
Zipfian frequency distributions facilitate word
segmentation in context. Cognition, 127, 439–453.
Piantadosi, S. T. (2014). Zipf’s word frequency law in
natural language: A critical review and future directions.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21, 1112–1130.
doi:10.3758/s13423-014-0585-6
Zipf, G. K. (1935). The psycho-biology of langauge. New
York: Houghton-Mifflin.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Elizabeth Wiemers and Elizabeth
Jennings, for help in designing and preparing stimuli. I
would also like to thank Naomi Feldman, Stine Lindvig and
Kim Myhrvold and audiences at Johns Hopkins University
and Psychonomics 2014, for comments on previous versions
of this work. All errors are my own.

References
Albright, A. (2002). Islands of reliability for regular
morphology: Evidence from Italian. Language, 78(4),
684–709.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2015). Praat: Doing phonetics
by computer.

709

