The Past and Future are in Your Hands:
How Gestures Affect Our Understanding of Temporal Concepts
Melvin M. R. Ng (a0052092@nus.edu.sg)
Winston D. Goh (psygohw@nus.edu.sg)
Melvin J. Yap (melvin@nus.edu.sg)
Department of Psychology, National University of Singapore, 9 Arts Link,
Singapore 117570, Singapore

Chi-Shing Tse (cstse@cuhk.edu.hk)
Wing Chee So (wingchee@cuhk.edu.hk)
Department of Educational Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong

Abstract
Metaphors are commonly used by individuals to represent and
reason about time in daily conversations. These metaphors are
often paired with gestures that reveal the possible axes along
which our internal conceptualisation of time may be aligned
against. The present study attempts to use such gestures as
temporal primes to investigate how individuals conceptualize
time. Results revealed effects of congruency along the sagittal
axis, but not the lateral. This suggests that individuals
primarily represent time most strongly along the sagittal axis.
Implications for models of how individuals represent time as
well as methods of investigating how time is represented in the
mind are discussed.
Keywords: Time; gestures; priming

Introduction
According to Lakoff and Johnson’s (1999) Conceptual
Metaphor Theory, abstract concepts such as time are
grounded in more concrete dimensions such as space or
motion. For example, in English, as well as the majority of
languages of the world, metaphors referring to time are
arranged primarily along the sagittal axis (Radden, 2003),
e.g., “I am looking forward to tonight’s dinner” and “It is
good that we put our past behind us”.
Recent research have found evidence for a lateral timeline.
Past-related concepts are situated on the left, while futurerelated concepts are placed on the right for English speakers,
mirroring the way they read and write (e.g., Boroditsky,
Fuhrman & McCormick, 2011). Previous findings have also
provided evidence for a mental timeline running along the
sagittal axis (e.g., Walker, Bergen & Nunez, 2013; Ulrich,
Eikmeier, de la Vega, Fernández, Alex-Ruf & Maienborn,
2012), whereas others failed to find that (e.g., Fuhrman,
McCormick, Chen, Jiang, Shu, Mao & Boroditsky, 2011).
Studies that found evidence of a lateral timeline (but not a
sagittal one) often used response congruency as their main
means of investigation. This method is based on the spatialtemporal association of response codes (STEARC) effect,
and “past-related” or “earlier” responses have been found to
be responded to faster from a congruent location than an

incongruent one (e.g., in the case of the lateral timeline, “past”
responses made with the left hand/button/key should be
faster than if the response had to be made on the right). This
congruency effect between temporal event and spatial
location is taken to suggest the existence of a ‘mental time
line’ (Ishihara, Keller, Rossetti & Prinz, 2008). However,
one of the factors that determine how an individual
represents time is the immediate presence of spatial
representations that may be recruited to help them think
about time (e.g., Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008; Casasanto
& Bottini, 2014). In studies that use response congruency as
their main means of investigation, the required mode of
response naturally becomes the spatial frame that is most
cognitively available for participants to co-opt for thinking
about time. Hence, it is entirely possible that any results
found may arise from task demands; requiring participants to
make specific motor responses would naturally evoke
transient directional spatial frames that they then recruit on
the spot to represent time. As such, findings of a lateral plane
(and the absence of a sagittal plane) may be a product of the
response congruency methodology, rather than how people
naturally represent time in their minds.
In the present study, we propose a new means of
investigation that circumvents the potential problem of the
response congruency method. Instead of varying the
response keys for past and future responses, we kept the
method of response consistent throughout, focusing instead
on accessing temporal representations directly through
priming. An advantage of this is that by having each target
serve as its own control, while holding other aspects of the
experiment constant, it is possible to determine if the
conditions evoked by the prime are responsible for any
differences observed. In essence, rather than relying on
specific responses as a proxy to mental timelines (which may
be heavily influenced by such responses), the usage of
priming allows for a direct investigation of temporal
representations in the mind while circumventing any
inclination towards a particular axis as a result of the
imposition of specific response frames. To that end, our
study makes use of stimuli that is commonly encountered in
everyday conversations about time: Gestures. Gestures are

1715

spontaneous hand movements produced by speakers when
they speak and convey substantive information (McNeill,
1992). Speakers have commonly been found to produce
gestures along both sagittal and lateral planes when talking
about time (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2012). As such, the
prevalence of gestures accompanying temporal speech may
imply a possible role of bodily motion in temporal cognition
and communication of such temporal concepts. Previous
studies have reported that iconic gestures are capable of
priming semantically related words and concepts (Wu &
Coulson, 2011; Yap, So, Yap, Tan & Teoh, 2011). In
essence, the usage of gestures as primes may present a means
to access the very same objects or concepts they represent.
Furthermore, the usage of gestures yokes the axis of interest
to the gesturer, allowing participants the freedom to interpret
time without the constraint of specific response methods.
As such, by using temporal gestures as primes, in
conjunction with binaural auditory tokens which have been
found to be as effective as visual stimuli in probing temporal
concepts (Ouellet, Santiago, Israeli & Gabay, 2010), the
present research hopes to probe temporal concepts directly
without using any specific method of response as a proxy.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we investigated the sagittal axis. Previous
studies found mixed evidence for a mental timeline spanning
the sagittal axis. However, given the abundance of sagittal
metaphors in text corpus in languages around the world (e.g.,
“I am looking forward to seeing you”; Radden, 2004),
researchers have been reluctant to discount its existence.
Since past-related concepts are commonly situated behind
the individual in English, a temporal gesture indicating an
area of space behind the gesturer should prime past-related
concepts and aid in the temporal judgement of past-related
words, and forward gestures for future-related words.

Method
Participants. A group of 44 undergraduates from the
National University of Singapore participated in the study for
course credit or payment. All participants were EnglishMandarin bilinguals who have studied in Singapore for at
least 10 years. Participants reported their level of proficiency
in English and Mandarin using a language background
questionnaire and indicated that their first language was
English and they had better proficiency in it than Mandarin.
Design. A 2 (Temporality: past- vs. future-related word) x 2
(Congruency: congruent vs. incongruent) within-subject
design was used. Congruency was determined with respect
to the gesturer, so a point towards the back is considered to
be congruent if it was paired with a past-related word, and
incongruent if paired with a future-related one.
Materials. Time-related words were chosen from the online
Oxford Dictionary (2015). Ten students from the same
population sample, but who did not take part in the main

experiments, rated how past- or future-related the words
were. A 5-point Likert scale was used, with 1 representing a
strongly past-related word, 5 a strongly future-related word,
and 3 being a temporally neutral word. A final set of 80, with
an equal number of past- and future-related words, was
chosen from words that were rated as either past- (<3) or
future-related (>3). Interrater reliability was high and there
was high agreement between raters on whether a word was
past- or future-related, Cronbach’s α = .967. Characteristics
of the chosen words are summarised in Table 1 and the words
themselves can be found in the Appendix.
Within each temporal category, the words were further
divided into two equal sub-lists, with each group being either
paired with a congruent gesture (e.g., the model pointing to
her left + “yesterday”) or an incongruent gesture (e.g., the
model pointing to her right + “olden”). Thus, each word was
paired with either a related or unrelated gestural prime for
each participant in a Latin-squared fashion, and across all
participants, all targets were preceded equally often by
related and unrelated gestural primes.
As past and future words could not be made identical,
separate one-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were
conducted between each sub-list to ascertain that the words
were properly distributed between sub-lists.
Results showed the temporal words were matched across
sub-lists on word duration, log-transformed hyperspace to
analog (HAL) frequency, phonological neighbourhood
density, number of phonemes, number of syllables and
phonological Levenshtein distance (all Fs < 1).
All stimuli were spoken by a linguistically trained female
speaker and recorded digitally in 16-bit mono, 44.4Tim kHz,
.wav format.
Two gesture video clips were paired with either related or
unrelated temporal words. These gesture clips were
constructed by recording silent videos of a female actor
facing and looking at the camera and pointing either
backwards or forwards along the sagittal axis. The video
included the actor’s face. One video was made for each
gesture of interest, with an emphasis on its stroke. (Figure 1
shows a snapshot of the gestural stimuli used.)

Figure 1. Snapshot of the gestural stimuli with the gesturer
pointing forwards.
Procedure. The experiment was conducted using E-Prime
2.0 and the data was collected using the PST Serial
Response Box (Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002).
Participants were seated in front of a 17-inch screen and
instructed to make a temporal judgement, as quickly and
accurately as possible, of the word using the response box

1716

Table 1: Average Word Properties of the Word Sets in the Experimental Conditions

Word Duration (ms)
Log HAL Word Frequency
Phonological neighbourhood size
No. of Phonemes
Phonological Levenshtein distance
Temporality rating

Past-related words
M
SD
853.38
166.27
8.08
2.17
1.4
3.74
6.7
1.86
3.02
1.06
1.58
0.39

Results and Discussion
For the reaction time (RT) data, only correct judgements with
RTs more than 200 ms and less than 3000 ms were included
in the analyses. Following which, the overall mean and SD
of each participant’s RT was calculated and trials with
latencies being 2.5 SDs above or below each participant’s
mean RT were removed. These trimming criteria resulted in
a removal of 5.00% of accurate trials. Overall accuracies
were all very high (M = .91, SD = .06).
The mean RTs across the 4 conditions in Experiment 1
are summarised in Figure 4. A two-way repeated-measure
ANOVA was conducted on participants’ mean RTs by
congruency (congruent vs. incongruent) and temporality
(past vs. future).
Participants were found to judge past-related and
future-related words equally quickly (1348ms vs 1346ms),
F(1,43) = 0.01, p > .05. More crucially, participants were
found to respond faster to congruent gesture-word pairs
(1335ms) than to incongruent pairs (1360ms), F(1,43) =
4.372, MSe = 6238, p < .05. The interaction between the two
variables was not significant (p > .05). In other words, an
effect of congruency was found along the sagittal plane
indicating that gestures were able to prime temporal concepts
that were either congruent or incongruent with the auditory
target. Furthermore, the effect of congruency was found to
mirror the spatio-temporal metaphors commonly recruited to
talk about time, with the past situated behind the individual
and the future, ahead. Having established that our paradigm
was capable of priming temporal concepts, we proceeded to
investigate the lateral axis using the same method.

Reaction Time (ms)

with the left- and right-most buttons assigned to Past-related
and Future-related, respectively. To minimize the
imposition of a spatial frame, the response box was situated
at a central location relative to the participant, and the
response keys were situated in close proximity to one
another. Each trial began with a gesture video clip lasting
1000 ms, immediately followed by an auditorily presented
temporal word to be judged as either past- or future-related.
Prior to the actual experiment, 10 practice trials were
administered to familiarize the participants with the
experiment. There were a total of 80 experimental trials and
participants were allowed a break after every 20 trials

Future-related words
M
821.68
9.08
4
6.58
2.55
3.99

SD
165.16
1.96
7.52
2.21
1.01
0.24

1420
1400
1380
1360

Congruent

1340

Incongruent

1320
1300
Past

Future

Figure 2. Average RTs for responses in Experiment 1 (error
bars indicate 1 standard error above and below the mean)

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we addressed the following question:
Would individuals be found to represent time along the
lateral axis, as shown in previous studies, when a nonresponse congruency method was employed? If so, we
expected that when a primed temporal gesture was congruent
with the word to be judged (e.g., a temporal gesture
indicating “left” + “yesterday”), responses would be faster
than when the primed temporal gesture was incongruent (e.g.,
a temporal gesture indicating “right” + “yesterday”). Since
past-related concepts have previously been found to be
situated on the left, a temporal gesture that indicates the left
should prime past-related concepts and aid in the temporal
judgement of past-related words, and vice versa for futurerelated words.

Method
Participants. Forty-four undergraduates from the National
University of Singapore participated in the study for course
credit or payment. All participants were English-Mandarin
bilinguals who have studied in Singapore for at least 10
years. Participants also reported their level of proficiency in
English & Mandarin using the same language background
questionnaire as in Experiment 1 and indicated that their first
language was English and they had better proficiency in it
than Mandarin.

1717

Design. The same design as Experiment 1 was used.
Materials. The same words in the previous experiment were
used. Two gesture video clips were constructed by recording
silent videos of the same female actor pointing either left or
right the lateral axis. One video was made for each gesture
of interest, with an emphasis on its stroke. Figure 3 shows a
snapshot of the gestural stimuli used.

Figure 3. Snapshot of the gestural stimuli with the gesturer
pointing to her left.
Procedure. The experiment employed the same procedure
as in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion

Reaction Time (ms)

The same trimming criteria were used as in Experiment 1,
and resulted in the loss of 5.97% of accurate trials. Once
again, overall accuracies were very high (M = .90, SD = .06).
The mean RTs across the 4 conditions in Experiment 1
are summarised in Figure 2. A two-way repeated-measures
ANOVA was conducted on participants’ mean RTs, by
congruency and temporality.
Overall, neither variable was found to exert an effect on
the obtained RTs (ps > .05). There was no difference in
response latencies between congruent and incongruent pairs
(1359ms vs 1374ms), F < 1, as well as past- and futurerelated words (1355ms vs 1378ms), F(1,43) = 1.68, MSe =
607152, p > .05. In addition, the interaction was also not
statistically significant (p > .05). Our results appear to run
contrary to previous findings of individuals favouring the
lateral axis for representing time, reflecting both reading and
writing directions (see Fuhrman et al., 2011). This
discrepancy is discussed further in General Discussion.
1420
1400
1380
1360

Congruent

1340

Incongruent

1320
1300
Past

Future

Figure 4. Average RTs for responses in Experiment 1 (error
bars indicate 1 standard error above and below the mean)

General Discussion
The results of the present study did not replicate the
congruency effect found along the lateral axis in previous
studies that have used the response congruency method in
their investigations. A significant effect of congruency was
found along the sagittal plane, however, providing further
support for a mental timeline that is aligned along the sagittal
axis.
Our results support the notion that spatiotemporal
metaphors found in language reflect temporal concepts in the
mind (Lai & Boroditsky, 2013; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999).
The overwhelming abundance of metaphors aligned along
the sagittal plane in both English (Radden, 2004) and
Mandarin (as compared to vertical ones; Chen, 2007),
coupled with the almost complete absence of lateral
spatiotemporal metaphors would conceivably predispose
individuals in representing time along the sagittal axis, rather
than the lateral or vertical axes. More recent studies have also
found evidence that the left-right mapping of time along the
lateral axis may not be as strong as the sagittal one (Eikmeier
& Ulrich, 2014).
Participants in our study did not show evidence of a
mapping of time along the lateral axis. This suggests that it
might be possible that the previously found
conceptualization of time along the lateral axis is a result of
the methodologies employed by response congruency
methods. However, it is unlikely that this possibility can
account fully for previous findings as there have been studies
that do not employ response congruency methods have also
found evidence for time representations arrayed along the
lateral axis (e.g., Fuhrman et al., 2011). Hence, rather than
the lateral timeline being a product of the paradigm, it could
be that the response congruency methodology serves to make
prominent this lateral representation, thereby predisposing
participants to preferentially adopt that frame for thinking
about time at the point of the experiment.
Why then did our lateral temporal gestures not
predispose our participants into adopting a conceptualization
of time along the lateral axis? After all, it has been proposed
by Casasanto and Jasmin (2012) that the lateral axis is of
greater informational value and changes along this axis are
often easier for interlocutors to perceive than the sagittal
axis. A possible reason behind this unexpected finding could
be due to the nature of the stimuli chosen for our
experiments. Words such as “primordial” or “impending” are
more akin to general deictic expressions of time that point in
the direction to either the “past” or “future” with respect to
the “present”. This is in contrast with sequential expressions
of time that array events in a sequential manner (E.g.,
Monday comes before Wednesday or lunch comes after
breakfast). Further to this, isolated words are more likely to
be perceived of as deictic rather than sequential, given that
the latter requires a point of reference that needs to be set
with respect to the word. As noted by Casasanto & Jasmin
(2012), people are more likely to produce lateral gestures
than sagittal gestures when using sequential expressions of
time. The reverse is true when deictic expressions are used.

1718

Hence, it might be possible that sagittal gestures are more
meaningful when paired with deictic expressions of time
than lateral gestures. As such, our lateral temporal gestures
would not be as useful as the sagittal temporal ones
considering our largely deictic stimuli. Further studies could
potentially determine if sagittal gestures aid the
comprehension of deictic expressions of time and if lateral
gestures aid the comprehension of sequential expressions,
given their greater co-occurrences.
While our new paradigm provides a useful method of
investigating how individuals represent time, it is not without
its limitations. For one, our method of response (using the
left and right keys of a response box oriented laterally for
both experiments) may have been subject to a shortcoming
of the response congruency method by providing a spatial
frame that participants might have then used to represent
time. However, we found no evidence of it predisposing
participants in adopting a representation of time along the
lateral axis. Furthermore, the effect of congruency along the
sagittal plane that was found is unlikely to be a result of our
response method, given that the layout is different from the
plane being investigated (lateral response vs. sagittal plane).
Nonetheless, future studies could adopt the use of non-spatial
responses such as vocal responses (e.g., Walker et al., 2014).
The present study also has implications for future
investigations into the structure of our mental timeline. When
a response congruency method is not adopted, individuals are
withheld from any readily available spatial frames that they
might potentially adopt to transiently represent time. As a
result, effects of congruency along the lateral axis are
diminished, and individuals are less constrained in
conceiving about time. Such findings are partially replicated
in Lai and Boroditsky (2014, Study 2) where, when allowed
to point to regions in space instead of being constrained
along certain modes of response, participants are found to
represent time along the sagittal axis as well when asked to
arrange events in temporal order. In short, as noted by
Walker et al. (2013), the majority of space-time associations
observed thus far in response congruency experiments (e.g.,
Boroditsky et al., 2011; Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2010) could
have arisen from the particulars of the experimental
paradigm being used.
Future studies may explore if these findings are
particular to gesture or if other spatial stimuli (e.g., arrows)
may similarly prime temporal concepts in individuals. The
sagittal spatialization of time has been proposed to be
oriented with respect to an individual’s sagittal axis, and is
grounded in the experience of front-back locomotion that our
bodies are accustomed to (Clark, 1973, Lakoff & Johnson,
1999; Radden, 2004). As such, while other spatial stimuli
may prime temporal representations, gestural stimuli
involving seeing another person may be most effective in
priming the sagittal timeline. Furthermore, given that an
individual’s representation of time appears to be heavily
influenced by sensorimotor systems that coincide with
human movement, having participants perform these
gestures may result in a stronger priming of the sagittal

timeline. This may then be reflected in greater effects of
congruency in a similar paradigm wherein participants are
tasked with producing the gestures themselves instead of
watching a video of an actor. Studies that investigated
Mandarin speakers have also found evidence of a top-tobottom pattern of aligning time along the vertical axis (e.g.,
Fuhrman et al., 2011) as well as corresponding gestures
along this axis (Chui, 2011), mirroring Chinese
spatiotemporal metaphors that place past concepts higher
than future ones. Future investigations may also look into
Mandarin speakers using vertical gestures and Mandarin
words or phrases as stimuli to see if the vertical metaphors in
their language would predispose them in adopting a vertical
plane for the representation of time.
In conclusion, we present a novel paradigm in which
gestures may act as a means by which we may access an
individual’s implicit spatial conceptualization of time. This
paradigm may provide future researchers with a way to
investigate how individuals construe time without
constraining them through necessitating particular modes of
response, and may reveal patterns that would otherwise be
obscured as a result of task demands.

References
Boroditsky, L., Fuhrman, O., & McCormick, K. (2011). Do
English and Mandarin speakers think about time
differently?. Cognition, 118(1), 123-129.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106(2), 579593.
Casasanto, D., & Bottini, R. (2014). Mirror reading can
reverse the flow of time.Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 143(2), 473.
Casasanto, D., & Jasmin, K. (2012). The Hands of Time:
Temporal Gestures in English Speakers. Cognitive
Linguistics, 23(4), 643-674.
Chen, J. Y. (2007). Do Chinese and English speakers think
about time differently? Failure of replicating Boroditsky
(2001). Cognition, 104(2), 427-436.
Chui, K. (2011). Conceptual metaphors in gesture. Cognitive
Linguistics, 22(3), 437-458.
Clark, Herbert H. (1973). Space, time, semantics and the
child. In T. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language (pp. 27-63). New York: Academic
Press
Eikmeier, V., & Ulrich, R. (2014). How Closely Related are
Time and Space on the Left-right Axis? Procedia-Social
and Behavioral Sciences, 126, 172-173.
Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Cross‐Cultural
Differences in Mental Representations of Time: Evidence
From an Implicit Nonlinguistic Task.Cognitive
Science, 34(8), 1430-1451.
Fuhrman, O., McCormick, K., Chen, E., Jiang, H., Shu, D.,
Mao, S., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). How linguistic and
cultural forces shape conceptions of time: English and
Mandarin time in 3D. Cognitive science, 35(7), 13051328.

1719

Ishihara, M., Keller, P. E., Rossetti, Y., & Prinz, W. (2008).
Horizontal spatial representations of time: evidence for the
STEARC effect. Cortex, 44(4), 454-461.
Lai, V. T., & Boroditsky, L. (2013). The immediate and
chronic influence of spatiotemporal metaphors on the
mental representations of time in English, Mandarin, and
Mandarin-English speakers. Frontiers in psychology, 4.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought.
Basic books.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal
about thought. University of Chicago Press.
Radden, G. (2004). The metaphor TIME AS SPACE across
languages. Zeitschrift für Interkulturellen
Fremdsprachenunterricht, 8(2/3), 1-14.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime: User's guide. Psychology Software Incorporated.
Ouellet, M., Santiago, J., Israeli, Z., & Gabay, S. (2010). Is
the future the right time? Experimental
psychology, 57(4), 308.
Oxford University Press (2015). Oxford Dictionaries.
Retrieved from http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/
Ulrich, R., Eikmeier, V., de la Vega, I., Fernández, S. R.,
Alex-Ruf, S., & Maienborn, C. (2012). With the past
behind and the future ahead: Back-to-front representation
of past and future sentences. Memory & cognition, 40(3),
483-495.
Walker, E., Bergen, B. K., & Nunez, R. (2014).
Investigating spatial axis recruitment in temporal
reckoning through acoustic stimuli and non-spatial
responses. Center for Research in Language Technical
Report, University of California, San Diego, 25, 1-10.
Wu, Y. C., & Coulson, S. (2007). Iconic gestures prime
related concepts: An ERP study. Psychonomic bulletin &
review, 14(1), 57-63.
Yap, D. F., So, W. C., Yap, M.J., Tan, Y. Q., & Teoh, R. L.
S. (2011). Iconic gestures prime words. Cognitive
science, 35(1), 171-183.

Appendix
List of words used as stimuli for the experiments.
Past-Related Words
aged
ancestor
ancient
antique
archaic
before
beforehand
bygone
classic
dated
defunct
departed
earlier
extinct
flashback
forefather
former
fossilized
history
initial

1720

memoir
nostalgia
obsolete
old
outdated
passe
preceding
precursor
predecessor
prehistoric
previous
primitive
prior
recollection
reminiscence
retrospect
stale
timeworn
vintage
yesterday

Future-Related Words
advanced
after
ahead
anticipated
approaching
brewing
coming
conclusion
consequently
destiny
emerging
ensuing
eventually
expect
fate
final
following
forecast
foretell
forthcoming

future
hence
impending
later
looming
modern
nearing
next
pending
prophesy
prospective
resulting
someday
soon
subsequent
succeeding
thereafter
tomorrow
ultimately
upcoming

