Hierarchical Reasoning with Distributed Vector Representations
Cody Kommers (cydeko@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Volkan Ustun (ustun@ict.usc.edu)
Institute for Creative Technologies
Playa Vista, CA 90094 USA

Abram Demski (demski@usc.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
Institute for Creative Technologies
Playa Vista, CA 90094 USA

Paul Rosenbloom (rosenbloom@usc.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
Institute for Creative Technologies
Playa Vista, CA 90094 USA
Abstract
We demonstrate that distributed vector representations are capable of hierarchical reasoning by summing sets of vectors representing hyponyms (subordinate concepts) to yield a vector
that resembles the associated hypernym (superordinate concept). These distributed vector representations constitute a potentially neurally plausible model while demonstrating a high
level of performance in many different cognitive tasks. Experiments were run using DVRS, a word embedding system
designed for the Sigma cognitive architecture, and Word2Vec,
a state-of-the-art word embedding system. These results contribute to a growing body of work demonstrating the various
tasks on which distributed vector representations perform competently.
Keywords: hierarchical reasoning; word embeddings; language modeling; concepts; distributed representations

strawberry	  

blackberry	  

berry	  

raspberry	  

Figure 1: The normalized summation of the vectors representing hyponyms strawberry, blackberry, and raspberry
yields a vector resembling the hypernym berry.

Introduction
In this paper, we demonstrate that distributed vector representations are capable of performing hierarchical reasoning
by inferring the appropriate category from a set of category
members (Figure 1). This capability is one among many varieties of tasks that recent methods for learning distributed vector representations, also known as word embeddings, have
been shown to perform competently. These capabilities include: language modeling (Bengio et al., 2006; Mikolov,
2012), natural language understanding (Collobert & Weston,
2008; Zhila et al., 2013), machine translation (Mikolov et
al., 2013a; Zou et al., 2013), image labeling (Frome et al.,
2013), paragraph representation (Le & Mikolov, 2014), and
relational extraction (Socher et al., 2013).
In addition to state-of-the-art performance, one major advantage of these vector models is their supposed neuralplausibility (Blouw & Eliasmith, 2013). At a gross level
of abstraction, concepts are represented in the brain as distributed networks of neural activation throughout cortical
and subcortical regions (Rissman & Wagner, 2011). Distributed vector representations attempt to approximate these

distributed networks of activation. Intuitively, if the semantic discrepancies between two concepts, such as “dog” and
“cat”, can successfully be encoded as distinct patterns of neural firings, then it follows that the discrepancies could also
be encoded as distinct patterns of values in a vector (Hinton,
1984). Furthermore, Kelly and West (2012) argue that vector representations constitute both symbolic and subsymbolic
representation, allowing distributed vector representations to
provide a comprehensive analysis of a cognitive process.
An example of the utility of distributed vector representations as a model of cognitive phenomena is their application
in analogical reasoning. The use of vectors to model analogical reasoning dates back to Rumelhart and Abrahamson
(1973). More recent examples of distributed vector representations for performing analogy are presented in Zhilia et al.
(2013) and Socher et al. (2013). In these examples, analogical reasoning with distributed vector representations can
be performed by vector arithmetic. For example, the difference between vectors representing woman and man is approximately the same as the difference between vectors represent-

1171

ing queen and king:
[W ] − [M] ≈ [Q] − [K]

(1)

This equation can also be interpreted as an analogy,
woman:man::queen:king.
Analogical reasoning with distributed vector representations can be incorporated into existing cognitive models.
Upon reorganization, the equation for analogical reasoning
with vectors (Equation 2) successfully maps onto an excerpt
of the cognitive model of analogical reasoning presented in
Holyoak (2012). [W ] − [M] maps onto the source; +[K] maps
onto the target; and ≈ [Q] maps onto the inference.
[W ] − [M] + [K] ≈ [Q]

(2)

In this paper, we demonstrate that distributed vector representations can perform hierarchical reasoning in a similar
manner to how they perform analogical reasoning (i.e., with
simple vector arithmetic). The present demonstration contributes to accumulating work exemplifying the capabilities
of distributed vector representations. Additionally, it is unclear to what extent distributed vector representations are capable of modeling human cognition, and hierarchical reasoning, like analogical reasoning, is among the features for which
a comprehensive model of human cognition must account.
Thus, the present results lend support for the ability of distributed vector representations to model human cognition.
It has previously been hypothesized that distributed vector
representations can accurately represent hierarchical information (e.g., Lenci & Benotto, 2012; Erk, 2009a; Erk, 2009b;
McDonald & Ramscar, 2001; Geffet & Dagan, 2005). Lenci
& Benotto (2012) define this as the distributional inclusion
hypothesis: “if u is a semantically narrower term than v, then
a significant number of salient distributional features of u is
included in the feature vector of v as well.” Previous experiments have attempted to quantify the phenomenon of vectors
representing hyponyms sharing a common set of characteristic features of the associated hypernym.
A representative example of these previous experiments
is Geffet and Dagan (2005), which developed an automated
word-level feature inclusion testing method, called the Inclusion Testing Algorithm (ITA). For each pair of vectors representing a hypernym and a hyponym, ITA computes a set
of characteristic features for the hypernym vector and tests if
those features are also included in the vector of the hyponym.
This inclusion occurred in 86% percent of their tested pairs.
In other words, the vector that represents a category member
contains the information that characterizes it as a member of
the associated category.
The results presented in this paper derive from the same hypothesis as the above results, but further the empirical analysis. Specifically, instead of comparing a single hyponym
vector with a single hypernym vector, we compare sets of
hyponym vectors with the common hypernym. This is an
advance for cognitive modeling of hierarchical reasoning because it transitions from purely representational (i.e., that vec-

tors can represent the characteristics) to algorithmic (i.e., deriving the hypernym shared among hyponyms).
The results in this paper are derived chiefly from distributed vector representations learned by DVRS (Ustun et al.,
2014), a word embedding system designed for the Sigma cognitive architecture (Rosenbloom, 2013). DVRS learns realvalued lexical (meaning) vectors in an unsupervised manner
from large, shallow information sources based chiefly on cooccurrence and skip-gram algorithms. DVRS is intended to
be implemented within the Sigma cognitive architecture and
thus strives to maximize performance while retaining its integrity as a cognitive model. As a point of comparison, results are also presented from vectors learned by Word2Vec
(Mikolov et al., 2013b), a state-of-the-art word embedding
system.
DVRS draws inspiration from BEAGLE (Jones & Mewhort, 2007), but relies on skip-grams rather than n-grams
and replaces circular convolution with pointwise multiplication. Representations learned by BEAGLE have been hypothesized to encode hierarchical information. This is suggested
by the tendency of the representations to cluster hierarchically
(e.g., vehicles with other vehicles and birds with other birds),
but no formal demonstration exists, to our knowledge, in the
capacity demonstrated in this paper.
To obtain the present results, vectors of 200 dimensions
were trained for both DVRS and Word2Vec with their respective default settings on the first 109 bytes of a Wikipedia dump
from March 3, 2006 (enwik9)1 . The data were preprocessed
to convert all text to lower case, convert numbers to text, and
eliminate links and other references2 .

Experiments
Four experiments were run on three different corpora of
hypernym-hyponym sets to demonstrate hierarchical reasoning with distributed vector representations. The first three experiments measure aptitude for hierarchical reasoning with
distributed vector representations. The fourth experiment
measures the number of neighbors for both hyponyms and
their associated hypernyms to evaluate the hypothesis that
more general concepts (i.e., hypernyms) have more neighbors.
In each of the first three experiments, a set of N vectors representing hyponyms were summed; the result was normalized
and the closest M vectors in the lexicon, as measured by cosine similarity, were considered as potential hypernyms. If
the appropriate hypernym was among the M closest vectors,
then the trial was counted as correct. As with analogical reasoning, the vector calculation for hierarchical reasoning can
be expressed by an equation of vector arithmetic:

1172

∑N1 [hn ]
≈ [hcategory ]
| ∑N1 [hn ]|

(3)

1 Obtained from http://cs.fit.edu/mmahoney/compression/textdata.html.
2 Script

provided by Matt Mahoney with the Wikipedia dump.

N is the number of hyponyms being summed, [hn ] is the
vector representing the hyponym, and [hcategory ] is the vector representing the hypernym. For example, the normalized
summation of the vectors for hyponyms strawberry, blackberry, and raspberry yields a vector resembling the hypernym berry (Figure 1). In other words, the vectors can be used
to judge that strawberry, blackberry, and raspberry are members of the category berry.
The use of three different corpora show the robustness of
this effect, independent of any idiosyncrasy of the data. In addition to using different corpora, three values were varied to
show a range of effectiveness in performing the task: (1) the
word embedding system under consideration (labeled System
in results tables), (2) N, the number of hyponyms to sum (labeled #Hypo), and (3) M, the number of closest vectors in the
lexicon that will be considered as potential hypernyms (labeled #Hyper). The table shows the number correct out of
the total possible, which varies based on how the categories
were grouped.
Results are shown for both DVRS and Word2Vec in most
cases. DVRS is the focus of these results, because it is
most concerned with explanatory power as a cognitive model.
Word2Vec is shown as a point of comparison, because it
is a state-of-the-art word embedding system. Results from
Word2Vec are shown mostly for the trials in which the best
performance is expected (i.e., #Hypo=10). This allows for
comparison of performance between DVRS and Word2Vec,
while elaborating on several more detailed cases with DVRS
(i.e., cases with fewer summed hyponyms).
The number of hyponyms was varied to demonstrate that,
in principle, it is possible to derive hypernyms from a relatively small set of hyponyms. There are many anecdotal cases
in which the correct hypernym can be derived from only two
hyponyms. Accordingly, even though performance is weaker
with sets of fewer hyponyms, there are still examples of successful trials.
The number of closest vectors considered as potential hypernyms is varied to demonstrate that, even if the targeted hypernym vector is not the top result, it is among the top results.
That is, the vector resulting from the summed hyponyms consistently resembles the vector of the hypernym, even though
it may not be the best match.

The number of hyponyms per hypernym varied from three
(in the case of six hypernyms) to 98 (in the case of one hypernym, animal). For the trials labeled All in the #Hypo column,
every hyponym was summed, regardless of number. For trials with 3 or 10 hyponyms, hyponyms were separated into
appropriately sized subsets. For example, in a trial with 10
summed hyponyms, the hyponyms of animal (with 98 total
hyponyms) were separated into nine different subsets. These
sets were created by alphabetical ordering (e.g., the top 10
in alphabetical order constituted the first set) and remaining
hyponyms were not included in the test.
For the present purposes, this data set contains a small
amount of noise. These data were generated by labeling semantic features that were judged to be associated with basiclevel concepts. That is to say, these features are not necessarily concerned with selecting the canonical hypernym of the
hyponyms, merely a hypernym that is accurate. It does not
necessarily follow that the labeled hypernym is the best hypernym that follows from the associated hyponyms. Thus, the
distributed vector representations may produce an answer that
is acceptable, but merely not listed in these data. While this
ambiguity does not nullify the utility of these data, it presents
an issue that may negatively affect the performance.
Results are shown in Table 1. DVRS performs best, as expected, in the case of summing 10 hyponyms and considering
10 hypernyms; at 44% the performance is consistent, though
not tremendous. DVRS significantly outperforms Word2Vec
in every case. It is unclear exactly why this discrepancy in
performance occurred.
Table 1: Hierarchical reasoning results on McRae et al.
(2005) data.

System
DVRS
DVRS
DVRS
DVRS
DVRS
Word2Vec
Word2Vec
Word2Vec

Experiment 1
The first data set is from McRae et al. (2005), a corpus consisting of human-generated data on semantic feature norms
for 541 basic-level concepts. Seven hundred and twenty-five
participants were recruited to label semantic features for the
concepts. Each concept was labeled with 10 unprompted semantic features by at least 30 of the subjects. A semantic
feature was included as a norm if more than three participants included the feature for the same concept. Hypernymy
was among the semantic features coded by the researchers. A
subset of 535 concepts were used in the present experiment;
this subset consisted of basic-level concepts for which at least
three shared a hypernym.

#Hypo
All
3
3
10
10
All
10
10

#Hyper
1
1
10
1
10
1
1
10

Corr.
9
18
54
8
15
3
1
5

Total
39
167
167
34
34
39
34
34

Acc.
23.1%
10.8%
32.3%
23.5%
44.1%
7.7%
2.9%
14.7%

Experiment 2
The second data set is derived from WordNet (Miller, 2005),
a standard database of semantic relationships between words.
One hundred and forty-seven basic-level concepts were chosen as hypernyms for which WordNet supplied hyponyms.
Though WordNet supplied the hyponyms, these hypernyms
were chosen by the authors under no systematic criterion. For
that reason, this set of basic-level concepts cannot be claimed
to achieve the same standard of empirical disinterest as the
McRae et al. (2005) data set. However, there appears to be

1173

no qualitative difference between the kinds of basic-level concepts that appear in these data versus those from the data in
McRae et al. (2005).
WordNet choices for hyponyms, while empirical, contain
significant noise. That is to say, in many cases they do not
represent what could be considered canonical categorizations
of hypernymy as one could imagine might be judged by a human. For example, schizocarp, pyxis, rowanberry, and drupe
appear as hyponyms for hypernym fruit; shamanism, zoroastrianism, mithraism, and hindooism [sic] appear as hyponyms
for hypernym religion; thanatology, cryptanalysis, agrobiology, and architectonics appear as hyponyms for hypernym
science. While these categorizations may not be inaccurate,
they do not constitute the most representative set of human
judgments of hypernymy.
Results are shown in Table 2. As with Experiment 1,
DVRS outperforms Word2Vec in every case, though by a
smaller margin. In the best-performance-expected trial (10
hyponyms summed and 10 hypernyms considered), DVRS
obtains 50.0% accuracy, which is comparable to its performance of 44.1% under the same criteria in Experiment 1.
In contrast, Word2Vec more than doubles its accuracy for
the same best-performance-expected criteria between Experiment 1 (14.7%) and Experiment 2 (35.4%). Results of hyponym summations begin with sets of five (instead of three)
to adjust for noise associated with WordNet hyponyms.
Table 2: Hierarchical reasoning results on WordNet data.

System
DVRS
DVRS
DVRS
DVRS
DVRS
DVRS
Word2Vec
Word2Vec
Word2Vec

#Hypo
5
5
5
10
10
10
10
10
10

#Hyper
1
5
10
1
5
10
1
5
10

Corr.
24
36
55
19
27
41
10
22
29

Total
119
119
119
82
82
82
82
82
82

Acc.
20.2%
30.3%
46.2%
23.2%
32.9%
50.0%
12.2%
26.8%
35.4%

in the present paradigm; that is to say, these are the results of
a hand-selected data set and a charitable judging criterion.
For each set of N hyponyms, the result from the closest M
vectors was judged to be correct if it represented any commonality between the hyponyms. This could include a common category, a common entity of which all vectors are members, or a common trait. For example, a trial was considered
correct if hyponyms Monterrey, Bakersfield, and Riverside
yield a hypernym such as city, the common entity of which
all are members such as California, or a common attribute
such as Californian. A trial was considered incorrect if the
summation yielded results such as similar category members
(e.g., Merced) or wholly unrelated concepts.
Results are shown in Table 3. While both systems demonstrated their best respective results, there were still failed instances by both. These failed instances most likely do not
come from a lack of examples by which a sufficient representation can be learned, but solely a failure to encode hierarchical information. For example, with the California example
mentioned above, DVRS got the trial incorrect because the
hierarchical information was insufficiently represented, not
necessarily because there were too few encounters with the
associated words. This claim is corroborated by a correct response from Word2Vec in the California case.
Qualitative analysis suggests that often when the answer is
completely incorrect, the result is a another hyponym instead
of a hypernym (i.e., a category member rather than the category). For example, a set of vectors representing cardinal
directions including north, west, northwest, etc. yields southeastern rather than directions or cardinal. This seemed to be
the case for Experiments 1 and 2 as well.
Table 3: Hierarchical reasoning results on data selected by
authors. These results may be considered an upper-bound on
performance for hierarchical reasoning with the present word
embedding systems.

System
DVRS
DVRS
Word2Vec
Word2Vec

Experiment 3
The third data set consists of 58 sets of eight subordinate
concepts selected by the authors to constitute a data set that
would be most likely to result in correct answers from DVRS.
While these data do not represent a randomly selected sample, they are judged by the authors to be a data set without the
ambiguity of the data from McRae et al. (2005) or the noise
of the data from WordNet. There was no systematic criterion by which these data were selected; they were selected
only by if the authors thought the system should be capable
of producing a category shared by all members. Thus, they
should be interpreted as an upper bound of the capabilities of
hierarchical reasoning with distributed vector representations

#Hypo
8
8
8
8

#Hyper
1
10
1
10

Corr.
28
50
6
36

Total
58
58
58
58

Acc.
48.3%
86.2%
10.4%
62.1%

Experiment 4
A subset of the WordNet hypernym-hyponym sets used for
testing hierarchical reasoning in Experiment 2 were used to
compare the number of neighbors between hypernyms and
hyponyms in the associated vector space. This subset consisted of 39 hypernym-hyponym sets which DVRS got correct
in Experiment 2 (i.e., hierarchical information was successfully encoded) and 39 hypernym-hyponym sets which DVRS
did not get correct in Experiment 2 (i.e., hierarchical information was not successfully encoded). We hypothesized that, in

1174

comparison between a category and a subcategory, the more
general concept would have more neighbors (Figure 3). Additionally, for sets in which the relevant hierarchical information was shown to be successfully encoded in Experiment 2,
the effect should be more consistent than those sets that did
not demonstrate success in Experiment 2. The present results
support this hypothesis.

tion. The discrepancy in performance between DVRS and
Word2Vec suggests that not all methods of learning such vectors yield equally successful representations. Additionally, an
intriguing relationship has been uncovered between concept
generality and the number of neighbors in the associated vector space.

Proposed Geometric Intuition
Philosopher

Aristotle

Figure 2: In this example, Philosopher is more general than
Aristotle; thus, its vector would be hypothesized to have more
neighbors.
For each trial, the number of neighbors within a cosine
similarity of 0.7 was compared between the hypernym and
the average of three corresponding hyponyms. The three hyponyms were randomly selected from the set of all WordNet
hyponyms corresponding to the hypernym. If the number of
neighbors was higher for the hypernym than the average hyponym, then the trial was counted as correct.
Results are shown in Table 4. As expected, vectors representing hypernyms consistently have more neighbors within
a cosine similarity of 0.7 than their hyponyms. In the case of
hypernym-hyponym sets where the hierarchical relationship
is demonstrated to be encoded (i.e., correct in Experiment 2),
this effect was seen in 89.7% of tested cases. If the hierarchical relationship was demonstrated to not be successfully
encoded (i.e., incorrect in Experiment 2), this effect is closer
to chance (66.7%). According to our hypothesis, if the hierarchical information is not encoded, then the probability of the
hypernym having more neighbors should be the same as in a
comparison with any other word (i.e., 50%). Thus, it appears
that some hierarchical information is encoded in those cases
that are unsuccessful in Experiment 2, but not sufficient for
robust performance.
Table 4: Vectors representing hypernyms consistently have
more neighbors within a cosine similarity of 0.7.

System
DVRS
DVRS

Hierarchy encoded?
Yes
No

Corr.
35
26

Total
39
39

Acc.
89.7%
66.7%

What is the intuition behind how distributed vector representations are capable of representing this hierarchical information? One plausible explanation is that this effect is merely
a function of word frequency. In this case, Philosopher has
more neighbors than Aristotle simply because it is more frequent in the corpus on which the vectors were learned. Another explanation which may also contribute is that more general concepts take on properties of a hyperplane on which
subordinate concepts lay (Figure 2).
Plato

(1,0,0)

Philosopher (1,1,0)

Homer Simpson
Descartes

(0,1,0)

Figure 3: More general concepts may take on features of a
hyperplane on which the associated subordinate concepts lay.
In the 3-dimensional case depicted in Figure 3, the hypernym Philosopher encodes relevant feature information related to its hyponyms Plato and Descartes. Philosopher may
be thought of as having hyperplane-like properties because
its vector is yielded by the summation of its hyponyms. Related concepts, such as Plato and Descartes, lay on the hyperplane created by Philosophy while unrelated concepts, such
as Homer Simpson, do not. While in three dimensions this is
an implausible scenario for a complex ontology of concepts,
it is plausible for a high dimensional space (e.g., 200), as with
distributed vector representations.
This interpretation appears to be in line with the aforementioned distributional inclusion hypothesis, in which subordinate concepts include features of their superordinate concepts. More results will be necessitated to explore this connection.

Acknowledgments
Discussion
The present experiments demonstrate that distributed vector
representations can successfully encode hierarchical informa-

This work has been sponsored by the U.S. Army. Statements
and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the position
or the policy of the United States Government. No official
endorsement should be inferred.

1175

References
Barbu, E. (2009). Acquisition of common sense knowledge
for basic level concepts. RANLP, 23–27.
Bengio, Y., Schwenk, H., Senécal, J.-S., Morin, F., & Gauvain, J.-L. (2006). Neural probabilistic language models.
Innovations in Machine Learning, 137–186.
Blouw, P., & Eliasmith, C. (2013). A neurally plausible encoding of word order information into a semantic vector
space. 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 1905–1910.
Collobert, R., & Weston, J. (2008). A unified architecture for
natural language processing: Deep neural networks with
multitask learning. Proceedings of the 25th international
conference on Machine learning, 160–167.
Eliasmith, C., & Thagard, P. (2001). Integrating structure
and meaning: A distributed model of analogical mapping.
Cognitive Science, 25(2), 245–286.
Erk, K. (2009a). Representing words as regions in vector
space. Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, 57–65.
Erk, K. (2009b). Supporting inferences in semantic space:
representing words as regions. Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on Computational Semantics,
104–115.
Frome, A., Corrado, G. S., Shlens, J., Bengio, S., Dean, J.,
Mikolov, T., et al. (2013). Devise: A deep visual-semantic
embedding model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2121–2129.
Geffet, M., & Dagan, I. (2005). The distributional inclusion
hypotheses and lexical entailment. Proceedings of the 43rd
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, 107–114.
Hinton, G. (1984). Distributed representations (Tech. Rep.
No. CMU-CS-84-157). Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon
University, School of Computer Science.
Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning. The
Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning, 234–259.
Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. (2007). Representing word
meaning and order information in a composite holographic
lexicon. Psychological review, 114(1), 1.
Kelly, M. A., & West, R. L. (2012). From vectors to symbols
to cognition: The symbolic and sub-symbolic aspects of
vector-symbolic cognitive models.
Kiefer, M., & Pulvermüller, F. (2012). Conceptual representations in mind and brain: theoretical developments, current evidence and future directions. Cortex, 48(7), 805–
825.
Le, Q. V., & Mikolov, T. (2014). Distributed representations of sentences and documents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1405.4053.
Lenci, A., & Benotto, G. (2012). Identifying hypernyms
in distributional semantic spaces. Proceedings of the First
Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics,
75–79.

Levy, S. D., & Gayler, R. (2008). Vector symbolic architectures: A new building material for artificial general intelligence. Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Artificial
General Intelligence 2008: Proceedings of the First AGI
Conference, 414–418.
McDonald, S., & Ramscar, M. (2001). Testing the distributional hypothesis: The influence of context on judgements
of semantic similarity. Proceedings of the 23rd annual conference of the cognitive science society, 611-616.
McRae, K., Cree, G., Seidenberg, M., & Mcnorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large set
of living and nonliving things. Behavior Research Methods, 37(4), 547-559.
Mikolov, T. (2012). Statistical language models based on
neural networks. Presentation at Google, Mountain View,
2nd April.
Mikolov, T., Le, Q. V., & Sutskever, I. (2013a). Exploiting similarities among languages for machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1309.4168.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean,
J. (2013b). Distributed representations of words and
phrases and their compositionality. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26, 3111–3119.
Miller, G. A. (1995). Wordnet: a lexical database for english.
Communications of the ACM, 38(11), 39–41.
Mitchell, J., & Lapata, M. (2010). Composition in distributional models of semantics. Cognitive Science, 34(8),
1388–1429.
Rissman, J., & Wagner, A. D. (2012). Distributed representations in memory: insights from functional brain imaging.
Annual Review of Psychology, 63, 101–128.
Rosenbloom, P. S. (2013). The sigma cognitive architecture
and system. AISB Quarterly, 136, 4–13.
Rumelhart, D. E., & Abrahamson, A. A. (1973). A model for
analogical reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 5(1), 1–28.
Salton, G., Wong, A., & Yang, C.-S. (1975). A vector
space model for automatic indexing. Communications of
the ACM, 18(11), 613–620.
Socher, R., Chen, D., Manning, C. D., & Ng, A. (2013).
Reasoning with neural tensor networks for knowledge base
completion. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 926–934.
Ustun, V., Rosenbloom, P. S., Sagae, K., & Demski, A.
(2014). Distributed vector representations of words in the
sigma cognitive architecture. Artificial General Intelligence, 196–207.
Van Der Vet, P. E., & Mars, N. J. (1998). Bottom-up construction of ontologies. Knowledge and Data Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on, 10(4), 513–526.
Zhila, A., Yih, W., Meek, C., Zweig, G., & Mikolov, T.
(2013). Combining heterogeneous models for measuring
relational similarity. HLT-NAACL, 1000–1009.
Zou, W. Y., Socher, R., Cer, D. M., & Manning, C. D.
(2013). Bilingual word embeddings for phrase-based machine translation. EMNLP, 1393–1398.

1176

