How Physical Interaction Helps Performance in a Scrabble-like Task
Morgan Fleming (mfleming2@ucmerced.edu)

Paul P. Maglio (pmaglio@ucmerced.edu)

Cognitive and Information Sciences
University of California, Merced
5200 N Lake Rd
Merced, CA 95343
Abstract

for instance, by grouping letters to alleviate the need to rely
on memory of recently created words, or by testing out letter combinations in the environment to “see” potential words
rather than having to imagine them. Some studies suggest that
physical interaction with the task environment can provide effective scaffolding for learning in a spatial task (Smith, 2001);
in this case, participants who had trained to do a visualspatial task by physically interacting with the environment,
performed better on a non-interactive version of the same
task after training than participants who did not interact or
who only observed interactions during training. The general
hypothesis is that interaction in this Scrabble task provides
participants the opportunity to physically manage the problem of finding words, possibly simplifying their internal processes by relying on external action. If this hypothesis is true,
then the general question is how exactly does taking physical action support the task of finding words? A more specific
question is are there any lasting effects of physical interaction
on agent-internal procceses in the Scrabble task?

An experiment tested the hypothesis that people sometimes
take physical actions to help themselves solve problems. The
task was to generate all possible words that could be formed
from seven Scrabble letters. In one condition, participants
could use their hands to manipulate the letters, and in another
condition, they could not. Quantitative results show that more
words were generated and lower frequency words were generated with physical manipulation than without. Qualitative
results suggest that participants who could manipulate the letters tended to subdivide the task into smaller tasks (focusing on
fewer letters at a time). Overall, our results can be explained in
terms of an interactive search process in which external, physical activity effectively complements internal, cognitive activity, providing a reliable way to simplify search, explore the
space of letter combinations, and identify potential words.
Keywords: Interactive skill, Scrabble, word games

Introduction
People actively reorganize and interact with their environments for cognitive purposes (Clark, 1997; Hutchins, 1995a,
1995b; Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; Kirsh, 1995b). Pilots use
the cockpit to help calculate speeds and execute timely actions (Hutchins, 1995b). People reorient Tetris pieces rather
than mentally rotating them (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; Maglio
& Kirsh, 1996). People group things physically while counting and doing arithmetic (Carlson, Avraamides, Cary, &
Strasberg, 2007; Kirsh, 1995a). These are just some of many
cases in which interaction with the external environment can
amplify or simplify cognitive processing. But exactly how
and under what conditions does physically arranging and interacting with the external environment help?
Here we examine performance and behavior in an word
generation task like the one solved by Scrabble1 players. In
the board game Scrabble, players form words by arranging
tiles with letters printed on them. When trying to come up
with words in this game, people can either mentally rearrange
the letters or physically rearrange the letters. Based on the
idea that people routinely set up their environments to make
their cognitive jobs easier, it is reasonable to suppose that it
is easier to form words by physically moving the letters than
by simply imagining their rearrangement (Clark & Chalmers,
1998; Kirsh, 1995b). In fact, prior research has shown that in
specific situations, people are more effective at finding words
in a set of Scrabble letters when they can move the letters than
when they cannot (Maglio, Matlock, Raphaely, Chernicky, &
Kirsh, 1999; Vallée-Tourangeau & Wrightman, 2010).
Moving letters around in the environment may support the
cognitive process of forming words in a number of ways,
1 Scrabble

Performance does not improve with physical interaction in
all cases (Maglio et al., 1999; Vallée-Tourangeau & Wrightman, 2010), and people do not always choose to interact (Destefano, Lindstedt, & Gray, 2011). There may be
tradeoffs in time and processing costs, and assessing the
tradeoffs in real-time may be difficult to adequately compensate for. After all, humans are not the best at deciding
when information seeking actions are worth the tradeoff (Fu
& Gray, 2006). The Scrabble task in particular has not always shown benefits of physical interaction with the task
environment (Fusaroli et al., 2014). There are many possible confounds, including the frequencies or complexity of
words that can be found in a set of letters and individual
experience with similar tasks or with word games generally.
Controlling effectively for word frequency will be critical, as
low frequency words are harder to find than high frequency
words in anagram-solving tasks (Mayzner & Tresselt, 1958).
Prior work on the Scrabble task in particular found performance benefits of interaction only for letter sets in which
there were relatively low-frequency words, suggesting interaction with the letters helps mainly when the task is relatively
difficult (Maglio et al., 1999).
In what follows, we describe our experiment in detail. Our
results are both quantitative and qualitative. In the end, we
discuss implications for a general theory of interactivity.

is a registered trademark of Hasbro Inc.

716

Table 1: Stimuli were created by finding letter sets with
matching word productivity and word frequencies. Using
data available from the English Lexicon Project, we calculated productivity (number of words found in the corpus) and
frequencies (log HAL frequency) for each set (Balota et al.,
2007).

Method
The goal of our experiment is to examine performance and
interactive strategies in a word formation task using Scrabble
letters. Based on prior work, we expected that people would
generate more words from a set of Scrabble letters when allowed to manipulate the letters than when not allowed to manipulate the letters (Maglio et al., 1999; Vallée-Tourangeau &
Wrightman, 2010). We also expected those who manipulated
letters would perform better over time, that is, they would get
better with practice faster. Moreover, we expected those who
manipulated the letters during practice would perform better
on a post-test, even when they could no longer manipulate the
letters.
A total of 18 undergraduates from the University of California, Merced, participated in the experiment for course
credit. Each participant completed a pre-test, two blocks
of five experimental trials each, and a post-test. Participants were split into two conditions (between-subjects design): Non-interactive, in which they could not move the letters, and Interactive, in which they could move the letters.
The pre-test and post-test were Non-interactive trials for all
participants. All participants received the same letter sets in
the same order (see Table 1).2
To create reasonably matched stimuli, that is, letter sets
with similar word productivity, we searched systematically
for letter sets that could generate approximately the same
numbers of words with approximately the same word frequencies. Specifically, after generating sets of seven letters,
we examined all the words that could be made from two or
more of the letters in each set and assessed the frequencies
of each word (see Table 1), relying on the corpora available
from the English Lexicon Project for word lists and frequency
data (Balota et al., 2007).
The experiment was run using custom software on an iPad.
The letters for each trial were displayed as Scrabble letters
arranged horizontally in a row on the iPad screen. Each trial
lasted 3 minutes. Participants were told to produce as many
words as they could in that time, speaking and spelling each
word they found. The iPad recorded the verbal responses.
For Interactive trials, participants could drag the letters to arbitrary locations on the screen using their fingers. Participants
in the Interactive condition were encouraged to move the letters on the screen. The iPad recorded all interactions with a
resolution of about 10 milliseconds. For Non-interactive trials, the letters remained static. See Figure 1.

Block
Pre-test
Block 1

Block 2

Post-test

Letters
NMGERDA
ESWTLBA
LRSEHCA
TEMSHCA
OSELRCA
TICSEDA
NTKSEDA
KILSEDA
LFTESDA
EIMTSDA
OHSRCEA
LIEFSDA

Avg Freq
9.40
8.12
8.8
8.93
8.60
8.80
8.90
8.51
8.26
8.60
8.58
8.7

Tot Wds
80
115
94
113
102
96
85
96
107
123
109
100

on performance, and then we looked more closely at individual behavior to learn exactly when and how individuals relied
on physical interaction.

Quantitative Analyses
We first transcribed the recordings to find the words generated
by each participant. There was an average of 12.2 words generated on the pre-test, with a standard deviation of 5.3 words.
One participant who generated 31 words on the pre-test in the
Non-interactive condition was removed from further analysis
because the score was more than three standard deviations
from the mean, leaving 8 participants in the Non-interactive
condition and 9 in the Interactive condition. The remaining
pre-test scores ranged from 6 to 14.
Because of wide variability in the number of words generated between participants, we divided the number of words
produced on each trial and on the post-test by the number
of words produced on the pre-test, resulting in a normalized
word-generation score for each trial, with scores higher than
1 representing improvement over the pre-test. We first examined word generation by comparing performance on the posttest across conditions, and found no difference (Interactive
M = 1.2, SD = 0.35, Non-interactive M = 1.0, SD = 0.33),
t(15) = 1.24, p = .23.
We next examined word generation by comparing performance in Interactive and Non-interactive conditions across
Block 1 and Block 2, see Figure 2. Participants in the Interactive condition generated more words overall (M = 1.2, SD =
0.23) than those in the Non-interactive condition (M = 1.0,
SD = 0.16), F(1, 15) = 5.1, p = 0.040.
We then examined the frequency of words generated (using word-frequency data as described previously) by comparing performance in Interactive and Non-interactive con-

Results
We first completed a statistical analysis of the experimental
data to see whether in fact physical interaction has an effect
2 Note, of course, that sampling from our student population may
limit generalizability of our results, as our participants may not reflect the diversity of the population, even though University of California, Merced, students are the most ethnically, racially, and economically diverse college students in the University of California
system (see http://ipa.ucmerced.edu/student.htm).

717

(a) Non-interactive trial

Figure 2: More words were generated overall in the Interactive condition than in the Non-interactive condition.

(b) Interactive trial

Figure 1: The image in (a) shows a Non-interactive trial, with
letters arranged statically in a row. The image in (b) shows
an Interactive trial in which letters have been dragged around
the screen arbitrarily.

Figure 3: Lower frequency words were generated overall in
the Interactive condition than in the Non-interactive condition.

ditions across Block 1 and Block 2, see Figure 3. Participants
in the Interactive condition generated on average lower frequency words (M = 10.1, SD = 0.37) than those in the Noninteractive condition (M = 10.3, SD = 0.28), F(1, 15) = 14.5,
p = 0.002. Participants also generated on average lower frequncy words in Block 2 (M = 10.1, SD = 0.28) than in Block
1 (M = 10.3, SD = 0.37), F(1, 15) = 7.8, p < 0.013.
We also examined the frequency of words generated on the
pre-test versus those generated on the post-test by condition
and found that participants generated on average lower frequency words on the post-test (M = 9.8, SD = 0.57) than
on the pre-test (M = 10.6, SD = 0.80), F(1, 15) = 16.1,
p = 0.001.

building (Simon, 1989). Specifically, we report here on behavior of participants during the last trial of Block 2 in the
Interactive condition. We sampled the last trial here only
to ensure participants were fully familiar with the task and
test environment. Because of errors in the data recording, we
could not reconstruct playback for one participant, leaving a
total of 8. In all, we analyzed 24 minutes of activity, during
which participants found 94 words.
Overall Observations. We observed all participants using their hands to move the letters around, and all participants constructed at least some of the words they found interactively on the screen. For the most part, participants
constructed words on the screen horizontally, with letters
read left-to-right (91.58% of all the words found). On occasion, they also constructed words vertically, with letters
read bottom-to-top (2.11% of all the words constructed on
screen). When they did arrange the letters to form words on
the screen, they constructed the words in their entirety, occasionally moving all extraneous letters out of the way (49.42%
of all the words constructed on screen). Often, they moved

Descriptive Analyses
To examine what participants were doing in the Interactive
condition, we used the movement and letter position data collected by the iPad to reconstruct and playback participant behavior aligned with the audio recordings of the words generated. Thus, we were able to examine in detail the behavior of participants. This sort of informal observation is
a well-known and appropriate method for guiding theory-

718

(a) Multi-level group

(a) Before clean up

(b) Pooled group

(b) After clean up

Figure 4: The image in (a) shows an example of multi-level
grouping in which two groups of letters are arranged horizontally, and the image in (b) shows an example of a pooling in
which the word in the center, “rose”, is surrounded by other
letters.

Figure 5: The image in (a) shows a multi-level group before
letters are moved away or cleaned up, and the image in (b)
shows the resulting configuration after clean up.

We observed multi-level grouping and pooling differ
mainly in the ways in which the letters are used after the
structures are set up. Multi-level groups are characterized by
multiple distinct letter sets in which the letters from each set
are not used together to generate words. Pooled groups, by
contrast, organize the screen around a focal word, with an inner and an outer structure in which the inner structure is used
as the area to construct a word, and the periphery provides additional letters that are sometimes combined with letters from
the focal word to generate a new word.
In addition to these two consistent methods of grouping
letters to form words, we observed participants often cleaning up their groups on their way to constructing new groups.
These cleaning actions do not result in new words arranged
on the screen, but seem to be taken to segregate letters under
consideration for word generation from letters that are not.
In the case of a pooled group, clean-up often involves moving letters away from the word at the center. In the case of a
multi-level group, participants often segregate the letters used
to construct a word on one half of the screen, and then move
all the remaining letters to the other half (see Figure 5).

the letters into position in the words formed in order, meaning they would position the first letter, then the second, and
so on (32.18% of all the words constructed on screen). In all
cases, the first letter moved was part of the first word generated. Although there was plenty of movement overall, we
also observed long periods during some trials in which there
were no words generated and no action taken at all.
Interaction Details. We observed participants routinely
grouping letters when constructing words on screen (about
35% of the time). We identified two consistent patterns of
grouping behavior: multi-level grouping and pooling (see
Figure 4). Multi-level grouping refers to a series of actions
that result in two different groups of letters on the screen,
each arrayed horizontally along a different level of the y-axis.
Pooling refers to a series of actions that result in a single
group of letters arrayed horizontally with additional letters
scattered around them. On average, each participant spent
22% of the time using the multi-level grouping strategy, and
15% of the time using the pooling strategy.

719

The two different grouping strategies have different dynamics. Multi-level groups tended to be stable over time,
with an on-stage area where words are actively constructed
and an off-stage area where they are not. For the most part,
the position of the first letter moved established the on-stage
area, with additional letters either moved to the same horizontal line (on-stage) or moved to a different line to establish the
off-stage area. Once the stage is set, letters are then moved
from off-stage to on-stage and on-stage to off-stage to form
new words on the screen.
In contrast to the relatively stable structure of multi-level
groupings, the pooling strategy creates more transient structures. For example, we observed participants with multilevel groups quickly merge their on-stage and off-stage areas around a focal word to create pooled groups, creating
words horizontally between the existing areas, and then just
as quickly, move the letters back to their multi-level groups.
In fact, we observed many instances in which participants
moved letters around not to form words or parts of words
visually, but to maintain their groupings, particularly multilevel groupings.
Overall, we observed consistent behaviors across all participants in the Interactive condition. All used their hands to
move the letters on the screen to form words, mainly horizontally and left-to-right. They used strategies consistently
to segregate sets of letters (multi-level groups) and to merge
sets of letters (pooled groups), and even took actions that did
not lead to new words but served only to maintain or establish
groupings.

strategies segregate subsets of letters from the rest, creating
visual displays with effectively fewer letters and potentially
constraining the search for letter combinations.
It seems clear to us that the consistent interactive strategies
we observed across all participants facilitate performance
mainly by helping to constrain the sets of letters under consideration at any one time. Note, however, that establishing
subsets of letters on the screen does not change what information is being displayed, only how it is being displayed. The
letters themselves do not change as a consequence of a participant’s actions, only their relative position changes. In a very
basic sense, then, interaction cannot change the abstract task,
it can change only how elements of the task are displayed. In
the end, we believe moving the letters around serves an attentional function for participants, enabling them to focus on a
subset of letters by organizing letters into groups in the visual
environment.
Obviously, participants in both the Non-interactive and Interactive conditions are solving the same abstract problem:
Finding words by rearranging letters in a given set. In the
non-interactive case, participants could rely only on internal processing, presumably some kind of search through the
space of letter and sound combinations (Maglio et al., 1999).
In the interactive case, participants can interleave external
actions with internal processing, presumably changing the
sort of search they need to perform. By interleaving internal
and external actions, participants may sometimes simplify the
search by restricting the set of letters. Though it is possible to
restrict the letters under consideration in the non-interactive
case internally, our results suggest that it is in fact easier to
do this in the interactive case externally.

Discussion
In summary, we found (a) an effect of Interactive trials on
productivity in the number of words produced during practice (normalized by pre-test score), (b) no effect of condition
on the number of words produced on the post-test relative to
the pre-test, (c) an effect of condition on the frequency of
words produced (with Interactive trials resulting in less frequent words), and (d) an effect of block, with less frequent
words produced in Block 2 than in Block 1. Thus, participants generated more words when they could interact with the
letters and they also generated lower frequency words when
they could interact with the letters. However, there was no
transfer from the Interactive trials during training to the Noninteractive post-test.
By observing in detail the behavior of participants in Interactive trials, we identified a number of consistent strategies that participants naturally developed and that simplify
the problem of searching for possible words. By grouping
letters in the environment, participants can effectively focus
attention on subsets of letters. In a set of 7 letters, there
are 13,692 different possible combinations of 2-to-7 letters.
In our stimuli, each set of letters could be arranged to generate only 85-135 words. Moving letters into groups of 4
decreases the theoretical search space from 13,692 combinations to 84 combinations. Both the pooling and multi-level

Summary and Future Work
Participants who could interact with letters in this Scrabblelike task found more words and found lower frequency words
than those who could not interact. These differences may
have resulted from the interactive group’s ability to simplify
the problem of word-finding by spatially grouping different
subsets of letters. In a process of searching through the space
of letter combinations, restricting the set of letters under consideration at any given time seems to facilitate search.
Yet the question of what role interaction with the task environment is playing is not fully answered. It is possible that
the organization of items on the screen and not the act of organizing the items on the screen may have the biggest impact on
performance. This could be tested by comparing the performance on an interactive version of the task with performance
on a non-interactive version in which letters are arranged on
the screen in a multi-level group or similar fashion.
Our result on whether training in the Interactive condition
facilitates future performance in non-interactive settings is inconclusive. Whereas we did not find transfer from interactive
training to non-interactive test, it is possible we did not provide enough training or that the test stimuli were not properly
controlled. For instance, here, we controlled for difficulty by

720

ensuring that each letter set was highly productive and contained words of about the same frequency and length, but manipulating frequency may shed light on differences on what is
being learned in interactive or non-interactive training.

ceedings of twenty-first annual conference of the cognitive
science society (p. 326-330). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Mayzner, M. S., & Tresselt, M. E. (1958). Anagram solution times: A function of letter order and word frequency.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56, 376-379.
Simon, H. A. (1989). The scientist as problem solver. In
D. Klahr & K. Kotovsky (Eds.), Complex information processing: The impact of herbert a. simon (p. 376-398). Hilsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Smith, G. (2001). Interaction evokes reflection: Learning
efficiency in spatial visualization. In C. Montgomerie &
J. Viteli (Eds.), Proceedings of world conference on educational multimedia, hypermedia and telecommunications
2001 (pp. 1755–1760). Norfolk, VA: Association for the
Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE).
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., & Wrightman, M. (2010). Interactive
skills and individual differences in a word production task.
AI & Society, 25(4), 433-439.

Acknowledgments
We thank Lamar Williams for help constructing the iPad software, Cesar Gamez for help running subjects, Carolyn Jennings and Bodo Winter for helpful discussions of the study
and results, and Teenie Matlock for use of her lab, helpful
discussions and feedback, and comments on an early draft of
this paper.

References
Balota, D., Yap, M., Hutchison, K., Cortese, M., Kessler, B.,
Loftis, B., . . . Treiman, R. (2007). The english lexicon
project. Behavior Research Methods, 39(3), 445-459.
Carlson, R. A., Avraamides, M. N., Cary, M., & Strasberg,
S. (2007). What do the hands externalize in simple arithmetic?. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 33(4), 747–756.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting body, brain, and world
together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. J. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58, 7-19.
Destefano, M., Lindstedt, J. K., & Gray, W. D. (2011). Use
of complementary actions decreases with expertise. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the cognitive science society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Fu, W.-T., & Gray, W. D. (2006). Suboptimal tradeoffs in
information seeking. Cognitive Psychology, 52(3), 195 242.
Fusaroli, R., Ostergaard, S., Raczaszek-Leonardi, J.,
Bjørndahl, J. S., Stjernfelt, F., & Tylen, K. (2014). Doing words together: assessing joint problem solving in a
scrabble task. In Proceedings of the thirty-seventh annual
conference of the cognitive science society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Hutchins, E. (1995a). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995b). How a cockpit remembers its speed.
Cognitive Science, 19.
Kirsh, D. (1995a). Complementary strategies: Why we
use our hands when we think. In Proceedings of seventeenth annual conference of the cognitive science society
(pp. 212–217). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kirsh, D. (1995b). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence, 73, 31–68.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic
from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18, 513-549.
Maglio, P. P., & Kirsh, D. (1996). Epistemic action increases with skill. In Proceedings of the eighteenth annual
conference of the cognitive science society. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Maglio, P. P., Matlock, T., Raphaely, D., Chernicky, B., &
Kirsh, D. (1999). Interactive skill in scrabble. In Pro-

721

