How Sharing Contexts Influence Purchase Amounts: The Case of Food Choices
Jeffrey R. Parker (jeffparker@gsu.edu)
Marketing Department, Georgia State University
PO Box 3991, Atlanta, GA 30302 USA

Nita Umashankar (numashankar@gsu.edu)
Marketing Department, Georgia State University
PO Box 3991, Atlanta, GA 30302 USA

Martin G. Schleicher (mschleicher@iae.edu.ar)
Marketing Department, IAE Business School
Mariano Acosta s/n y Ruta Nacional 8 (B1629WWA) Pilar, Buenos Aires, Argentina

how people approach decisions in sharing (if not all)
decision contexts are (i) their egocentric perspectives of
the choice context and (ii) the aspects of the choice
context under their control. Egocentric perspectives
(Zhang and Epley 2009) bias the manner in which
information is perceived and/or the information to which
one simply has access. In sharing contexts, people have
direct (limited/no) access to their (others’) personal
resources, motives, and intentions. Such informational
asymmetries focus the individual on the more-easily
accessed information (Zhang and Epley 2009), which will
consequently tend to be more influential at the time of
choice (Higgins 1996). Concurrently, while people have
control over what they will purchase, consume, and give
in sharing contexts, they are likely to have little or no
control over what others will purchase, consume, and
give. Together, the information and control asymmetries
inherent in sharing contexts should bias peoples’ thoughts
toward the amount they intend to give (and personally
consume), and away from the amount they expect to
receive. Given the regularity with which people make
decisions in sharing contexts, this giving-bias is likely to
become an ingrained aspect of their decision-making
processes in those contexts (Amir and Levav 2008).
Two pilot studies, using participants recruited from
Amazon Mechanical Turk (hereafter, AMT) supported the
existence of a giving-bias in sharing contexts. The first
pilot study asked 25 participants the seemingly simple
question, “What does it mean to share with someone?”
Fifty-six percent indicated that sharing was the act of
giving to another, 24% indicated that it was an act of
allowing or offering others access to or the use of
something, and 0% made any mention of either (i)
receiving from others, or (ii) others being in debt to the
giver. The second pilot study asked 30 participants to
indicate (i) the type of food they would bring to a potluck,
(ii) the amount they would bring, and (iii) how they
decided on that amount. Fifty-seven percent indicated that
they decided the amount to bring based on the amount
they expected to give, while 0% indicated considering the

Abstract
This work focuses on the impact of sharing contexts on
consumers’ decision processes and purchase-amount
decisions. Four studies, using both hypothetical and real
(incentive-compatible) choices, find that people regularly
purchase more in sharing (vs. non-sharing) contexts.
Evidence is presented suggesting that a significant portion
of this effect is driven by a cognitive bias arising in sharing
contexts that focuses people on what they will give to
others, and away from what they will receive from others.
Consequences of this bias include the noted surplus in
purchase amounts, over-consumption, and waste.
Keywords: sharing; purchase amounts; decision processes

Introduction
This paper formally examines how sharing (vs. nonsharing) contexts influence purchase-amount decisions. In
contrast to non-sharing contexts in which people choose
only for themselves, the sharing contexts of interest here
are those in which it is announced—before purchase
decisions are made—that the members of a group will
share with each other (e.g., potluck dinners or group
picnics). Rationally, unless members of a group intend to
consume more or less in sharing contexts, there should be
no effect of these contexts on average purchase-amount
decisions: People will consume the same average amount
and, thus, should purchase the same average amount. Yet,
these sharing contexts may artificially complicate
purchase-amount decisions by making relevant not only
what people intend to personally consume, but also the
amount they expect to give to, and receive from, others.
Sharing contexts may further give rise to specific
motivational drivers, including social norms (Becker
2005), self-image concerns, or considerations of freeriding off of others’ purchases (Kiyonari and Barclay
2008)—all of which are largely irrelevant in non-sharing
contexts. Thus, purchase-amount decisions could differ
significantly between sharing and non-sharing contexts.
Two factors likely to have a significant influence on

1817

amount they would receive from others.
We are not suggesting that people in sharing contexts
explicitly believe they will receive nothing from others
but, instead, that the amount they expect to receive is not
salient or focused on at the time of the purchase-amount
decision and, therefore, not integrated into that decision.
To summarize, our general hypothesis is that people,
despite not intending to consume more, will purchase
significantly more in sharing than non-sharing contexts.
Further, a significant proportion of the observed increase
in purchase amounts should be directly attributable to the
outlined giving-bias, in addition to other causes such
social desirability concerns or uncertainty in others’
preferences. Since giving intentions should increase the
amount purchased, while receiving expectations should
decrease the amount one needs to purchase for personal
consumption, focusing on the former while ignoring the
latter should inflate purchase amounts. Formal hypotheses
are presented and tested across four experiments.

Hence, the third hypothesis tested in experiment 1 is:
H3: The influence of sharing (vs. non-sharing)
contexts on purchase amounts will be moderated by
group size. Purchase amounts will increase with
group size in sharing, but not non-sharing, contexts.
Method. One hundred sixty AMT participants were asked
to imagine that they were dining at a Buffalo wings
restaurant and were randomly assigned to one of four
between-subjects conditions in a 2 (group size: 3 vs. 10) x
2 (context: sharing vs. non-sharing). The sharing
condition explicitly stated that all group members would
order what they liked, but that everyone would share
when the food arrived. The non-sharing condition
explicitly stated that there would be no sharing during the
meal. Participants indicated the number of wings they
would order, responded to an attention-check and several
follow-up questions, and reported their age and gender.
Results. Eight participants that failed the attention check
were eliminated from the following analyses (final N =
152). The amount participants would normally eat was
included as a covariate in the following analyses.
A 2 (group size: 3 vs. 10) x 2 (context: sharing vs. nonsharing) between-subjects ANOVA revealed the expected
significant interaction (F(1,147) = 4.58, p = .034; table 1).
Planned contrasts revealed that group size did not
influence the number of wings participants ordered in the
non-sharing conditions (F < 1, NS). However, participants
in the sharing conditions ordered significantly more wings
when the group had ten, versus three, members (F(1,147)
= 7.94, p < .006), supporting H3. Notably, the amount
ordered did not significantly vary by decision context
when the group consisted of 3 individuals. This may
suggest an important boundary condition: Perhaps as
group size decreases people more readily recognize the
give-and-take nature of the sharing context (e.g., it may
be easier to imagine or visualize receiving from one or a
few others). Alternatively, the amount one plans to give to
smaller groups should be less and perhaps measurement
error or other statistical noise overshadows the influence
of the sharing contexts on those decisions.

Experiments
Each of the following four experiments examines the
influence of sharing contexts on purchase-amount
decisions in the domain of food choices. The food-choice
domain was chosen because (i) food is regularly
purchased and consumed in the presence of others and is
most typically divisible—both necessary conditions for
sharing to occur—and (ii) food choices are regularly
influenced by perceptual (Chandon and Wansink 2007)
and cognitive (Parker and Lehmann 2014) processes.
Hence, any impact of sharing contexts on purchaseamount decisions should be observable in the domain of
food choices. Further, food choices are substantively
relevant and their consumption and waste consequences
are observable. Sample size in each experiment was
determined by the needs of co-run experiments (exp. 1 &
2) or the availability of participants (exp. 3a & 3b).

Experiment 1: Purchase-Amounts in Sharing
Contexts as a Function of Group-Size
The primary hypotheses tested in experiment 1 are:
H1: People will purchase significantly more food
in sharing (vs. non-sharing) contexts.
H2: The influence sharing (vs. non-sharing)
contexts have on purchase-amounts is driven by a
giving-biased decision-process: People will focus on
the amount they will give to others (and personally
consume) and neglect the amount they will receive
from others in sharing contexts.
The giving-biased decision process proposed here
yields a specific prediction regarding the influence of
group size: Each additional group member is a person
whom the individual may consider giving to and, thus,
purchase amounts should increase with the group size
(holding budget concerns constant) in sharing contexts.

Table 1: Average number of wings purchased by
condition (standard deviations in parentheses).

Group
Size

3
10

Sharing
13.76 (6.03)
17.53 (8.84)

Non-Sharing
12.15 (7.55)
10.61 (6.83)

An equivalent analysis of the participants’ intended
consumption levels revealed participants intended to eat
less in sharing contexts (M = 9.52 vs. 9.97; F(1,147) =
13.56, p < .001). Thus, the greater number of wings
ordered in the sharing (vs. non-sharing) condition cannot
be attributed to intended levels of consumption.

1818

Lastly, an equivalent analysis of the amount
participants intended to give to others revealed the
expected main effect of sharing context (Msharing = 6.73 vs.
Mnon-sharing = 1.40; F(1,147) = 30.77, p < .001), which was
qualified by a significant interaction with group size
(F(1,147) = 3.96, p < .05). Hayes’s (2013) PROCESS
macro (model 8) for testing moderated mediation
confirmed that the amount participants intended to give
was a significant mediator of the interaction between
group size and choice context (sharing vs. non-sharing)
on purchase amounts (95% CI, lower = .2551, upper =
3.9442), directly supporting H2. Several alternative
accounts of the results pertaining to expected
cost/payment, contextual generosity, and preference
uncertainty were examined but not supported.

following analyses—leaving a final sample size of 352.
All participants were (i) shown a picture of a plate
containing a variety of picnic sandwiches, (ii) informed
that “each picnic sandwich is about ¼ the size of a
traditional, sliced bread sandwich,” and (iii) asked the
number of picnic sandwiches they would typically eat.
Participants were then asked to imagine they would be
attending a picnic with nine friends and randomly
assigned to one of five between-subjects conditions: one
non-sharing condition and four sharing conditions
organized in a 2 x 2 factorial design (the factors and
levels are detailed below). Participants assigned to the
non-sharing condition were given the following
instructions: In terms of food, it has been decided that
each person will bring his or her own lunch. You’ve
decided to bring picnic sandwiches for yourself. Those
assigned to the sharing conditions were informed: In
terms of food, it has been decided that the group will
share the food that is brought during lunch. The group
has decided that each person should bring picnic
sandwiches of his/her preference to share.
All participants were asked the number of sandwiches
they (i) anticipated receiving from others and (ii) expected
to give to others. In the non-sharing condition, both
questions were answered after the purchase-amount
decision. Within the sharing conditions, the timing of
these questions was manipulated in 2 (receiving salient:
no vs. yes) x 2 (giving salient: no vs. yes) betweensubjects design. Those in the baseline-sharing condition
answered both questions after the purchase amount
decision, as in the non-sharing condition. Those in the
receiving-salient condition indicated the amount they
expected to receive before, and the amount they expected
to give after, the purchase-amount decision. Those in the
giving-salient condition did the opposite. Finally,
participants in the receiving and giving-salient (hereafter
R&G-salient) condition answered both questions before
the purchase amount decision. Lastly, participants
answered four questions measuring their generosity
motives and several other follow-up questions.

Experiment 2: What Drives Purchase-Amount
Decisions In Sharing (vs. Non-Sharing) Contexts?
Experiment 2 tests the giving-bias argued to arise in
sharing contexts via moderation. Since focusing people on
neglected information can de-bias decision processes
(Higgins 1996; Kahn, Luce, and Nowlis 2006), focusing
them on the amount they will likely receive before the
purchase-amount decision should de-bias the process and
significantly reduce purchase amounts.
H4a: In sharing contexts, focusing people on the
amount they expect to receive from others (vs. not)
before the purchase-amount decision will
significantly reduce the amount of food purchased.
In contrast, explicitly focusing their pre-decision
attention on the amount they will give to others should
have little to no impact on the amount purchased. Hence:
H4b: In sharing contexts, focusing people on the
amount they expect to give to others (vs. not) before
the purchase-amount decision will not significantly
reduce the amount of food purchased.
Importantly, those who are more motivated by
generosity should be those most concerned with the
amount they will give in sharing situations. Hence, these
people will inherently be more likely to (i) focus on what
they will give to others and (ii) neglect what they will
receive from others. Therefore, that the moderating
influence of focusing people on what they expect to
receive will be the most pronounced among those more
motivated by generosity in sharing contexts. Formally:
H5: The greater the motivation to be/appear
generous, the greater the extent to which focusing
people on the amount they expect to receive from
others (before the purchase-amount decision) will
reduce purchase amounts.

Results. An omnibus ANOVA revealed that purchase
amounts were significantly influenced by the condition to
which participants were assigned (F(4,346) = 10.68, p <
.001; table 2), as expected, and that participants’ typical
consumption levels were a significant covariate (F(1,346)
= 7.32, p < .008). Further, replicating experiment 1 and
supporting H1, purchase amounts were significantly
higher in the baseline-sharing than the non-sharing
condition (F(1,346) = 37.00, p < .001). Note, purchaseamounts in all sharing conditions were significantly
greater than those in the non-sharing condition (table 2).
We next simultaneously tested (Hayes 2013) if the
effect of sharing contexts on purchase amounts was
mediated by the amount participants (i) intended to eat,
(ii) intended to give to others, and (iii) expected to receive

Method. Three-hundred ninety-eight AMT participants
completed experiment 2. Forty-six participants failed one
or both of two attention checks pertaining to crucial
aspects of the experiment were dropped from the

1819

from others. Supporting H2, the influence of baseline
sharing (vs. non-sharing) contexts on purchase-amounts
was significantly mediated by the amount participants
intended to give (95% CI, lower = 8.8767, upper =
16.5655) and intended to eat (95% CI, lower = .0176,
upper = 4.1573), but not by the amount they expected to
receive (95% CI, lower = -1.7549, upper = 2.7914). In
sum, sharing contexts once again significantly increased
purchase amounts, an effect primarily driven by giving
intentions. For the remaining analyses, we focus on the
four sharing conditions to directly examine H4a/b and H5.

Generosity-motivation did not have a significant main
effect or other significant interaction effects on purchaseamounts. In sum, these results directly support H5 and are
consistent with the contention that the proposed giving
bias will be strongest amongst those more strongly
motivated by being/appearing generous. No other
meaningful differences were found related to our other
follow-up questions.
In sum, participants purchased significantly more food
in the baseline- (vs. non-) sharing condition, replicating
experiment 1 and supporting H1. Focusing on the sharing
conditions, it was found that making receiving
considerations salient significantly reduced the amount of
food purchased—supporting H4a—while making giving
considerations salient had no significant influence on
purchase amounts—supporting H4b. Lastly, it was found
that the mitigating influence of the receiving-salient
manipulation on purchase amounts was stronger for those
participants more motivated by generosity, supporting H5.
Although possible, it seems unlikely that focusing
participants on the amount they expected to receive
decreased the need to be generous. Indeed, no correlation
was found between our receiving-salient manipulation
and participants’ self-reported generosity motives.

Table 2: Average number of picnic sandwiches purchased
by condition (means with the same superscript within a
given column are significantly different at p < .05).
Condition
Non-Sharing
Sharing
Baseline
Receiving-Salient
Giving-Salient
R&G-Salient

Mean
5.89

SD
5.58

20.23a,b
12.24a,c
19.19c
15.39b

17.17
11.34
12.13
14.17

As expected, even when accounting for giving
intentions,
receiving
expectations,
and
typical
consumption levels, purchase amounts were significantly
reduced by the receiving-salient manipulation (Msalient =
13.77 vs. Mnot-salient = 19.75; F(1,281) = 14.96, p < .001),
supporting H4a. Conversely, significant effects were not
found for the giving-salient manipulation (Msalient = 17.25
vs. Mnot-salient = 16.32; F(1,281) = 1.54, p > .21),
supporting H4b, or the interaction between the two
salience manipulations (F(1,281) = 2.79, p = .10). The
results are robust: removing the covariates strengthens the
effect of the receiving-salient manipulation and further
weakens the giving-salient and interaction effects.
Four items measuring participants’ motivations to be
and appear generous were highly correlated (α = .85) and
averaged into a single measure of generosity motives. The
generosity-motive measure (mean-centered) was added to
the model used in the previous analysis and interacted
with the two salience manipulations to test H5. Doing so
did not meaningfully alter any of the primary results, but
did reveal a significant interaction between generositymotives and the receiving-salient manipulation (F(1,277)
= 6.98, p < .009). This interaction was decomposed via a
spotlight analysis (Spiller et al. 2013) at +/- 1 SD on the
generosity-importance measure. Consistent with our
theory, it was found that the receiving-salient
manipulation significantly decreased purchase amounts
among those more motivated by generosity (LSMsalient =
13.86 vs. LSMnot-salient = 20.62; t = 4.72, p < .001).
Conversely, the receiving-salient manipulation had no
influence on those less motivated by generosity (LSMsalient
= 15.20 vs. LSMnot-salient = 15.81; t = .34, p > .73).

Experiments 3a and 3b: Real-World PurchaseAmount Decisions in Sharing Contexts
Experiments 3a and 3b were both field experiments
completed by executive MBA students in a South
American country. In total, we were allowed access to
four sections of students. We discuss the commonalities
between the two experiments here, and the differences
within the respective methods sections below.
In all conditions students were given a budget roughly
equivalent to five U.S. dollars that they could use to
purchase their lunch from a set menu of empanadas (six
different types of empanadas were available to choose
from to account for intrinsic food preferences, allergies,
and other dietary concerns). This budget allowed them to
choose up to ten empanadas each, far more than the
typical individual can eat in a single meal. Participants
were informed that any portion of their budget not spent
on food would be given to them in cash (i.e., the
experiments were incentive-compatible). During the lunch
break, the students received the empanadas—at which
point the amount consumed and leftover was recorded—
and were given any change they were owed.
Measuring waste is not straightforward since people
may not intend to waste food that is not immediately
consumed. For this reason, we hypothesize the effect of
sharing (vs. non-sharing) contexts on the amount
consumed but not on the amount wasted. Specifically:
H6: Consumers will consume significantly more
food in sharing (vs. non-sharing) contexts.

1820

Experiment 3a: Method. One hundred fifteen students
divided across two sections participated in experiment 3a.
Immediately prior to filling out the order-sheets,
participants were told either (i) to order what they wanted
for lunch with no mention of sharing (the non-sharing
condition) or (ii) to order what they wanted for lunch but
that the class would be sharing all of the food when it was
delivered (the baseline-sharing condition). Once the
students had finished lunch, they were asked to indicate
the number of empanadas they had consumed.

baseline-sharing condition also ate more empanadas than
did those in the receiving-salient sharing condition, but
not significantly so (Mbaseline-sharing = 4.07 vs. Mreceiving-salient
=3.80; F < 1, NS). Thus, H6 is only directionally
supported in experiment 3b. Next, the number of
empanadas leftover was significantly greater in the
baseline-sharing condition than in the receiving-salient
sharing condition (Mbaseline-sharing = 1.31 vs. Mreceiving-salient =
.08; F(1,82) = 6.75, p < .02).
Experiments 3a and 3b: Discussion. Both field
experiments, using incentive-compatible designs,
supported our predictions: Participants purchased more in
sharing contexts (H1), but this effect was reduced when
their attention was directed toward the amount they
expected to receive from others (H4a). We intentionally
kept the baseline-sharing conditions identical in the two
field experiments to determine if the results might be
statistically comparable across experiments. As expected,
these two conditions were statistically indistinguishable in
terms of number of empanadas purchased (M3a = 5.54 vs.
M3b = 5.38; F < 1, NS), indicating that there were no
systematic differences between the samples used for the
two field experiments. Given their statistical equivalence,
the baseline-sharing conditions from the two field
experiments were combined into a single overall
“sharing” condition, while the non-sharing (3a) and
receiving-salient sharing condition (3b) were combined
into a single “other” condition. Contrasting these two
conditions—while including the specific experiment from
which the results emerged as a dummy-coded covariate—
reveals that participants in the sharing conditions ordered
significantly more (Msharing = 5.47 vs. Mother = 4.03;
F(1,196) = 27.25, p < .001), ate significantly more
(Msharing = 4.31 vs. Mother = 3.80; F(1,196) = 5.13, p < .03),
and had significantly more leftover food (Msharing = 1.18
vs. Mother = .23; F(1,196) = 11.70, p < .0001). Thus, H1
and H4a were supported. H6 also was supported, but less
so in experiment 3b.

Experiment 3a: Results. Eight students in the baselinesharing condition were unexpectedly unable to attend
lunch. We exclude these responses, but this has no effect
on the results. Those in the baseline-sharing condition
purchased significantly more empanadas than did those in
the non-sharing condition (Mbaseline-sharing = 5.58 vs. Mnonsharing = 4.15; F(1,104) = 15.78, p < .001). Thus, H1 was
supported using a fully incentive-compatible design with
real choices under budget constraints. Participants in the
baseline-sharing condition also ate significantly more
empanadas than did those in the non-sharing condition
(Mbaseline-sharing = 4.51 vs. Mnon-sharing = 3.80; F(1,104) =
5.17, p < .025), supporting H6. The number of empanadas
leftover was also significantly greater in the baselinesharing than in the non-sharing condition (Mbaseline-sharing =
1.08 vs. Mnon-sharing =.35; F(1,104) = 5.17, p < .025).
Experiment 3b: Method. Eighty-five students divided
across two sections participated in experiment 3b. To
address issues that might have arisen in experiment 3a
from participants perceiving their lunch budget as
windfall gains (Arkes et al. 1994) or house money (Clark
2002), participants in this experiment were asked to
complete an unrelated survey and informed that the
school would be compensating them for their time by
buying them lunch. Explicitly linking participants’ efforts
on the brand survey with the money they were given to
order lunch should make participants less likely to
consider that money as a windfall (Arkes et al. 1994).
All participants were placed in a sharing context in
experiment 3b, but we manipulated the salience of the
amount expected to be received from others between
conditions in order to test H4a. Specifically, the baselinesharing condition was identical to the one in experiment
3a. In contrast, the receiving-salient sharing condition
asked participants to answer the following question—
translated into Spanish—before placing their orders: “Of
the total number of empanadas you intend to eat, how
many will be from what your classmates ordered?”

General Discussion
Four experiments demonstrate that people tend to
purchase significantly more in sharing than non-sharing
contexts—the consequences of which can be overconsumption and waste. We proposed that, when making
purchase-amount decisions in sharing contexts, people are
unknowingly influenced by a cognitive giving-bias: The
amount one expects to give is salient and focal, while the
amount one expects to receive is largely ignored. Since
purchase amounts should increase (decrease) with the
amount one expects to give to (receive from) others, this
bias leads people to purchase significantly more in
sharing contexts, especially when sharing with larger
groups. Evidence for this was provided both via
mediation (experiments 1 and 2) and moderation

Experiment 3b: Results. Supporting H4a, participants in
the baseline-sharing condition purchased significantly
more empanadas than did those in the receiving-salient
sharing condition (Mbaseline-sharing = 5.38 vs. Mreceiving-salient =
3.88; F(1,82) = 11.67, p < .001). Participants in the

1821

(experiments 2 and 3b) of the effect. Indeed, it was found
that focusing people on the amount they expected to
receive prior to the purchase-amount decision
significantly reduced the amount purchased. This effect
was particularly pronounced among those for whom
generosity was more important (experiment 2), as would
be expected. Thus, although many factors may influence
purchase-amount decisions in sharing contexts, a
significant portion of the effect can be explained by the
proffered giving-bias.
The findings here are consistent with findings that
people consume more when they split the bill at a
restaurant (Gneezy, Haruvy, and Yafe, 2004). However,
in contrast to Gneezy et al.’s argument that consumption
is driven by selfish motives, our findings suggest that
increased consumption in such contexts may be driven by
over-purchasing—that is, by generosity motives.
Importantly, these findings are seemingly inconsistent
with two important previous findings: (i) the prevalence
of free-riding off others contributions in public goods
games and (ii) egocentric anchoring. Indeed, we agree
that what we find stands in stark contrast to many findings
that people will often free ride in public goods scenarios.
However, in contrast to the impersonal nature of many of
those investigations, participants in our studies either
were among friends or imagined they were. Hence, the
motive to be or appear generous is likely stronger in the
sharing contexts of interest here. Moreover, most of the
examined contexts are those in which each member’s
contributions can be relatively easily observed—a
contextual characteristic shown to reduce free-riding even
when other group members are unfamiliar (Kiyonari and
Barclay, 2008).
However, we do not believe that our findings are
inconsistent with egocentric anchoring (Zhang and Epley,
2009). On the contrary, it is our contention that much of
the effect is driven by individuals’ perspectives of the
context and the inherent biases that result. Still, our
results are admittedly inconsistent with egoistic biases,
which reflect self-serving motivations. But, as discussed
above, we feel this likely reflects the friendly and
personal nature surrounding most sharing contexts—
particularly those examined in the current work.
In closing, the current set of findings is not intended to
fully characterize the influence that sharing contexts have
on consumers’ purchase-amount decisions, much less on
decisions in general. On the contrary, there is much yet to
be learned. Hopefully these findings will stimulate further
research on the topic.

invaluable feedback on this paper.

References
Amir, O. and J. Levav (2008), “Choice Construction
versus Preference Construction: The Instability of
Preferences Learned in Context,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 45 (2), 145–58.
Arkes, H., C. A. Joyner, M. V. Pezzo, J. G. Nash, K.
Siegel-Jacobs, and E. Stone (1994), “The Psychology
of Windfall Gains,” Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 59 (3), 331–47.
Arora, N. and G. M. Allenby (1999), “Measuring the
Influence of Individual Preference Structures in Group
Decision Making,” Journal of Marketing Research, 41
(11), 476–87.
Becker, G. (2005), A Treatise on the Family, enlarged ed.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Belk, R. (2010), “Sharing,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 36 (1), 715–34.
Chandon, P. and B. Wansink (2007), “Is Obesity Caused
by Calorie Underestimation? A Psychophysical Model
of Fast-Food Meal Size Estimation,” Journal of
Marketing Research, 44 (1), 84–99.
Clark, J. (2002), “House Money Effects in Public Good
Experiments,” Experimental Economics, 5 (3), 223–31.
Gneezy, U., E. Haruvy, and H. Yafe (2004), The
Inefficiency of Splitting the Bill,” The Economic
Journal, 114(495), 265-280.
Higgins, E. T. (1996), “Knowledge Activation:
Accessibility, Applicability, and Salience,” in Social
Psychology: Hanbook of Basic Principles, Ed. E. T.
Higgins and A. W. Kruglanski, New York: The
Guilford Press, 133–68.
Kahn, B. E., M. F. Luce, and S. M. Nowlis (2006),
“Debiasing Insights from Process Tests,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 33(1), 131-38.
Kiyonari, T. and P. Barclay (2008), “Cooperation in
Social Dilemmas: Free Riding May be Thwarted by
Second-order Reward Rather than by Punishment,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95 (4),
826–42.
Parker, J. R. and D. R. Lehmann (2014), “How and When
Grouping Low-Calorie Options Reduces the Benefits of
Providing Dish-Specific Calorie Information,” Journal
of Consumer Research, 41 (1), 213–35.
Zhang, Y. and N. Epley (2009), “Self-Centered Social
Exchange: Differential Use of Costs versus Benefits in
Prosocial Reciprocity,” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 97 (5), 796–810.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank (in alphabetical order)
Ryan Hamilton, Donald R. Lehmann, Nicholas Reinholtz,
Rom Y. Schrift, Morgan K. Ward, and the participants in
the CB Group at Georgia Tech University for their

1822

