How Causal Mechanism and Autocorrelation Beliefs Influence Information Search
Benjamin Margolin Rottman (rottman@pitt.edu)
Learning Research and Development Center, 3939 O’Hara St
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
Abstract
When testing which of multiple causes (e.g., medicines)
works the best, the testing sequence has important
implications for the validity of the final judgment. Trying one
cause for a period of time is important if the cause has
tolerance, sensitization, delay, or carryover effects (TSDC).
Alternating between the causes is important in autocorrelated
environments – when the outcome naturally comes and goes
in waves. Across two studies, participants’ beliefs about
TSDC influenced the amount of alternating; however, their
beliefs about autocorrelation had a very modest effect on the
testing strategy. This research helps chart how well people
adapt to various environments in order to optimize learning,
and it suggests that in situations with no TSDC effects and
high autocorrelation, people may not alternate enough.
Keywords: causal reasoning, information search, dynamic
environments

Introduction
Information Gathering and Hypothesis Testing in a
Causal Environment
How do people choose which of two causes produces the
most desirable outcome by repeatedly testing the two
causes? Information gathering and hypothesis testing have
been studied extensively in other fields. One particularly
close example is how people choose which of two gambles
produces the highest reward on average by repeatedly trying
the two gambles (Hills & Hertwig, 2010). However, testing
causes introduces a variety of complexities that need to be
considered in the testing process.
For concreteness, imagine that a patient has chronic back
pain and a doctor gives the patient two medicines to try.
Each day the patient can try one of the two medicines, and
at the end of 14 days he makes a choice about which
medicine is better so the doctor write a prescription for the
indefinite future. The question of interest is how the patient
chooses between the two medicines on each of the 14 days.
One critical feature of causal search is that different
causes have different temporal mechanisms. Tolerance is
when a cause generally, or a medicine in particular, initially
works but has weaker effectiveness with repeated use (e.g.,
caffeine). Sensitization is when a cause requires repeated
use to become effective (e.g., antidepressants). Delay,
somewhat similar to sensitization, is when a cause takes
time before working. Lastly, carryover is when a cause
continues to work even after the cause is stopped.
In the back pain scenario, if the patient believes that the
medicines could have tolerance, sensitization, delay, or
carryover (hereafter TSDC) effects, it would make sense to
perseverate, to try Medicine 1 for a while and then switch to

Medicine 2 for a while, rather than alternating between the
two. For tolerance and sensitization, perseveration is
necessary to see if the effectiveness changes over time. For
delay and carryover, switching quickly between the
medicines will make it difficult to determine whether the
current medicine is responsible for the current level of back
pain, whether the previous medicine is having an influence
(carryover), or whether the current medicine has not started
to work (delay). Trying each medicine for a period of time
will give a clearer picture of which medicine is better
(Laska, Meisner, & Kushner, 1983).
Another critical feature of the environment is the temporal
pattern of the outcome variable (e.g., back pain) over time.
In some environments the outcome is autocorrelated. For
example, presumably an individual’s back pain comes and
goes in waves (autocorrelated). In other environments the
outcome variable is random from one observation to the
next. Though it is theoretically possible for an individual
patient’s back pain to be random from day to day, more
obvious situations of independent and identically distributed
(iid, or low autocorrelation) data involve a doctor trying the
medicines on 14 separate patients such as in a betweensubjects randomized controlled trial.
If the outcome is IID, the order in which the two
medicines are tested does not matter. However, in
autocorrelated environments, it is problematic to try Cause 1
for a long period of time before trying Cause 2 for a long
period of time. Consider trying Medicine 1 for 7 days, and
then Medicine 2 for 7 days, and the pain generally decreases
over the 14 days. It is not possible to know if the decrease is
due to the change in medicine or due to an underlying
temporal trend because they are confounded. Instead,
alternating between the medicines would distinguish the
medicines and the underlying trend, leading to more
accurate inference.
In sum, increased plausibility of TSDC effects should
lead a learner to perseverate more. Believing that the
baseline trend comes and goes in waves (is autocorrelated)
should lead a learner to alternate more. There is existing
evidence that people are able to detect more vs. less
autocorrelation (Lopes & Oden, 1987), detect whether a
causal mechanism is exhibiting tolerance or sensitization
(Rottman & Ahn, 2009), and use knowledge about delay
when interpreting time-series data for making causal
inferences (e.g., Hagmayer & Waldmann, 2002). However,
it is not known whether people are able to make use of
knowledge about TSDC and autocorrelation when planning
a testing strategy to optimize learning rather than just
interpreting pre-existing data.

2033

Motivation of Current Experiments

Methods

A previous set of studies using the medicine for back pain
scenario found that most participants tended to perseverate,
though about 7% of participants alternated consistently
(Rottman, 2014). In this task the underlying back pain
function was autocorrelated, which caused participants who
perseverated to have very high error rates, grossly over or
underestimating the actual difference in the effectiveness of
the two medicines. For example, if the baseline pain trend
increased over time, participants often concluded that the
first medicine worked much better than the second.
Participants who alternated, either by choice or by
instruction, were much more accurate. Furthermore,
perseveration vs. alternation did not make a difference when
the underlying function was random from day to day.
Given that perseveration caused worse performance, why
did most participants perseverate? One potential reason is
that they were worried about TSDC effects and wanted to
give each medicine enough time to exhibit these effects. A
second reason is that they thought that back pain was
random from day to day, in which case alternation would
not be necessary. The current studies test whether people
have the foresight to choose appropriate search strategies
based on their beliefs about autocorrelation and TSDC.
There are at least two other factors that may influence this
search task. If participants really imagine themselves as the
patient in the scenario, they might try to test the medicine
that they think is currently working the best (“exploiting”).
This could lead to just a couple switches between the
medicine rather than frequent alternating. A very similar
strategy to exploiting is some sort of positive test strategy –
to keep on testing the medicine that one thinks is working
better because one erroneously thinks that testing this
medicine is the best way to figure out which of the two
medicines actually works best. Exploiting and positive
testing are hard to empirically disentangle.
The following two studies test whether people are able to
use their beliefs about autocorrelation and TSDC effects to
choose more optimal search strategies. In Study 1, I
approached this question by creating cover stories for which
participants had different pre-existing beliefs about
autocorrelation and TSDC to see if they are able to make
use of these beliefs. In Study 2, I directly manipulated
participants’ beliefs about TSDC and autocorrelation. Both
of these studies have strengths and weaknesses. The strength
of Study 2 is that it has a high degree control. However, the
weakness is that by manipulating people’s beliefs explicitly
it cannot assess how people behave in situations for which
their beliefs about TSDC and autocorrelation are internally
generated. In addition, Experiment 2 used 15 different cover
stories to examine information search across a variety of
situations for external validity.

Participants There were 300 participants from MTurk,
about 20 participants per cover story. They were paid $1 for
about 6-8 minutes, with the possibility of a bonus.

Study 1
The purpose of Study 1 was to test whether background
information that participants have about TSDC effects and
autocorrelation influences their information search patterns.

Stimuli and Design There were three conditions and five
cover stories per condition (Table 1). Condition A was the
base case with high autocorrelation and low TSDC. A
prototypical cover story is choosing which of two gas
stations has cheaper prices after visiting one or the other for
14 weeks. Presumably participants would realize that gas
prices fluctuate in waves over time. However, going to one
gas station on a given week should have no effect on the gas
prices the next week (no opportunity for TSDC effects).
Condition B had stories with high autocorrelation and
high TSDC. A prototypical example is testing two
medicines on their effects on back pain within one patient
over 14 days. Here TSDC effects are plausible, and back
pain is likely to come and go in waves even without taking
any medicine. Comparing Conditions A and B tests whether
beliefs about TSDC have an influence on search strategy
Table 1: Summary of Cover Stories in Study 1.
Condition A – TSDC Low, Autocorrelation High: This is
the base case to which the other two conditions can be
directly compared. The stories are 1) choosing which gas
station has cheaper prices after visiting one or the other for
14 weeks, 2) determining which grocery store has cheaper
blueberry prices after going to one or the other for 14
weeks, 3) deciding which location to install a solar panel by
testing how much electricity it generates in one or the other
location over 14 days, 4) deciding on a new deodorant by
trying one or the other for 14 days, 5) choosing the faster
route to work by trying one or the other for 14 days.
Condition B – TSDC High Autocorrelation High:
Participants tested two treatments on one patient over 14
consecutive days to figure out which treatment worked
better. The causes could potentially have TSDC effects. The
scenarios involve testing which of two medicines works
better to relieve 1) back pain or 2) allergies, 3) testing two
brands of vitamin supplement to increase vitamin D, 4)
testing psychological reward vs. punishment to reduce
thumb sucking in a child, and 5) testing yoga vs. meditation
to improve mood.
Condition C - TSDC Low, Autocorrelation Low: Each of
the 14 observations should be viewed as independent of the
prior observation. The scenarios involve 1) choosing
between two instant lottery games on 14 consecutive days to
figure out which one has the higher payoff, 2) having 14
consecutive restaurant customers judge one of two teas
before deciding which tea to buy for future customers 3)
choosing which of two pain medicines works better by
testing them on 14 different patients, 4) choosing whether
reward vs. punishment works better to reduce thumb
sucking in 14 children, 5) choosing whether yoga vs.
meditation improves mood more in 14 separate patients.

2034

Condition C had stories with low autocorrelation and low
TSDC effects. A prototypical example is a doctor testing
two back pain medicines on 14 sequential patients (each
patient gets only one medicine once). There should be no
autocorrelation or TSDC effects across 14 patients because
there is no plausible way that one patient’s pain level or
medicine should influence another patient’s pain level.
Comparing Conditions A and C tests for an influence of
autocorrelation beliefs on the testing strategy.
There is no fourth condition because it is difficult to
conceive of situations in which each observation is
independent from the previous one (low autocorrelation) yet
an intervention at one time could have some TSDC effect at
a later time. It is not that such a case is impossible (see
Experiment 2), but that it would be hard to devise a natural
situation that participants would confidently interpret as
having low autocorrelation and high TSDC effects.
There were 3 reasons for having 5 stories per condition.
First, if only one story was used per condition, any
differences between condition could be due to the different
story. Thus I took the approach of sampling from a broader
range. Second, using a variety of stories introduces
variability in the cover stories within and across conditions
(e.g., degree of belief in autocorrelation), which is useful for
correlational analyses. Third, the cover stories allow for a
degree of external validity not typically afforded to many
reasoning studies.
Procedures and Manipulation Checks Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the 15 cover stories. After
reading the story they answered two questions about
whether the outcome (e.g., pain, mood) was autocorrelated
or not. Two measures were used because there are no
validated instruments about autocorrelation beliefs, and
autocorrelation beliefs can be queried multiple ways.
Question 1 asked whether the outcome scores were closely
related (9) to the prior observation or not (1). Question 2
showed participants a graph with low, medium, and high
autocorrelation and participants judged which graph
reflected their beliefs about the outcome on a 1-9 scale.
Even though the two measures were not strongly correlated,
r=.27, p<.001, they behave similarly for all the analyses, so
they are averaged for simplicity. The manipulation worked
as intended. Participants believed that autocorrelation was
higher in Condition A (M=5.4, SD=1.8) than C (M=3.5,
SD=2.0), t(202)=7.01, p<.001, d=.98, and there was no
difference between A and B (M=5.6, SD=1.7), t(197)<1.
Then, participants in Condition B were asked to rate
whether the causes would have TSDC effects. These four
questions were not asked in Conditions A and C. For
example, it does not make sense how one patient’s medicine
would have a tolerance or carryover effect on another
patient’s back pain (Condition C). Asking participants to
make such a judgment could encourage unintended beliefs
about the scenario to accommodate the question. The only
exception was that these questions were asked of the

deodorant story in Condition A; this story was included in
Condition A instead of B because it was guessed that
deodorant would be viewed to have low TSDC effects.
Beliefs about tolerance, sensitization, delay, and
carryover were all significantly (p<=.01) but weakly (rs in
the range of .23-.27) correlated; the only exception was that
tolerance and delay were uncorrelated, r=-.06, p=.53). Even
though they were weakly associated, they are all expected to
have the same influence on alternation (and indeed they all
show the same pattern when analyzed separately), so for
conceptual convenience they were averaged. Participants
were worried about the possibility of TSDC effects within
Condition B; the average rating was 5.12, right at the middle
of the 9-point scale, “somewhat likely”. Average ratings for
individual scenarios ranged from 4.62 to 5.78. The
deodorant story had an average rating of 3.35, verifying that
it did belong in Condition A.
Next, participants were tasked with figuring out which of
the two options produced a better outcome. Participants
received 14 sequential choices between the two options.
After they chose one option they saw the outcome score
(e.g., pain, mood, etc.). When they were ready they made
the next choice.
The outcome score after each choice was determined in
the following way. There was a baseline function that
participants did not know about. One of the options
increased the score of the baseline function by exactly 5
points whenever it was chosen, and the other did not change
the score from the baseline function. So, at any given
choice, one option always worked exactly 5 points better
than the other, but participants could not directly experience
the 5 point difference because they had to choose between
the two options. The outcome scores were given
numerically, and disappeared when the next choice was
made; they did not see a graphical plot over time.
In Conditions A and B, the baseline function was a
compilation of three sine waves with different amplitudes
and frequencies. This function is highly autocorrelated and
gradually fluctuates in unpredictable waves. In Condition C,
14 observations from the function were sampled, but then
randomized so that the data would support the interpretation
that the observations were independent, not autocorrelated.
After making the 14 choices participants were instructed
to identify the better option (e.g., the higher option for the
Vitamin D scenario and the lower option for the back pain
scenario). They also rated how much better it was; 5 points
was the correct answer counterfactually. Participants knew
in advance that they would earn a 20, 15, 10, or 5 cent
bonus for a judgment within 2, 4, 6, or 8 points on either
side of the correct answer, respectively.
Finally, participants rated the extent to which they
exploited and used a positive test strategy. They were asked:
“When I thought that one medicine was working better than
the other, I would continue to use that medicine”…“in order
to reduce my pain during the 14 days” (exploitation) and “in
order to figure out whether it really works better or not to
choose the best medicine for the future” (positive testing).

2035

Exploitation and Positive Testing had a correlation of .70,
and were averaged to create one composite measure (EPT).
The reason for asking these questions was to understand
why certain participants perseverated. However, there is a
challenge in interpreting these sorts of questions in which
subjects introspect about their reasons for behaving in a
particular way; it is possible that they use the questions to
justify their behavior even if it was not actually the cause of
the behavior. Participants had higher ratings for exploiting
and positive testing in Condition B (M=5.3, SD=2.4) than A
(M=4.1, SD=2.8), t(197)=3.3, p=.001, and C (M=3.9,
SD=2.6), t(195)=4.1, p<.001, and no difference between A
and C, t(202)<1. This difference could be interpreted two
ways. First, it could be interpreted as a confound, that there
was some inherent difference in Condition B that lead to
exploiting and positive testing. Another interpretation is that
participants perseverated more in Condition B, and
consequently rated these questions higher as justification.
The analyses will account for both of these possibilities.
Autocorrelation High
25
20
15
10
5
0
25
20
15
10
5
0

Autocorrelation Low
TSDC High

Condition B

Condition A

Condition C
TSDC Low

1

4

7

10

13

1

4

7

10

13

Number of Alternations

Figure 1: Histograms of Alternation in Study 1.

Results
The dependent variable of interest was the number of times
that participants alternated between the two choices. Given
that there were 14 choices, there were 13 opportunities to
alternate; 9 participants are ignored in future analyses for
alternating zero times suggesting disengagement in the task.
Figure 1 shows histograms of the number of alternations.
In Condition B, almost all participants alternated less than
chance (7 out of 13 possibilities), and there were almost no
participants who consistently alternated. The most common
strategy was to try one option (often for exactly 7 days), and
then try another option.
In contrast, Conditions A and C have trimodal
distributions suggesting three strategies: alternating exactly
once, exactly 13 times, or something in the middle –
alternating roughly randomly or every 2 to 3 observations.
Because of the three distinct strategies, some of the
following analyses use multinomial regression with three
outcome categories: 1, 2-12, and 13.

Accuracy The prior research already demonstrated that
alternating reduces error in participants’ judgments of which
option is better and by how much. This finding was
replicated. Within the autocorrelation high conditions (A
and B), more alternation is associated with less absolute
(logged) error, b=-.11, p<.001, r2=.15, but within the
autocorrelation low condition (C), the number of
alternations had no influence on the amount of error, b=-.01,
p=.48, and the interaction is significant b=.09, p=.002. This
finding highlights the importance of alternating in
autocorrelated environments.
Autocorrelation Beliefs Conditions A and C provide the
minimal pair to test the influence of autocorrelation beliefs,
so only these two conditions are analyzed here. The critical
question is whether participants who believed that the
outcome was more likely to be autocorrelated alternated
more. In Figure 1 there is no obvious difference between
Conditions A vs. C. A multinomial logistic regression
assessed whether autocorrelation beliefs were associated
with different distributions across the three basic strategies
(1 vs. 2-12 vs. 13 alternations). The 2-12 strategy was set as
the reference, so the regression tests whether autocorrelation
beliefs are associated with a change in the ratio of 1 vs. 2-12
alternations, and in the ratio of 13 vs. 2-12 alternations. The
regression did not find any influence of participants’ beliefs
about autocorrelation on alternation: b=.04, p= .73 for 1 vs.
2-12, b=.02 p=.85 for 13 vs. 2-12. To investigate whether
the autocorrelation beliefs had an influence on the amount
of alternations within the range of 2-12 (n=127), a Gaussian
regression was run within this subset of data. There was a
marginal positive effect of beliefs about autocorrelation on
number of alternations, b=.17, p=.10; if there is any effect of
autocorrelation beliefs is very small, r2=.02.
TSDC beliefs There is a large difference in the pattern of
alternations between Conditions A and B (Figure 1). As
already explained, when comparing Conditions A and B
there is a possible confound of exploiting and positive
testing (EPT). This possible confound was accounted for
two ways.
First, multinomial regression was run to predict number
of alternations in Condition A vs. B while statistically
controlling for EPT. Higher scores on EPT where associated
with a higher ratio of 2-12 vs. 1 alternation, b=.39, p<.001.
The reason for this increase is that EPT often requires trying
Option 1, then trying Option 2, and sometimes switching
back to Option 1 if it is judged to be more beneficial; in
contrast, a common strategy that does not involve exploiting
is trying Option 1 for (roughly) 7 days and then Option 2 for
7 days. EPT was also associated with a higher ratio of 2-12
alternations relative to 13 alternations, b=1.02, p<.001;
alternating at every opportunity necessarily means not
exploiting. Above and beyond EPT, Condition B (relative to
Condition A) was associated with a higher ratio of 1
alternation relative to 2-12, b=.94, p=.03, and was also
associated with a higher ratio of 2-12 alternations than 13,

2036

b=1.64, p=.05. In sum, this analysis suggests that
participants alternated less in Condition B even after
controlling for EPT beliefs; a likely reason is the possibility
of TSDC effects.
The second way to test of an effect of TSDC beliefs but
removing the possible confound of EPT between Conditions
A and B, involved testing whether TSDC beliefs were
correlated with the amount of alternation only within
Condition B (and also including the deodorant story), for a
total of 118 participants. Because the distribution for
Condition B in Figure 1 does not show the characteristic trimodal distribution of the other two conditions, a Poisson
regression was run (due to the skew). This regression a did
not reveal an effect of TSDC, b=.02, p=.47. These findings
do not change if both TSDC and autocorrelation beliefs are
simultaneously used as predictors. In sum, there is mixed
evidence as to whether TSDC beliefs influence the amount
of alternation.

Discussion

Methods
Participants There were 201 participants from MTurk, and
they were again paid $1 with a bonus of up to 20 cents.
Stimuli and Design For increased control, only the back
pain cover story was used. The design was a 2 (TSDC: high
vs. low) x 2 (Autocorrelation: high vs. low).
Procedures The procedures were very similar to Study 1
except for the following differences. Beliefs about
autocorrelation were manipulated by presenting participants
with 14 days of pain scores sequentially before starting to

Autocorrelation Low

30
20
10
0
30

TSDC Low

Study 2

Autocorrelation High

TSDC High

Study 1 assessed whether beliefs about autocorrelation and
TSDC that participants have going into the search influence
the search pattern. It would make sense for high
autocorrelation beliefs to lead to many alternations, and for
high TSDC beliefs to lead to low alternation.
This study successfully activated beliefs of high vs. low
autocorrelation for different scenarios, yet these beliefs had
minimal if any influence on participants’ alternation
patterns. There is mixed evidence on whether TSDC effects
had an influence on the testing strategy. There was a
significant difference in the search patterns between the
high vs. low TSDC stories, even after accounting for a
possible confound of exploitation and positive testing.
However, beliefs about TSDC within the high TSDC
condition had no influence on search strategy.
The strength of Study 1 was that it assessed the influence
of participants’ own beliefs about TSDC and autocorrelation
in a variety of learning challenges, but the weakness is
lower control. Study 2 attempted a more controlled and
stronger manipulation of TSDC and autocorrelation beliefs
to see whether people can use this knowledge, when made
more explicit, to choose appropriate search strategies.

test the 2 medicines for another 14 days. The pain scores
(both in the initial 14 days and during the 14 days of testing)
were either autocorrelated using the same wave-like
function from Study 1, or they were from the same function
but randomized across the 28 days just like in the
autocorrelation low condition from Study 1. Participants
then judged the amount of autocorrelation in the back pain
level using the same two measures from Study 1. The two
measures were moderately correlated, r=.49, p<.001, and
both received significantly higher scores in the high
condition: Question 1, M=5.8 vs. 4.0, t(196.07)=6.71,
p<.001, d=.95; Question 2, M=7.0 vs. 3.0 t(198.96)=12.89,
p<.001, d=1.82.
After experiencing the initial 14 days, participants were
told that they visit a doctor who tells them about the two
medicines that they can test for 14 days. The doctor conveys
information about the medicines that manipulates whether
TSDC beliefs were high or low. Participants were told that
the medicines start to work in 30 minutes (low) vs. 1-2 days
(high), that they continue to work for 12 hours (low) vs. 1-2
days (high), and that they either do not (low) vs. may start to
work better or worse after repeated use (high). In order to
move forward with the study they had to correctly answer
three questions about TSDC to verify that participants had
read these instructions. The 14 days of testing proceeded the
same way as in Study 1.

20
10
0
1

4

7

10

13

1

4

7

10

13

Number of Alternations

Figure 2: Histograms of Alternation in Study 2.

Results
TSDC and Autocorrelation Beliefs Figure 2 shows
histograms of the number of alterations by condition. Casual
inspection reveals that 1) most participants across all
conditions alternated fairly little, 2) there appears to be
considerably more alternation in the low than high TSDC
condition, and 3) it is less evident whether the
autocorrelation manipulation influenced the test strategy.
A multinomial regression predicting alternation pattern (1
vs. 2-12 vs. 13) was run with autocorrelation and TSDC
conditions as predictors. Increasing TSDC beliefs increased
the ratio of 1 vs. 2-12 alternations, b=1.35, p<.001, and
(marginally) increased the ratio of 2-12 vs. 13 alternations,
b=1.86, p=.08. Increasing beliefs about the amount of

2037

autocorrelation increased the ratio of 2-12 vs. 1 alternation,
b=.95, p=.003, but it did not have an influence on ratio of 212 vs. 13 alternations, b=.26, p=.67.
For the sake of robustness, a Poisson regression was also
run to model the entire distribution rather than just the three
categories of alternation. Higher TSDC beliefs caused less
alternation, b=-.97, z=10.80, p<.001. Higher autocorrelation
beliefs caused a marginally higher amount of alternation,
b=.15, z=1.88, p=.06.

General Discussion
Two studies found that people use knowledge of tolerance,
sensitization, delay, and carryover effects (TSDC),
particularly when information about such effects was
provided explicitly instead of implicitly, for deciding how to
test which of two causes produces a better outcome. In
contrast, the studies found minimal use of beliefs about
autocorrelation in the environment for deciding how to test
the causes.
Performance in the TSDC low autocorrelation high
condition in Study 2 is especially problematic. In this
condition participants have all the information they need
that would warrant frequent switching (they know that
TSDC effects are not plausible and they know that the pain
function has waves), yet there was still no consistent pattern
of alternating, which would have produced more accurate
judgments and higher payoffs. Two likely culprits are a
desire to exploit, and positive testing, though it is very
difficult to empirically distinguish these two strategies.
Indeed, out of participants in Study 2 who eventually said
that one medicine was better than the other (not equal), 40%
tested both medicines exactly 7 times, 47% tested the
medicine they eventually thought worked better more than 7
times, and only 13% tested the medicine that they
eventually thought worked better less than 7 times.
Whenever one tests one option more than the other
(exploitation) it inherently limits the number of possible
alternations. One direction for future research is to examine
how people test two causes in a situation for which there is
no possibility of exploiting or the possible outcomes are
equally desirable.
How will these results, particularly the low rates of
alternation, translate into the real world? One plausible
hypothesis is in the real world people would want to exploit
even more, which could further reduce the probability of
choosing the correct medicine. On this topic, it will be
important to further probe whether implicit vs. explicit
beliefs moderate the extent to which knowledge about
TSDC and autocorrelation is used. In Study 2, knowledge
about TSDC and autocorrelation were made more explicit,
but in many contexts in the real world it would not be so
explicit (Study 1).
How do people test two causes when they also have the
possibility of trying neither? In the current study
participants were forced to try one or the other. Abstaining
from either cause, if used appropriately, could help

participants distinguish increasing and decreasing trends
from TSDC effects.
Another direction for future study is separately examining
beliefs about tolerance, sensitization, delay, and carryover
effects on the testing strategy. In the current research they
were grouped together because they should all have the
same influence on the amount of alternation. Additionally,
even if they are in fact separable, they are interrelated. For
example, sensitization is similar to delay, the difference
being that delay is the time of onset after a single dose or
intervention, whereas sensitization is an accumulation
across doses or interventions. Furthermore, in many
situations a learner may have a belief that TSDC effects are
plausible, but not have specific beliefs about any of them.
Thus, as a first investigation it seemed sensible to group
them together. But it will also be important to investigate
how people reason about combinations of them.
Lastly, an optimal learner model of autocorrelation and
TSDC would help clarify exactly how one should test two
causes. However, such a model will be challenging to build
because of the many possible functional forms of TSDC.
More broadly, most research on causal learning has
investigated situations with low autocorrelation and for
which TSDC effects are implausible. Yet, in many causal
decisions autocorrelation is high and TSDC effects are
plausible. Understanding how people reason in these
complex environments is critical for predicting human
behavior and providing support or training where people
have suboptimal habits, such as physicians and patients
working together to identify the optimal medicine.

References
Hagmayer, Y., & Waldmann, M. R. (2002). How temporal
assumptions influence causal judgments. Memory &
Cognition, 30(7), 1128–37.
Hills, T. T., & Hertwig, R. (2010). Information search in
decisions from experience. Do our patterns of sampling
foreshadow our decisions? Psychological Science, 21(12),
1787–92. http://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610387443
Laska, E., Meisner, M., & Kushner, H. B. (1983). Optimal
crossover designs in the presence of carryover effects.
Biometrics, 39(4), 1087–1091.
Lopes, L. L., & Oden, G. C. (1987). Distinguishing
Between Random and Nonrandom Events. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 13(3), 392–400.
Rottman, B. M. (2014). Information Search in an
Autocorrelated Causal Learning Environment. In P. Bello,
M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1321–1328). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Rottman, B. M., & Ahn, W. (2009). Causal learning about
tolerance and sensitization. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 16(6), 1043–9.
http://doi.org/10.3758/PBR.16.6.1043

2038

