Iconicity in English Vocabulary and its Relation to Toddlers’ Word Learning
Lynn K. Perry (lkperry@wisc.edu)
Marcus Perlman (mperlman@wisc.edu)
Gary Lupyan (lupyan@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract
Scholars have documented substantial classes of iconic
vocabulary in many non-Indo-European languages. In
comparison, Indo-European languages like English are
assumed to be arbitrary outside of a small number of
onomatopoeic words. In three experiments, we asked English
speakers to rate the iconicity of words from the MacArthurBates Communicative Developmental Inventory. We found
English—contrary to common belief—exhibits iconicity that
correlates with age of acquisition and differs across lexical
classes. Words judged as most iconic are learned earlier, in
accord with findings that iconic words are easier to learn. We
also find that adjectives and verbs are more iconic than nouns,
supporting the idea that iconicity provides an extra cue in
learning more difficult abstract meanings. Our results provide
new evidence for a relationship between iconicity and word
learning and suggest iconicity may be a more pervasive
property of spoken languages than previously thought.
Keywords: English, iconicity, sound symbolism, vocabulary,
word learning

Introduction
A long-held assumption of linguistics is that languages are
arbitrary by design (Saussure, 1983; C.F. Hockett, 1960),
and that outside of marginal cases like onomatopoeia, the
forms of words bear no resemblance to their meanings. As
Pinker and Bloom observed, arbitrariness is “most obvious
in the choice of individual words: there is no reason for you
to call a dog dog rather than cat except for the fact that
everyone else is doing it” (1990: p. 718).
With the modern understanding that signed languages are
bona fide languages, they became recognized as an
exception to the principle of arbitrariness. Many signs are
clearly iconic, exhibiting correspondence between form and
meaning: For example, in British Sign Language (BSL),
bringing a cupped hand close to the mouth to represent
“drinking.” Yet, researchers have often argued signers
ignore this iconicity during normal language use, and that it
is irrelevant to the acquisition of signs (e.g., Klima &
Bellugi, 1979; Orlansky & Bonvillian, 1984). Meanwhile,
researchers have generally maintained the theory that
spoken languages are essentially arbitrary. Indeed, some
have proposed that because of intrinsic limitations of the
vocal modality, spoken languages could simply be no other
way (e.g., Hockett, 1978; Tomasello, 2008).
However, linguists working outside of Indo-European
languages have documented that many spoken languages
feature a special lexical class of iconic vocabulary, often
termed mimetics, ideophones, or expressives (Diffloth,

1972; Voeltz & Kilian-Hatz, 2001). These words are
grammatically and phonologically distinct from other
lexical classes, and they serve adverbial or adjectival
functions through the depiction of sensory and motor
imagery (Dingemanse, 2012). For instance, in Japanese, the
word ‘koron’ refers to a light object rolling once, ‘korokoro’
to a light object rolling repeatedly, and ‘gorogoro’ to a
heavy object rolling repeatedly (Imai & Kita, 2014). Across
languages, these iconic words express a wide variety of
meanings spanning different modalities, including qualities
like luminance and color, manner of movement and speed,
shape, size, duration, texture, visual appearance, taste,
temperature, and emotional and psychological states.
The discovery that iconic lexical classes in non-IndoEuropean languages are so widespread has led some
researchers to propose that iconicity, as much as
arbitrariness, is a design feature of all languages, signed and
spoken (Perniss, Thompson, & Vigliocco, 2010; Perniss &
Vigliocco, 2014). According to this idea, Indo-European
languages, and especially English, are treated as exceptional
because of their obviously high degree of arbitrariness.
Vigliocco et al. (2014: p. 2) note:
“Indeed, if we look at the lexicon of English (or that of other
Indo-European languages), the idea that the relationship between
a given word and its referent is defined by an arbitrary
connection alone seems entirely reasonable. For example, there
is nothing in the sequence of sounds in the English word ‘house’
that indicates its meaning of ‘a building for human habitation.’”

Iconicity in Language Learning
Along with documentation that iconicity exists in many
spoken languages, mounting evidence indicates that it can
facilitate word learning. The apparent speed and ease with
which toddlers learn words has long seemed an incredible
feat given the apparent difficulty of the task at hand—
selecting the correct referent of a word from a potentially
infinite number of possibilities (Quine, 1960). Some
researchers have proposed that iconic words, through their
resemblance to meaning, could provide the learner with cues
to constrain the referent (Imai & Kita, 2014; Perniss &
Vigliocco, 2014). Iconicity could be an especially useful cue
when the word’s referent is not present in the environment,
or when its meaning is relatively abstract (e.g. verbs
compared to nouns, Gentner, 1982).
There is now evidence that iconicity does help learners to
associate spoken words with their referents. For example,
both Japanese- (Imai, Kita, Nagumo, & Okada, 2008) and

1859

English-speaking toddlers (Kantartzis, Imai, & Kita, 2011)
more accurately generalized novel sound-symbolic verbs
than novel non-sound-symbolic verbs. Importantly, while
the verbs in these studies were constructed based on existing
Japanese sound-symbolic words both groups of toddlers
benefitted from the iconicity, suggesting at least some level
of universality of the sound-referent pairings. Not only are
iconic words easier to learn, but when novel meanings are
denoted by iconic words, the meanings themselves (the
categories denoted by the words) have been shown to be
learned more quickly (Lupyan & Casasanto, 2014).
These findings show that iconicity can aid learning, but
left unknown is whether it plays a significant role in actual
learning. If so, languages ought to exhibit iconicity across
their lexicon in predictable ways (Imai & Kita, 2014;
Monaghan, Shillcock, Christiansen, & Kirby, 2014).
Iconicity should be more prevalent among the earliestlearned words and in words with referents that are most
difficult to identify in the environment. Thus, the degree of
iconicity in a lexicon should correlate with age of
acquisition (AoA) such that words higher in iconicity are
learned before words lower in iconicity. Additionally, words
with abstract referents that are more difficult to identify, e.g.
verbs, should be more iconic than words with concrete
referents that are identified more easily, e.g., nouns.
Recent studies of BSL provide some evidence for this
theory in the case of signed languages. Native BSL signers
rated the iconicity of common signs. Results showed that
signs learned earlier in development tend to be more iconic
(Vinson, Cormier, Denmark, Schembri, & Vigliocco, 2008;
Thompson, Vinson, Woll, & Vigliocco, 2012).
In spoken languages such as Japanese, with a rich iconic
lexical class, caregivers may use these words more
frequently with infants and toddlers to facilitate word
learning. Observations of the infant directed speech of
Japanese caregivers support this hypothesis (Imai & Kita,
2014). Proponents of this view have suggested that spoken
languages such as English, that do not have a special iconic
lexical class, may compensate for the lack of iconicity in
their lexicon by the use of co-speech iconic gestures and
prosody to link form and meaning (Thompson et al., 2012).
Additionally, English may actually be iconic in ways that
support word learning. To our knowledge, no one has ever
conducted a systematic study of iconicity across the lexicon
of a spoken language1. Here, we examine iconicity in
English vocabulary by asking native speakers to rate the
iconicity of 605 words from the MCDI. We assess whether
rated iconicity correlates with AoA, and whether it is
distributed differently across lexical classes.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants 442 native English speakers were recruited
from Amazon Mechanical Turk and received $0.35 for their
participation.
Stimuli We used words from the MCDI Words and
Sentences, a normed list of the early productive vocabulary
of 16-30-month-old toddlers learning American English
(Fenson et al., 1994). We removed compound and
polysemous words leaving 592 of the 680 words. The words
included nouns, verbs, adjectives, interjections (e.g., no),
sound effects (e.g., quack), and function words. Function
words comprised all closed class words including
determiners, pronouns, question words, conjunctions,
auxiliary verbs, prepositions and verb particles. The list did
not include any open class adverbs, such as those conveying
manner of motion (e.g., those productively derived from
adjectives with the suffix –ly). For statistical analyses, we
combined onomatopoeia and interjections into a single
lexical category. Syntactically and phonologically,
interjections behave similarly to onomatopoeia. Our
measure of AoA is the proportion of toddlers producing a
given word at 30 months as based on Dale & Fenson’s
(1996) norms.
Procedure To quantify the iconicity of English vocabulary,
we relied on a measure comparable to that used in the study
of signed languages: ratings by native speakers (Thompson
et al., 2012; Vinson et al., 2008) (see General Discussion for
a possible reservation with this procedure). Iconicity was
defined through the following instructions:
“Some English words sound like what they mean. For example,
SLURP sounds like the noise made when you perform this kind
of drinking action. An example that does not relate to the sound
of an action is TEENY, which sounds like something very small
(compared to HUGE which sounds big). These words are iconic.
You might be able to guess these words’ meanings even if you
did not know English. Words can also sound like the opposite of
what they mean. For example, MICROORGANISM is a large
word that means something very small. And WHALE is a small
word that means something very large. And finally, many words
are not iconic or opposite at all. For example there is nothing
canine or feline sounding about the words DOG or CAT. These
words are arbitrary. If you did not know English, you would not
be able to guess the meanings of these words.” 2

Participants then rated each word, one at a time, on a scale
from -5 to 5 such that -5 indicated words that sound like the
opposite of what they mean, 5 indicated words that sound
like what they mean, and 0 indicated words that are
arbitrary—do not sound like what they mean or the
opposite. Each word was presented to the left of a slider
scale that participants used to indicate their rating.
2

1

But see discussion below of Monaghan, et al. (2014) and their
study of systematicity in English.

This example of anti-iconicity comes from Hockett (1960: 90):
“’Whale’ is a small word for a large object; ‘microorganism’ is the
reverse.” ‘Dog’ and ‘cat’ are commonly used as examples of
arbitrariness, as in Pinker and Bloom (1990) above.

1860

0.2
Residual Iconicity Rating

Analysis We examined the effect of iconicity on predicting
Age of Acquisition using linear mixed effects regression
models. Significance levels were calculated using chi-square
tests that compared fit of mixed-effect models with and
without the factor of interest (Baayen, Davidson, & Bates,
2008). To eliminate alternative explanations for a
relationship between our ratings and AoA, we regressed out
the effects of other factors known to relate to AoA from our
iconicity ratings. We then predicted the residual iconicity
ratings from AoA. These factors included log frequency,
concreteness, word length (as measured by number of
phonemes and number of morphemes), and systematicity.
Additionally, we collected ratings of the association of each
word with babies (independent of AoA) from a separate
group of participants, and we regressed these ratings out of
iconicity ratings as well.
Monaghan, et al. (2014) measured the systematicity of
English words, or statistical regularity of sound-meaning
pairings. They found that even after factoring out
derivational and inflectional morphology and historical
relatedness, there was a small but significant tendency for
words with similar meanings to have similar forms.
Moreover, they found earlier learned words were more
systematic than later learned words. As Monaghan et al.
note, this measure, sometimes called “relative iconicity,” is
in theory orthogonal to resemblance between form and
meaning—what we refer to here as iconicity. Systematicity
measures were only available for half of our words. Thus,
we first conducted analyses on the full set of words
regressing out concreteness, log frequency, word length, and
association to babies from iconicity ratings. We then
conducted a second analysis on the subset to examine
whether iconicity predicts AoA even after accounting for
systematicity.

Lexical Class As shown in Figure 2a, iconicity varied by
lexical class. Participants rated onomatopoeia, M=3.15, and
interjections, M=2.70, as more iconic than all other lexical
classes, p≪.0001. Adjectives, M=1.31, and verbs, M=1.15,
were rated as more iconic than nouns, M=.51, and function
words, M=.36, p≪.0001. Finally, iconicity was overall very
negatively related to concreteness, X2(1)=663.93, p≪.0001,
suggesting that iconicity is most needed for learning abstract
words.
A
Experiment 1: Written English Words

−0.4
−0.6
20

B

40
60
80
100
Proportion of Children Saying Word at 30mos

Experiment 2: Spoken English Words

0.2
0.0

−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
20

C

40
60
80
100
Proportion of Children Saying Word at 30mos

Experiment 3: Estimated Alien Accuracy

5
Residual Iconicity Rating

Results and Discussion
The average rating across all words was .75, (SD=.99, range
= -2.10 - 4.36). Examples of words along the continuum are
listed in Table 1. We next examined whether iconicity
corresponds to AoA and lexical class.
Age of Acquisition As shown in Figure 1a, iconicity
correlated with AoA such that words rated as more iconic
were more likely to be produced by toddlers. A regression
analysis revealed that iconicity rating was a reliable
predictor of AoA, b=.006, 95% CI [.003, .008],
X2(1)=20.19, p≪.0001. This held for the reduced set of
words for which we had the systematicity measure,
b=.004, 95% CI [.0005, .008], X2(1)=4.87, p=.03. AoA
was still a reliable predictor of iconicity after removing
onomatopoeia and interjections, b=.003, 95% CI [.001,
.006], X2(1)=7.50, p=.006.

0.0

−0.2

Residual Iconicity Rating

Participants were asked to say each word aloud before
making their judgment. We collected at least 10 judgments
for each word, with each participant rating 20 words.

0

−5

−10
20

40
60
80
100
Proportion of Children Saying Word at 30mos

Figure 1. Relationship between age of acquisition (as measured by
proportion of children saying each word at 30 months of age) and
A) iconicity ratings of written stimuli, B) iconicity ratings of
spoken stimuli, and C) judgments of an alien’s accuracy in
guessing a word’s meaning from its sound. Error bands represent
standard error of linear model estimates.

1861

Conclusions The results of the first experiment demonstrate
that more iconic words are learned earlier than less iconic
words. Critically, iconicity predicts AoA above and beyond
other known predictors of AoA. Additionally, the
differences between words of different lexical classes fits
with the prediction that word classes like verbs and
adjectives, with referents that are more difficult for toddlers
to identify, may be especially iconic to facilitate learning.
Together, these results suggest that not only is there
iconicity in early English vocabulary, but also that this
iconicity has consequences for language learning.

set of words for which we had systematicity measures,
b=.004, 95% CI [.00007, .008], X2(1)=3.98, p=.05. AoA
was still a reliable predictor of iconicity after removing
onomatopoeia and interjections, b=.003, 95% CI [.0007,
.005], X2(1)=6.68, p=.01.
A

rb
Ve

s

un

No

o
cti

ord
nW

n

Fu

Experiment 3: Estimated Alien Accuracy

Mean Rating

60

40

20

0
eia
po ns
ato ectio
m
j
o
r
On Inte
+

tive
jec

Ad

rb
Ve

s

un

No

n
tio

rd
Wo

nc

Fu

Lexical Class

Methods

Figure 2: Relationship between words’ lexical class and A)
iconicity ratings based on written and spoken stimuli, B)
participants’ judgments of an alien’s accuracy in guessing a word’s
meaning from its sound. Error bars depict the standard error of the
mean.

Participants 343 native English speakers were recruited
from Mechanical Turk and received $0.35 for participation.
Stimuli Auditory recordings of each word from Experiment
1 were made by a female native English speaker.
Procedure The procedure was identical to that of
Experiment 1 except that participants listened to an audio
recording of each word on each trial before making their
judgment. The written word was still presented to ensure
that participants heard and interpreted the word accurately.

Age of Acquisition As shown in Figure 1b, iconicity
correlated with AoA, such that words learned earlier
tended to be more iconic, b=.005, 95% CI [.003, .007],
X2(1)=17.93, p≪.0001. This effect held for the reduced

tive
jec

Ad

Lexical Class

B

Experiment 2

The average iconicity rating across all words was .78 (SD=
.98, range = -2.18 - 4.64). This mean was not reliably
different from that in Experiment 1, X2(1)=.31, p=.58 A
correlation between the ratings obtained in Experiment 1
and 2, r=.61, p<.0001, suggests a moderate degree of
consistency in ratings regardless of modality.

1

ia
oe s
top ction
a
om rje
On Inte
+

In Experiment 2, we sought to replicate the results of
Experiment 1 with spoken stimuli. Participants listened to
the words rather than read them. We wondered whether
hearing the words would enhance or otherwise alter
participants’ sense of an iconic relationship between the
word forms and their meanings.

Results and Discussion

2

0

Average Rating
4.36
3.69
2.81
2.50
0.00
-1.64
-2.1

Mean Rating

Lexical Class
Onomatopoeia
Adjective
Interjection
Verb
Noun
Noun
Function Word

Experiment 1: Written words
Experiment 2: Spoken words

3

Table 1. Examples of words with ratings from Experiment 1 from
iconic (5) to opposite (-5) meanings.

Word
Uh oh
Hard
No
Stop
Jeans
Purse
Would

Experiment 1 & 2: English Words

Lexical Class As shown in Figure 2a, iconicity varied with
lexical class similarly to Experiment 1. Onomatopoeia,
M=3.39, and interjections, M=2.46 (combined), were again
rated as most iconic, p≪.0001. Adjectives, M=1.14, and
verbs, M=1.15 were rated as more iconic than nouns,
M=.56, and function words, M=.42, p≪.0001.
Conclusions Experiment 2 replicated Experiment 1,
indicating more iconic words are learned earlier than less
iconic words and iconicity relates to lexical class. These
relationships remain after factoring out effects of other
factors related to AoA. We found no evidence that listening
to the word compared to saying it aloud oneself altered
participants’ sense of iconicity.

Experiment 3
One potential concern about the results of Experiments 1-2
is that, despite our instructions, participants might not have
understood the concept of iconicity. In Experiment 3, we
sought to measure iconicity in a more implicit task.

1862

Methods
Participants 415 native English speakers were recruited
from Mechanical Turk and received $0.35 for participation.
Stimuli The same words from Experiment 1 were used.
Procedure Participants were told that a space alien who did
not know any English was trying to translate English words
into his own language. They were asked to judge how
accurately the alien could guess each word’s meaning based
only on its sound. They responded on a scale from 0 to 100
with 0 indicating that the alien would likely guess the wrong
meaning and 100 indicating that the alien would likely
guess the correct meaning. Participants were asked to
pronounce each word aloud before making their judgment.

Results and Discussion
The average judgment of accuracy across all words was
37.06 (SD= 11.97, range = 8.64 - 74.67). There was a
significant correlation between judgment of iconicity from
Experiment 1 and judgments of alien accuracy from
Experiment 3, r=.46, p<.0001, suggesting a moderate
correspondence between ratings in a task explicitly
measuring iconicity and one implicitly measuring iconicity.
Age of Acquisition As shown in Figure 1c, participants’
judgments of the alien’s perceived guessing accuracy
corresponded to human AoA of those words, b=.10, 95% CI
[.08, .13], X2(1)=58.81, p≪.0001. The effect held for the
reduced set of words for which we had systematicity
measures, b=.12, 95% CI [.08, .16], X2(1)=37.17, p≪.0001.
AoA was still a reliable predictor of alien accuracy after
removing onomatopoeia and interjections, b=.08, 95% CI
[.05, .10], X2(1)=35.35, p≪.0001.
Lexical Class As shown in Figure 2b, judgments of alien
accuracy varied with lexical class similar to the patterns
found in Experiments 1 and 2. Onomatopoeia, M=56.55,
and interjections, M=63.15 (combined), were rated as most
likely to be guessed accurately, p≪.0001. Adjectives,
M=41.48, and verbs, M=39.24, were rated as more likely to
be guessed accurately than nouns, M= 35.62, and function
words, M=33.33, all p<.05.
Conclusions This more implicit measure of iconicity—
assessing
people’s
intuitions
of
sound/meaning
correspondence without directly asking them to rate
iconicity—replicates the findings of the first two
experiments with respect to AoA and lexical class.

General Discussion
We conducted a systematic study of iconicity across the
early-learned vocabulary of a spoken language. In three
experiments we replicate the same pattern of results:
English words that are rated as more iconic tend to be
learned earlier than less iconic words. Although we cannot
establish with certainty that iconicity plays a causal role in

learnability, the strong relationship between iconicity and
AoA after accounting for several other factors known to
relate to word learning, including frequency, concreteness,
word length, and Monaghan, et al.’s (2014) measure of
systematicity (relative iconicity), is consistent with the
possibility of a causal relationship. Moreover, by factoring
out the degree to which the words were associated with
babies, we can rule out the possibility that the relationship
between iconicity and AoA is driven by participants
strategically rating baby-like words as iconic. We
additionally found that word classes like verbs and
adjectives (with referents that are more difficult for toddlers
to identify), exhibit more iconicity than nouns (which are
typically more concrete).
Both patterns are consistent with the proposal that
iconicity in spoken languages serves to bootstrap word
learning (Imai & Kita, 2014; Perniss & Vigliocco, 2014).
Iconicity supports early language learning by helping
young, inexperienced learners to identify a referent from the
environment; iconicity is therefore expected to be more
prevalent in the earliest-learned words. Similarly, as the
referents of words like verbs and adjectives are typically
more difficult to identify from the environment than nouns
(cf. Gentner, 1982), these words are expected to be more
iconic to provide the learner with extra help.
Our findings also fit with recent accounts suggesting that
languages exist in a dynamic balance between iconicity and
arbitrariness (Gasser, 2004; Monaghan et al., 2014).
Iconicity grounds language in our sensorimotor system, and
helps learners connect word forms with meanings. However,
it also constrains the phonological space of a word, and
leads words with similar meanings to be less discriminable
from each other. Consequently, iconicity tends to erode as
lexicons become more densely populated in semantic space
and discriminability becomes a more critical factor. As
English has fewer verbs and adjectives than nouns, these
classes may end up being more iconic than nouns.
Altogether these results provide compelling new evidence
that iconicity is alive and well within the English lexicon. It
is strongest in onomatopoeia, but spreads across the
vocabulary, concentrating in the earliest learned words, and
especially in the abstract classes of adjectives and verbs.
Compared to the distinct iconic lexical classes documented
across many non-Indo-European languages, the iconicity
found in early English vocabulary is subtle. It nevertheless
may play an important role in word learning, raising the
interesting question of whether languages with large iconic
lexical classes also exhibit more distributed iconicity in
early-learned vocabulary in the manner of English.
One potential limitation of our findings it that they rely on
the subjective ratings of English speakers. Unlike frequency
or AoA, it is not possible to compute objective iconicity
values of word forms. So, although there may be something
about the word “sour” that makes it a better match to a sour
taste than a bitter one, this can only be ascertained by
studying people’s responses to the word-form. In this way,
our iconicity measure is similar to other subjective ratings

1863

commonly used in psycholinguistics such as concreteness. If
subjective ratings provided by English speakers correlate
with AoA because iconic words are related to meanings in a
non-arbitrary way, then we expect those words rated by
English speakers as most iconic (and whose meanings will
be most accurately guessed by an alien), to correspond to
words that are easier to guess/learn by people unfamiliar
with English and related languages. Showing this
correspondence is a natural next step.
Ultimately, our findings suggest that iconicity may be a
fundamental design feature of language (Imai & Kita, 2014;
Perlman & Cain, in press; Perniss & Vigliocco, 2014), both
signed and spoken. English, the linguistic poster child for
arbitrary languages, may not be so arbitrary after all.

Acknowledgments
We are very grateful to Padraic Monaghan for sharing his
data on the systematicity of English words for our analyses.
This work is in part supported by NSF INSPIRE Award
1344279 to GL.

References
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language,
59(4), 390–412.
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development norms for
young
children. Behavior Research
Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28(1), 125–127.
Diffloth, G. (1972). The notes on expressive meaning. In Papers
from the Eigth Regional Meeting of Chicago Linguistic
Society (pp. 440–447). Chicago.
Dingemanse, M. (2012). Advances in the Cross-Linguistic Study
of Ideophones. Language and Linguistics Compass,
6(10), 654–672.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J.,
Pethick, S. J., … Stiles, J. (1994). Variability in Early
Communicative Development. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 59(5), i–185.
Gasser, M. (2004). The origins of arbitrariness in language. In
Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (Vol. 26, pp. 4–7)
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In
Language development: Vol 2. Language, thought, and
culture (pp. 301–334). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hockett, C.F. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific American,
203, 88–96.
Hockett, Charles F. (1978). In Search of Jove’s Brow. American
Speech, 53(4), 243–313.
Imai, M., & Kita, S. (2014). The sound symbolism bootstrapping
hypothesis for language acquisition and language
evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences,
369(1651), 20130298.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008). Sound
symbolism facilitates early verb learning. Cognition,
109(1), 54–65.

Kantartzis, K., Imai, M., & Kita, S. (2011). Japanese SoundSymbolism Facilitates Word Learning in EnglishSpeaking Children. Cognitive Science, 35(3), 575–586.
Klima, E. S., & Bellugi, U. (1979). The Signs of Language.
Harvard University Press.
Lupyan, G. & Casasanto, D. (2014). Meaningless words promote
meaningful categorization. Language and Cognition,,1–
27.
Monaghan, P., Shillcock, R. C., Christiansen, M. H., & Kirby, S.
(2014). How arbitrary is language? Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
369(1651), 20130299–20130299.
Orlansky, M. D., & Bonvillian, J. D. (1984). The Role of Iconicity
in Early Sign Language Acquisition. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Disorders, 49(3), 287.
Perlman, M., & Cain, A. A. (in press). Iconicity in Vocalization,
Comparisons with Gesture, and Implications for
Theories on the Evolution of Language. Gesture.
Perniss, P., Thompson, R. L., & Vigliocco, G. (2010). Iconicity as
a General Property of Language: Evidence from Spoken
and Signed Languages. Frontiers in Psychology, 1.
Perniss, P., & Vigliocco, G. (2014). The bridge of iconicity: from a
world of experience to the experience of language.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 369(1651), 20130300.
Quine, W.V.(1960). Word and object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Saussure, F. de. (1983). Course in General Linguistics. La Salle,
IL: Open Court.
Thompson, R. L., Vinson, D. P., Woll, B., & Vigliocco, G. (2012).
The Road to Language Learning Is Iconic Evidence
From British Sign Language. Psychological Science,
23(12), 1443–1448.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of Human Communication.
Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press.
Vigliocco, G., Perniss, P., & Vinson, D. (2014). Language as a
multimodal phenomenon: implications for language
learning, processing and evolution. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
369(1651), 20130292–20130292.
Vinson, D. P., Cormier, K., Denmark, T., Schembri, A., &
Vigliocco, G. (2008). The British Sign Language (BSL)
norms for age of acquisition, familiarity, and iconicity.
Behavior Research Methods, 40(4), 1079–1087.
Voeltz, E. F. K., & Kilian-Hatz, C. (2001). Ideophones. John
Benjamins Publishing.

1864

