Illusory inferences: disjunctions, indefinites, and the erotetic theory of reasoning
Salvador Mascarenhas (salvador.mascarenhas@stcatz.ox.ac.uk)
Laboratory for the Philosophy and Psychology of Rationality and Decision,
Faculty of Philosophy, University of Oxford,
St. Catherine’s College, Manor Road, Oxford, UK

Philipp Koralus (philipp.koralus@stcatz.ox.ac.uk)
Laboratory for the Philosophy and Psychology of Rationality and Decision,
Faculty of Philosophy, University of Oxford,
St. Catherine’s College, Manor Road, Oxford, UK
Abstract
Work in the mental model tradition has shown that human
reasoners are subject to fallacious inferences from very simple premises that have been described as tantamount to cognitive illusions (Walsh & Johnson-Laird, 2004; Khemlani &
Johnson-Laird, 2009). We present four experiments that show
that these phenomena are much more general and systematic
than has previously been thought. Among other results, we
find that premises using ‘some’ mirror premises using ‘or’
in generating fallacious inferences, showing that there are interesting facts about reasoning with quantifiers beyond syllogisms that have been the main focus in the literature. Neither
mental model theory nor other familiar theories of reasoning
account for the results we present. However, the novel illusory
inferences we present are predicted by the erotetic theory of
reasoning (Koralus and Mascarenhas, 2013). The key idea is
that, by default, we reason by interpreting successive premises
as questions and maximally strong answers to those questions,
which generates the observed fallacies.
Keywords: illusory inferences; disjunction; quantifiers;
erotetic theory; reasoning; mental models; fallacies

Introduction
The capacity for reasoning is central to modern human endeavors. The most widely discussed approaches to understanding this capacity are mental logic (Rips, 1994),
Bayesianism (Oaksford & Chater, 2007), and mental model
theory (Johnson-Laird, 1983). Each of these approaches has
important advantages. Mental logic approaches incorporate
the important insight that a fully satisfactory theory of reasoning should be formally precise in the sense that it is possible to calculate predictions of the theory for an unbounded
number of possible reasoning problems from a clearly specified set of axioms. Bayesian approaches are a heterogeneous
family, and some theorists place themselves broadly within
the mental logic or the mental models approach. Nevertheless, they uniformly have the advantage of seeking to account
for our reasoning performance in ways that would flow from
a simple core idea of what our reasoning capacity is aiming
at, e.g. rationally updating a probability distribution in light
of evidence. Mental model theory has the advantage of making central the nature of the representations we build as we
interpret premises and how those representations can be less
detailed than the premise statements in terms of their information content. We have argued elsewhere for a new theory of
reasoning that we believe unites those advantages, the erotetic

theory of reasoning (henceforth ETR) (Koralus & Mascarenhas, 2013). The core idea behind ETR is the notion that we
reason by raising questions and seeking to answer them as
directly as possible. This intuitive notion has been given a
mathematically rigorous description (Koralus & Mascarenhas, 2013), which we showed captures core existent data on
propositional reasoning. Here, we present four new experiments on reasoning documenting novel systematic fallacies,
and argue that those results support the erotetic theory over
existing approaches.

Illusory inferences from disjunction
Inferences from disjunctive statements involving ‘or’ may
well be the simplest non-trivial cases of reasoning. For example, if we accept that either there is an apple on the table
or else an orange, and we further accept that there isn’t an
orange on the table, we may straightforwardly conclude that
there is an apple. Now, we are subject to systematic failures
of reasoning with premises that are similarly simple. Walsh
and Johnson-Laird (2004) presented participants in an experiment with the following problem:
(1)

P1 : Either Jane is kneeling by the fire and she is
looking at the TV or otherwise Mark is standing at the window and he is peering into the
garden.
P2 : Jane is kneeling by the fire.
Concl.: Jane is looking at the TV.

Only 10% of participants gave correct answers to problems
of this form, prompting the authors to call them “illusory inferences.” Most participants say that it follows from the two
premises that Jane is looking at the TV. However, on reflection, we can see that this is a fallacy. The truth of the premises
is compatible with a situation in which Jane is kneeling by the
fire but not looking at the TV, while Mark is standing by the
window and is peering into the garden.1
To date, the only systematic accounts of illusory inferences
of this kind are offered by the mental model theory and by
the erotetic theory of reasoning. The mental-model based explanation Walsh and Johnson-Laird propose for this illusory
inference is based on the idea that we build mental models
1 Notice that the conclusion in (1) is illicit even if we interpret
‘or’ exclusively (i.e. “A or B but not both”).

1541

of only some of the alternative possibilities compatible with
the first premise, notably of the alternatives in which Jane is
kneeling and looking, the alternative in which Mark is standing and peering, and the alternative which combines both of
the former. Walsh and Johnson-Laird suggest that when we
encounter the categorical premise we “match” that premise to
the alternatives that are partly co-referential with the second
premise in the disjunction. This match is then treated as definitely establishing that one of these alternatives holds. In this
case, all envisaged alternatives that “match” Jane kneeling by
the fire also include that Jane is looking at the TV, yielding
the illusory inference.
ETR proposes a rather different explanation of illusory inferences. The core idea is that a disjunctive premise statement
raises the question of which of the disjuncts is the case. Effectively, P1 is interpreted as akin to the question, “am I in
a kneeling and looking situation or in a standing and peering
situation?” P2 is then interpreted as akin to the answer, “you
are in a kneeling situation!” Interpreted strongly, this answer
would lead us to conclude that we are in a kneeling and looking situation. This question/answer-based explanation of the
illusory inference pattern does not require co-reference between expressions in the premise statements. Moreover, ETR
predicts an effect of premise order that the mental models
account does not. If reasoners are being led to errors by
their interpreting the disjunctive premise as a question and
the simpler premise as an answer, then this tendency should
be mitigated by a reversal in the order of the premises. It
ought to be somewhat more difficult to apply a question asking/answering strategy to the problem if the (putative) answer
occurs first and the question second. By contrast, the mental
model matching strategy ought not to be sensitive to order in
this sense. In Experiment 1, to be presented shortly, we show
that indeed this effect of premise order exists.

From disjunctions to indefinites
One natural way to look at sentences with indefinite expressions as in (2a), schematized in (2b), is as generalized (and
theoretically infinitary) disjunctions as in (2c)/(2d).
(2) a.
b.
c.
d.

Some student smokes.
Some x is an A who also has the B property.
John is a student and smokes, or Mary is a student
and smokes, or . . .
x0 is an A with the B property, or x1 is an A with the
B property, or . . .

This perspective on indefinite expressions is more than just a
formal logical curiosity. The view that indefinite expressions
share substantive properties with disjunction has also been
championed as crucial part of accounts of indefinites in several guises from within linguistic semantics.2 Consequently,
it is important to ask whether (something like) illusory in2 In particular, the alternative semantics of Kratzer and Shimoyama (2002) and the inquisitive semantics of Ciardelli (2009) and
Mascarenhas (2011).

ferences from disjunction can be replicated in the domain of
indefinite quantification. In Experiments 2 and 3 we show
that this is the case.

An effect of premise order
Experiment 1
The mental model matching strategy does not intrinsically invoke order. By contrast, we cannot treat something as an answer without having a question first. Thus, the explanation of
the illusory inference offered by ETR, unlike the matchingbased account, immediately predicts an order effect. In experiment 1, we examined whether illusory inferences from
disjunction are mitigated if the order of premises is reversed.
We examined four illusory inference problems and four
control problems that were not hypothesized to yield illusory
inferences. Both types of problems involved two premises,
where the first premise consisted of a disjunction and the second premise consisted of an atomic proposition or a negated
atomic proposition. The target and control problems were
variants of the following two examples:
(3) Sample Target Problem
There is an ace and a queen, or else a king and a ten.
There is a king.
What if anything follows?
(4) Sample Control Problem
There is an ace and a king, or else a queen and a jack.
There isn’t an ace.
What if anything follows?
We predicted that in the target problem participants should
systematically draw the illusory inference that there is a ten
in the hand, and so on in similar problems. This should be the
case despite the lack of co-reference in the premise statements
above; since we are using indefinite expressions like “a king”
and “a ten,” rather than proper names like “Jane” and “Mark,”
co-reference is not guaranteed in our examples. We predicted
moreover that the incidence of these mistakes in target problems should be far greater than the incidence of invalid inferences in the control problems. Crucially, we predicted that
subjects who saw the target problems with premises in reversed order would make significantly fewer mistakes.
Participants and design Two batches of 120 members of
the mTurk worker community carried out eight reasoning
problems. The first group (average age 35 years, σ = 12, 62
female, 57 male, 1 declined to state) saw all target and control problems in canonical order; the second group (average
age 30, σ = 9, 75 male, 46 female) saw the same materials
but with premises in reverse order. Subjects served as their
own controls. The order of presentation was randomized for
each subject. In each problem, the premise statements were
followed by the question, “what if anything follows?” and a
text box to record responses.

1542

Type

Pattern

ILL

INV

Type

Pattern

ILL

Target
Target
Target
Target
Control
Control
Control
Control

aq ∨ kx ; k
j2 ∨ a8 ; j
q8 ∨ 2a ; 2
xk ∨ qa ; x
ak ∨ qj ; ¬a
j8 ∨ ax ; ¬j
28 ∨ kj ; ¬k
8k ∨ qa ; ¬q

108(90%)
108(90%)
113(94%)
111(93%)
-

15(13%)
17(14%)
16(13%)
16(13%)

Target
Target
Target
Target

k ; aq ∨ kx
j ; j2 ∨ a8
2 ; q8 ∨ 2a
x ; xk ∨ qa

97(81%)
101(84%)
98(82%)
98(82%)

Table 2: Results of experiment 1, reversed order condition.
“a”, “j”, “k”, “q”, “2”, “8”, and “x” stand for the cards
ace, jack, king, queen, two, eight, and ten, respectively.

Table 1: Results of experiment 1, canonical order condition.
“a”, “j”, “k”, “q”, “2”, “8”, and “x” stand for the cards
ace, jack, king, queen, two, eight, and ten, respectively.

the same for the two premise orders (Mann-Whitney, z =
2.05477, p < 0.038). The results for the target cases in the
reverse-order condition are summarized in Table 2. By contrast, there was no significant effect of premise order for the
control problems.

Procedure The experiment was carried out over the internet using Qualtrics and participants were anonymously recruited and paid through the Amazon mTurk website. Each
participant was rewarded with USD 0.25 for their participation. Participants were invited to engage in a study of reasoning in which they had to say what they can conclude from
a set of statements. They were asked not to make notes or
use search engines while performing the task. Before the
target and control questions were presented, each participant
was shown two worked-out sample reasoning problems of an
unrelated kind using conditionals. All statements were explained to be about a large hand of cards. They were told that
the experiment would last approximately 5 minutes but were
given as much time as they needed, up to 10 minutes.
Results Participants’ written responses were coded as follows into binary categories. For target problems, we coded a
response as a ‘1’ in the category of illusory inference (ILL)
if and only if at least one illusory inference proposition was a
conjunct in the written answer and no other invalid inferences
were present. For control problems, we coded a response as
invalid (INV) if and only if at least one invalid inference of
any sort was present, excepting responses like “nothing follows,” “no,” and the like. In all cases, we made allowance for
the fact that some participants may interpret ‘or’ as inclusive
and some as exclusive.
Both authors of this paper coded the free-form responses
into the above categories and discrepancies were resolved by
agreement. 97.5% of participants made one or more illusory
inferences, while 18.3% made one or more invalid inferences
in control problems. We rejected the null hypothesis that illusory inferences were as frequent as invalid inferences in control problems (Wilcoxon Matched-Pairs Test, T = 117.5 (sum
of negative difference rank), p < .0001). We summarize the
data for the different target and control problems in canonical
order in Table 1 above.
As predicted, fewer illusory inferences were made in the
reversed condition than in canonical order. The number of
illusory inferences dropped by approximately 10% on average when the premises were reversed. We rejected the
null hypothesis that the frequency of illusory inferences was

Discussion Our results show first of all that the pattern of
illusory inference is not due to co-reference across premises
and also cast some doubt on the idea that representations of
spatial configurations are required for such inferences (assuming that card scenarios do not as readily invoke spatial
imagery as scenarios of people standing and peering into gardens). The explanation offered by ETR depends on neither
co-reference nor spatial models.
More interestingly, the results are consistent with the prediction of ETR that reversing the order of premises would
mitigate the illusory inference pattern. They cast doubt on
explanations of these kinds of inference patterns involving
notions like “matching” that are not relevantly asymmetric.
One could respond on behalf of mental model theory that
matching only applies if we already have a set of mental
models from a disjunctive premise so that we can match the
information of a categorical premise to an element of this
set. If we take this avenue, matching simply does not apply
in the reversed-order case. However, for reasoning steps in
which we are not integrating premises by “matching,” mental model theory provides a more general procedure for conjoining mental models (Johnson-Laird, 2008; Khemlani &
Johnson-Laird, 2009). The first premise would generate a
single mental model, which would have to be conjoined with
the set of mental models generated by the second premise.
However, the process for conjoining mental models is also
designed to make us jump to conclusions in reasoning. As
we conjoin the mental model for “there is a king” with the
mental models for “there is an ace and a queen, or else a king
and a ten,” the procedure, as defined by Johnson-Laird and
Khemlani, rules out all of those mental models in which we
do not have an ace and a queen. Thus, even if we maintain
that the mental model matching procedure does not hold in
the case in which premises of the illusory inference problem
are reversed, the mental model conjoin procedure would then
apply to yield the same result. Consequently, both matching
and mental model conjoin procedures fail to explain why the

1543

illusory inference is mitigated in the reversed case.3
Despite a significant drop in illusory inferences in the
reversed-order condition, illusory inferences did not altogether disappear. How does the erotetic theory explain the
fact that a significant, though lower, quantity of illusory inferences is still present in the reversed condition? We propose,
tentatively for now, that those participants that made illusory
inferences in the reversed order condition overruled the order of premises given in the experiment, choosing to process
premise 2 before premise 1. Our account’s default reasoning
strategy (on which more in this article’s general discussion
section) proceeds by taking premises in the order in which
they are given, but the theory is compatible with some subjects realizing that nothing new immediately follows from the
premises in reversed order, subsequently reparsing the reasoning problem in the canonical order, and thereby getting
the illusory inference. We leave a detailed treatment of this
issue to future work.

Illusory inferences with quantifiers
Experiments 2 and 3 — indefinites
We tested for indefinite versions of illusory inferences from
disjunction with two experiments. In experiment 2, our pilot,
we tested the two patterns in (5):
(5) a.

b.

Some student smokes.
John is a student.
Does it follow that John smokes?
Some pilot writes poems.
John is a pilot.
Does it follow that John writes poems?

In the aggregate, we found that about 30% of subjects made
the fallacious conclusion, significantly more than our invalid
controls (Wilcoxon matched-pairs test p < .05). However, a
by-item analysis showed that the effect was only significant
for (5b). We hypothesized that subjects’ prior expectations
about what is typical for the topical individuals of our materials were responsible for the variance. We suspected that
subjects’ expectations about how unlikely students are to be
smokers played a key role in making the corresponding illusory inference seem less attractive. On the erotetic theory as
sketched above, it is expected that the ease with which reasoners can conjure up alternative representations for individuals should correlate inversely with the attractiveness of the
relevant illusory inferences.
In experiment 3, we factored out entirely subjects’ expectations about the topical individuals, by using completely unfamiliar properties in both restrictor and nuclear-scope positions in our materials.
3 We are open to the possibility that mental model theory could
revise or expand the mental-model-building procedure so as to capture our order effect, but as far as we know, no such proposal exists
in the literature at the time. We thank an anonymous reviewer for
highlighting this.

Participants and design We recruited 977 workers from
the mTurk crowdsourcing platform to solve twelve reasoning
problems. Statements in each reasoning problem were about
biological organisms and properties. We concocted the examples ourselves with no regard for the truth of the sentences or
coherence of the statements as statements about biology. This
was a legitimate strategy given that we presumed no knowledge of the subject matter. In (6) we give the two content
variations we used for canonical targets.
(6) a.

b.

Some firmicute produces endospores.
Clostridium is a firmicute.
Does it follow that clostridium produces endospores?
Some thermotogum stains gram-negative.
Maritima is a thermotogum.
Does it follow that maritima stains gram-negative?

Of the twelve problems subjects saw, six constituted variations on our target illusory inferences with indefinites, and six
were control inferences, three valid and three invalid. Of the
six targets, three had their premises in canonical order, three
were reversed. Each subject solved all twelve problems, serving as his or her own control, in a randomized order. Subjects
were asked not to make use of search engines while answering the questionnaire.
Procedure Subjects were shown one inference at a time,
each inference consisting of two premises and a proposed
conclusion. They answered whether the conclusion followed
from the premises. They were given three answers to choose
from: “yes,” “no,” and “choose not to respond.” Subjects
were also asked not to make notes or use search engines while
performing the task. We also asked in the general demographic questionnaire, after solving all reasoning problems,
whether subjects had used any search engines. They were
told that the experiment would last approximately 5 minutes
but were given 10 minutes to answer the questionnaire.
Results We found that around 40% of subjects committed
the predicted fallacy. This was a very significantly higher
rate of reasoning error than in our controls not involving indefinites (Wilcoxon matched-pairs test p < .01). Contrary to
our pilot experiment 2, in experiment 3 we found no effect of
item content. We also found a significant order effect on the
premises: when the order of the premises in stimuli as in (6)
was inverted, we found significantly fewer fallacies for target
stimuli (Wilcoxon matched-pairs test p < .01). This order effect was not significant in either our valid controls (Wilcoxon
matched-pairs test p > .61) or our invalid controls (Wilcoxon
matched-pairs test .17 < p < .41).
Discussion These results fit with our prediction: indefinites
give rise to illusory inferences akin to those of disjunction.
These fallacious inferences are novel, and crucially do not
constitute syllogisms. They lie outside the scope of all extant
theories of reasoning with quantifiers that we are acquainted
with (see for example the comprehensive literature review by

1544

Khemlani & Johnson-Laird, 2012). Our results also show
that the order effect we found for standard illusory inferences
from disjunction carries over to indefinites. As before, mental
models theory is, as far as we can see, at a loss to explain this
order effect, while the erotetic theory derives it immediately.

Experiment 4 — universals
Experiments 2 and 3 showed that there exist robust fallacious
inferences with quantifiers beyond syllogisms. We suspected
that the phenomenon was not restricted to indefinites. In experiment 4, we made a different “translation” of the standard illusory inference in (1) into the domain of quantification, building on an idea from Mascarenhas (2014). Instead
of using indefinites to do the work of disjunction, we used
universal quantifiers where (1) has conjunctions. Because the
materials in experiment 4 contained overt disjunctions, we
predicted that the number of alternative states-of-affairs to be
considered by reasoners at any point would be capped at two,
leading us to suspect that there would not be an effect of content as we found with indefinites in our pilot experiment 2.
Thus, we used familiar expressions in our materials, rather
than unfamiliar technical terms. We used five target items, of
which (7a) and (7b) are representative examples:
(7) a.

b.

Every boy or every girl is coming to the party.
John is coming to the party.
Does it follow that Bill is coming to the party?
Mary has met every king or every queen of Europe.
Mary has met the king of Spain.
Does it follow that Mary has met the k. of Belgium?

As predicted, we found acceptance rates entirely comparable
to those reported by Walsh and Johnson-Laird (2004) for the
propositional counterpart, at around 82%. This result demonstrates that the range of illusory inferences with quantifiers is
not limited to indefinite expressions.

Discussion — the erotetic theory of reasoning
We showed with new data that the kinds of cognitive illusions
usually discussed in the mental models literature are only the
tip of a large iceberg, extending from propositional reasoning
with disjunctions to reasoning with quantified expressions.
We argued that mental model theory does not provide an adequate account of this broader family of illusory inferences,
and sketched how our erotetic theory of reasoning (Koralus
& Mascarenhas, 2013) predicts and explains the full range of
data.
We want to point out that we maintain the crucial insight
from Johnson-Laird and his collaborators that reasoning proceeds by building mental models of premise statements. In
that sense, we argue against the specific “mental model theory” we discussed above while wholly embracing the idea
that reasoning is based on mental models. However, we take
a different view of what these models contain and we take a
different view of how mental models are updated as successive premise statements are taken into account. Specifically,

we take it that mental models are updated with the aim of
answering the questions they represent. In Koralus & Mascaranhas (2013) we give a complete and precise presentation
and formalization of the theory for the case of propositional
reasoning. We conclude presently with an informal summary
of the theory’s main features.

The erotetic principle
At the core of the theory is the erotetic principle, as follows.
(8) The erotetic principle
Part I — Our natural capacity for reasoning proceeds by
treating successive premises as questions and maximally
strong answers to them.
Part II — Systematically asking a certain type of question as we interpret each new premise allows us to reason
in a classically valid way.
We take it that reasoning proceeds by updating an integrated
mental representation of alternative possibilities in light of
successive premise statements. By default, this process of updating proceeds by treating successive premises as questions
and maximally strong answers to them. This is Part I of the
erotetic principle (8). Statements are interpreted relative to a
question that a hearer or reasoner seeks to answer in a way
that goes beyond the narrow propositional contribution of the
answer (Koralus, 2012).
But the theory is also concerned with the problem of success for reasoning, which is addressed by Part II of the
erotetic principle. Humans are not irretrievably lost to the
non-normative conclusions that their desire to find immediate
strong answers leads them to. Interestingly, questions play
a crucial role in leading us to normatively correct reasoning
in this account. If reasoners are careful to ask polar questions (i.e. yes-no questions) about each atomic proposition
that occurs in the question under consideration before updating with the putative answer supplied by a later premise, it
can be shown that their reasoning will be classically sound
in the technical sense. We prove this result as a theorem in
Koralus and Mascarenhas (2013).

Key components of the theory
A theory of mental representations The first step is
to specify what contribution individual premise statements
make. We adopt the view that ‘or’ raises the question of
which of the disjuncts is the case (Mascarenhas, 2009). Following standard approaches in natural language semantics,
we model questions as sets of alternative answers. For example, for a premise statement like “there is an ace and a queen
or a king and a jack,” we obtain the set {a&q, k& j}. For a
simple premise like “there is an ace,” we obtain a singleton
{a}. Indefinite expressions are interpreted as generalized disjunctions. This view on the interpretation of disjunctions and
indefinites is congenial to views of content from linguistic semantics that have gained currency in the past decade.
Mental model discourses The erotetic theory is dynamic:
premises are interpreted in the order that they were given, and

1545

in principle that order can make a difference. This follows
from the natural dynamics of question asking and answering.
Updating via the erotetic principle The next ingredient is
an update rule that implements Part I of the erotetic principle, treating certain premises as questions and others as maximally strong answers to questions in context whenever possible. Besides treating information as questions and answers
our update rule also has to allow for cases in which we simply accumulate information, as when we are given successive
categorical statements.
Simple deduction rule Reasoning is not just a matter of
update. Once reasoners hear and process each premise, they
must then be able to perform simple transformations on the
resulting mental model, to check what follows. We assume
that there is a rule of disjunct simplification, validating the
inference (p ∧ q) ∨ r |= p ∨ r. This rule for disjunct simplification includes conjunction elimination as a special case, as
the reader can see.
Eliminating contradictions The theory takes it that reasoners do not immediately see anything wrong with contradictions. However, there must be a process allowing them
to look at the representations they are entertaining and check
whether they are consistent or not. This comes at a cost and
is not part of default reasoning (to be defined shortly), but it
must be a possibility if we want to account for the successes
of our reasoning faculty. We therefore define an operation
that filters the mental model in discourse, going over each
alternative and eliminating all those that are contradictory.
Expanding possibilities through inquiry The mental
models of the erotetic theory represent only what is minimally required to model a statement, and are therefore typically underspecified. We need an operation that expands the
mental model under consideration through successive applications into one that represents every possibility with respect
to some propositional atom. This is a crucial ingredient of
the strategy allowing for classically sound reasoning and it
implements Part II of the erotetic principle.
Default reasoning strategy Finally, we make a simple postulate describing how reasoning problems are approached by
default. Namely: when given a reasoning problem with
premises P0 , . . . , Pn and conclusion C, reasoners update a
blank mental model discourse with each premise, in the order the premises were given. They may then apply the simple
deductive rule, targeting the conclusion C. If the resulting
mental model in discourse is identical to C, then the inference is deemed valid. Otherwise, it is deemed invalid. The
full description of the default reasoning strategy in Koralus
and Mascarenhas (2013) includes a model of how established
background knowledge can influence reasoning performance.
Though we do not have the space to argue for the more general framework here, we propose the erotetic theory as a step
toward a general account of reasoning and decision-making.
Besides propositional reasoning, the erotetic theory has also

been extended to model decision-making (Koralus, 2014), the
cognitive factor in a multi-factor model of delusion (Parrott &
Koralus, 2014) and aspects of moral judgment (Koralus and
Alfano, in preparation).

References
Ciardelli, I. A. (2009). Inquisitive semantics and intermediate logics. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of
Amsterdam.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: towards a cognitive science of language, inference, and consciousness.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2008). Mental models and deductive
reasoning. In L. Rips & J. Adler (Eds.), Reasoning: studies in human inference and its foundations (pp. 206–222).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2009). Disjunctive
illusory inferences and how to eliminate them. Memory
and Cognition, 37(5), 615–623.
Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2012). Theories of the
syllogism: a meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 138,
427–457.
Koralus, P. (2012). The open instruction theory of attitude
reports and the pragmatics of answers. Philosopher’s Imprint, 12(14).
Koralus, P. (2014). Decisions, illusory reasons, and erotetic
equilibrium. Under review.
Koralus, P., & Mascarenhas, S. (2013). The erotetic theory
of reasoning: bridges between formal semantics and the
psychology of deductive inference. Philosophical Perspectives, 27, 312–365.
Kratzer, A., & Shimoyama, J. (2002). Indeterminate pronouns: the view from Japanese. In Third tokyo conference
on psycholinguistics.
Mascarenhas, S. (2009). Inquisitive semantics and logic.
Unpublished master’s thesis, ILLC.
Mascarenhas, S. (2011). Licensing by modification: the
case of positive polarity pronouns. In A. A. Guevara,
A. Chernilovskaya, & R. Nouwen (Eds.), Proceedings of
Sinn und Bedeutung 16 (p. 417-429).
Mascarenhas, S. (2014). Formal semantics and the psychology of reasoning: Building new bridges and investigating
interactions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, New York
University.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality:
The probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford
University Press.
Parrott, M., & Koralus, P. (2014). The erotetic theory of
delusional thinking. Under review.
Rips, L. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Walsh, C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2004). Coreference and
reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 32, 96-106.

1546

