In Search of Triggering Conditions for Spontaneous Visual Perspective Taking
Xuan Zhao (xuan_zhao@brown.edu)
Corey Cusimano (corey_cusimano@brown.edu)
Bertram F. Malle (bertram_malle@brown.edu)
Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown University,
190 Thayer Street, Providence, RI 02912 USA
Abstract
Visual perspective taking (VPT) – people’s ability to
represent the physical world from another person’s viewpoint
– plays a fundamental role in social cognition. However, little
is known about whether and when VPT can be triggered
spontaneously without any explicit verbal prompting. In six
studies, we measured spontaneous VPT as the tendency to
read an ambiguous number from another agent’s imagined
perspective (“6”) rather than from one’s own default visual
perspective (“9”). We found that the likelihood of
spontaneous VPT varied systematically with the target agent’s
behavior. The strongest trigger for spontaneous VPT was the
agent’s goal-directed reaching, followed by object-directed
gaze, and lastly the agent’s mere presence in the scene.
Furthermore, observing an agent’s reaching or gaze toward an
object triggered viewers’ spontaneous VPT even for objects
with which the agent was currently not engaged.
Keywords: visual perspective taking; nonverbal behaviors;
social cognition; self; egocentric; theory of mind.

Introduction
Physical space sets minds apart. What is visible to one
person might be occluded from another person’s view, and
what one person sees as a figure “6” might appear to be a
“9” to the viewer from the opposite. To overcome such
differences in point of view, humans have evolved the
capacity for visual perspective taking (hereafter, VPT). With
this capacity, people determine the visibility of an object to
another person (“Level-1 VPT”) or its visual aspects relative
to that viewpoint (“Level-2 VPT”) (Flavell, Everett, Croft &
Flavell, 1981). Through VPT, people identify shared
knowledge (Clark, 1992), establish common ground (Clark
& Brennan, 1991), and resolve referential ambiguity in
communication (Duran, Dale & Kreuz, 2011).
A considerable amount of research on VPT centers on the
question to what degree and at what levels of accuracy
people demonstrate VPT. While some evidence suggests
that VPT is rare, effortful, and error-prone (e.g., Keysar,
Barr, Balin & Brauner, 2000), other studies indicate that
even young children readily see the world from another
person’s viewpoint (e.g. Moll & Meltzoff, 2011). However,
previous research rarely studied the conditions under which
alternative visual perspectives became salient. Instead, in
many cases, explicit experimenter instructions simply
required participants to take another person’s viewpoint
(e.g., Michelon & Zacks, 2007), a paradigm characterized as
“instructed perspective taking” (Zwickel & Müller, 2013) .
However, only when experimental settings allow

participants to freely decide what perspective to take can we
identify the favorable triggering conditions for spontaneous
VPT – especially the more advanced Level-2 VPT, which
people often have difficulty engaging in.
The current project therefore employs a free-response
approach to investigate whether small differences in a target
agent’s nonverbal behaviors influence people’s readiness to
take that person’s visual perspective. More specifically, we
focus on gaze and reaching as potential triggers of
spontaneous VPT, because both are taken as minimal signs
of another person’s mental agency: Another’s gaze invites
an inference of knowledge; another’s reaching invites an
inference of preference or desire (Woodward, 1998).
Neither of the two, however, requires a shift in visual
perspective; in fact, gaze has been shown to be powerful in
guiding the observer’s own attention toward the gazed-at
object (Driver, Davis, Ricciardelli, et al., 1999), and
reaching, according to a prominent view, triggers the
observer’s own action program of reaching (Rizzolatti,
Fogassi & Gallese, 2001). So it would be by no means
trivial if these signs of agency were able to trigger VPT – as
if by merely recognizing other minds, human perceivers
were ready to adopt their point of view. Beyond the general
power of these triggering conditions, we further
hypothesized that goal-directed reaching would be a more
effective trigger than gaze because it conveys a stronger and
clearer intention to causally alter the physical environment.
Research on the spontaneous activation of spatial
perspective taking also lends support to this hypothesis, as
people tend to describe an object’s physical location from
another person’s viewpoint upon seeing that person’s goaldirected reaching (Tversky & Hard, 2009).

Study 1a: Spontaneously Seeing a “6”
Methods
Stimuli. To capture people’s spontaneous VPT, we created
a single-trial task in which naïve participants viewed one of
four photographs depicting a young male sitting at a table
with neutral facial expression (Figure 1). Placed on the table
was a red wooden digit “9”, which could also be read as a
“6” from across the table. All photographs were taken with a
20˚ angle down upon the actor and the table, so that both the
number and the actor’s movements were clearly visible to
the participants.
Design. There were four conditions in this between-subjects
study, where the actor was either 1) looking away from the

2811

object, thus being merely present in the scene (Presence), 2)
gazing at the object (Gaze), or 3) reaching for while gazing
at the object (Reaching). In a control condition, 4) neither
the actor nor his chair was present in the scene (No Actor)
(See Figure 1).

TRT data also seemed to suggest that participants in the
gaze and reaching conditions taken together spent less time
on taking the actor’s perspective than those in the presence
condition (M = 15.8s), but there were only eight successful
VPT trials in the presence condition, and the TRT difference
was not significant, p = .119.
***

***

*
Figure 1. Four conditions in Study 1: No Actor (control),
Presence, Gaze, and Reaching.
Procedures. All participants were recruited on Amazon
Mechanical Turk and were randomly assigned to one of four
conditions. After providing consent, each participant saw a
photograph and a question below: “What number is on the
table?” Participants typed their answers in a text box below
the question and clicked “continue” to submit their answer.
We recorded a total response time (TRT) between the
participant’s opening the photograph page and clicking on
the “continue” button. On the next page they provided
demographic information and received a payment code.

Results
Twelve participants who had TRTs three standard
deviations beyond the mean of their respective conditions
were removed from further data analysis (a criterion to
exclude outliers in all studies in this paper). Of the
remaining 236 participants (mean age = 29.7, 46% females,
N = 56-64 per condition), all answered either “6” or “9”. A
response of “6” counted as spontaneous VPT, while “9”
counted as seeing from a “self perspective.”
A logit analysis with Helmert contrasts showed that,
compared to the control condition where no actor was
present, the three actor-present conditions elicited
significantly higher VPT rates, z = 3.4, p < .001 (see Figure
2). Compared to the mere presence condition (12.5%), the
average of gaze and reaching conditions elicited a
significantly higher VPT rate, z = 4.0, p < .001, while the
gaze condition (42.1%) and the reaching condition (45.8%)
did not differ from one another.
A one-way ANOVA on TRTs for only those VPT trials
(where people answered “6”) revealed that people were
significantly faster in taking the actor’s perspective when he
was reaching for the number (M = 14.6s) than when he was
gazing at the number (M = 11.6s), p = .019 (See Figure 2).

Figure 2. Spontaneous Visual Perspective Taking (VPT)
rates (above) and mean Total Response Times (TRT)
(below) in Study 1a.

Study 1b & 1c: Instructed Self-perspective and
Other-perspective (VPT) Judgments
To better interpret the spontaneous VPT rates in Study 1a,
we conducted Studies 1b and 1c. We aimed to assess the
lower and upper bounds of people’s VPT rates when people
were explicitly asked to take either their own or someone
else’s perspective.
In Study 1b, when participants were asked to report a
number from their own visual perspective, those who still
reported a number from the actor’s viewpoint can be
characterized as spontaneous VPT. In Study 1c, when
participants were explicitly requested to report a number
from the actor’s perspective, those who followed the
instruction and answered “6” fit the category of instructed
VPT, and their performance represented the optimal VPT
performance people could achieve in the current setup.

Methods
Studies 1b and 1c applied the same stimuli, design, and
procedures as Study 1a, except for the free-response
questions. Instead of asking the perspective-neutral question
“What number is on the table?”, Study 1b asked “What
number can you see?”, and Study 1c asked “What number
can he see?” The actor-absent control condition was omitted
in Study 1c because asking what another person could see
was meaningless with no one being present.

2812

Results
In Study 1b, 236 out of 249 participants (mean age = 31.0,
54% females) entered data analysis (N = 55-63 per
condition). No participants in the presence or gaze condition
provided other-perspective judgments, while one participant
in the control condition mentioned both perspectives. In the
reaching condition, by contrast, 17.2% of participants took
the actor’s perspective and answered “6”, even though they
were explicitly asked to adopt their own perspective. In a
logit analysis, the spontaneous VPT rate in the reaching
condition was significantly higher than that in the remaining
conditions, z = -3.66, p < .001.
In Study 1c, 189 out of 204 participants (mean age = 30.1,
50% females) entered data analysis (N = 55-63 per
condition). VPT rates of presence, gaze, and reaching
conditions were 73.8%, 80.0%, and 69.0%, respectively.
Neither VPT rates nor TRTs of the VPT trials in the three
conditions significantly differed from each other.

Discussion
Three preliminary conclusions regarding spontaneous VPT
can be drawn from Studies 1a, 1b & 1c.
First, Study 1a has shown that, compared to a person’s
mere presence, the person’s gaze and reaching behaviors
significantly increased the observer’s tendency to take the
actor’s perspective. Second, as suggested by TRT
differences between the gaze and reaching conditions in
Study 1a and the high spontaneous VPT rate (17.2%) in the
reaching condition in Study 1b, goal-directed reaching may
be a more effective trigger than goal-directed gaze. Third, as
indicated by Study 1c, when people were explicitly
instructed to take another person’s perspective (the typical
“instructed VPT” paradigm), the three conditions no longer
differed in their effectiveness in triggering VPT. This
suggests that an instructed VPT paradigm could completely
obscure the differences among VPT triggering conditions.
Considering the important role VPT plays in action
coordination and social interaction (and the fact that it is
rarely verbally requested by the other interactant), future
research should more closely heed the distinction between
spontaneous and instructed perspective taking processes.
Although VPT can be induced spontaneously, Study 1c
also provided evidence that VPT requires extra effort: An
average VPT rate of 74.3% seems underwhelming when the
VPT task is explicit and straightforward. In this light, the
high spontaneous VPT rates in the gaze and reaching
conditions in Study 1a are all the more impressive.
These studies confirm the hypothesis that people’s
propensity for spontaneous VPT varies as a function of an
observed agent’s specific behaviors, and triggering VPT
becomes more effective from mere presence to goal-directed
gaze to reaching. However, one question arises from the
current paradigm: Do perspective-takers describe the
number from the actor’s visual perspective only when he is
currently engaging with it? In other words, would people
stop to represent the number from his viewpoint when his
gaze or reaching behavior is directed towards an irrelevant

object? If so, then the spontaneous VPT activated by an
actor’s goal-directed behavior is object-specific. However, if
people still describe the number according to the actor’s
viewpoint even when his action is not directed towards that
number, then VPT is activated globally, where people also
take the actor’s perspective to represent other objects of
potential engagement.
To test whether goal-directed gaze and reaching activate
spontaneous VPT in a global or object-specific fashion, we
adjusted our paradigm for Study 2. In particular, because the
reaching condition in Study 1 also encompassed gaze
towards the same object, we disassociated them in Study 2
to investigate their individual triggering effects.

Study 2a & 2b: Spontaneous VPT Activated by
Gaze and Reaching: Global or Object-Specific?
When people know where an object is located, they often
reach for it while looking at another object. Inspired by such
natural movements, we made gaze and reaching behaviors
entirely independent. To this end, a horizontally symmetric
diamond was placed on the table beside the familiar 6/9
number (see Figure 3). The actor could look at either the
diamond or the number while simultaneously reaching for
either object, resulting in four gaze-reaching combinations.
In addition, he could merely look at either object without
reaching, resulting in two gaze-only conditions.
If gaze activates spontaneous VPT globally, then people
should show similar VPT rates when the actor is looking at
either the diamond or the number; similarly, if reaching
triggers VPT globally, then people should show similar
VPT rates when the actor reaches for either object. Objectspecific activation, on the other hand, predicts that VPT
rates should drop significantly when the goal-directed
behavior (either gaze or reaching) is directed at the diamond
rather than the number.

Gaze-D,
Reach-No

Gaze-D,
Reach-D

Gaze-D,
Reach-Num

Gaze-Num,
Reach-No

Gaze-Num,
Reach-D

Gaze-Num,
Reach-Num

Figure 3. Six experiment conditions in Study 2a and 2b. “D”
= Diamond. “Num” = the Number “6”/”9”. The mere
presence condition (baseline) is not shown above.

2813

Methods
Stimuli. Photographs in Study 2a and 2b were very similar
to those in Study 1 except that they displayed both a digit
“9” and an equally sized, horizontally symmetric diamond
shape on the table. These two symbols were placed on two
sides of the table in front of the same actor (Figure 3).
Design. There were seven conditions in both studies. In the
baseline condition, the actor was looking aimlessly to his
left without goal-directed gaze, which was the same as the
presence condition in Study 1. Other conditions were the six
combinations of the actor’s gaze direction (diamond vs.
number) and his reaching behavior (no reaching, reaching
for the diamond, reaching for the number). We tested the
impact of the reaching manipulation by way of two Helmert
contrasts: no reaching vs. some reaching, and reaching for
diamond vs. reaching for number.
Procedures. Focusing on the activation conditions of
spontaneous VPT, we again asked participants to provide
free responses to the question “What number is on the
table?” (Study 2a) and to the question “What number can
you see?” (Study 2b). The remaining procedures were the
same as those in Study 1.

likely to perform VPT when he reached for the number
(27.0%) rather than for the diamond (7.4%), z = 3.56, p
< .001. In addition, no interaction effect was found between
the diamond-reaching vs. number-reaching contrast and
gaze direction.
Two-way ANOVA on TRTs in Study 2b revealed only
one significant effect: people were faster in VPT trials when
the actor was reaching for the number than for the diamond,
p < 0.01. Neither main effect of gaze direction nor any
interaction effects were significant.
A.

***
**

B.

Results

**

In Study 2a, 660 out of 688 participants (mean age = 31.3,
57.6% females) entered data analysis (N = 88-98 per
condition). All participants answered either “6” or “9”,
except one who answered from both perspectives. VPT rates
are shown in Panel A of Figure 4. A 2 × 3 logit analysis
found no main effect of gaze direction (toward diamond or
number) but a main effect of reaching behavior. The first
Helmert contrast showed that people were more likely to
take the actor’s perspective when he was reaching for
something than not reaching at all (23.3%), z = 4.47, p
< .001; the second Helmert contrast showed that people
were more likely to take the actor’s perspective when he
was reaching for the number (50.5%) rather than the
diamond (35.7%), z = 2.90, p = .004. No interaction
between gaze direction and reaching behavior was found.
A two-way ANOVA on TRTs of VPT trials found that
people were marginally faster to generate an otherperspective answer when the actor exhibited some reaching
behavior than when he was not reaching at all, p = 0.085.
No other effects were significant.
In Study 2b, 384 out of 420 participants (mean age = 30.2,
49.5% females) entered data analysis (N = 51-61 per
condition); all but three participants answered either “6” or
“9”. VPT rates are shown in Panel B of Figure 4. According
to a 2 × 3 logit analysis, people were overall more likely to
take the actor’s perspective when his gaze was directed at
the number (14.8%) rather than the diamond (11.6%), z =
2.12, p = .034. VPT rates also showed a significant main
effect of reaching behavior: according to the first Helmert
contrast, people were more likely to take the actor’s
perspective when he was reaching for something than not
reaching at all (5.2%), z = 2.63, p = .008; and the second
Helmert contrast found that people were significantly more

***

Figure 4. Panel A: Spontaneous VPT rates in Study 2a.
Panel B: Spontaneous VPT rates in Study 2b. Dashed lines
indicate VPT rates in baseline conditions where the actor
was merely present. The six bars represent the 2 Í 3 design
of two gaze directions (diamond vs. number) and three
reaching behaviors (no reaching, reaching for the diamond,
reaching for the number).

Discussion
Both studies confirmed the conclusions of Studies 1a & 1b:
Reaching was more effective than gaze at triggering
spontaneous VPT. More importantly, these studies
disassociated the triggering effects of gaze and reaching to
reveal whether they activated spontaneous VPT in a global
or object-specific fashion.
The triggering effect of reaching was always the strongest
when it was directed toward the number and weakest when
it was not displayed at all. However, when reaching was
directed toward an irrelevant, adjacent object on the same
table (the diamond), people’s VPT rates were neither as
high as those in the number-reaching condition, nor were
they as low as when reaching was absent. This suggests that
the activation of spontaneous VPT was not entirely objectspecific, because people were still inclined to take the

2814

actor’s perspective to describe other things he might
potentially reach for; and it was also not entirely global,
because VPT rates were still highest for the object he was
directly engaging with.
The conclusion on the triggering effect of gaze contains
more nuances. Study 2a found that people had similar VPT
rates and TRTs regardless of the object the actor looked at,
suggesting that gaze activated spontaneous VPT globally.
Study 2b also found no differential effect of gaze direction
on TRTs, yet there was a main effect of gaze direction.
However, a close examination on VPT rates in Panel B of
Figure 4 seems to suggest that the effect of gaze direction
only survived when reaching was absent. In other words,
with the presence of a stronger cue such as reaching, people
were not sensitive to gaze direction; however, when gaze
was the only trigger, people showed sensitivity to its
specific target – just like reaching.

Study 3: Problem Solving by Taking Visual
Perspective
Without being explicitly instructed, a considerable number
of participants provided descriptions of the target number
from another person’s perspective, and we take such
descriptions as evidence for the “spontaneity” of VPT.
However, there is an alternative interpretation: Participants
in all conditions may have recognized another person’s
perspective but deliberately selected from the two
perspectives the “right” one, considering their interpretation
of the scenes and their perception of the experimenter’s
expectations. According to this explanation, participants still
spontaneously took the actor’s visual perspective in the first
place, but their differential responses to the various
triggering conditions might have been more deliberate than
spontaneous.
To eliminate the possibility that differences among
triggering conditions were a mere reflection of participants’
deliberate effort to infer a likely answer, we designed a task
where there was one objectively correct answer that could
be accessed only if the participant spontaneously and
successfully represented another person’s visual perspective.
Once participants take the other’s perspective, they would
recognize that this perspective provides the right answer,
and they would no longer consider an answer based on their
self-perspective. Therefore, being able to provide this
answer would serve as a reliable indicator of genuinely
spontaneous VPT, and differential rates due to presence,
gaze and reaching would indicate the inherent triggering
effects of these conditions.

however, seeing a clear pattern in the displayed numbers
requires participants to take the actor’s visual perspective.

Figure 5. Presence and reaching conditions in Study 3. Gaze
and control conditions were analogous to previous studies.
Design. As in Study 1a, participants were randomly
assigned to one of four conditions. In the presence condition,
the agent was looking aimlessly to his left. In the gaze
condition, he was looking at the paper that covered “87”. In
the reaching condition, he was reaching for the paper. In a
control condition, neither the person nor his chair was
present (no actor).
Procedures. Amazon Mechanical Turk participants saw one
of the four photographs and a question below, “What
number is under the paper?” They typed their answers into a
text box. After submitting their answers, participants were
asked to indicate what computer device they used to
complete the study, whether they turned their device upside
down to view the photograph, and whether they had seen
similar questions in the past. They also provided basic
demographic information.

Results
432 participants completed this study. Those who had seen a
similar puzzle before, who turned their device upside-down
to view the photograph, and those whose TRTs were three
standard deviations beyond the mean of their respective
conditions were discarded, resulting in 377 participants in
data analysis (mean age = 30.8, 59.2% females, N = 88-109
per condition). The percentages of participants who
correctly answered “87” are shown in Figure 6. Notably,
66.3% of the participants gave the answer “78”, which was
the likely conclusion when one saw “68 88 ( ) 98” from
one’s own perspective.

***

**

Methods
Stimuli. We created a scenario resembling that in previous
studies, but instead of two objects on the table, the actor
faced four numbers – 86, 87, 88, and 89 – with equal
distance between them and the number “87” covered under
a piece of white paper (Figure 5). Critically, the visible
numbers were horizontally symmetric and therefore did not
reveal their orientation when viewed from either direction;

2815

Figure 6. Spontaneous VPT rates in Study 3.

A logit analysis with Helmert contrasts showed that,
compared to the minimal VPT rate in the baseline condition
when no actor was present (2.8%), the three actor-present
conditions induced significantly higher VPT rates, z = 3.61,
p < .001. Compared with the mere presence condition
(11.4%), the average of gaze and reaching conditions
induced a significantly higher VPT rate, z = 2.58, p = .01.
Finally, the gaze condition (20.4%) and the reaching
condition (31.5%) differed marginally from each other, z =
1.66, p = .10.
One-way ANOVA on TRTs of trials in which participants
correctly answered “87” did not reveal any significant
effects. However, only a fraction of participants in each
condition provided the correct answer of “87”, resulting in
only 3 to 29 data points per condition. A closer observation
of the trend in TRTs across different conditions revealed
that TRTs seemed to decrease from presence (21.6s) to gaze
(19.0s) to reaching (18.4s).

Discussion
Study 3 deployed a problem-solving task that was less
subject to participants’ deliberate selection between two
potential perspectives and more effective in capturing the
activation of spontaneous VPT. The difficulty of the task
lowered overall VPT rates, but it showed, as previous
studies, that the proportion of people who took the other
person’s visual perspective increased from baseline to mere
presence to gaze and then goal-directed reaching. Although
only marginally significant, people’s VPT rates tended to be
even higher for reaching than for gaze.

General Discussion
In the present studies, we measured spontaneous VPT as
participants’ tendency to read an ambiguous number from
another agent’s perspective (“6”) rather than from their own
perspective (“9”). We found that the mere presence of the
agent activated a low level of VPT; object-directed
behaviors such as gaze and reaching markedly increased
spontaneous VPT; and of those, reaching was more effective
than gaze as a VPT trigger. In addition, observing an agent’s
goal-directed gaze or reaching toward one object triggered
VPT even for objects with which the actor was currently not
engaged.
A more general message our project aims to convey is
that research on VPT needs to look beyond the debate on
people’s capacity of perspective taking and instead study
social and contextual triggers that give rise to its activation.
By taking a dynamic approach and viewing VPT as a
cognitive tool that is more readily available under certain
conditions, our project provides one initial step towards
such exploration. However, we limited our search scope to
the most fundamental “mental agency” behaviors in this
project; in all likelihood, there are additional behavioral and
social contexts that might evoke VPT in people’s daily
interaction.
For example, future research may examine how other
nonverbal behaviors, such as eye contact and referential

pointing, can influence people’s VPT tendency, and whether
specific relationships between interactants influence their
spontaneous adoption of each other’s viewpoint in dyadic
interaction or joint action. Future research should also
expand from visual perspective taking to other types of
perspective taking, such as understanding and predicting
other people’s beliefs, desires, and emotions, and examine
whether similar triggers are responsible for the different
kinds of perspective taking, and how these different kinds
relate to one another at the level of cognitive processing.

References
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. Levine, & S. D.
Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Clark, H.H. (1992). Arenas of language use. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Driver, J., Davis, G., Ricciardelli, P., Kidd, P., Maxwell, E.,
& Baron-Cohen, S. (1999). Gaze Perception Triggers
Reflexive Visuospatial Orienting. Visual Cognition, 6(5),
509–540.
Duran, N. D., Dale, R., & Kreuz, R. J. (2011). Listeners
invest in an assumed other’s perspective despite cognitive
cost. Cognition, 121(1), 22–40.
Flavell, J. H., Everett, B. A., Croft, K., & Flavell, E. R.
(1981). Young children’s knowledge about visualperception – Further evidence for the level 1–level 2
distinction. Developmental Psychology, 17, 99–103.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., Balin, J. A., & Brauner, J. S. (2000).
Taking perspective in conversation: The role of mutual
knowledge in comprehension. Psychological Science, 11,
32–38.
Michelon, P., & Zacks, J. M. (2006). Two kinds of visual
perspective taking. Perception & Psychophysics, 68(2),
327-37.
Moll, H., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2011). How does it look?
Level 2 perspective-taking at 36 months. Child
Development, 82(2), 661-673.
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2001).
Neurophysiological
mechanisms
underlying
the
understanding and imitation of action. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 2(9), 661–670.
Tversky, B., & Hard, B. M. (2009). Embodied and
disembodied cognition: spatial perspective-taking.
Cognition, 110(1), 124-9.
Woodward, A.L. (1998) Infants selectively encode the goal
object of an actor’s reach. Cognition, 69, 1–34.
Zwickel, J., & Müller, H. J. (2013). On the relation between
spontaneous perspective taking and other visuospatial
processes. Memory & Cognition, 41(4), 558–70.

2816

