Inferring the Tsimane’s use of color categories from recognition memory
Pernille Hemmer1 (Pernille.hemmer@rutgers.edu)
Kimele Persaud1 (Kimele.persaud@rutgers.edu)
Celeste Kidd2 (ckidd@bcs.rochester.edu)
Steven Piantadosi2 (spiantadosi@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Psychology, Rutgers University1
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester2
2004; Stickles & Regier, 2014; Xu, Griffiths, & Dowman,
2010), and several clear patterns of color universality have
emerged. For example, it has been shown that universal
tendencies persists in color naming across societies (Berlin
& Kay, 1969; Regier, Kay, & Cook, 2005) and that those
tendencies are linked to 11 basic color terms (i.e., red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, purple, pink, black, white, gray
and brown). A possible source of universal tendencies in
color naming is similarities in favored color percepts (i.e.
best examples) across various languages (Regier, Kay, &
Cook, 2005). These color universals are shown to have a
subjective perceptual basis, in that they can be used to
partition the color space into distinct regions that facilitate
color categorization (Webster & Kay, 2012).
While these 11 universal categories are found across
most industrialized societies, there are also substantial
individual, environmental, and cultural differences in color
knowledge (e.g., Palmer & Schloss, 2010; Stickles &
Regier, 2014). Internal (e.g., emotional) relationships and
preferences to certain colors serve as a candidate source of
variation in individual color knowledge as postulated by the
Ecological Valence Theory of Human Color Preferences
(Palmer & Schloss, 2010). This theory posits that people’s
emotional response to a color is their cumulative affective
response to the objects to which the color is associated.
Individuals prefer colors that they have had positive
experiences with (e.g. yellow – color of flowers) and do not
prefer colors with which they have had bad experiences (e.g.
red – color of fire), signifying each person’s close and
personal relationship to color.
At the group level, a source of variation in subjective
color knowledge is the relationship between color and the
variability in natural environments. For example, color
terms in languages with climates of abundant vegetation
(e.g. rainforest) are significantly different from color terms
in languages with dry climates (e.g. Savanna), but not in
places with relatively similar climates (e.g. rainforest and
monsoon) (Stickles & Regier, 2014). The difference in the
greenery of the climates presumably accounts for difference
in color naming. Thus, it appears that local environmental
factors influence color knowledge and promotes variability
in color terms across languages.
Cultural differences are a third source of subjective
variation that engenders differences in color knowledge. It
has been suggested that color category knowledge develop

Abstract
Knowledge of color has strong individual,
environmental, and cultural differences that may
systematically influence performance in cognitive tasks.
For example, color knowledge has been shown to
influence recall of color (Persaud & Hemmer, 2014).
This manifests as a systematic regression to the mean
effect, where memory is biased towards the mean hue
of each universal color category. What remains unclear
is whether differences, such as culture and
environment, might differentially influence memory.
We tested recognition memory for color in the
Tsimane’ of Bolivia; an indigenous population with
little or no modern schooling, whose environment is
very different from industrialized societies. We found
that recognition regressed towards the mean of some
universal color categories, but for others was
systematically biased toward neighboring categories. A
cluster analysis suggested that the Tsimane’ use five
underlying color categories—not the standard
universals. This might be shaped by education,
language and the environment.
Keywords: Episodic memory; color; Prior knowledge;
Expectations; Tsimane’.

Introduction
“The whole world, as we experience it visually, comes to us
through the mystic realm of color.”― Hans Hofmann

Similarities and Differences in Color Knowledge
Color holds social and cultural relevance and people’s
relationship to color can be both internally (e.g. emotional
connections to color) and externally (e.g. through the visual
experience in their environment) derived. In addition, color
is a ubiquitous domain for research across developmental,
social, and cultural groups, as well as across domains of
cognition.
Importantly, for investigative purposes people have
similar, but also different knowledge states of color. There
is an extensive literature characterizing knowledge of color
across cultures (e.g., Davies & Corbett, 1997; Regier, Kay,
& Cook, 2005; Roberson, Davidoff, Davies, & Shapiro,

896

as a function of cultural experience (e.g. Roberson, Davies,
& Davidoff, 2000). For example, there are significant
differences in perceptual judgments for color between
different cultural groups. This has been demonstrated in
various groups including Russian, who have two terms for
blue (Paramei, 2005; Winawer, Witthoft, Frank, Wu, Wade,
& Boroditsky, 2007), Papua New Guinea, who uses 5 color
categories (Roberson, Davies, & Davidoff, 2000), and a
semi-nomadic South African tribe, who categorizes color
based on light and dark (Roberson, Davidoff, Davies, &
Shapiro, 2004).
Other theories have been postulated to account for both
the universality and cultural differences in color naming
across languages. For example, one theory suggests that
color naming reflects near optimal divisions of perceptual
color space giving rise to both universal tendencies and
language differences in color terms (Regier, Kay, &
Khetarpal, 2007).

Furthermore, Persaud and Hemmer (2014) found a
regression to the mean effect in free recall, such that studied
hue values that were darker shades (above the mean of the
color category) were underestimated, while studied hue
values that were lighter shades (below the mean of the color
category) were overestimated. They modeled this regression
effect with a Bayesian cognitive model of memory which
assumed recall to be a combination of prior expectations for
color and noisy episodic representations. What remains to
be examined is whether differences across cultural, social,
and developmental groups might differentially influence
memory. For example, systematic differences in memory
may reflect individuating states of knowledge across
cultural groups.

Inferring Color Categories of the Tsimane’
The goal of the current investigation is to examine
memory for color in a population that has potentially
different expectations for color based on their environment
or culture. Specifically, we investigated recognition memory
for color in the indigenous Tsimane’ group of Bolivia.
The Tsimane’ are an indigenous people of lowland
Bolivia who inhabit lowland rainforest east of the Andes in
the Beni department of Bolivia. They live close to ranching
lands and many come to the Bolivian city of San Borja to
trade local farmed goods. Otherwise, they have minimal
contact with Bolivians and live a traditional lifestyle as
"farming foragers", i.e., they are hunter-gatherers who have
some agriculture. They have highly variable amounts of
education (see table 1) and few manufactured artifacts or
even permanent artifacts.
The Tsimane’ language is closely related to the
Moseten language. In the Tsimane’ language color terms are
highly variable and morphologically complex—e.g., yellow
is called “color-of-the-cuchi-cuchi-tree”. Furthermore, while
some people know this term, some do not. This holds true
for other color terms as well. The high variability in color
terms might stem from several sources. The variability in
knowledge might be reflective of educational level. The
Tsimane’ have very little modern education. This includes
the use of educational toys employed in modern education
that emphasize color naming. Education is known to
influence a number of cognitive domains, such as numerical
cognition (Piazza, Pica, Izard, Spelke, & Dehaene, 2013),

Prior knowledge and memory
In the domain of memory, it has been shown that
knowledge of the statistical regularities of the environment
exerts strong influences on the information recalled, e.g., the
size of objects (Hemmer and Steyvers, 2009a), objects in
scenes (Hemmer and Steyvers, 2009c) and the height of
people (Hemmer, Tauber, and Steyvers, in press); for a
review see Hemmer & Persaud (2014). Memory for color,
specifically, demonstrates that recall is influenced by
knowledge of the hue distributions over color categories.
For example, Persaud and Hemmer (2014) measured bidirectional category knowledge of color, i.e. linguistic
categorization (what label describes this color), and
category representativeness (generate a color for this label).
They found strong agreement in color naming and
generation for hue values associated with universal color
categories. They also found a hierarchical naming
granularity of 7 universals and additional subordinate level
labels within those color categories (e.g. light-green, skyblue). While all participants used labels from the 7 universal
categories, there were strong individual differences in the
use of subordinate labels. This suggests that people’s shared
bi-directional knowledge of color may be reflective of their
shared environment, but might also reflect expertise and the
communicative usefulness of this knowledge.

Figure 1. Tsimane’ woman participating in the study. The experiment was conducted in a class and people from the
community were watching. The left panel shows a study trial and the right panel the corresponding testing trial.

897

and education might bias color knowledge and the use of
color terms. The lack of a communicative need for
referencing certain colors in the Tsimane’ environment
might also influence development and use of color terms, as
evidenced by the findings of Stickles and Regier (2014).
Such differences in education, language and environment
might result in different influences on memory than those
found in U.S. students (Persaud & Hemmer, 2014).

education to 10 years of education, and arithmetic skills
ranged from 0-11 out of 11 questions correct on an ad hoc
field measure (using all addition questions), and highest
count ranging from 2-102 (meaning knowing all numbers).
Table 1 gives a detailed breakdown of the demographics and
skill variables.
Materials & Design Stimuli consisted of 24 random shapes
uniformly filled with 24 unique colors sampled from the hue
color space. Colors were sampled such that saturation and
luminance were held constant at 100% and 50%
respectively. Because saturation and luminance were held
constant, the presented hue values did not include black,
white, brown or gray. The 24 colors were selected from the
remaining 7 color categories and varied in hue by a
minimum of 5 units (on a total range of 239). Furthermore,
colors were distributed across the hue space such that the
colors were selected from the categories based on the size of
the categories hue range (e.g., yellow hue ranges only from
approximately 35-50, but green ranges from 55-110—See
Persaud & Hemmer (2014) for full set of hue ranges used in
free recall with undergraduate participants). Thus, hue
values were randomly selected from each color category,
proportional to the size of the color category (i.e. 2 red, 3
orange, 2 yellow, 6 green, 6 blue, 2 purple, and 3 pink).
Study shapes were printed individually on 5.5-by-8 inch
cards. For test slides the study hue and shape combination
was printed on a 5.5-by-8 inch card along with 5 colors
distractors appearing on the same shape as the study shape
(See figure 2 for a sample study test pair). The colors of the
distractors were chosen such that the hue values of two
distractors were greater than the hue value of the target
color, two distractors were less than the hue of the target,
and the last distractor hue value was either greater or less
than the target, but at a further absolute distance from the
target than the other distractors (see Figure 2 for
illustration).

Memory for Color
In the following experiment, we assessed recognition
memory for color. The goal of this study was to infer what
color categories Tsimane’ ascribe to, evidenced by their
memory performance. Based on previous work assessing
recall for color in U.S. student populations, our predictions
for performance were two-fold. First, we predicted a
systematic regression to the mean effect where memory is
biased towards the mean of the hue range for a color
category. Second, based on the high variability in color
terms in the Tsimane language, potential differences due to
education, and their natural environment, we predict that the
specific categories the Tsimane’ regress toward will be
different than U.S. populations.
The regression effects could then take several forms:
Memory could regress towards a smaller number of
categories – conjoining neighboring categories, as observed
in several cultures using terms to combine categories such
as green and blue (e.g., Roberson, Davies, & Davidoff,
2000; Roberson, Davidoff, Davies, & Shapiro, 2004). They
could split universal categories – e.g., as observed in
Russian where blue has two terms (e.g., Paramei, 2005).
Lastly, memory could be non-systematic, i.e., not regress or
regress away from the category mean. This would provide
support for cultural and environmental factors that influence
memory. Alternatively, regression towards the standard
universal color categories would suggest that these factors
(education, language, and environment) may have little
influence on memory.

Procedure Participants were gathered in a communal
classroom, and there were a number of onlookers during the
administration of the test. Figure 1 shows both the
experimental setting and a study-test trial sequence. A
translator explained the task, and all participants appeared to
immediately understand the procedure. A color shape
combination measuring 5-by-5 inch was presented in the
center of a white card.

Method
Participants Twenty-three individuals participated in this
study and were compensated with small gift bags of local
goods. Participant ages ranged from 18-65 years of age.
Self-reports of education levels ranged from no formal
Table 1 Participant Demographics
Age (years)

Education (years)
Spanish

*n=23

18

20-28

30-34

40-48

60+

4

8

6

3

2

0

1

2

3-5

6-9

10

4

1

3

9

5

1

0

6-9

10-11

102

(translate out of 11)

Counting (highest #)
Arithmetic (out of 12)

1

19

3

2

5-9

15-31

46-64

93

1

2

5

3

1

11

0

1

2-3

4-5

6

10-11

2

3

10

2

2

3

Figure 2. Sample study – test stimuli.

898

BIAS (recalled - studied)

40

observed data averaged over participants

30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
235

5

15

25

30

35

50

60

65

75

80

95

105 115 120 130 145 160 170 185 190 200 210 225

STUDY HUE VALUES

Figure 3. Recognition bias by hue value. Mean bias (data points) and response ranges (box plots) for each studied hue
value. Colors of the data makers indicate the standard universal color categories. Positive bias indicates over
estimation and negative bias indicates underestimation. The black line indicates no bias.
Presentation time of the 1-item study card was as close to 1
second as possible. The study trial was followed by a 6alternative forced choice immediate recognition task. For
the 6-way choice, participants had as much time as they
needed, but most responded immediately. The response was
recorded in a booklet and the experiment proceeded to the
next trial. On some trials (approx. 5%) it was not clear
where the participant had pointed, and participants were
asked to repeat their choice. They were asked to touch,
rather than point, to try to alleviate this problem. Total
participation time was approximately five minutes per
subject. Participants also completed other unrelated tasks
(either before or after) for a total of about 20-25 minutes.
Trial order was randomized between participants. Due to the
field demands, it was not possible to randomize the
target/foil locations on the test trials. This means that all
participants saw identical test cards.

an immediate recall task for the spatial location of dots.
They removed 2.4% of responses based on trial more than
45 degrees from the study location and an additional 1.5%
of responses based on a threshold of 3 standard deviations.
Thus, we used a much more conservative criterion and
removed only 2/3 the number of trials. After calculating the
bias measure described below, individual subject data
revealed that there was one participant whose data were
very noisy. Performance appeared essentially random in that
50% of this participant’s responses were either 6 standard
deviations away from the studied hue or were outside of the
study color category (studied yellow and recalled red). This
data may reflect either impairment in color vision1 or
inattention to the task and was removed from all further
analysis.
Recognition Bias and Regression Memory performance
was measured in terms of recognition bias, i.e., the
difference between the hue value participants remembered
and the hue value studied. First, bias was calculated for each
individual participant and then averaged across participants
for each studied hue value. Figure 3 shows recognition bias
as a function of studied hue values. It should be noted that
in all figures the hue range is visualized such that hue values
235 and 5—both red hues—are next to each other on the left
side of the graphs. The data appear to show clear regression
to the red, green, blue and pink color categories. The data
for orange, yellow, and purple is more ambiguous. Based on
a this ambiguity, we partitioned the averaged bias into 5
categories – combining orange and yellow, and combining
purple and pink— and fit a linear regression model to each
of the 5 resulting color categories (Figure 4). The slope of
the regression in each category (except for the
orange/yellow range) is negative, indicative of a regression
to the mean effect. Values below the mean of the category
are overestimated and hue values above the mean are
underestimated. This is consistent with the findings from
recall for color (Persaud & Hemmer, 2014). A one-way

Results
Prior to any analysis, recognition responses that were
more than 6 standard deviations away from the studied hue
value were removed. These data points constituted 2.5% of
all the data (14 out of 545 data points). This is consistent
with the procedure of Huttenlocher et al. (1991) who used

Figure 4. Regression fits to 5 color categories.
Categories are partitioned by hue ranges outlined in
Persaud & Hemmer (2014) with orange and yellow
combined, and pink and purple combined. The black
line indicates no bias. The data points are color coded
with a hue for that color category. The lines give the
regression fits for each of the 5 categories.

1

A limitation of this study is that we were not able to conduct a
color blindness test. The assessment required naming knowledge
of complex shapes which was confounded with education.

899

235

observed data

150
150

5

BIAS (recalled - studied)
BIAS (recalled - studied)

100
100

15
25
30
35

STUDY HUE VALUES

50
60
65

5050

0 0

-50-50

-100
-100

75
80

-150
-150

-200
-200
0 0

95

5050

100
100

150
150

200
200

STUDY
STUDYHUE
HUEVALUES
VALUES

105
115
120
130

Figure 6. K-means Cluster Analysis. Bias data
partitioned into 5 learned clusters from an unsupervised
k-means cluster analysis, and color coded with a hue
from that category. Vertical lines and color labels on xaxis show the standard universal categories.

145
160
170
185
190

Cluster Analysis The visual inspection of figure 5 appears
to show interestingly different color categories compared to
the universal seven (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple
and pink). Therefore, rather than manually assigning color
categories as seen in figure 4, we conducted a k-means
cluster analysis to learn the underlying color categories that
participants may have used (Figure 6). We ran 10 iterations
of the cluster analysis on four different clusters sizes (i.e., 4,
5, 6, and 7) and found the greatest cluster agreement over
the 10 chains for a cluster size of 5. This cluster size was
further confirmed by the Calinski Harabasz criterion.
Consistent with the regression analysis in figure 4, the
cluster analysis also combines colors in the purple/pink
ranges and orange/yellow ranges. However, the cluster
analysis further combined the orange/yellow category with
red, but split the universal blue range into two blue
categories.

200
210
225
-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

BIAS (recalled - studied)

Figure 5. Recognition response bias to studied hue
values. All responses for a given study hue value appear
in a horizontal row. The response markers are scaled by
the frequency at which they were given (larger boxes
indicate greater frequency) and colored with the exact
hue value chosen.
analysis of variance revealed a significant main effect of
intercepts (F[109]=25, p<.001) across color categories,
indicating that each category has a different intercept.
However, performance in the orange/yellow range appears
to be different from the other categories. In this category,
the slope runs in the opposite direction, showing a
regression towards orange-red rather than towards yellow.
Moreover, there was no significant correlation between
recognition bias and the demographic variables (i.e. age,
education level, highest count, and arithmetic performance).
All Recognition Responses Next, we examined the hue
values remembered for each hue studied. Figure 5 shows all
hue responses to each of the study hue values in square
boxes scaled by the frequency at which they were given.
Correctly recognized hue values lie vertically at the 0-bias
line of the x-axis. For each study value, all responses to that
value form a straight horizontal line. For example, for study
hue 95 (green-blue - indicated by arrow) all responses to fall
in line with the black arrow. Responses greater than 95 fall
to the right of the 0-bias line and responses less than 95 fall
to the left. The squares in each horizontal row are colored
by their true response hue value. A visual inspection of this
graph suggests that categories may be partitioned differently
than observed in Figure 4. For example, red, orange, and
yellow hues appear to tightly cluster with no clear diagonal
regression line, while a possible light blue category
(between green and blue) emerges.

Discussion
In this paper we sought to infer the color categories of
an indigenous population, the Tsimane’ of Bolivia,
evidenced by their memory for colors. Based on this work,
two clear patterns emerged. First, a regression to the mean
effect was borne out of the data, such that memory was
biased towards some universal color categories. This finding
suggests that the regression to the mean effect in memory is
a universal cognitive process and is systematic across
cultural, environmental, and educational
groups.
Interestingly, however, the categories regressed toward were
different than observed in a standard U.S. population. The
standard finding is a regression towards seven universal
color categories (i.e. red, orange, yellow, green, blue,
purple, and pink). In the Tsimane’ population, memory
followed this pattern only for red, green, blue and pink, but
differed for orange (biased toward red), yellow (no
systematic bias) and purple (biased toward pink). Moreover,
a k-means cluster analysis further suggests that the
Tsimane’ segregate blue into two categories, resulting in
five inferred categories: red/orange/yellow, green, light
blue, dark blue, and purple/pink.

900

The population specific bias observed in the Tsimane’,
relative to a U.S. population, might be related to the
underdevelopment of category knowledge for some
categories. This could be due to low environmental
incidence, low frequency in language, limited formal
education of color, or little communicative need of certain
color terms. For example, if a certain color is not pervasive
in an environment, or tied to objects of importance,
development of a linguistic label and prototype for that
category might be hampered. Even if a that color does exist
in the environment, but it is tied to only a few objects and
all examples of that object are that color, the color label
might not help to disambiguate communication. For
example, if all houses were brown, saying “go to the brown
house” is not helpful. Instead, other disambiguating features
of the object (e.g., “the tall house”, “the house with the
thatched roof”) are needed.
From a memory perspective, the underdevelopment of
color categories raises several interesting questions. A color
like yellow, which is somewhat rare in the Tsimame’
environment, might lead to an outlier (or Von Restorff)
effect, where it is better remembered. Conversely, a
pervasive color (with a high prior probability in the
environment) is also likely to lead to better memory, and
might account for the shallow regression line in the blue
category (figure 4). Future studies are required to
substantiate these intuitions about the Tsimane’ population,
including an extensive quantification of the color terms
found in the Tsimane language. These studies are a part of
an ongoing investigation of prior knowledge and memory
for this population.
We believe that this study provides important evidence
for an experience based mechanism (development and
maintenance of prior knowledge) that gives rise to
differences in color knowledge. This is consistent with the
findings of Stickles and Regier (2014) that environment
impacts language (i.e., color words). Furthermore, the study
provides strong support for the influence of category
knowledge on memory, and the systematicity of memory
across groups with varying prior knowledge content.

categorical knowledge and episodic memory across
domains. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1-5.
Hemmer, P., and Steyvers, M. (2009a). Integrating episodic
memories and prior knowledge at multiple levels of
abstraction. Psychonomic Bull. & Rev. 16, 80–87.
Hemmer, P., and Steyvers,M. (2009c). “Integrating episodic
and semantic information in memory for natural scenes,”
in Proceedings of the 31th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 1557–1562
Hemmer, P., Tauber, S., and Steyvers, M. (in press).
Bayesian estimation in rational models. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in
establishing spatial location. Psych Review, 98, 352-376.
Palmer, S. & Schloss, K. (2010). An ecological valence
theory of human color preference. PNAS, 107, p.88778882.
Paramei, G.V. (2005). Singing the Russian blues: An
argument for culturally basic color terms. Cross-Cultural
Res. 39, 10–38.
Persaud, K., and Hemmer, P. (2014). The influence of
knowledge and expectations for color on episodic
memory. Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society,
Piazza, M., Pica, P., Izard, V., Spelke, E. & Dehaene, S.
(2013). Education enhances the acuity of the nonverbal
approximate number system. Psych Science, 24, 10371043.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Cook, R. (2005). Focal colors are
universal after all. PNAS, 102, 8386-8391.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming
reflects optimal partitions of color space. PNAS, 104,
1436-1441.
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I., & Shapiro, L. (2004).
The development of color categories in two languages: A
longitudinal study. J.E.P.: General, 4, 554–571.
Roberson, D., Davies, I., & Davidoff, J. (2000). Colour
categories are not universal: Replications and new
evidence from a Stone-Age culture. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 369–398.
Stickles, E. and Regier, T. (2014). The relation of color
naming and the environment. Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Webster, M.A. & Kay, P. (2012). Color categories and color
appearance. Cognition, 122, 375-392
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M.C., Wu, L., and
Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal effects of
language on color discrimination. PNAS USA. 104, 7780–
7785.
Xu, J., Griffiths, T.L., & Dowman, M. (2010). Replicating
color term universals through human iterated learning.
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.

Acknowledgments
This work is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant Number NSF DGE 0937373 and National Science
Foundation I.G.E.R.T. under Grant Number NSF DGE
0549115.

References
Berlin, B. and P. Kay (1969). Basic Color Terms: Their
Universality and Evolution. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Davies, I. R. L. & Corbett, G. C. (1997). A cross-cultural
study of colour-grouping: Evidence for weak linguistic
relativity. British Journal of Psychology, 88, 493-517.
Hemmer, P. and Persaud, K. (2014). Interaction between

901

