Influence of Excitation/Inhibition Imbalance on Local Processing Bias in
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Yukie Nagai, Takakazu Moriwaki1 , and Minoru Asada
({yukie, takakazu.moriwaki, asada}@ams.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University
2-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan
Abstract
People with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) tend to detect local patterns of visual stimuli more quickly than global patterns,
which is opposite to the behavior of typically developing people. We hypothesized that the imbalance between excitation
and inhibition neurons in the visual cortex causes the local processing bias observed in ASD. Stronger inhibitory connections
could diminish the neural activities and thus prevent global feature integration, whereas properly balanced connections would
enable the cortex to detect features of any size. We verified
our hypothesis by employing a computational neural network
called a neocognitron. Our experimental results demonstrated
that the network with stronger inhibitory connections exhibited a local processing bias, whereas the network with properly
adjusted connections showed a moderate global bias. Moreover, the networks with extremely strong or weak inhibitions
revealed no perception bias. These results suggest that an excitation/inhibition imbalance causes multiple types of atypical
perception in ASD.
Keywords: autism spectrum disorder; local processing bias;
excitation/inhibition balance; neocognitron

Figure 1: Evaluation of local processing bias in ASD. The left
figure shows the visual stimuli consisting of hierarchically
compound letters. The right graph plots the reaction time to
identify the local or global letter (adapted from (Behrmann,
Avidan, et al., 2006)).

Introduction
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental
disorder that is characterized by impaired social interaction
and communication (Baron-Cohen, 1995). For example, people with ASD show difficulties in making eye contact, establishing joint attention, and reading others’ intentions—
abilities that are otherwise usually acquired in the first few
years of life. Unlike the traditional view of ASD, recent studies in cognitive science, neuroscience, and Tojisha-Kenkyu2
suggest that a core problem of ASD lies in the lower perception and action rather than in higher cognition (Frith &
Happé, 1994; Happé & Frith, 2006; Ayaya & Kumagaya,
2008). A new hypothesis was proposed called “weak central coherence” (Frith & Happé, 1994; Happé & Frith, 2006),
suggesting that a diminished ability to integrate information
or an enhanced ability in the lower perception causes social
difficulties in ASD. Researchers in Tojisha-Kenkyu has provided further insight into the mechanism. They argue that
ASD may be associated with an abnormal sensitivity to prediction error, and thus individuals with ASD acquire a different internal model from typically developing people (Ayaya
& Kumagaya, 2008). Difficulties in social communication
may therefore be caused by the difference between the internal model of ASD and that of non-ASD rather than by disabilities intrinsic to ASD (Nagai, 2015).
1 T.

Moriwaki is with Ishida Co., Ltd. since April 2014.

2 A developing research area, in which researchers suffering from

ASD investigate their atypical sensorimotor experiences from a firstperson perspective.

Behavioral evidence of a local processing bias in pattern recognition has emerged to support the above hypothesis (Behrmann, Avidan, et al., 2006; Behrmann, Thomas,
& Humphreys, 2006; Simmons et al., 2009). People with
ASD focus stronger and quicker visual attention to spatially
local features than global features, whereas typically developing people exhibit the opposite behavioral pattern. Figure 1
shows the result of a behavioral experiment (Behrmann, Avidan, et al., 2006), in which subjects with or without ASD were
asked to respond to a visual stimulus of a large letter (global)
composed of smaller letters (local) by naming the local or
global letter presented (left: the visual stimuli, right: reaction
time). Subjects with ASD exhibited a stronger local bias in
recognition, especially when the local and global letters were
inconsistent (e.g., a large “S” consisting of small “H”s).
However, an open question remains as to the specific neural mechanisms involved in this atypical perception in ASD.
Although a number of studies have revealed behavioral and
neural abnormalities in ASD, no study has yet explained
the underlying mechanism of these symptoms. We address
this issue from a computational point of view. A computational approach has potential to bridge the gap between
behavioral findings and neural evidence (Vattikuti & Chow,
2010; Bakhtiari, Mohammadi Sephavand, Nili Ahmadabadi,
Nadjar Araabi, & Esteky, 2012). Our hypothesis inspired
by the result of neuroscience studies, is that the imbalance
between excitatory and inhibitory neurons in the visual cor-

1685

tex causes a local processing bias in ASD. Previous studies
have reported an atypical excitation/inhibition balance (E/I
balance) and relevant gamma-band activity in ASD (Sun et
al., 2012; Snijders, Milivojevic, & Kemner, 2013). Furthermore, the association between the E/I imbalance and social
dysfunction was demonstrated in a mouse experiment (Yizhar
et al., 2011). Based on this evidence, we consider that the
E/I balance might influence the integration of spatial information. For example, stronger inhibitory connections could
diminish the response of succeeding neurons and thus hinder
global feature integration. We verify our hypothesis by employing a computational neural network called a neocognitron (Fukushima & Miyake, 1982; Fukushima, 1988, 2003).
(a) Typical architecture of the neocognitron

Neocognitron: A Hierarchical Neural Network
for Pattern Recognition
We introduce a neocognitron (Fukushima & Miyake, 1982;
Fukushima, 1988, 2003) as the basis of our computational
model. The neocognitron is a hierarchical, multilayered neural network, which is capable of robust visual pattern recognition. Figure 2 (a) shows the typical architecture of the network. Inspired by the structure of the primary visual cortex,
the network consists of multiple layers: U0 is the input layer
that receives visual stimuli, UG is the contrast-extraction layer
that detects the edge features of the input, and US1 to UC5 are
the layers that recognize the patterns presented in the input.
Visual stimuli fed into the network are processed through receptive fields (denoted by circles in Figure 2 (a)), which cover
local areas in the lower layers and gradually integrate the information into the higher layers.
The network learns to recognize visual inputs by updating
the connections between the US and UC layers. Figure 2 (b)
illustrates the connections from the (l − 1)-th to l-th layers.
US and UC are alternately arranged in the network (i.e., US1
→ UC1 → US2 → UC2 . . .) and contain three types of cells: Scells, C-cells, and V-cells. S-cells serve as feature-extracting
cells, similar to simple cells in the visual cortex. S-cells in
USl receive excitatory connections (aSl ) from C-cells in the
preceding layer and receive inhibitory connections (bSl ) from
V-cells in the same layer, and thereby learn to respond selectively to particular features in their receptive fields. The
output of S-cells (uSl ) is calculated by
[
]
θl
1 + ∑KCl−1 ∑ASl aSl uCl−1
uSl =
ϕ
−1 ,
(1)
1 − θl
1 + θl bSl vl
where θl is a fixed threshold, ϕ[ ] is a function defined by
ϕ[x] = max(x, 0), KCl−1 and ASl are the number of cell planes
and the size of the receptive fields, respectively, and uCl−1 and
vl are the outputs of C-cells and V-cells, respectively. Here,
the connections aSl and bSl are the targets to update through
learning and define the E/I balance, which is our point of interest with respect to the atypical perception in ASD. The
learning rule of aSl is defined by
∆aSl = ql cSl uCl−1 ,

(2)

(b) Connections between US and UC layers

Figure 2: Neocognitron
and bSl is calculated accordingly by
√

KCl−1 ASl

bSl =

a2

∑ ∑ cSlSl

(3)

so that uSl learns to respond selectively to particular visual
features. Here, ql is a positive constant parameter determining the learning speed, and cSl represents fixed connections
from C-cells to V-cells. After learning, S-cells in the lower
layers (e.g., US1 and US2 ) are able to extract local features
such as lines in particular orientations, whereas those in the
higher layers (e.g., US4 and US5 ) are able to extract global
patterns such as letters, numbers, and diagrams consisting of
multiple local features.
C-cells resemble complex cells in the visual cortex. That
is, they receive fixed excitatory connections (aCl ) from S-cells
in the preceding layer, where S-cells are trained to extract the
same feature but from slightly different positions. The output
of C-cells (uCl ) is calculated by
[
]
uCl = ψ

ACl

∑ aCl uSl

,

(4)

where ACl is the size of the receptive fields, and ψ[ ] is a function defined by ψ[x] = ϕ[x]/(1 + ϕ[x]). An important point
here is that C-cells respond if at least one of the connected

1686

S-cells yields an output. C-cells thus spatially blur the responses of S-cells and make the network robust against position errors in visual stimuli. The mechanism of the neocognitron is described in greater detail in Fukushima and Miyake
(1982) and Fukushima (1988, 2003).

Influence of E/I Balance on
Local/Global Information Processing
We hypothesize that the E/I balance influences the local/global processing bias in pattern recognition. Figure 3
illustrates how the relative strength of the inhibitory connections bSl from V-cells affects the output of S-cells uSl in the
neocognitron: (a) proper inhibitory connections, (b) stronger
inhibitory connections, and (c) weaker inhibitory connections. We suppose that the neocognitron has been trained with
visual stimuli, each of which contains a single number but
with various types, sizes, and positions. The network is then
presented with hierarchically compound numbers, as shown
in the leftmost of Figure 3 (a), where multiple small number
“3”s form a large number “2” according to their close positioning.
If the network has properly adjusted connections, it should
be able to detect the numbers presented in the input image
regardless of their sizes and positions. As illustrated in the
rightmost image of Figure 3 (a), the output of S-cells, which
receive proper inhibitory connections from V-cells, maintains
the features of both “3” and “2” as the integration of multiple “3”s. The extracted features then enable the network to
recognize both the local and global patterns in the succeeding layers. In contrast, stronger or weaker inhibitory connections cause local or global processing bias in the recognition.
If inhibitory neurons have stronger connections, as shown in
Figure 3 (b), they suppress the global response of S-cells so
that they extract only the core features of the input. Under
this scenario, only the local number “3” becomes visible, but
not the global number “2”, because of the sparse activation
of S-cells. On the other hand, weaker inhibitory connections
produce the opposite effect. Figure 3 (c) depicts how weaker
inhibitions enhance the responses of S-cells and therefore diminish the local features of the input. In this case, only the
global number “2” becomes visible by connecting the local
number “3”s, while “3” per se becomes increasingly difficult
to recognize.
Taken together, our hypothesis suggests that the atypical
perception in ASD as well as the typical perception in nonASD can be modeled by the E/I balance in the visual cortex.
Of particular importance, the use of a unified architecture allows for not only the local processing bias but also another
type of symptom in ASD to be modeled. Behavioral studies
suggest two types of ASD symptoms: hyperesthesia and hypoesthesia. Hyperesthesia corresponds to the local processing bias because it exhibits increased sensitivity to perceptual
stimuli. Hypoesthesia, on the other hand, corresponds to a
super-global or no bias in pattern recognition (i.e., difficulty
in pattern recognition), because it shows reduced sensitivity

(a) Proper inhibitory connections maintain both local and global
features.

(b) Stronger inhibitory connections extract only local features.

(c) Weaker inhibitory connections emphasize global features.

Figure 3: Influence of E/I balance on local/global processing
bias
to the stimuli. Our computational model thus reveals the underlying neural mechanism based on a common architecture:
stronger inhibitory connections (i.e., a lower E/I balance) may
cause hyperesthesia, whereas weaker inhibitory connections
(i.e., a higher E/I balance) may cause hypoesthesia.

Pattern Recognition Experiment
Training and Testing Data
To verify our hypothesis, we conducted a pattern recognition
experiment using the neocognitron. The visual stimuli used
for the training and testing of the network are presented in
Figures 4 (a) and (b), respectively. Each stimulus was a black
and white image with a size of 130 × 130 pixels. The training
data contained a single number per image, where the number
was “0” to “9” drawn in different sizes and positions (for a total of 400 images). The neocognitron was trained in a super-

1687

(a) Training data: numbers of different sizes and positions

(b) Testing data: hierarchically compound numbers

Figure 4: Training and testing data used in the experiment
vised manner in order to differentiate the numbers regardless
of their sizes and positions.
The testing data were hierarchically compound numbers.
All possible combinations of “0” to “9” were created (a total
of 90 images). Note that the compound numbers were only
used for testing, but not for learning. Thus, the network was
not explicitly trained toward local or global processing but
rather spontaneously acquired a bias to either local or global
processing due to the balance between the excitatory and inhibitory connections.

The Neocognitron and its E/I Balance
The neocognitron used in our experiment consisted of an input layer U0 , a contrast-extraction layer UG , and five US -UC
layers. The number of US -UC layers was determined based on
learning performance. U0 and UC5 were given as 130 × 130
C-cells and 10 C-cells, respectively, so that each cell in UC5
represented a single type of the input numbers. The size of
the receptive fields was set from 4 to 8 pixels, depending on
the layers.
The E/I balance of the neocognitron was manipulated to
examine its effect on the local/global processing bias. We
modified Eq. (3), which determines the relative strength of
the inhibitory connections, as below:
√
KCl−1 ASl 2
a
b0Sl = αbSl = α ∑ ∑ Sl
(5)
cSl
so as to control the E/I balance by changing the coefficient α.
Note that α was fixed over the learning and testing phases. If
α = 1.0, which is equivalent to Eq. (3), the network should acquire properly balanced inhibitory connections, as shown in
Figure 3 (a). This network was expected to reproduce the behavior of typically developing people. If α > 1.0 or α < 1.0,
the network should acquire relatively stronger or weaker inhibitory connections, as shown in Figures 3 (b) and (c), respectively. These networks were expected to reproduce the
two types of ASD symptoms (i.e., hyperesthesia and hypoesthesia). In our current experiment, α ranged from 0.5 to 1.4
to observe the diverse influence of the E/I balance.

Figure 5: Influence of E/I balance on local/global information
processing

Experimental Results
Local/Global Processing Bias Caused by
E/I Imbalance
We first examined the influence of the E/I balance on local/global information processing. Figure 5 shows the relationship between α and the local/global bias evaluated in the
testing phase. The vertical axis ∆u is defined by
∆utarget = uC5 (ktarget ) −

1 KC5 −1
∑ uC5 (k),
KC5 k=0

(6)

where uC5 (·) is the output of C-cells in UC5 , and KC5 is the
number of C-cells in the same layer. In our experiment, KC5 =
10 because there were ten numbers to recognize (i.e., “0” to
“9”) . ktarget was either the local or global number in the test
stimulus. Therefore, ∆u represents how strongly the local and
global numbers in the compound numbers were recognized
compared to the irrelevant numbers.
A two-way ANOVA revealed a significant interaction between α and the local/global bias. The ∆u value for the global
numbers was significantly higher than that for the local numbers when α = 0.9 and 1.0 (p < 0.001), whereas the opposite
result was found when α = 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and 1.4 (p < 0.001).
These results suggest that a change in the E/I balance effectively reproduced the behavioral difference observed between
typically developing people and people with ASD. According to Behrmann, Avidan, et al. (2006), and as shown in Figure 1, typically developing people tend to detect global patterns more quickly than local patterns. In our experiment,
higher ∆u values for the global numbers demonstrated such a
global processing bias in typically developing people, where
the strength of the output corresponded to a shorter reaction
time shown in Figure 1. The properly balanced E/I connections (i.e., α = 0.9 to 1.0) enabled the network to recognize

1688

the global numbers more strongly than the local numbers. In
contrast, higher ∆u values for the local numbers demonstrated
the local processing bias in ASD. Inhibitory connections enhanced by α = 1.1 to 1.4 forced the network to extract the
local features more strongly than the global ones, which generated an ASD-like bias toward the local information.
Moreover, our results suggest that our computational
model with a variable E/I balance can reproduce multiple
types of ASD symptoms. ASD is characterized by both hypoesthesia as well as hyperesthesia in sensory perception. As
mentioned above, hyperesthesia might be related to a local
processing bias, whereas hypoesthesia might be linked to a
super-global or no processing bias. When α = 0.5 to 0.7,
the neocognitron did not show any bias toward the local or
global patterns. Indeed, the network could recognize neither
the local nor global numbers. This inability to recognize the
patterns also appeared when α > 1.4. These results indicate
that hypoesthesia in ASD shares a common neural mechanism with hyperesthesia, and that a change in the E/I balance
produces the difference between these symptoms.

(a) Response of the whole network when α = 1.0

Internal Representation of the Neocognitron
Acquired through Learning
Next, we analyzed the internal representation of the neocognitron to investigate the effect of the E/I balance on the network structure. Figure 6 presents the responses of (a) the
whole network when α = 1.0 and of (b) only UC4 when α =
0.5, 1.0, and 1.2. In this example, the compound numbers
“3” (local) and “2” (global) were given as the input to the
network.
Figure 6 (a) first demonstrates the hierarchical feature integration acquired in the network, which is a basic function
of the neocognitron. Local lines in particular orientations
were detected in UC1 , while more global patterns such as corners and longer lines were extracted in UC2 and UC3 . The
response of UC4 demonstrated that the network recognized
both the local and global features. The top three cell planes
(denoted by squares) in UC4 showed wider activation in the
image area, whereas the bottom four showed narrower activation at different positions. The black regions represented
the preferred areas of the C-cells, where the C-cells became
activated if particular patterns were detected. The existence
of both wider and narrower activation in UC4 indicates that the
network could recognize both the local and global numbers in
the visual stimuli.
Figure 6 (b) shows the effect of different α values (α =
0.5, 1.0, and 1.2) on the representation of UC4 . Comparing
these three conditions reveals how the E/I balance affected
the local/global information processing in the neocognitron.
As described above, the neocognitron with a proper E/I balance (i.e., α = 1.0) enabled UC4 to extract both the local and
global features by creating cell planes responding to features
of various sizes. In contrast, when α = 0.5, only a single cell
plane was created, which covered the whole region of the input image. The network with such a limited internal representation could not differentiate the visual patterns, because UC4

(b) Response of UC4 when α = 0.5, 1.0, and 1.2

Figure 6: Internal representation of the neocognitron after
learning

always responded regardless of the type, size, and position of
the input. When α = 1.2, the network exhibited the opposite behavior. UC4 created many cell planes, each of which
responded to a specific local pattern but not to a global pattern. Therefore, the network with stronger inhibitory connections showed a local processing bias similar to that of ASD.
These analytical results reveal how the E/I balance affected
the internal structure of the network and thus produced the
local/global processing bias in pattern recognition.

Discussion and Conclusion
This paper has presented our computational experiments to
verify the hypothesis that the E/I imbalance causes the atypical perception observed in ASD. A local processing bias and
E/I imbalance are well known features of ASD; however, no

1689

previous study has demonstrated their association. Our computational model revealed that the E/I balance affects the internal representation of the visual cortex and thus produces a
local/global processing bias in pattern recognition.
One of our most notable experimental results is that the
unified neural architecture could reproduce multiple symptoms of ASD as well as typical non-ASD behavior by changing only one parameter (i.e., the E/I balance). A proper E/I
balance led to a behavioral pattern representative of typically
developing people, whereas a higher or a lower E/I balance
resulted in hyperesthesia or hypoesthesia, which is representative of ASD. Only a change in the E/I balance generated
the behavioral differences between typical and atypical visual perception. This result provides new insight into ASD
and further supports a recent argument that the hyperesthesia and hypoesthesia of ASD are two sides of the same coin;
although their behaviors appear different, they may share a
common underlying mechanism (Ayaya et al., 2013). Our
computational model is therefore highly plausible because of
its unified architecture.
There has been another hypothesis about the neural mechanism underlying local processing bias. A magnocellular
deficit or its abnormal activity might be a cause of the observed local processing bias in ASD (Sutherland & Crewther,
2010; McCleery, Allman, Carver, & Dobkins, 2007). The human brain has two parallel pathways for visual processing:
the magnocellular pathway conveying the global and coarse
information of visual input, and the parvocellular pathway
conveying the local and fine information of the input. Therefore, a magnocellular deficit in ASD could result in difficulty
of recognizing the global feature of a stimulus. Our results do
not deny this possibility but instead provide another potential
explanation for these observed ASD symptoms. Furthermore,
our model has an advantage of reproducing multiple aspects
of the ASD symptoms, instead of only the local processing
bias, by employing a shared neural architecture. We intend to
further investigate the relationship between different neural
models for ASD.

Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by MEXT/JSPS KAKENHI (Research Project Numbers: 24119003, 24000012,
25700027).

References
Ayaya, S., Kawano, T., Mukaiyachi, I., Tojisha-Kenkyukai,
N., Ishihara, K., Ikeda, T., & Kumagaya, S. (2013). Tojisha
kenkyu no kenkyu (in japanese) (K. Ishihara, Ed.). Igakushoin.
Ayaya, S., & Kumagaya, S. (2008). Hattatsu shougai tojisha
kenkyu (in japanese). Igaku-shoin.
Bakhtiari, R., Mohammadi Sephavand, N., Nili Ahmadabadi,
M., Nadjar Araabi, B., & Esteky, H. (2012). Computational model of excitatory/inhibitory ratio imbalance role in
attention deficit disorders. Journal of Computational Neuroscience, 33(2), 389–404.

Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness. MIT Press.
Behrmann, M., Avidan, G., Leonard, G. L., Kimchi, R., Luna,
B., Humphreys, K., & Minshew, N. (2006). Configural
processing in autism and its relationship to face processing.
Neuropsychologia, 44(1), 110–129.
Behrmann, M., Thomas, C., & Humphreys, K. (2006). Seeing it differently: visual processing in autism. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10(6), 258–264.
Frith, U., & Happé, F. (1994). Autism: beyond ”theory of
mind”. Cognition, 50, 115–132.
Fukushima, K. (1988). Neocognitron: A Hierarchical Neural
Network Capable of Visual Pattern Recognition. Neural
Networks, 1, 119–130.
Fukushima, K. (2003). Neocognitron for handwritten digit
recognition. Neurocomputing, 51, 161–180.
Fukushima, K., & Miyake, S. (1982). Neocognitron: A new
algorithm for pattern recognition tolerant of deformations
and shifts in position. Pattern Recognition, 15(6), 455–
469.
Happé, F., & Frith, U. (2006). The Weak Coherence Account: Detail-focused Cognitive Style in Autism Spectrum
Disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 36(1), 5–25.
McCleery, J. P., Allman, E., Carver, L. J., & Dobkins, K. R.
(2007). Abnormal Magnocellular Pathway Visual Processing in Infants at Risk for Autism. Biological Psychiatry,
62, 1007–1014.
Nagai, Y. (2015). Mechanism for cognitive development. In
H. Ishiguro, M. Osaka, T. Fujikado, & M. Asada (Eds.),
Cognitive neuroscience robotics: A: Synthetic approaches
to human understanding. Springer (in press).
Simmons, D. R., Robertson, A. E., McKay, L. S., Toal, E.,
McAleer, P., & Pollick, F. E. (2009). Vision in autism
spectrum disorders. Vision Research, 49(22), 2705–2739.
Snijders, T. M., Milivojevic, B., & Kemner, C. (2013). Atypical excitation-inhibition balance in autism captured by the
gamma response to contextual modulation. NeuroImage:
Clinical, 3, 65–72.
Sun, L., Grutzner, C., Bolte, S., Wibral, M., Tozman, T.,
Schlitt, S., . . . Uhlhaas, P. J. (2012). Impaired GammaBand Activity during Perceptual Organization in Adults
with Autism Spectrum Disorders: Evidence for Dysfunctional Network Activity in Frontal-Posterior Cortices. Neurobiology of Disease, 32(28), 9563–9573.
Sutherland, A., & Crewther, D. P. (2010). Magnocellular
visual evoked potential delay with high autism spectrum
quotient yields a neural mechanism for altered perception.
Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 133, 2089–2097.
Vattikuti, S., & Chow, C. C. (2010). A computational model
for cerebral cortical dysfunction in autism spectrum disorders. Biological Psychiatry, 67(7), 672–678.
Yizhar, O., Fenno, L. E., Prigge, M., Schneider, F., Davidson,
T. J., O’Shea, D. J., . . . Deisseroth, K. (2011). Neocortical
excitation/inhibition balance in information processing and
social dysfunction. Nature, 477(7363), 171–178.

1690

