Interpersonal Anticipatory Synchronization:
The Facilitating Role of Short Visual-Motor Feedback Delays
Auriel Washburn (washbual@mail.uc.edu), Rachel W. Kallen (rachel.kallen@uc.edu), Charles A.
Coey (coeyca@mail.uc.edu), Kevin Shockley (kevin.shockley@uc.edu), Michael J. Richardson
(michael.richardson@mail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 4150 Edwards 1
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA
Abstract
Effective interpersonal coordination is fundamental to robust
social interaction, and the ability to anticipate a co-actor’s
behavior is essential for achieving this coordination.
However, coordination research has focused on the behavioral
synchrony that occurs between the simple periodic
movements of co-actors and, thus, little is known about the
anticipation that occurs during complex, everyday interaction.
Research on the dynamics of coupled neurons, human motor
control, electrical circuits, and laser semiconductors
universally demonstrates that small temporal feedback delays
are necessary for the anticipation of chaotic events. We
therefore investigated whether similar feedback delays would
promote anticipatory behavior during social interaction.
Results revealed that co-actors were not only able to
anticipate others’ chaotic movements when experiencing
small perceptual-motor delays, but also exhibited movement
patterns of equivalent complexity. This suggests that such
delays, including those within the human nervous system,
may enhance, rather than hinder, the anticipatory processes
that underlie successful social interaction.
Key words: anticipatory synchronization; interpersonal
coordination; chaos; global coordination; complexity
matching

Coordinating one’s movements and actions with those of
another individual is fundamental to successful social
interaction. In most instances, such interaction is effortless
and efficient, even when we are faced with highly variable
and often unpredictable behavioral events. Key to achieving
coordination and cooperation in this context is being able to
predict or anticipate the behaviors and actions of other
individuals. The majority of research investigating the
perceptual-motor mechanisms that support behavioral
anticipation has been based on hypotheses about neural
simulation processes (Blakemore & Decety, 2001), feedforward internal models and motor programs (Noy, Dekel,
& Alon, 2011), or shared intentional and representational
states (Sebanz, Bekkering, & Knoblich, 2006). These and
similar constructs have been formulated to account for how
the human nervous system compensates for the temporal
delays that inherently occur between the production of a
movement and the perception of its outcome (i.e.,
feedback). The traditional assumption is that perceptualmotor feedback delays present a problem for coordinating
behavior because in linear systems theory feedback delays

amplify errors and lead to instability (Stepp & Turvey,
2010).
In contrast to the idea that feedback delays promote
instability, recent work examining the dynamics of laser
semiconductors (e.g., Sivaprakasam et al., 2001), coupled
neurons (Toral et al., 2003), and electrical circuits (Voss,
2002), as well as work on human motor control (Stepp,
2009), has found evidence that small temporal feedback
delays actually enhance the ability for a system to
synchronize with unpredictable, chaotic events. This
counterintuitive phenomenon, referred to as self-organized
anticipation or anticipatory synchronization, has been found
to emerge when a “slave” system (i.e., electronic circuit or
motor process) is unidirectionally coupled to a chaotically
behaving “master” system (i.e., a second electronic circuit
or a continuously moving environmental stimulus). As the
slave system begins to synchronize with the chaotic
behavior of the master system, small temporal delays are
introduced into the feedback loop between the slave’s
behavior and the resulting outcomes of that behavior.
Surprisingly, following the introduction of these delays, the
actions of the slave system begin to anticipate the ongoing
behavior exhibited by the chaotic master system. In other
words, a small temporal feedback delay in these systems
appears to support, rather than hinder, anticipatory behavior
by prospectively tuning the behavior of the slave system to
the evolving dynamics of the master system (Stepp &
Turvey, 2008).
Stepp (2010) indicates that in order for a physical system
to achieve anticipatory synchronization with respect to
another physical system, the potential behavior states for
both systems must first be similarly constrained, and the
slave system must be sensitive to these constraints. The
slave system can then be understood as embodying the
constraints, and consequently the inherent dynamics, of the
master system. Notably, it appears that the frequency of
behavior to be synchronized has an impact on the
constraints of coordinating systems and subsequent success
at synchrony, such that primarily reactive behavior is
observed at relatively lower movement frequencies for a
variety of tasks (Hayashi & Sawada, 2013). With the
introduction of a feedback delay with respect to the
outcomes of its own behavior, a slave system must actually
perform in an anticipatory manner in order to synchronize
with the master system. The ability of the slave system to
successfully anticipate the chaotic behavior of a master

2619

system in this context can thus be understood as a function
of the embodiment of the master system dynamics, along
with the need to act ahead of the master system in order to
maintain synchrony while experiencing a delay.
Given that anticipating others’ behavior is conducive to
effective social interaction, but often challenging when such
behaviors are seemingly unpredictable, a provocative
hypothesis is that small feedback delays might also promote
the ability of individuals to anticipate the chaotic
movements of other people. The current study was designed
to determine whether anticipatory self-organization would
occur when two individuals interacted to perform a joint
motor coordination task. More specifically, we examined
whether the introduction of small perceptual-motor
feedback delays enabled a naïve coordinator to anticipate
the chaotic movements of another actor. Of particular
interest were the local, short-term lead/lag patterns of
coordination that occurred between the two actors, and
whether the presence of small feedback delays would result
in one actor anticipating (i.e., leading) the highly variable
and chaotic movements of the other. We were also
interested in characterizing the long-term structure of the
actors’ movement dynamics, as recent research has found
evidence that individuals can embody the global structure
and behavioral complexity of those with whom they interact
(e.g., Coey, Washburn, & Richardson, 2014; Delignières &
Marmelat, 2014). Such ‘global coordination’ appears to be a
signature of self-organized anticipation because it indicates
that the behavioral dynamics of each actor are self-similar
and long-range dependent (Delignières & Marmelat,
2014)—meaning that each actor will display recurrent
patterns of sensorimotor variability over a broad range of
time scales. This global coordination can be quantified by
comparing the fractal (i.e., self-similar) structure of the
behavioral variability found within each of the two actors’
concurrent, coordinated behaviors to determine whether the
complexity of the two behavioral sequences match (socalled complexity matching).

Method
Participants
Twenty-two students (11 pairs) were recruited from the
University of Cincinnati to participate in the experiment.
Participants ranged in age from 18 to 27 years.

Procedure and Design
Pairs of naïve participants completed a task in which one
participant was assigned to the role of movement
“producer” and the other participant was assigned the role of
“coordinator.” The producer in each pair was instructed to
create continuous, aperiodic (chaotic), elliptical movement
sequences 1 , while the coordinator was instructed to
1

During two practice trials, the producer was asked to coordinate
with fully chaotic, simulated sequences based on the equation for a

synchronize his or her own movements with those of the
producer (supplementary materials, materials and methods).
For this task, the coordinator filled the role of the slave
system, and for each experimental trial the coordinator
experienced either no perceptual feedback delay or one of
three short temporal delays (200, 400, or 600 ms) with
respect to the outcome of their own movements. Participants
sat back-to-back, each facing their own display monitor (50”
HD Plasma TV), and were equipped with a motion sensor
attached to the middle joint of the first two fingers of their
right hands. Producer movements were displayed on both
screens as a red dot (2 cm in diameter), and coordinator
movements were displayed as a blue dot (2 cm in diameter).
These dots appeared on the right half of the producer’s
screen and the left half of the coordinator’s screen (the other
half of the screen was covered). The display was generated
by an application written using C/C++ and OpenGL. A
Polhmeus Liberty magnetic tracking sensors (Polhemus
LTD, Colchester, VT) were used by participants to control
their visual stimulus. The OpenGL program was also used
to record the movement data collected by the Polhemus
motion sensors, at a sampling rate of 120 Hz.
Past investigations of anticipatory synchronization
(Sivaprakasam et al., 2001; Stepp, 2009; Toral et al., 2003;
Voss, 2002) have involved a unidirectional coupling
between subsystems whereby the slave system gains
information about the master system, but not vice versa.
However, social interaction often involves a bidirectional
coupling, or mutual enslavement, between actors such that
both actors have information about the other’s behaviors
through one or more sensory modalities. In the current
study, two visual coupling conditions between the producer
and coordinator participants were utilized, both of which
involved the mutual enslavement characteristic of most joint
action tasks. That is, the producer (i.e. ‘master’ system), as
well as the coordinator (i.e., ‘slave’ system) always had the
opportunity to see each other’s behaviors with respect to
their own. This not only allowed us to test whether
anticipatory synchronization can occur in a bidirectionally
coupled master-slave system, but also provided an
opportunity to examine how the information available to the
producer (i.e., master) about a coordinator’s movements
might affect the producer’s behaviors and, subsequently, the
occurrence of anticipatory synchronization.
The first, congruent, visual condition was designed so that
both individuals had the same information about the
coordinator’s behavior; the producer saw the coordinator’s
movements at the same perceptual delay that the coordinator
experienced. In the second, incongruent, condition the
producer always viewed the coordinator’s movements in
real time while the coordinator saw his or her own
“chaotic spring” system. The observation of positive average
largest Lyapunov exponents (LLEs) for each participant indicates
that the behavioral dynamics produced were consistent with chaos.

2620

movements with a feedback delay. This situation introduced
the possibility that, should anticipatory synchronization
occur, the producer would perceive the coordinator’s
movements as leading their own. If anticipatory
synchronization was dependent on having a master system
that operates independently of slave system behavior, we
might expect that allowing producers to perceive that
coordinator behaviors occur before their own would result
in a breakdown of the coordination, or a switching of coactor roles such the coordinator, rather than the producer,
would begin to drive the patterns of social motor
coordination. However, if anticipatory synchronization is to
be useful in understanding complex, interpersonal
coordination then it must still occur in the context of
bidirectional coupling between co-actors, and necessarily
when both actors are able to see the other’s behavior in real
time. Accordingly, the bidirectional visual coupling
conditions employed in the present study provided a test of
whether self-organized anticipation can be achieved
between mutually enslaved subsystems, as well as whether
different forms of bidirectional coupling might differentially
impact resulting coordination and anticipation.

Interestingly, the congruency of the visual coupling had no
influence on the behavioral patterns of coordination
observed for the different feedback delay conditions.
Moreover, compared to what has been observed in the
context of unidirectional actor-environment coupling
(Stepp, 2009), the bidirectional nature of the visual coupling
employed in the current study appeared to have little effect
on the emergence of anticipatory synchronization. This
finding is critical to the understanding of anticipatory selforganization as an interpersonal coordinative process, as
many complex social behaviors inherently involve mutual
enslavement and information flow between actors.

Data Analysis & Results
Cross-Correlation and Phase Lead
To determine whether anticipatory synchronization occurred
between coordinators and producers, we first performed a
cross-correlation analysis between the movements of the
coordinator and producer. This analysis indexes the degree
of synchrony between two behavioral time series across a
range of possible temporal relationships (see Stepp, 2009).
Of relevance for determining anticipatory synchronization is
the maximum degree of synchrony that occurred (indexed
by the maximum observed cross-correlation coefficient) and
the corresponding time lag (or lead) at which the synchrony
occurred. Although the maximum cross-correlation results
revealed that the coordinators were able to coordinate their
movements with those of the producers (Figure 1), when
coordinators did not experience delayed feedback about
their own movements no anticipation (as measured by the
time lag/lead at which the maximum cross correlation
coefficient was found) was observed (Figure 1). Consistent
with the phenomenon of anticipatory synchronization,
however, in the 400 ms feedback delay condition the
movements of the coordinator began to lead those of the
producer, indicating that the coordinator was in fact
anticipating the producer’s chaotic (i.e., fundamentally
deterministic, yet unpredictable) movements. A smaller
degree of anticipatory synchronization was also observed
for the 600 ms feedback delay condition, but overall the
stability of coordination at this delay was poor in
comparison to the other delay conditions. Consistent with
our observation of participants performing the task, it
appears that the 600 ms delay simply makes the
coordinator’s goal of synchronizing so difficult that
coordination in general is no longer well supported.

Figure 1: Cross-correlation and temporal lead. (Top)
Average maximum cross-correlation between coordinator
and producer movements. (Bottom) Average temporal lead
between coordinator and producer movements. Line graphs
in this figure are presented as means ± SEM. **p< .005, *p<
.05; two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Fisher’s
LSD post hoc comparisons.

Instantaneous Relative Phase
To confirm the cross-correlation results, an analysis of the
relative phase between the movements of the coordinator
and producer in each participant pair was conducted.
Relative phase captures the spatial-temporal patterning of
the coordination that occurs between two movement timeseries (see Lopresti-Goodman et al., 2008). Of particular
relevance for the current study was the distribution of
relative phase angles that occurred for each feedback delay
condition (i.e., how often a particular relative phase
relationship was observed between the coordinator and
producer over the course of a behavioral trial), with peaks in
the distribution indicative of the stability of the coordination

2621

(higher peaks = higher stability) and the degree to which the
coordinator led or lagged behind the movements of the
producer (Figure 2).
Consistent with the results of the maximum crosscorrelation analysis, the relative phase distributions
indicated that the coordinator did indeed anticipate the
aperiodic movements of the producer for the 400 ms
feedback delay condition. Additionally, although a modest
degree of anticipatory behavior was observed for the 600 ms
condition, the stability of the phase relationship between the
coordinator and the producer at this feedback delay was
again found to be very low. More interestingly, however,
the distributions of relative phase didn’t just reveal
anticipatory behavior on the part of the coordinator for the
200 ms condition. They also showed that for this condition,
as well as for the 400 and 600 ms feedback delay
conditions, coordinators both lagged and led producer
movements, suggesting that the anticipatory synchronization
observed was intermittent. Intermittent, or relative,
coordination is a known characteristic of weakly coupled
physical or biological limit-cycle oscillators (see Kelso &
Ding, 1993), including visually coupled rhythmic limb
movements of co-acting individuals (Schmidt &
Richardson, 2008). While this has never before been
demonstrated with respect to anticipatory synchronization in
the context of feedback delays, evidence of similar
intermittent leading and lagging behavior has previously
been observed within the mutual interactions of coordinated
musicians (Wing et al., 2014).

Box Counting
As mentioned above, recent research has demonstrated that
the movements of interacting individuals do not only
become entrained on a local or synchronous time-scale but
can also become matched with respect to their long-term
statistical structure and behavioral complexity (e.g., Coey et
al., 2014; Delignières & Marmelat, 2014). Such global
coordination or complexity matching provides further
evidence of self-organized anticipation by demonstrating
that the behavior of co-actors is self-similar and long-range
dependent. As these characteristics are directly related to
patterns of behavioral variability exhibited across several
timescales, we were interested in measuring the long-term
global coordination that occurred between the co-actors as a
complement to our assessments of the local (short-term). To
determine whether the movements of the coordinator were
globally coordinated with the chaotic dynamics of the
producer’s movements, we assessed the spatial selfsimilarities between producer and coordinator movements
during each trial by calculating the correlation between the
fractal dimension (FD) of producer and coordinator
movements in the 2-dimensional movement plane (i.e., for
the ‘x’ and ‘y’ dimensions parallel to the ‘x’ and ‘y’
dimensions of the display screen). The results revealed
significant evidence of complexity matching in that there

was a very strong positive relationship between the FD of
producer movements and the FD of the associated

Figure 2: Distribution of instantaneous relative phase (IRP).
Average values between coordinator and producer
movements for the congruent visual condition (top) and
incongruent visual condition (bottom) over the course of a
trial, for each feedback delay condition.
coordinator movements (Figure 3). This was the case
irrespective of visual condition and feedback delay
condition, although the relationship was weakest for the 600
ms feedback delay condition and highest for the 200 ms
feedback delay condition.
There remains some debate as to whether local and global
coordinative processes are mutually exclusive, or whether
one or the other is more likely to occur in specific contexts
(see Stephen & Dixon, 2011 for further details). To address
this question for the current task, correlations between the
average maximum cross-correlation and the average
difference between coordinator and producer FDs were
calculated for the different delay and visual coupling
conditions. This analysis revealed no consistent relationship
(a significant relationship between the two variables was
only found at the 400 ms feedback delay in the incongruent
visual coupling condition, r(9) = -.72, p < .05), indicating
that the degree of complexity matching and global
coordination observed within a given trial was not entirely
dependent on the level of local or synchronous behavioral
coordination achieved. In other words, coordinators appear
to have embodied the long-term structure of the producers’
chaotic movements regardless of the strength of the local
coordination observed.

2622

Figure 3: Complexity Matching. Scatterplots show average
fractal dimensions (FD) for producer and coordinator
movements, by participant pair, for each combination of
visual conditions and feedback delay conditions. All
Pearson correlations were significant, p<.01.

Discussion
The current study was designed to determine whether
anticipatory synchronization of chaotic movement behaviors
could occur during human social interaction. Our findings
demonstrate that the short perceptual feedback delays
necessary for an actor to achieve anticipatory
synchronization in an intrapersonal (i.e., non-social) actorenvironment context (see Stepp, 2009) also appear to be
critical for anticipatory synchronization in a social
coordination context. More specifically, feedback delays
around 200 ms to 400 ms were observed to be most
effective in facilitating anticipation, with a significant
breakdown in coordination being observed for the longer
delay of 600 ms. These results indicate that the very short
temporal delays known to exist within the human
sensorimotor system (e.g., Wallot & Van Orden, 2012) may
therefore be fundamental to the production of anticipatory
behavior, and ultimately serve to facilitate the production of
stable coordination patterns, rather than destabilize motor
performance as is often assumed.

It is important to note that the experimentally introduced
delays used here are superimposed on top of the delays
already inherent within the human sensorimotor system, and
likely provide an exaggerated view of the naturally
occurring anticipatory processes that result from existing
delays. In fact, the ability of an actor to coordinate with the
chaotic behaviors of their co-actor, at a very short temporal
lag and in the absence of any experimentally introduced
feedback delay, may itself be evidence for naturally
occurring anticipatory synchronization (Stepp & Turvey,
2010). Indeed, successful anticipatory behavior does not
necessarily require that an actor consistently lead a coactor’s behavior, as is indicated by the intermittency of the
anticipatory synchronization observed here. Rather, the
outcome may be constrained to the maintenance of a
functional level of synchronization, but with increases in
feedback delay (up to around 400 ms) supporting an
exaggerated expression of naturally occurring behavioral
anticipation.
Notably, our findings also demonstrate that anticipatory
synchronization can be achieved within a system made up of
two bidirectionally coupled co-actors. Even within the
incongruent visual coupling condition, in which the
producer could have noticed that coordinator movements
were ahead of their own, the same anticipatory relationship
between coordinator and producer movements was
achieved. The current findings therefore indicate that it is
not actually necessary for one to be “ahead” in order to be
driving coordinated joint-action. On the contrary, it appears
that functional coordination of such complex behaviors is
varied, flexible, and resilient to small fluctuations in the
phase relationship between movements.
The self-organized anticipation underlying such local,
interpersonal coordinative behaviors also appears to have
resulted in global coordination, or complexity matching
between co-actors. However, while feedback delays around
200-400 ms seem to promote high levels of local behavioral
anticipation, the occurrence of global coordination between
actors does not appear to be influenced by the introduction
of these short delays (the 600 ms delay appears to disrupt
the stability of coordination at all levels examined).
Previous studies have demonstrated, however, that
complexity matching for one system with respect to another
is dependent on pre-existing statistical self-similarity of the
behavior that a coordinating system or individual is trying to
match (Delignières & Marmelat, 2014). Ultimately, this
allows the coordinating system to exploit the existing
complexity of this ongoing behavior, in order to produce
more adaptive and efficient behavior with respect to any
task goal (Delignières & Marmelat, 2014). For a
bidirectionally coupled system, the complexity within each
component subsystem provides an opportunity for mutual
adaptation and bidirectional anticipation (Delignières &
Marmelat, 2014) that can lead to corresponding fluctuations
in behavioral variability (e.g., changes in movement
trajectory and velocity). Therefore, the chaotic behaviors

2623

produced in the current task are understood as supporting
self-organization of both local and global coordinative
phenomena.
Both the local anticipatory behavior and global
complexity matching of interacting individuals observed
here are understood to be natural consequences of the
universal, lawful dynamics that shape and constrain the
time-evolving structure of behavior. Although many
biological and human behaviors may be chaotic (see
Newell, Deutsch, & Morrison, 2000), they are still lawful
and deterministic. This implies that the behavioral dynamics
of all human, perceiving-acting agents are constrained by
the same physical laws of energy dissipation and
information flow, and that these intrinsic commonalities in
behavioral order allow for the self-organized emergence of
anticipatory coordination (Stepp & Turvey, 2008). The
dynamics of delay-induced anticipatory synchronization
might therefore provide a lawful explanation for how and
why we can achieve the robust social anticipation and
coordination that underlies everyday activities. Whether
navigating a busy sidewalk, loading a dishwasher with a
family member, or coordinating ones movements with
others during team sports, such an explanation no longer
requires recourse to a set of internal, ‘black-box’
compensatory neural simulations, representations, or feedforward motor programs.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Institutes of
Health (R01GM105045).

References
Blakemore, S. J., & Decety, J. (2001). From the perception
of action to the understanding of intention. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 2(8), 561-567.
Coey, C. A., Washburn, A., & Richardson, M. J. (2014).
Recurrence Quantification as an Analysis of Temporal
Coordination with Complex Signals. In Translational
Recurrences (pp. 173-186). Springer International
Publishing.
Delignières, D., Marmelat, V. (2014). Strong anticipation
and long-range cross-correlation: Application of
detrended cross-correlation analysis to human behavioral
data. Physica A 394:47-60.
Hayashi, Y., & Sawada, Y. (2013). Transition from an
antiphase error-correction mode to a synchronization
mode in mutual hand tracking. Physical Review E,88(2),
022704.
Kelso, J. A. S., & Ding, M. (1993). Fluctuations,
intermittency, and controllable chaos in biological
coordination. Variability and motor control, 291-316.
Kelty-Stephen, D., & Dixon, J. A. (2012). When physics is
not "just physics": complexity science invites new
measurement frames for exploring the physics of

cognitive and biological development. Critical Reviews in
Biomedical Engineering, 40(6), 471-483.
Lopresti-Goodman, S. M., Richardson, M. J., Silva, P. L., &
Schmidt, R. C. (2008). Period basin of entrainment for
unintentional visual coordination. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 40(1), 3-10.
Newell, K. M., Deutsch, K. M., & Morrison, S. (2000). On
learning to move randomly. Journal of motor behavior,
32(3), 314-320.
Noy, L., Dekel, E., & Alon, U. (2011). The mirror game as a
paradigm for studying the dynamics of two people
improvising motion together. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 108(52), 20947-20952.
Schmidt, R. C., & Richardson, M. J. (2008). Dynamics of
interpersonal coordination. In Coordination: Neural,
behavioral and social dynamics (pp. 281-308). Berlin,
Germany: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: bodies and minds moving together. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 10(2), 70-76.
Sivaprakasam, S., Shahverdiev, E. M., Spencer, P. S., &
Shore, K. A. (2001). Experimental demonstration of
anticipating synchronization in chaotic semiconductor
lasers
with
optical
feedback. Physical
Review
Letters, 87(15), 154101.
Stephen, D. G., & Dixon, J. A. (2011). Strong anticipation:
Multifractal cascade dynamics modulate scaling in
synchronization behaviors. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals,
44(1), 160-168.
Stephen, D. G., Stepp, N., Dixon, J. A., & Turvey, M. T.
(2008). Strong anticipation: Sensitivity to long-range
correlations in synchronization behavior. Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 387(21), 52715278.
Stepp, N. (2009). Anticipation in feedback-delayed manual
tracking of a chaotic oscillator. Experimental brain
research, 198(4), 521-525.
Stepp, N., & Turvey, M. T. (2008). Anticipating
synchronization as an alternative to the internal model.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31(02), 216-217.
Stepp, N., & Turvey, M. T. (2010). On strong anticipation.
Cognitive systems research, 11(2), 148-164.
Toral, R., Masoller, C., Mirasso, C. R., Ciszak, M., &
Calvo, O. (2003). Characterization of the anticipated
synchronization regime in the coupled FitzHugh–Nagumo
model for neurons. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and
its Applications, 325(1), 192-198.
Voss, H. U. (2002). Real-time anticipation of chaotic states
of an electronic circuit. International Journal of
Bifurcation and Chaos, 12(07), 1619-1625.
Wallot, S., & Van Orden, G. (2012). Ultrafast cognition.
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 19(5-6), 141-160.
Wing, A. M., Endo, S., Bradbury, A., & Vorberg, D. (2014).
Optimal feedback correction in string quartet
synchronization. Journal of The Royal Society
Interface, 11(93), 20131125.

2624

