Is statistical learning trainable?
Luca Onnis (lucao@ntu.edu.sg)
Matthew Lou-Magnuson (matt0020@ntu.edu.sg)

Division of Linguistics and Multilingual Studies, Nanyang Technological University
Singapore, 637332
Hongoak Yun (oaktreepark@gmail.com)

Department of Media and Communication, Konkuk University
Seoul, Korea, 143-701
Erik Thiessen (thiessen@andrew.cmu.edu)

Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
Abstract
Statistical learning (SL) is the ability to implicitly extract
regularities in the environment, and likely supports various
higher-order behaviors, from language to music and vision.
While specific patterns experience are likely to influence SL
outcomes, this ability is tacitly conceptualized as a fixed
construct, and few studies to date have investigated how
experience may shape statistical learning.
We report one experiment that directly tested whether SL
can be modulated by previous experience. We used a prepost treatment design allowing us to pinpoint what specific
aspects of “previous experience” matter for SL. The results
show that performance on an artificial grammar learning task
at post-test depends on whether the grammar to be learned at
post-test matches the underlying grammar structures learned
during treatment. Our study is the first to adopt a pre-post test
design to directly modulate the effects of learning on learning
itself.
Keywords: experience; implicit learning; pre-post test
design; sequential learning; statistical learning; statistical
training; transition probabilities.

Introduction
Statistical learning (SL) is the ability to acquire
patterned regularities in the environment, and
abstract over them to find structural relations
among sequences of stimuli and events. This core
human ability is believed to involve a set of basic
cognitive mechanisms that are sensitive to
probabilistically distributed spatial and sequential
information.
Underlying most of the research in SL to date is
the tacit assumption that SL mechanisms are a
fixed set, and do not change substantially in
individuals as a function of either time or
experience (Reber, 1993). This assumption is
corroborated by studies finding parallel results
when infants, children, and adults are exposed to

similar statistical cues and similar tasks,
reinforcing the ubiquitous role of SL in human
cognition across the lifespan. For example,
Meulemans, Van der Linden, and Perruchet
(1998) found no age-related performance
differences in a serial reaction time in 6- or 10year-olds, nor in adults, pointing to the stable
persistence of this ability in humans (although see
Simon et al., 2011 for evidence of a decline in
ageing population). Here we challenge the longheld assumption of fixedness of SL abilities, and
ask whether SL can be augmented through prior
learning experiences. In particular we ask whether
participants in tasks that involve tracking
probabilistic relations among sequential stimuli
can be trained to implicitly attend to statistics that
differ from the ones they would be normally
inclined to detect.
If statistical learning involves a form of
optimization and reduction of uncertainty about
the environment (Onnis, Christiansen, Chater, &
Gomez, 2003), we would expect statistical
learning to result in adaptations to the specific
sensory environments of the learner. A few
studies have begun to assess this possibility of
learning to learn. In most of these cases,
however, the adaptations involved characteristics
of the input (such as phonotactic or phonological
patterns) that might be learned via mechanisms
other than statistical learning (e.g., Saffran &
Thiessen, 2003). Lany and Gomez (2008) found
that in 12-month olds the initial familiarization
with adjacent dependencies resulted in enhanced

1781

learning of nonadjacent dependencies, a type of
relation that is difficult to learn at that age.
Similarly, word learning in infants (Graf-Estes et
al., 2007) and adults (Mirman et al., 2008) can be
facilitated when words are consistent with
expectations based on a previous word
segmentation task containing statistical cues to
word boundary.
These studies established that learners can build
on certain types of computations to better attend
to other regularities in the input for different
aspects of language learning. However, they did
not assess directly whether the same statistical
computations that learners process by default are
altered by their past experience.
One recent experiment, though, found that the
patterns of transitional probabilities to which
learners are sensitive varies as a function of
linguistic background (Onnis & Thiessen, 2013).
The authors interpreted these results to mean that
years of exposure to specific statistical patterns in
different linguistic environments induced changes
in statistical learning of novel artificial grammars.
This interpretation suggests that learners carry
with them statistical biases developed over years
of exposure to their native language(s) that lead to
different expectations about novel subsequent
input. Onnis & Thiessen (2013) represents the
point of departure of the current study. Because a
putative correlation between language background
and subsequent performance in a SL task cannot
establish any direction of causality, in this study
we set out to directly manipulate the statistical
landscape of a first artificial grammar to establish
whether it differentially affects parsing
preferences in a subsequent artificial grammar
task. To our knowledge, our pre-post test design is
the first to be applied to the statistical learning
literature to assess effects of experience on
learning.
Method
We exposed participants consecutively to two
artificial grammars that shared no surface
features, and looked at participants’ preferences
for grouping percepts – here syllables – based on
how they utilized information from forward and
backward transition probabilities (TPs). A pre-

post test design manipulated two statistical
training conditions, allowing us to directly assess
their impact on subsequent statistical learning.
Participants. We recruited 62 Korean students at
Konkuk University, Seoul. They received the
equivalent of US$9 for their participation.
Materials. Two types of artificial grammar were
created. Grammar A was a sequence of 711 letter
symbols generated according to the rules of a
stochastic Markovian grammar chain. The process
started by choosing one of eight possible symbols
(X, Y, A, B, C, D, E, F) at random, and then
generating the next symbol according to a set of
probabilistic sequencing rules. The actual
sequence was realized as the continuous
concatenation of eight monosyllabic words to
form a pauseless 3.5 minute speech stream. We
randomly assigned each letter placeholder to a
given word, in which 80 ms was allotted for
consonants and 260 ms for vowels. Because we
were interested in the perception of grouping
boundaries as driven by statistical biases alone,
we synthesized the speech stimuli eliminating
possible prosodic cues. The resulting audio was
faded in and faded out over 5 seconds, giving the
impression of an infinite loop. The Italian diphone
set in MBROLA (http://tcts.fpms.ac.be/synthesis/
mbrola.html) created words that sounded different
in vocal quality from Korean, but were still
clearly perceivable, so as to engage participants in
an “alien language” learning task. All phonemes
had equivalent phonemic realizations in Korean,
and all syllable sequences were phonotactically
permitted. Crucially, the sequence of concatenated
syllables in Grammar A contained conflicting
forward and backward transitional probabilities,
as in the following training sample:
a) .. fushezirafunizitifugezibu ..
Previous research has shown that infants and
adults alike are independently sensitive to both
forward and backward transition probabilities, and
use them implicitly to make judgments about the
likely groupings of otherwise unsegmented
streams of speech. Unlike previous studies in
which forward and backward TPs worked
together to assist speech segmentation (e.g.,
Saffran et al., 1996), in our Grammar A, forward
TPs and backward TPs were pitted against each

1782

other and thus competed as cues for grouping
boundaries. Thus, Grammar A was statistically
ambiguous such that whenever forward
probability was low between any two adjacent
syllables, (e.g., fwd-TP(zi|she) = .33), backward
probability was high (back-TP(she|zi) = 1), and
vice versa (e.g., fwd-TP(ra|zi) = 1; backTP(zi|ra) = .33). A consequence of this statistical
ambiguity is that two parses of sample a) into
two-syllable linguistic units were thus equally
acceptable and possible – namely parses b) and c)
below. In b), one segments the signal such that the
two syllables of a unit have a high forward
probability and a low backward probability (the
Hi-Lo patterns), while in c), the word-internal
forward probabilities are low and the backward
probabilities are high (the Lo-Hi pattern).
b) (Hi-Lo parse):..fushe zira funi ziti fuge zibu ..
c) (Lo-Hi parse): .. shezi rafu nizi tifu gezi ..
At test, two-word groupings corresponding to the
Hi-Lo and Lo-Hi patterns were pitted one against
the other in a two-alternative forced-choice (AFC)
task. Six test pair trials were presented in random
sequential order, while the order within a pair was
counterbalanced by repeating each test pair twice,
for a total of 12 test trials.
The other type of grammar was split into two
varieties, namely, B-forward and B-backward,
and their sequential structure contained opposite
statistical cues to group boundaries. We first
created a training corpus of 12 new synthesized
monosyllabic words (‘do’ ‘te’ ‘ma’ ‘ke’ ‘ne’ ‘tu’
‘bi’ ‘ge’ ‘da’ ‘pa’ ‘vo’ ‘po’). The total length of
the sequence, as well as the length of individual
syllables, were the same as Grammar A, with the
difference that the voice used was male. Likewise,
test stimuli were created by grouping two
monosyllabic words at a time at each transition
point in the stream.
Each of these two Grammar B varieties were
randomly assigned to participants. Modeled after
the grammar of Perruchet & Desaulty (2008; see
also Onnis & Thiessen, 2013), in the Grammar BForward, forward transition probabilities were
informative, with syllables alternating between
high and low forward TPs (1 and 0.11
respectively). Backward probabilities were
uninformative.
In
Grammar
B-Backward

,backward
transition
probabilities
were
informative, with words alternating between high
and low backward TPs (1 and 0.11 respectively).
This
time
forward
probabilities
were
uninformative.
We reasoned that participants may perceive
grouping
boundaries
in
the
sequence
probabilistically when it is most informative (i.e.,
whenever the backward or forward TPs are
lowest) in accordance with previous research
(Perruchet & Desaulty, 2008; Pelucchi et al.,
2009). Thus, we expected the two Grammar Bs to
differentially bias learners toward one type of
transition probability, resulting in different
groupings at test.
Procedure. All participants listened to the same
Grammar A at pre- and post-test, while they were
randomly assigned to one of the Grammar Bs
during treatment/biasing. Listening lasted 3.5 min
for both grammars. The forced-choice tests
occurred at the end of each listening session. As
customary for these types of segmentation
experiments, for each stimuli pair participants
were asked to choose which one formed a
grouping in the sequence they had just heard.
Participants wore headphones and instructions
were administered in Korean. The experiment was
conducted on two separate days one week apart.
Pre-test (Grammar A) on Day 1, and treatment +
post-test (Grammar B + Grammar A again) on
Day 2.
Results

We analyzed results separately in terms of group
scores at pre-test, treatment, and in terms of
change of scores between pre- and post-test. In all
analyses and for each test trial LoHi preference
was coded as 1 and Hilo preference was coded as
0. We then averaged across test trials to obtain a
proportion preference for LoHi patterns for each
participant.
Pretest results. After establishing that the
distribution of participants’ preference for LoHi
patterns was not uniform (Shapiro-Wilk normality
test, W = 0.96, p = 0.026), the nonparametric oneway Wilcoxon signed-rank test with continuity
correction revealed that participants’ mean as a
group was not significantly different from the

1783

random baseline of 0.5 (M = 0.52, SD = 0.19, V =
746.5, p = 0.70). As apparent from the standard
deviation, there was individual variation in
participants’ degree of bias. Further inspection
revealed a non-unimodal distribution of data,
suggesting one mode with preference for HiLo
patterns and another one with preference for LoHi
patterns. This may be due to differences in
participants’ linguistic backgrounds, as many of
the participants spoke multiple languages, which
may influence their bias for forward-going or
backward-going directionality (Onnis & Thiessen,
2013). Regardless, these results demonstrate that
as a group, these participants have no strong bias
for forward-going or backward-going TPs.
Treatment results. Participants assigned to
Grammar B-backward preferred LoHi patterns (M
= 0.73, SD = 0.18), while those assigned to
Grammar B-forward dispreferred LoHi patterns
(M = 0.37, SD = 0.23), showing a preference for
HiLo patterns. A one-way ANOVA with Biasing
condition as a two-level between-subject factor
(Grammar B-backward versus Grammar Bforward) revealed highly significant differences
between the two Biasing groups, F(1,59)=41.64,
p<0.001). Thus both groups differed in pattern
endorsements in opposite directions, and in the
direction consistent with the statistical cues
present in each grammar. This result suggests that
learners attend to different types of statistical cues
when they are weighted in such a way to be
uniquely informative.
Pre-post test. We noted earlier that some
participants demonstrated strong pre-test biases in
both directions. To account for this heterogeneity
in the pre-test data we computed pre-post test
difference scores for each participant as the
dependent measure. A one-way ANOVA with
Biasing Condition (Grammar B-forward versus
Grammar B-backward) as a between-subject
factor revealed significant differences between the
two Biasing groups, F(1,58)=5.49, p<0.05 (one
participant did not complete the post-test and her
difference scores were not computed).
Importantly, the differences were in the expected
direction (see Figure 1). The Grammar B-forward
group did not modify their preference much from
pre- to post-test, arguably because the cues for

segmenting at low points of forward TP were
present in both Grammar A and Grammar Bforward. In comparison, Grammar B-backward
contained all cues in the opposite direction, and
participants trained on Grammar B-backward
shifted (as a group) their initial preference at pretest upward on the gradient from HiLo to LoHi at
post-test. These results suggest that it is possible
to alter participants’ biases to attend to different
statistics in the environment.

Figure 1. Mean score differences and standard deviations
of participants preferences for LoHi patterns, presented by
biasing condition. Pre-test scores were subtracted from Posttest scores.

Discussion
Recent research has begun to investigate the
effects of experience on statistical learning
mechanisms (e.g., Lany & Gomez, 2008; GrafEstes et al., 2007; among others). These studies
indicate that learners can use statistical
information in one task to discover different
relations in a new task. Our goal was to explore
the possibility to modify learners’ sensitivity to
the same statistical relations (here forward and
backward probabilities) by directly manipulating
and comparing different types of statistical
exposure. Trainability of statistical learning was
tested with a group of adult Korean speakers who
participated in a pre-test, treatment, post-test

1784

design. To our knowledge, this is the first
application of the design in the statistical learning
literature, and has both theoretical and practical
implications.
Theoretically, our results challenge the tacit
assumption in the literature that implicit SL is a
rather fixed skill, and there is relatively small
variation, both across (Reber, 1989), and within
individuals over time, as well as a function of
experience. The possibility that experience with
the perceptual world may modify statistical
learning proclivities has been recently explored in
the realm of language (e.g., Onnis & Thiessen,
2013) and music (Shook et al., 2013). While those
studies hinted at possible correlations between SL
and experience, our pre-post test design helped
establish an initial direct causal relation between
specific types of statistical experience and their
subsequent impact on learners’ statistical biases.
Our study also explored the possibility of
transfer for trained statistical bias to novel stimuli.
Importantly, such transfer of statistical penchant
can occur in the absence of surface similarity
between the stimuli – here Grammar A and B did
not share the same syllables. This is an important
finding, because detractors of SL often see it as a
set of mechanisms that operates only on the basis
of surface similarity. Thus, SL may occur as a
result of more powerful abstractive processes.
Our results invite future explorations into
individual differences in statistical learning.
Heterogeneity in both pre- and post-tests indicate
that some learners had stronger initial biases,
and/or they were be more or less susceptible to the
biasing conditions than others. This has
implications for studies that directly relate the
ability to learn statistically to the ability to learn
and process language. Infants exhibit individual
differences in statistical learning skills that may
modulate language development trajectories (e.g.,
Kidd, 2012). Direct predictive relations between
statistical learning scores and online sentence
processing and other linguistic tasks exist now
both for children and adults (Yim & Windsor,
2010). In addition, neurophysiological studies
using within-subject designs suggest that similar
neural mechanisms serve both syntactic
processing of language and statistical learning of

sequential patterns (Abla, Katahira, & Okanoya,
2008; Christiansen, Conway, & Onnis, 2007). Our
results using a pre-post design suggest the
applicability of future statistical training regimes
adapted for non-normally developing populations
of language learners. Studies with children have
now linked poor implicit and statistical learning
skills with reading difficulties (Yim & Windsor,
2010), developmental dyslexia (Hedenius et al.,
2013), and specific language impairments (Hsu,
Tomblin, & Christiansen, 2014; Lukács &
Kemény, 2014). Poor language learners may be
less sensitive to the statistics inherent in natural
language, or may pick up statistics of the
language that are less relevant to discovering
linguistic structure. If this were so, one attractive
potential of statistical learning training would be
to help learners implicitly optimize their learning
process, by targeting and scaffolding statistical
relations that are harder for them to internalize.
While the effect of experience we saw is in line
with our predictions, it is preliminary and future
research and comparisons would benefit from a
larger effect size, which may be possible with
alterations to this paradigm. First, exposure to the
Grammar B’s was limited to 4 minutes. Perhaps
longer exposure would make the bias more robust.
(though note that the post-test suggests
participants picked up the bias, suggesting that
increasing exposure may have limited effect)
Another possible explanation for the small effect
size of training is that most participants reported
remembering Grammar A at post-test from the
previous week at pre-test. Thus, the desired bias
may have been obfuscated by participants’ fresh
memories of the first exposure to the grammar at
pre-test. A better way to promote transfer would
thus be to create a novel Grammar C at post-test
that has the same underlying sequence as
Grammar A but no feature resemblance to either
Grammar A and the Grammar B’s.
Another way to improve the paradigm would
involve exposing participants to a bias in more
modalities or stimulus sets. Generally speaking,
experiencing a pattern in multiple different
contexts makes that pattern more generalizable to
novel contexts (e.g, Hintzman, 1986; Lively,
Logan, & Pisoni, 1993). Thus, participants could

1785

be exposed to forward or backward patterns in
shapes and tones, or perhaps instantiated by
multiple different speakers (as opposed to one
speaker) to promote generalization and transfer.
In conclusion, we have shown that participants’
preference to parse a string of phonemes
according to forward or backward transition
probabilities can be directly manipulated via prior
statistical learning experiences. Thus, rather than
being a fixed process that learners use, implicit
statistical learning might itself be a process that is
trainable.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by Nanyang
Technological University’s Start-Up-Fund grant
#M4081274 to the first author.
References
Abla, D., Katahira, K., & Okanoya, K. (2008). On-line
assessment of statistical learning by event-related
potentials. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(6), 952964.
Christiansen, M. H., Conway, C. M., & Onnis, L. (2012).
Similar neural correlates for language and sequential
learning: evidence from event-related brain potentials.
Language and cognitive processes, 27(2), 231-256.
Estes, K. G., Evans, J. L., Alibali, M. W., & Saffran, J. R.
(2007). Can infants map meaning to newly segmented
words? Statistical segmentation and word learning.
Psychological Science, 18(3), 254-260.
Hedenius, M., Persson, J., Alm, P. A., Ullman, M. T.,
Howard, J. H., Howard, D. V., & Jennische, M. (2013).
Impaired implicit sequence learning in children with
developmental dyslexia. Research in developmental
disabilities, 34(11), 3924-3935.
Hintzman, D.L. (1986).
“Schema Abstraction” in a
multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review, 93,
411-428.
Hsu, H. J., Tomblin, J. B., & Christiansen, M. H. (2013).
Impaired statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies
in adolescents with specific language impairment.
Frontiers in psychology, 5, 175-175.
Kaufman, S. B., DeYoung, C. G., Gray, J. R., Jiménez, L.,
Brown, J., & Mackintosh, N. (2010). Implicit learning as
an ability. Cognition, 116(3), 321-340.
Kidd, E. (2012). Implicit statistical learning Is directly
associated with the acquisition of syntax. Developmental
psychology, 48(1), 171-184.
Lively, S.E., Logan, J.S., & Pisoni, D.B. (1993). Training
Japanese listeners to identify English /r/ and /l/. II: The
role of phonetic environment and talker variability in
learning new perceptual categories. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 94, 2962-2973.

Lukács, Á., & Kemény, F. (2014). Domain-general
sequence learning deficit in specific language impairment.
Neuropsychology, 28(3), 472-483.
Mirman, D., Magnuson, J. S., Estes, K. G., & Dixon, J. A.
(2008). The link between statistical segmentation and
word learning in adults. Cognition, 108(1), 271-2
Meulemans, T., Van der Linden, M., & Perruchet, P. (1998).
Implicit sequence learning in children. Journal of
experimental child psychology, 69(3), 199-221.
Moreau, D., & Conway, A. R. (2014). The case for an
ecological approach to cognitive training. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 18(7), 334-336.
Oei, A.C. and Patterson, M.D. (2013) Enhancing cognition
with video games: a multiple game training study. PLoS
ONE 8, e58546.
Onnis, L., Christiansen, M. H., Chater, N., & Gómez, R.
(2003). Reduction of uncertainty in human sequential
learning: Evidence from artificial grammar learning. In
Proceedings of the 25th annual conference of the
cognitive science society (pp. 886-891). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Onnis, L., & Thiessen, E. (2013). Language experience
changes subsequent learning. Cognition, 126(2), 268-284.
Shook A, Marian V, Bartolotti J, Schroeder SR. (2013).
Musical experience influences statistical learning of a
novel language. American Journal of Psychology, 126(1):
95-104.
Pelucchi, B., Hay, J. F., & Saffran, J. R. (2009). Learning in
reverse: Eight-month-old infants track backward
transitional probabilities. Cognition, 113(2), 244-247.
Perruchet, P., & Desaulty, S. (2008). A role for backward
transitional probabilities in word segmentation?. Memory
& Cognition, 36(7), 1299-1305.
Reber, A. S. (1989). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 219–
235.
Saffran, J. R., & Thiessen, E. D. (2003). Pattern induction
by infant language learners. Developmental psychology,
39(3), 484-494.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274(5294), 1926-1928.
Simon, J. R., Howard, J. H., & Howard, D. V. (2011). Age
differences in implicit learning of probabilistic
unstructured sequences. The Journals of Gerontology
Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences,
66(1), 32-38.
Yim, D., & Windsor, J. (2010). The roles of nonlinguistic
statistical learning and memory in language skill. Korean
Journal of Communication Disorders, 15, 381-396.

1786

