Landmarks in motion: Unstable entities in route directions
Adriana Baltaretu (a.a.baltaretu@tilburguniversity.edu)
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@tilburguniversity.edu)
Alfons Maes (maes@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University, The Netherlands

between producing directions and navigating with them. For
example, instructions are communicated over distance (e.g.,
telephone) or asynchronously (based on previous experience
of the environment or maps, one participant produces
instructions, to be later used by another one). In such
situations, links to here-and-now motion do not exist and
their communication is useless. In this study we focus on a
novel situation in which this delay is absent: in-situ turn-byturn RDs. Particularly, the request for assistance is
formulated and followed on the spot. While experiencing a
shared dynamic environment, speakers can refer to any entity
that could improve the instructions.
The most important characteristic of a landmark is its
distinctiveness. Objects can be distinctive on different
dimensions (for example due to familiarity or functional
relevance). In this study, we focus on unfamiliar navigation
contexts in which perceptual salience is more important than
other (e.g., knowledge-based) information. It has been
theorized that, the more visually noticeable or attentiongrabbing an object is, relative to neighboring entities, the
more likely it is to be used as a landmark (Sorrows & Hirtle,
1999). For example, color and size seem to influence
landmark selection (Sorrows & Hirtle, 1999; Allen, Siegel, &
Rosinski, 1978) as confirmed by previous experimental work
in natural environments (Nothegger, Winter, & Raubal, 2004;
Raubal & Winter, 2002). However, in early processing stages
of attention, other simple visual attributes come into play,
such as the direction and velocity of motion (Itti & Koch,
2001). It is generally accepted that, if relevant, moving
entities grab and guide visual attention. If they grab attention
it seems intuitive that people would mention them, especially
when this motion is task-informative. Thus, to what extent do
people refer in a direction giving task to dynamic entities?

Abstract
In the present study, we investigate if and when speakers refer
to moving entities in route directions (RDs). On the one hand,
there is a general agreement that landmarks should be
perceptually salient and stable objects. On the other hand,
animated movement attracts visual attention, making entities
intrinsically salient. In two experiments, we tested to what
extent people are prepared to use moving entities. Our results
show that participants mention moving entities when the
communicative setting affords such references (route
directions in a joint communicative setting) and when the
movement is informative for the place where a turn should be
taken.
Keywords: stability; animated movement; moving landmarks;
visual attention; route directions.

In the last decade, GPS-based pedestrian navigation systems
and augmented reality have become increasingly popular.
Cutting edge technology can redefine the capabilities of
navigation systems, by grounding route directions (RDs) into
the visual context. For example, devices such as Google
Glass can capture visual surroundings (via videos) in real
time and this could enable pedestrian navigation systems to
become spatially aware and generate live instructions making
use of both stable database information (e.g., streets) and
variable visual information captured by the camera (e.g.,
cyclists or pedestrians). References to entities in the
environment (or landmarks) are considered key ingredients
for good RDs (Allen, 2000). However, the urban space is
under continuous transformation: as we walk events take
place at each step and people and cars are moving on the
streets. We know little about how the dynamic character of
the environment can influence RD production and landmark
selection. In a co-presence situation it might be common to
hear an instruction such as: “Turn left where that man turns
now”. It is yet unclear under which circumstances people
refer to such moving entities and to what extent these
references are useful in navigation.
In this study, by RDs we refer to a set of instructions on
how to (incrementally) follow a route (Richter & Klippel,
2005) and we focus on references to landmarks, traditionally
defined as environmental features that function as points of
reference (Allen, 2000). In RD studies, landmarks are defined
as route-relevant, stable entities, such as buildings. One likely
reason for this could be that the communicative situation used
in these studies includes some type of delay or asymmetry

Stable vs. dynamic objects
In navigation literature, there is high agreement that landmark
objects should be stable / permanent entities. Previous studies
suggest that good reference objects are large, geometrically
complex and stable (Talmy, 1983). The perceived stability of
objects seems to influence rodent and toddler’s use of
landmarks for orientation. For example, rats can search for a
location defined by visual landmarks, but will not do so if the
landmark’s position has varied from trial-to-trial (for a
review, see Burgess, Spiers, & Paleologou, 2004). In
addition, studies on toddler's reorientation behavior speculate
that stability and scale are important factors in landmark use,

142

with smaller or more portable objects having less
navigational significance attached to them (Learmonth,
Newcombe, & Huttenlocher, 2001; Smith, Gilchrist, Cater,
Ikram, Nott, & Hood, 2008). Recent human fMRI evidence
suggests that stable objects elicit greater activity in regions of
the brain involved in navigation and landmark assignment
(see Chan, Baumann, Bellgrove & Mattingley, 2012). Most
of these experimental studies start with the default
assumption that objects have to be stable in order to be used
as landmarks and with the exception of the rodent
experiments, the studies mentioned above were not designed
to test this assumption. In none of them the object's
movement is directly witnessed by the participants and
movement is never used as a clue that could potentially help
with solving the task. Moreover, in most communicative
situations used in the RD studies, stable landmarks are the
only available entities, a reason for which the scholarly
attention is mainly focused on these entities. For example, in
map-based RDs or RDs produced for later use (e.g., Denis,
Pazzaglia, Cornoldi, & Bertolo, 1999), the most frequently
mentioned landmarks are two dimensional, mostly related to
the path to be followed (e.g., streets), as well as three
dimensional, such as shops and pubs (see also May, Ross,
Bayer & Tarkiainen, 2003). In sum, in all cases in which
landmarks play a role (orientation studies; RD production),
these entities are always stable.
However, this does not mean that, in situations in which
both producer and addressee are co-present, moving entities
are not referred to. Humans have a rich repertoire of
landmarks and to our knowledge there are no studies
analyzing the conditions under which producers are ready to
mention moving entities in RDs. If moving entities would be
available would speakers refer to them? Moving entities are
notably attention grabbing, a prerequisite for landmarks.
Movement is processed effortlessly by the visual system and
an object's motion can efficiently grab and guide attention
when the movement is informative about the location of a
target (Hillstrom & Yantis, 1994). In an outdoor environment
there can be different types of movement (self-produced /
induced) of different entities (e.g., humans, cars). In this
study, we focus on self-produced, animated motion which
was empirically proven to (automatically) capture attention.
Animate entities seem to intrinsically capture visual
attention. They are conceptually highly accessible, retrieved
and processed more easily than inanimate entities (Prat-Sala
& Branigan, 2000). Visual representations of the face and the
human body have the ability to capture the focus of attention
even when visual attention is occupied by other tasks (see
Downing, Bray, Rogers, & Childs, 2004). Studies using static
images have shown that humans prioritize the visual
processing of animate objects over inanimate ones. Kirchner
and Thorpe (2006) found that people initiate saccades more
quickly to pictures of animals than to pictures of other
objects, and New, Cosmides, and Tooby (2007) showed that
changes in animals were detected more rapidly than changes
in objects. In addition, several studies using picture
description tasks presented evidence that attention and

animacy are linked and bias language production (for a
review, see Henderson & Ferreira, 2013).
Moreover, it was shown that the onset of motion (a feature
that contributes to the impression that movement is selfproduced) captures attention better than objects that are static,
continuously moving, or that have stopped suddenly (Abrams
& Christ, 2003). Allocation of attention and linguistic
reference are closely related and, given these results, we
would expect moving entities to be mentioned in RDs. When
other factors such as animacy and motion onset times are kept
under control, it seems that animate motion per se captures
attention (Pratt, Radulescu, Guo, & Abrams, 2010), thus
contributing to the object’s perceptual salience.
Previous experiences may, however, hinder the use of
moving landmarks. People might be much more used to
stable landmarks, so that in direction giving, perceptual
salience alone might not suffice for eliciting this type of
reference. For example, Miller and Carlson (2011)
manipulated the objects' perceptual salience (size and color)
and spatial position (decision versus non-decision point).
Their findings showed that perceptual salience positively
affected object memory, yet it was only the spatial position
that determined whether objects were included in the RDs.
This suggests that motion should be more than attention
grabbing. It should be relevant for both producer and listener.
This relevance stems both from the type of movement
witnessed (it seems unlikely to mention something that takes
place elsewhere than where the turn should be made) and the
communicative setting (it is useless to mention motion for an
addressee that cannot observe it, as in the asynchronous
communicative settings).

The current study
Given that referring to landmarks can maximize the
helpfulness of the instructions (Allen, 2000) and research has
shown that people nearly always refer to landmarks (Tom &
Denis 2003), we wonder if people refer to moving entities as
a function of motion relevance and if this referential behavior
is modelled by the communicative situation. We suggest two
crucial conditions for moving landmarks to be used in RDs.
First, references to moving objects depend on the
communicative context. As mentioned before, landmarks are
by default stable, but this might be due to the asynchronous
communication setting, which imposes several spatial and
temporal constraints. But, it might well be that this bias in
navigation studies hides the possibility that producers use
both types of landmarks, provided the communication
situation allows for. In this study, direction giving is a joint
activity and a situated communicative act. In order to test the
extent to which co-presence might influence reference to
(dynamic) landmarks we select two situations: one in which
producers are asked to imagine giving instructions to a
fictitious traveler who is seeing the same scenes (see
Experiment 1) as opposed to engaging in direction giving
with a real person (see Experiment 2).
In the first communicative situation, instructions are
framed to emphasize a co-presence context. Bringing people

143

in a particular mindset by asking them to imagine a situation
is a method successfully used to influence task performance.
For example, Anderson & Pichert (1978) found that
participants remember different details from a story after they
were told to imagine themselves in a specific role
(homebuyers or burglars). Asking participants to think about
the task in a specific way was also shown to influence
language production. Arts, Maes, Noordman, & Jansen
(2011) report more overspecified references when
participants were asked to imagine that the description they
had to produce was an instruction in long-distance medical
surgery, compared to a simple object description.
In the second setting, the joint situation is translated as
physical co-presence of producers and addressees. In general,
we expect producers to mention moving entities when they
believe that such references are beneficial for the listener.
When the addressee is not present, the producer has to decide
alone how much communicative effort to undertake to ensure
that the instructions are correctly understood. While, in the
second communicative situation, the producer can directly
evaluate the usefulness of the references by receiving
feedback from the listener.
Second, the type of movement perceived by the producer
might influence his referential behavior. To our knowledge
there are no studies to have manipulated movement as a
crucial variable in their design. If an entity attracts attention,
we expect it will be mentioned, especially when it is relevant
for the navigation task. By task relevant we mean that moving
landmarks (just like other landmarks) should be located and
timed near the navigation action. Thus, in this study there are
three conditions depicting moving entities that might be of
different relevance for the navigation situation (persons
moving towards the intersection or taking a turn in the
direction in which the addressee should also turn).
Lastly, we do not expect this type of dynamic landmarks to
replace stable objects that afford long-term orientation, as
they might be mentioned together (e.g., “turn right at the
shop, follow that person”). In such case, the moving entity
would help in disambiguating the stable landmark out of a
series of possible distractors (other shops in the scene).

movement condition (NM), 36 videos); (b) a person walking
/ cycling towards the intersection up to a point very close to
where the turn should be taken (irrelevant movement
condition (IM), 36 videos); (c) the same person recorded
some seconds later, while taking a turn in the required
direction (relevant movement condition (RM), 36 videos). As
all entities may be relevant, due to their proximity to the
intersection, the terms “irrelevant / relevant movement” are
used for labelling purposes only. The people recorded were
casually walking / cycling down the street, without paying
attention to the camera. These people were different from one
intersection to another. The filler videos captured a different
set of intersections from crowded pedestrianized areas or
intersections with complex geometric structures (36 videos)
in which passers-by did not turn in the indicated direction. A
semitransparent red arrow depicted the route and the
direction to be followed. Each video lasts 3 seconds.
Procedure Participants were presented with instructions
stating that we are developing software that can generate real
time/live pedestrian route descriptions based on the visual
input coming from the Google Glass video camera and
realized in audio format via a smartphone. The participant
task was to provide route instructions for a fictitious
addressee who would be attending the same videos.
Participants were explicitly told to be as informative as
possible and that they could take advantage of everything that
was visible on the streets, as they shared exactly the same
view with the addressee. Participants saw one video at a time
and filled in the RD in the input field provided under the
video. At the end of each video, the last frame would be
displayed until the participant moved to the next item, by
pressing a button. The videos could be replayed. Each
intersection was presented only once to each participant, thus
the critical trials were divided across three presentation lists,
to which participants were randomly assigned.
Design This study had Movement type (levels: NM, IM, and
RM) as within participants factor and Presentation List
(levels: 1, 2 and 3) as between participants factor. The
dependent variable was the number of landmarks mentioned.

Experiment 1
Results
Methods

There were 1944 RDs (54 participants x 36 videos) produced
in this test and 964 landmarks mentioned. In each condition,
approx. half of the instructions contained landmarks (M =
0.53 in NM; M = 0.47 in IM; M = 0.51 in RM). In general,
there were few references to moving landmarks (2 references
in NM; 6 in IM and 13 in RM). In addition, there were some
references to movable objects (objects that could potentially
move, such as parked cars and bikes: 15 references in NM;
20 in IM and 15 in RM). Overall, these results strongly
suggest that participants prefer stable landmarks irrespective
of the types of movement seen. Next, we will assess if
moving objects are mentioned in a co-presence situation.

Participants 54 native English speakers (20 women, mean
age 42 years) were paid to take part in the experiment via a
crowdsourcing service similar to Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Materials The materials consisted of 144 street view HD
videos recorded in 72 intersections of Rotterdam downtown.
The critical trial videos depicted 36 low traffic, +- shaped
intersections. These intersections have a simple geometric
shape, in which just saying “go left” would discriminate the
target street from the other branches of the intersection. Each
intersection was recorded three times illustrating a different
movement manipulation (see Figure 1): (a) no pedestrians /
cyclists moving towards / coming from the intersection (no

144

two paper booklets with line drawing maps of the
intersection's shape were prepared (the speaker booklet
included an arrow showing the direction to be taken in each
intersection).

a) No movement – the street up to the junction is free

Procedure Dyads of participants were presented with the
same Google Glass scenario as in Experiment 1. The task for
the speaker was to provide route instructions, while the
listener had to mark in his booklet the indicated street. The
speaker had to look first at the map, then play the video
projection and start giving instructions as soon as possible,
while watching the video. The listener had to watch the video
and afterwards mark the intended street on the map. The
listener was allowed to ask questions only if the instructions
were unclear. The videos could not be replayed, but the last
frame was displayed until the addressee announced he had
finished. Pointing was discouraged by installing a screen
between participants up to shoulder level. Each intersection
was shown only once to each participant pair, and
participants were randomly assigned to one of the three
presentation lists. The task started with 2 warm-up trials, then
72 experimental trials (36 critical trials) were presented in
randomized order. There were no time constraints.

b) Irrelevant movement – a cyclist moves towards the junction

Design and statistical analysis This study had Movement
Type (levels: NM, IM, and RM) as within participants factor
and Presentation List (levels: 1, 2 and 3) as between
participants factor. For the first analysis, the dependent
variable was the number of (different types of) landmarks
mentioned by the producer in the first instruction (moving /
stable entities) and, for the second analysis, if moving objects
are mentioned together with a stable object. Statistical
analysis was performed using logit mixed model analysis
(Movement type and Presentation List as fixed factors;
speakers and videos as random factors). Random intercepts
and random slopes for speakers and videos were included to
account for between-subject and between-item variation.
First, a model with a full random effect structure was
constructed (Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013). In case
the model did not converge, we excluded random slopes with
the lowest variance. The first converging model is reported.
This model contained random slopes for list in speakers and
movement in videos (p - values were estimated via parametric
bootstrapping over 100 iterations).

c) Relevant movement – the cyclist turns left

Figure 1: snapshots from critical trial in three versions

Results

Experiment 2

In total there were 1728 RDs (48 speakers * 36 videos)
produced. In all the three conditions, participants mentioned
landmarks (N = 998) of various stability. In each condition,
landmarks were mentioned in approximately half of the
instructions (M = 0.51 in NM; M = 0.56 in IM; M = 0.69 in
RM). In the NM condition, participants rarely referred to
moving landmarks (6 references to people walking on the
other side of the street or crossing in a different direction).
Thus, statistical analysis was performed only on data from the
other two conditions.

Methods
Participants 48 dyads of Dutch-speaking students of Tilburg
University (52 women, mean age 21 years and 5 months)
participated in exchange for partial course credits.
Participants were randomly assigned to speaker roles (30
women).
Materials the same as in Experiment 1, with the difference
that the videos did not contain arrows. Videos were projected
on a white wall, at size of approx. 170x120cm. In addition,

145

Table 1. Number of landmarks (moving, stable and
combinations) produced per condition.
NM

IM

RM

total no. landmarks

291 (100%)

317 (100%)

390 (100%)

stable landmarks

271 (93.12%)

237 (74.76%)

170 (43.59%)

6 (2.06%)

54 (17.03%)

184 (47.18%)

14 (4.81%)

26 (8.20%)

36 (9.23%)

moving landmarks
moving & stable

that their motion is not task-informative, they might have
been referred to because they are perceptually salient (due to
their movement), but also because they are walking very
close to the turning point. Based on this stimuli design we
cannot evaluate to what degree proximity had influenced the
perceived usefulness of these entities. Further analysis is also
needed to understand the role of these references: as
landmarks due to their position or as attributes used to
disambiguate a stable landmark out of a series of similar
entities (e.g., “turn left at the shop where the man turns”,
where the scene shows a couple of shops placed nearby the
intersection).
A couple of questions remain unanswered. For example,
how efficient are references to moving landmarks for the
addressee. A first analysis of the listeners’ data showed that
the task was simple and addressees rarely asked clarification
questions, subsequently, their drawings were mostly correct.
In addition, in an ongoing experiment, we try to determine
the navigational value of moving landmarks. In a future
study, we would like to further define the conditions under
which participants refer to moving landmarks (e.g., to what
extent the amount of movement or the complexity of the
intersection affect this type of references).
Despite several differences (such as cultural differences
between participant samples, familiarity with the Glass
concept), the data collected in the two experiments suggests
that references to moving landmarks were influenced by the
communicative context. Apparently without a joint
communicative situation, respondents preferred stable
landmarks. When conversation partners are distant in time
and space and no feedback is possible, the speakers have to
adapt to the situation and ensure that the message is well
understood (the principle of mutual responsibility, Clark &
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). Referring to moving landmarks when
no feedback and further correction is possible could result in
an unsuccessful instruction. In contrast, when the producer
was asked to address a real listener, participants referred to
moving entities quite often. Referring to a moving item might
be a faster heuristic to refer to the place where the turn should
be taken.
Finally, cutting edge technology enables machines with a
rich sensory input. Our results suggest that movement
detected in the nearby environment can be informative in a
landmark selection task. Of interest for real-time navigation
services, our results highlight that not only the stable
landmarks, but also the moving entities play a role in the
production of turn-by-turn route directions.

There was no significant effect of Presentation List (p >
.05). There was a main effect of Movement Type (β = 1.97;
SE = .30; p < .001). In the relevant movement condition
participants referred more often to the moving person taking
a turn (M = 0.39), than in the irrelevant movement condition
(M = 0.14)1. Moving entities were present in instructions
alone (e.g., “go left where the man is also going”; “follow
that man, go left”) or in combination with stable landmarks
(e.g., “at the pub turn left, where the man is going”).
In order to see if, in these RDs, moving landmarks are
considered sufficient, we analyzed to what extent moving
landmarks combine with stable ones across conditions. A
smaller data-set was created by selecting only the instructions
which mention moving persons. There was a main effect of
Movement Type (β = -1.41; SE = .51; p < .01). In IM
condition, the moving person is mentioned more often
together with other landmarks (M = 0.25), than in the RM
condition (M = 0.12).

Discussion
In this study, we have investigated the circumstances under
which people refer to moving landmarks. Specifically, we
focused on the type of movement and on the communicative
setting that might influence RD production.
The collected RDs included a fairly large amount of
references to unstable landmarks when producers were
giving instructions to a real addressee. When movement is
task informative more than half of the landmarks mentioned
are moving landmarks and often, these moving entities are
the only ones mentioned in the instructions, which highlights
the producer's preference for this heuristic in the here-andnow setting. The results suggest that factors contributing to
object salience in RDs depend largely upon context and
producer’s goals. The main role of these moving entities was
to provide short-term orientation for the listener, by marking
with their presence the street where a turn should be made.
Thus, a moving entity may function as a point of reference
and have navigational importance in a joint communicative
situation. In addition, moving landmarks were mentioned
even when their trajectory was not task-informative.
However, references to pedestrians that were just heading
towards the intersection without taking a turn were
significantly often mentioned in combination with other
(stable) landmarks from the environment. Despite the fact

Acknowledgments
The first author received financial support from the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research, via NWO
Promoties in de Geesteswetenschappen (322-89-008), which
is greatly acknowledged.

1 Means are calculated over all RDs from IM and RM conditions,
including the cases without landmarks.

146

to reorient. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
80(3), 225-244.
May, A.J., Ross, T., Bayer, S.H., & Tarkiainen, M.J. (2003).
Pedestrian navigation aids: information requirements and
design implications. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing,
7, 331-338.
Miller J., & Carlson L. (2011). Selecting landmarks in novel
environments. Psychonomic Bulletin Review, 18(1), 18419110.
New J., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2007). Category-specific
attention to animals reflects ancestral priorities, not
expertise. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 104(42), 16598–16603.
Nothegger, C., Winter, S., & Raubal, M. (2004). Selection of
salient features for route directions. Spatial cognition and
computation, 4(2), 113-136.
Prat-Sala, M., & Branigan, H.P. (2000). Discourse
constraints on syntactic processing in language production:
A cross-linguistic study in English and Spanish. Journal of
Memory and Language, 42(2), 168-182.
Pratt, J., Radulescu, P.V., Guo, R.M., & Abrams, R.A.
(2010). It’s alive! Animate motion captures visual
attention. Psychological Science, 21(11), 1724-1730.
Raubal, M., & Winter, S. (2002). Enriching wayfinding
instructions with local landmarks, In: Egenhofer, M.J.;
Mark, D.M. (Eds.), Geographic Information Science.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, (pp. 243-259). Berlin:
Springer.
Richter, K. F., & Klippel, A. (2005). A model for contextspecific route directions. In Spatial Cognition IV.
Reasoning, Action, Interaction (pp. 58-78). Berlin:
Springer.
Smith, A. D., Gilchrist, I. D., Cater, K., Ikram, N., Nott, K.,
& Hood, B. M. (2008). Reorientation in the real world: The
development of landmark use and integration in a natural
environment. Cognition, 107(3), 1102-1111.
Sorrows, M. E., & Hirtle, S. C. (1999). The nature of
landmarks for real and electronic spaces. In C. Freksa &
M. Mark (Eds.), Spatial information theory. Cognitive and
computational foundations of geographic information
science (pp. 37-50). Berlin: Springer.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In: H.L.
Pick, & L.P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation: Theory,
research and application (pp 225-282). NY: Springer US.
Tom, A., & Denis, M. (2003). Referring to landmark or street
information in route directions: What difference does it
make? In Spatial information theory. Foundations of
geographic information science (pp. 362-374). Berlin:
Springer.

References
Abrams, R.A., & Christ, S.E. (2003). Motion onset captures
attention. Psychological Science, 14(5), 427–432.
Allen, G.L. (2000). Principles and practices for
communicating route knowledge. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 14(4), 333-359.
Allen, G.L., Siegel, A.W., & Rosinski, R.R. (1978). The role
of perceptual context in structuring spatial knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 4(6), 617-630.
Anderson, R.C., & Pichert, J.W. (1978). Recall of previously
unrecallable information following a shift in perspective.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17(1), 112.
Arts, A., Maes, A., Noordman, L.G.M., & Jansen, C. (2011).
Overspecification in written instruction. Linguistics, 49(3),
555-574.
Barr, D.J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H.J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68(3), 255-278.
Burgess, N., Spiers, H.J., & Paleologou, E. (2004).
Orientational manoeuvres in the dark: dissociating
allocentric and egocentric influences on spatial memory.
Cognition, 94(2), 149-166.
Chan, E., Baumann, O., Bellgrove, M.A., & Mattingley, J.B.
(2012). From objects to landmarks: the function of visual
location information in spatial navigation. Frontiers in
Psychology, 3, 304.
Clark, H.H. & Wilkes-Gibbs. D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22(1), 1-39.
Denis, M., Pazzaglia, F., Cornoldi, C., & Bertolo, L. (1999).
Spatial discourse and navigation: An analysis of route
directions in the city of Venice. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 13(2), 145-174.
Downing, P.E., Bray, D., Rogers, J., & Childs, C. (2004).
Bodies capture attention when nothing is expected.
Cognition, 93(1), 27-28.
Henderson, J., & Ferreira, F. (2013). Interface of language,
vision and action. NY: Psychology Press.
Hillstrom, A.P., & Yantis, S. (1994). Visual motion and
attentional capture. Perception & Psychophysics, 55(4),
399-411.
Itti, L., & Koch, C. (2001). Computational modelling of
visual attention. Nature reviews neuroscience, 2(3), 194203.
Kirchner, H., & Thorpe, S.J. (2006). Ultra-rapid object
detection with saccadic eye movements: Visual processing
speed revisited. Vision Research, 46(11), 1762-1776.
Learmonth, A.E., Newcombe, N.S., & Huttenlocher, J.
(2001). Toddlers' use of metric information and landmarks

147

