Learning mode and comparison in relational category learning
John D. Patterson (jpatter4@binghamton.edu)
Kenneth J. Kurtz (kkurtz@binghamton.edu)
Department of Psychology, 4400 Vestal Parkway East
Binghamton, NY 13905 USA
Abstract
An important goal in the study of higher-order cognition is to
understand how relational categories are acquired and
applied. Previous work has explored the potential of withincategory comparison opportunities to promote relational
category learning and transfer. This follows from predictions
of structure mapping theory (Gentner, 1983, 2003) that
alignment leads to highlighting and abstraction of common
relational structure. However, a straightforward merging of
traditional classification learning with comparison (i.e., trials
presenting two same-category items) has not been effective.
We explore the hypothesis that classification and comparison
have an unforeseen incompatibility. In a 3x2 betweensubjects design we tested three presentation conditions
(unconstrained item pairs, category-matched items pairs,
single items) in two supervised category learning modes:
classification and observation. The major finding is an
interaction driven by highly accurate categorization for the
observational learners with same-category pairs. The
introduction of the observational mode yielded the predicted,
but elusive result of an advantage for within-category pairs
over twice as many single-item trials. We conclude that
within-category comparison can be an effective means to
promote relational category learning and discuss the apparent
impediment of the guess-and-correct cycle.
Keywords: relational categories; structural alignment;
comparison; classification learning; transfer; observational
learning mode

Introduction
Categorization and comparison are two core mechanisms
underlying human learning, comprehension, and knowledge
use. Within the study of categorization, the bulk of the
research attention has been devoted to object/entity
categories – categories whose members belong based on
sharing a set of intrinsic features. Though the learning and
generalization of entity categories has been studied using
different tasks, such as through inference of missing
features (Markman & Ross, 2003) and category construction
(Ahn & Medin, 1992), the traditional classification learning
paradigm has remained the most prevalently used (Murphy,
2003; Ross, Chin-Parker, & Diaz, 2005). In its most
common form, the traditional classification learning
paradigm operates as follows: a single stimulus is presented,
the participant is asked to classify the item into one of two
category options, a response is selected, and corrective
feedback is given. The traditional, classification learning
paradigm has yielded substantial knowledge and has offered
a testing ground for formal models of categorization (e.g.,

ALCOVE, Kruschke, 1992; DIVA, Kurtz, 2007; SUSTAIN,
Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004).
However, not all categories lend themselves well to
traditional accounts of category learning. Though a sizable
amount of knowledge can be captured through a featurebased understanding of the world, features alone do not
seem to capture the richness of what we know – the ways in
which objects and attributes relate to one another reflect a
critical facet of the concepts we hold. In the categorization
literature, an increasing emphasis has been placed on
relational categories (Gentner & Kurtz, 2005; Markman &
Stilwell, 2001) that are based on a common (perhaps rulelike) relational structure as opposed to a set of intrinsic
features (see Corral & Jones, 2014; Goldwater, Markman, &
Stilwell, 2011; Higgins & Ross, 2011; Kurtz, Boukrina, &
Gentner, 2013; Patterson & Kurtz, 2014; Smith & Gentner,
2014; Weitnauer, Carvalho, Goldstone, & Ritter, 2014). As
an example, take the relational noun bridge – something that
connects two other things. A member of the category bridge
might occupy the form of a concrete structure connecting
two landmasses. Alternatively, a bridge might take the form
of an ambassador connecting the geopolitical ideas of two
countries. In terms of features, these two members of the
category bridge are greatly disparate; a bridge does not have
much in common with a diplomat. Nonetheless, both
bridges are category members insofar as they relate to two
other things in the same way. This qualitative difference
between entity and relational categories translates to
differences on the quantitative level as well, with relational
categories exhibiting slower acquisition in children
(Gentner, 2005). These differences expose an empirical
need for the study of relational categories in order to further
the understanding of human categorization.
A pressing topic in the study of relational categories is
how they are learned. Prior investigation has demonstrated
benefits to the acquisition and transfer of relational
categories through comparison (Kurtz, Boukrina, &
Gentner, 2013; Patterson & Kurtz, 2014). The observed
comparison benefits can be understood through the process
of structural alignment (Gentner, 1983, 2003, 2010; Gentner
& Markman, 1997). According to the structural alignment
view, deep, relational similarity that exists between two
cases is rendered salient by aligning their relational
predicates during comparison, allowing for shared relational
structure to be abstracted into a portable knowledge
structure. It is predicted from this view that comparison
advantages should be great when same-category items are
compared, relative to single item learning and comparison
using contrasting categories whose relational structures are

1841

not alignable. Although same-category comparison during
classification learning has been shown to confer benefits on
near and far transfer of category knowledge (relative to
twice as many trials of single item learning), the comparison
advantage has only been found with the inclusion of some
different-category pairs (Kurtz, Boukrina, & Gentner,
2013). A fifty-fifty mix of same and different-category pairs
led to comparison outperforming single item learning. One
important characteristic of this format is that the learner
cannot assume both items belong to the same category and
is therefore encouraged to consider each of the items and
their category assignment relative to one another. While a
comparison advantage was found, it was not clear what
specific aspect(s) of this methodology provided the causal
power. To date, we know of no successful demonstration of
a pure, same-category comparison advantage over single
item learning – one successful attempt required twice as
many stimulus exposures as the single item control (Kurtz
& Gentner, 1998). In preliminary work to the current study,
we attempted to boost the invitation to compare during
same-category comparison trials. However, neither the use
of similarity ratings nor the drawing of correspondence lines
between compared items yielded differences between pure,
same-category comparison and single item learning. In these
cases it seemed clear that the comparison engine was
effectively engaged but, perplexingly, no advantage
accrued.
An alternate account of these observed shortcomings is
that the task acted in opposition to the benefits of samecategory comparison. Drawing on the machine learning and
attribute-based categorization literatures, a continuum can
be found between two different learning modes:
discriminative and generative learning (Levering & Kurtz,
2015; Ng & Jordan, 2001). Discriminative learning is
characterized by learning the probability of a category given
a set of features; the focus is on learning a minimalist way
to predict a category given aspects of the stimulus. By
contrast, a generative mode emphasizes learning the
probability of a set of features given a category; in other
words, the focus is on learning what stimulus aspects are
common to a given category, resulting in a more positively
defined, holistic representation. Consistent with this
generative/discriminative distinction, previous work has
shown the discriminative guess-and-correct cycle of
classification to result in reduced holistic category
knowledge compared to a more generative learning mode
(Levering & Kurtz, 2015). Accordingly, the less holistic
category representation encouraged by classification might
be at odds with making productive comparisons. From a
more general standpoint, a conflict may exist between
performing classification and getting the most out of
comparison – such that successfully coordinating and
integrating the two components is not possible.
An alternative to the traditional classification-learning
paradigm is supervised observational learning. On each trial,
items are simply presented with their correct category
labels. While the two modes generally lead to similar

performance outcomes (Estes, 1994; see also, Ashby,
Maddox, & Bohil, 2002; Edmunds, Milton, & Wills, 2014),
observational learning has been shown to result in richer
category knowledge (Levering & Kurtz, 2015). Using
unidimensional rule plus family resemblance categories,
Levering and Kurtz (2015) found observational learners
showed enriched knowledge of internal category structure
(relative to classification learners), demonstrating enhanced
ability to infer values on the partially diagnostic features
when provided only the category. Further, typicality ratings
revealed greater sensitivity to changes on partially
diagnostic features for observational learners compared to
classification learners. Applied to relational categories, the
more holistic consideration encouraged by observational
learning could provide benefits to comparison and relational
discovery.
Observational learning presents a viable task alternative
to circumvent potential impediments associated with pure,
same-category comparison learning under classification.
The task allows the learner to jointly consider the copresented examples as members of a category without the
distractions of the guess-and-correct cycle. It is expected
that, through unhindered structural alignment, the greatest
benefit at test and far transfer will be conferred to samecategory comparison in the observational mode, relative to
mixed comparison (having half as many same-category
comparison opportunities) or single item learning.

Method
The purpose of the experiment was to assess the impact of
learning mode on the effectiveness of different kinds of
comparison opportunities. To accomplish this, learning
mode and presentation condition were varied orthogonally.

Participants
184 undergraduates from Binghamton
participated for partial course credit.

University

Materials
The training and testing phase stimuli consisted of 36
unique, Stonehenge-like arrangements of rocks – examples
can be seen in Figure 1. Rocks varied in their size, shape,
and color. As in our previous studies, the stimuli comprised
three relational categories (category labels in brackets):
monotonicity [Besod] – defined by a monotonic decrease in
height of the arrangement from left to right, support [Makif]
– characterized by the presence of a rock being supported by
two other rocks, forming a sort of bridge, and symmetry
[Tolar] – captured by the presence of two same color rocks
of similar size and shape, one stacked atop the other. Each
arrangement belonged to only one of the three categories.
Of the 36 stimuli, a subset of 24 was utilized as the training
set (eight per category) and 12 were reserved for use at test
(four per category). The subsets matched those used in
Kurtz, Boukrina, and Gentner (2013) and subsets were held
constant across participants. For comparison conditions,
training stimuli were presented in pairs. Pairs were

1842

randomly generated for each participant according to the
condition – all same-category pairs (Same_ conditions) or a
fifty-fifty blend of same- and different-category pairs (Mix_
conditions).
To assess far transfer of category knowledge, a set of 15
mobile-like stimuli (colorful, geometric objects connected
with vertical lines, as if hanging down from a platform; see
Figure 1) was used. Each mobile conformed to one of the
three relational categories from training, five mobiles per
category. Compared to the training and testing stimuli, the
mobiles were dissimilar in their surface characteristics (in
color and shape of objects) and the orientation of the
category-defining core in each item was reflected over the
X-axis.

Procedure
In a between-subjects design, participants were randomly
assigned to one of six conditions. Four conditions employed
comparison
learning:
same-category
classification
(SameClass, n = 30), mixed-category classification
(MixClass, n = 31), same-category observational (SameObs,
n = 31), and mixed-category observational (MixObs, n =
32). Two conditions served as single item controls: single
item classification (SingClass, n = 31) and single item
observational (SingObs, n = 29). All participants received
an archeological cover story and were given the following
instructions: “Your overall goal is to figure out what makes
a given rock arrangement belong to one of the three types:
Besods, Makifs, or Tolars. You will be tested on your
knowledge of each type later.” The following instructions
were given to comparison conditions (and were stripped of
dual-item and comparison language in the single item
conditions): “On each learning trial, you will see two rock
arrangements. [Obs: You will be shown the correct type for
each arrangement to help you learn, Class: Try to figure out
the correct type for each arrangement. Use the mouse to
select your response. A box will appear around the
arrangement that you should respond to. You will be given
feedback at the end of each trial to help you learn]. At first
you will not understand what makes them belong to a type,
but before long you should become quite good at
recognizing the different types. Remember that there are
three different styles for arranging the rocks into
configurations. Looking at the two arrangements together
can help you learn these types. Try your best to gain
mastery of the names of each type and what makes an
arrangement belong to those types. Learn as much as you
can before the test!”
Comparison Conditions – Training
Training consisted of two cycles of 12 paired stimulus trials,
totaling 48 stimulus exposures. At the beginning of each
trial, two laterally offset stimuli were presented and
remained visible until the trial was complete. In the
classification conditions, a box appeared that randomly
queried one of the arrangements. Participants were asked for
the category of the queried item. They selected a response

using the mouse and were then queried about the other item.
Following both responses, participants were shown
simultaneous feedback for each item indicating: (1) whether
or not their response was correct, (2) the correct category of
the item (in green), and (3) if incorrect, the category they
responded with (in red). In the observational conditions, the
correct category labels were provided with the presented
items and remained on screen for the duration of the trial.
When the participant finished studying an item pair they
continued to the next trial with a mouse click. Participants
in both classification and observational conditions had as
much time to engage each trial as they wished.
Single Item Conditions – Training
Training consisted of two cycles of 24 randomized, single
item trials, totaling 48 stimulus exposures. A single stimulus
was presented at the start of each trial and remained visible
until the trial was complete. Classification and observational
conditions closely followed their comparison counterparts.
In the classification condition, participants were asked for
the category of the item. Following their response, they
were presented feedback identical in nature to the
comparison classification conditions. In the observational
condition, participants were presented with a single labeled
item. As in the comparison conditions, single item
conditions were permitted as much time as desired on each
trial.

Figure 1: Sample stimuli for each category in
each phase.
Assessment
Following training, all conditions performed an identical
assessment sequence. The sequence consisted of, first, a
within-domain test and, second, a far transfer assessment.

1843

The within-domain test randomly presented the 24 “old”
rock arrangements from training and 12 new arrangements.
After the within-domain test, the 15 mobile stimuli were
presented in random order for the far transfer phase. Both
the test and transfer trials employed an endorsement format:
on each trial a single item was presented, the participant was
asked if the item belonged to a given category, and
participants gave a yes/no response. This measure of
categorization performance is similar to, but distinct from
both the classification and observational learning tasks. The
endorsement task minimizes any transfer appropriate
processing advantages (Morris, Bransford, & Franks, 1977)
that might result from a perfect task match between training
and testing phases. As the primary interest was in how well
knowledge could be extended from the learning phase, old
test items were each presented once, while the new test and
far transfer items were each presented twice – once each
with accurate and inaccurate category labels.

Results
Given the absence of training accuracy data
observational conditions, the analyses for training data
omitted here. While our predictions primarily concern
extension of knowledge to new examples, we begin
considering performance on old test items.

for
are
the
by

Test – Old Items
In the absence of complete training data, old test data can
give an estimation of late learning phase performance. The
data were subjected to a two-way analysis of variance with
two levels of task (classification and observational learning)
and three levels of presentation format (same-category pairs,
mixed-category pairs, and single item). The ANOVA
revealed a significant effect of task, F(1, 178) = 7.71, p =
.006, showing that observation learners (M = 0.84, SD =
0.15) were more accurate in their endorsement decisions
than were classification learners (M = 0.77, SD = 0.17). No
main effect was found for presentation format, F(2, 178) =
0.72, p = .49, indicating that, collapsed across task, type of
comparison did not have an effect. Consistent with our
predictions however, a significant interaction showed that
task differentially impacted the effectiveness of the type of
comparison opportunity, F(2, 178) = 3.77, p = .025. The
interaction was marked by a significant difference between
observational (M = 0.88, SD = 0.13) and classification (M =
0.74 SD = 0.19) learning modes for same-category pairs
[t(59.36) = -3.42, p = .001, corrected for unequal variances],
but only a marginal difference between observational (M =
0.85, SD = 0.13) and classification (M = 0.79, SD = 0.14)
learning modes for mixed-category pairs, t(61) = -1.91, p =
.06. Task did not did not have an effect on single item
learning (SingClass, M = 0.79, SD = 0.18; SingObs, M =
0.78, SD = 0.18; p > .1).
Single Item Control As a reminder, one of the primary
goals of the experiment was to explore whether pure, samecategory comparison could lead to an advantage over single

item learning. As predicted, same-category comparison in
the observational mode was found to provide a significant
benefit over its task-matched, single-item control using a ttest comparison – the only comparison condition to do so,
t(53.10) = 2.45, p = .02, corrected for unequal variances.
Test – New Items
Looking at the data for never-before-seen, within-domain
items (see Figure 1, Figure 2), a 3x2 ANOVA denoted only
a significant interaction, F(2, 178) = 4.85, p = .009. Follow
up analyses indicated that a same-category observational
performance advantage over its classification counterpart
drove the interaction: while task led to significant
differences in endorsement accuracy for same-category
comparison conditions (SameClass, M = 0.69, SD = 0.17;
SameObs, M = 0.83, SD = 0.13; t(53.90) = -3.70, p = .001,
corrected for unequal variances), task did not lead to reliable
differences between mixed-category comparison conditions
or single item conditions. These results emphasize the
power of pure same-category comparison, but only under
the appropriate task circumstances.

Single Item Control As seen with the old-item test data,
same-category learning in the observational mode was
found to produce the predicted advantage over its taskmatched, single-item control on new test items [t(48.09) =
3.22, p = .002, corrected for unequal variances]. By
contrast, no other comparison condition was able to show an
advantage over single item learning.

Figure 2: New item test and far transfer
endorsement accuracy by condition. Error bars
show +/- 1 SE.
Far Transfer
Of critical interest was the impact different learning
conditions had on the ability to transfer category
knowledge. To assess this, the far transfer accuracy data

1844

were subjected to a 3x2 ANOVA that indicated a main
effect of task: learners in observational learners (M = 0.77,
SD = 0.17) showed enhanced transfer relative to
classification learners (M = 0.68, SD = 0.19), F(1, 178) =
4.22, p = .04. Consistent with both old and new test items,
no main effect of presentation format was found on far
transfer items. However, a marginally significant interaction
between task and presentation format was found, F(2, 178)
= 2.93, p = .056. Consistent with our predictions, the
interaction showed that levels of task resulted in larger
disparities between same-category comparison conditions
(SameClass: M = 0.67, SD = 0.20; SameObs: M = 0.81, SD
= 0.16; t(59) = -3.20, p = .002) than between mixed pair
comparison conditions (MixClass: M = 0.70, SD = 0.18;
MixObs: M = 0.72, SD = 0.17; t(61) = -0.56, p = .58). No
differences were seen between single item learning
conditions (SingClass: M = 0.70, SD = 0.20; SingObs: M =
0.70, SD = 0.19; t(58) = -0.09, p = .93).
Single Item Control Comparing same-category comparison
in the observational mode against its single item, taskcontrolled counterpart yielded the predicted advantage for
comparison at far transfer, t(58) = 2.43, p = .02. No other
comparison condition exhibited reliable differences over
single item learning.

Discussion
The empirical goal of the present study was to further the
understanding of how relational categories are best learned.
The specific questions being asked were: (1) how does
learning mode affect the acquisition of relational categories?
and (2) how does learning mode influence the effectiveness
of different types of comparison opportunities? The results
show clearly that the observational mode has a positive
influence on learning, increasing endorsement accuracy on
within-domain members and enhancing far transfer to
members across domain. While the type of comparison
opportunity did not exhibit a direct impact on performance,
exceptional performance in the same-category observational
group drove an interaction at within-domain test and pushed
an interaction near significance at far transfer. The
interaction underscores that the type of learning task plays
an important role in the effectiveness of certain kinds of
comparison opportunities (same-category pairs), but not for
others (mixed-category pairs). Further, same-category
comparison in the observational mode was the only
condition to display an advantage over single item learning
– and did so across all testing phases.
These results are compelling for a number of reasons.
First, they represent the first time that observational learning
has been shown to outperform feedback learning on a test of
category membership knowledge. Though the effectiveness
of observation as a learning vehicle has been sparsely
explored, previous work has shown observational learning
to be either equivalent or disadvantaged relative to
classification when category membership is the target of
assessment (Ashby, Maddox, & Bohil, 2002; Edmunds,

Milton, & Wills, 2015; Estes, 1994; Levering & Kurtz,
2015). It should be noted that most research employing
observational learning has been conducted using featurebased categories with single item presentation. Taken
together, this poses the possibility that the type of category
(feature-based or relational) may interact with task and
presentation format; this is a topic for further research.
Second, the findings clearly echo that learning mode can
substantially impact acquired category knowledge
(Markman & Ross, 2003). This highlights the need for
future categorization research to study phenomena using a
broader palette of learning methods. Third, this study
demonstrates a pure, same-category comparison advantage
over single item learning for the first time. This key finding
fits nicely into the theoretical framework developed in the
study of analogy (Gentner, 1983; Markman & Gentner,
1997). The success of same-category comparison under
observation, relative to classification, suggests that
classification is disruptive to fruitful comparison. Future
work will seek to further specify and elaborate on this
finding.
The excellent level of mean performance in the samecategory observational condition is unprecedented in the
study of relational category learning. Accordingly,
understanding the basis for this success is paramount. A
number of causal factors are worth exploring. One
speculation is that observational learning encourages greater
engagement than classification (despite being a less active
task: there is no responding). Unlike classification,
observational learning with same-category pairs does not
involve the guess-and-correct cycle. As such, classification
may promote discriminative goals that interfere with
making the most of comparison opportunities. Classification
learners may be more inclined to look for diagnostic
features and less attuned to relational structure. Also,
classification learners may be more focused on the
performance factor of getting correct answers as opposed to
the more global goal of category mastery.
A Further Speculation
One speculative factor that may serve to benefit engagement
in the same-category observational case is symbolic
juxtaposition (Gentner, 2010). By applying the same label to
the presented items, it represents an invitation through
language to compare and abstract commonalities that exist
between them. Getting this invitation at the beginning of the
trial (as opposed to the feedback period at the end of
classification trials) might have emphasized comparison as
the focus of the task and led to more engaged and effective
comparisons.

References
Ahn, W., & Medin, D. L. (1992). A two-stage model of
category construction. Cognitive Science, 16(1), 81-121.
Ashby, F. G., Maddox, W. T., & Bohil, C. J. (2002).
Observational versus feedback training in rule-based and
information integration category learning. Memory &

1845

Cognition, 30, 666–677.
Corral, D. & Jones, M. (2014). The effects of relational
structure on analogical learning. Cognition, 132 (3), 280300.
Edmunds, C.E.R., Milton, F., & Wills, A.J.
(2015). Feedback can be superior to observational
training for both rule-based and information-integration
category structures. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 68, 1-20.
Estes,W.K.(1994). Classification and cognition. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155–170.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner & S.
Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances in
the study of language and thought (pp. 195–235).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (2005). The development of relational category
knowledge. In L. Gershkoff-Stowe & D. H. Rakison
(Eds.), Building object categories in developmental time.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34,
752–775.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Relational categories. In
W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. Markman,
& P. W. Wolff Categorization inside and outside the
laboratory: Essays in honor of Douglas L. Medin (pp.
151–175). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52(1),
45-56.
Goldwater, M. B., Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H.
(2011). The empirical case for role-governed categories.
Cognition, 118, 359–376.
Higgins, E. J., & Ross, B. H. (2011). Comparisons in
category learning: How best to compare for what. In L.
Carlson, C. Holscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
Review, 99, 22-44.
Kurtz, K. J. (2007). The divergent autoencoder (DIVA)
model of category learning. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 14, 560–576.
Kurtz, K. J., Boukrina, O., & Gentner, D. (2013).
Comparison promotes learning and transfer of relational
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39(4), 1303–1310.
Kurtz, K. J., & Gentner, D. (1998). Category learning and
comparison in the evolution of similarity structure. In
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (p. 1236). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Levering, K. R., & Kurtz, K. J. (2015). Observation versus
classification in supervised category learning. Memory &
Cognition, 43(2), 266-282.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN:
A
Network
Model
of
Category
Learning. Psychological Review, 111(2), 309-332.
Markman, A. B., & Ross, B. H. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129(4), 592613.
Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 13, 329– 358.
Morris, C. D., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977).
Levels of processing versus transfer appropriate
processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 16, 519–533.
Murphy, G. L. (2003). The downside of categories. Trends
In Cognitive Sciences, 7(12), 513-514.
Ng, A.Y., & Jordan, M. (2001). On discriminative vs.
generative classifiers: A comparison of logistic regression
and naive Bayes. In T. G. Dietterich, S. Becker, and Z.
Ghahramani, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 14, 841–848.
Patterson, J.D., & Kurtz, K.J. (2014). Engaging the
comparison engine: Implications for relational category
learning and transfer. Poster presented at the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science. Quebec City,
Quebec.
Ross, B. H., Chin-Parker, S., & Diaz, M. (2005). Beyond
Classification Learning. In W. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B.
C. Love, A. B. Markman, P. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization
inside and outside the laboratory: Essays in honor of
Douglas L. Medin (pp. 197-213). Washington, DC, US:
American Psychological Association.
Smith, L. A., & Gentner, D. (2014). The role of differencedetection in learning contrastive categories. Proceedings
of the Thirty-Sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. (pp. 2088-2093). Quebec City, Quebec:
Cognitive Science Society.
Weitnauer, E., Carvalho, P.F., Goldstone, R.L., & Ritter, H.
(2014). Similarity-based Ordering of Instances for
Efficient Concept Learning. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M.
McShane, & B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1760-1765). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

1846

