Learning to reason about desires: An infant training study
Tiffany Doana (t3doan@uwaterloo.ca), Stephanie Denison a (stephanie.denison@uwaterloo.ca),
Christopher G. Lucasb (c.lucas@ed.ac.uk), & Alison Gopnikc (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
a
University of Waterloo, Department of Psychology
b
University of Edinburgh, School of Informatics
c
University of California, Berkeley, Department of Psychology

beliefs about the minds of other people?
This paper focuses on the development of desire-based
reasoning, or the ability to consider a person’s wants, likes,
and dislikes when reflecting on their behavior. For example,
children as young as two years understand that people’s
actions and emotions are influenced by their desires; they
know that a person will attend to objects that they want to
obtain and will be sad if their desires go unfulfilled
(Wellman and Woolley, 1990).
The present experiments examine a shift that occurs in
infants’ desire-based reasoning, specifically in their
reasoning about preferences. The paradigm is based on a
study that asked whether infants understand that preferences
can serve as an underlying cause of people's behaviors
(Repacholi & Gopnik, 1997). Fourteen- and eighteenmonth-old infants were presented with two different types
of food: Goldfish crackers and broccoli. The experimenter
determined which food the infants liked (the majority
preferred Goldfish crackers). She then demonstrated, using
emotional expressions and simple language, that she
preferred either that same food (Goldfish crackers in a
“matched” trial) or the opposite food (broccoli in an
“unmatched” trial), depending on the experimental
condition. When infants were asked to share some food with
the experimenter, the two age groups differed in their
responses. The 18-month-olds were able to correctly
determine the experimenter's preferences based on her
previous behaviors, and thus correctly gave her the food that
she liked, whether the infant themselves preferred this food
or not. However, the 14-month-olds gave the experimenter
the food that they themselves preferred, regardless of her
demonstrated preferences. This difference in performance
has been interpreted to suggest that some time around 18
months of age, infants’ desire-based reasoning undergoes a
significant conceptual change, moving from a simple to a
more complex model of preferences. That is, infants
younger than 18 months may have a very simple notion of
preferences in which they initially assume that preferences
are universal, rather than varying between people 1 . In

Abstract
A key aspect of theory of mind is the ability to reason
about other people's desires. As adults, we know that desires
and preferences are subjective and specific to the individual.
However, research in cognitive development suggests that a
significant conceptual shift occurs in desire-based reasoning
between 14 and 18 months of age, allowing 18- but not 14month-olds to understand that different people can have
different preferences (Lucas et al., 2014; Ma & Xu 2011;
Repacholi & Gopnik, 1997). The present research investigates
the kind of evidence that is relevant for inducing this shift and
whether younger infants can be trained to learn about the
diversity of preferences. In Experiment 1, infants younger
than 18 months of age were shown demonstrations in which
two experimenters either liked the same objects as each other
(in one training condition) or different objects (in another
training condition). Following training, all infants were asked
to share one of two foods with one of the experimenters –
they could either share a food that the experimenter showed
disgust towards (and the infants themselves liked) or a food
that the experimenter showed happiness towards (and the
infants themselves did not like). We found that infants who
observed two different experimenters liking different objects
during training later provided the experimenter with the food
she liked, even if it was something they disliked themselves.
However, when infants observed two experimenters liking the
same objects, they later incorrectly shared the food that they
themselves liked with the experimenter. Experiment 2
controlled for an alternative interpretation of these findings.
Our results suggest that training allows infants to overturn an
initial theory in the domain of Theory of Mind for a more
advanced one.
Keywords: Theory of mind; Desire-based reasoning; Infant
learning; Social cognition; Preferences.

Introduction
As social creatures, we are constantly trying to figure out
what other people are thinking. The ability to infer others’
mental states, such as their desires and beliefs, serves a
number of important functions. It allows us to please or
irritate others, to understand why they engage in particular
acts, and to predict their future behavior. These abilities
hinge on our having a well-developed theory of mind – the
understanding that people have mental states (e.g., desires,
beliefs, intentions) and that these mental states can differ
from person to person (Gopnik & Wellman, 1994).
Explicit theory of mind undergoes significant
development during infancy and early childhood, as
children first reason based on knowledge about others’
desires and then later incorporate knowledge about others’
beliefs. How do children arrive at these more sophisticated

1

For simplicity, we will characterize younger infants as
assuming that preferences are universal. An alternative is that they
are instead sensitive to the relative desirability of objects,
reasoning that some are inherently better than others. This
reasoning would also result in always sharing the item that they
personally like, as they would see it as the objectively better item.
While this is an important distinction we will not discuss it further,
because both processes result in identical behavior in our task.

578

type, wherein the experimenter’s preference conflicted with
the infant’s preference. Only infants who failed to give the
experimenter the food that she liked continued to a training
condition. The critical manipulation is that half of the
infants completed a “Diverse Desires Training” condition
(henceforth, DDT) where they observed multiple training
trials with two experimenters demonstrating different
preferences from one another. The other half completed a
“Non-Diverse Desires” Training condition (henceforth, NDDT), where they observed multiple training trials with two
experimenters demonstrating the same preferences.
Following training, infants were tested again on two
unmatched test trials, one directly after training and the
other approximately 24 hours later. The second test trial
occurred 1 day later to examine how enduring the effects of
training might be – would the effect still be evident
following a delay? We predict that only infants in the DDT
condition should show improved performance in attributing
preferences on the test trials.

contrast, older infants seem to recognize that desires are
diverse.
What occurs between the ages of 14 and 18 months to
promote such a significant advance in Theory of Mind? In a
recent paper, Lucas et al. (2014) suggested that infants
might first favor the simpler or “universal” model of
preferences because it gives a parsimonious explanation for
most of the data they encounter. For example, it is often the
case that preferences converge – most people like the taste
of pizza but they aren’t as enthusiastic about lima beans.
However, as children observe more choices, they have
increasingly robust evidence that people have divergent
desires. The hypothesis is that as children grow older, they
accumulate evidence pushing them away from the simple
but incorrect initial model toward a more complex and
flexible model, which allows them to consider the
consequences of distinct preferences. The suggestion is that
during this transition, children must observe or participate in
many desire-based interactions where people make choices
or produce other signals to suggest that their preferences are
incongruent with one another or with the infants themselves.
The idea that infants might shift from a simple to a more
complex model was formalized as part of a broader look
into whether children learn preferences in a way that is
rational or optimal under certain assumptions (Lucas et al.,
2014). Lucas et al. explored the idea that children have tacit
hypotheses about others’ behaviors or underlying mental
states, and evaluate those hypotheses against incoming data
in a manner consistent with Bayes Theorem. If children
expect others to have consistent preferences for options or
features (like goldfish crackers, or saltiness) and choose the
most attractive option based on the combined desirability of
its features – including some features that might be hidden
to the child – their preference attributions should be
consistent with the predictions of a widely-used economic
model, the Mixed Multinomial Logit (MML).
The MML is generally used to predict consumer behavior,
but it also succeeded in providing a unified account of data
from a wide range of experiments on children’s
understanding of preferences. It accounts for preschoolers’
ability to infer preferences from the statistical properties of a
collection of objects and an agent’s choices (Kushnir, Xu,
&, Wellman, 2010) and for children’s ability to use shared
preferences, as well as their knowledge of category
membership, as a means for making generalizations
(Fawcett & Markson, 2010) – see Lucas et al. for details.
This modeling work also yielded an important empirical
prediction about the development of desire-based reasoning:
if younger children were provided evidence of diverse
desires through lab-based training, then they might be able
to transition to the more complex model of preference
attribution. We test this hypothesis here using a training
study with 14- to 17-month-old infants in two experiments.
In Experiment 1 we began by assessing infants’
understanding of preferences by testing them in a modified
version of Repacholi & Gopnik’s (1997) Goldfish/broccoli
task. All infants were tested in the critical unmatched trial

Experiment 1: Methods
Participants
Infants in both experiments were recruited by phone and
email from the California East Bay Area and Southwestern
Ontario. In Experiment 1, 55 infants were tested. We used
the strict criterion that only infants who did not share the
correct item on an initial pre-test (described below)
continued to training, increasing our confidence that infants
completing training did not already know that preferences
are diverse. Twenty infants per condition were tested in the
full training procedure (DDT: mean age = 15.7 months;
Range = 14.1 months to 17.5 months; N-DDT: mean age =
15.6 months; Range = 14.4 months to 17.2 months). An
additional 15 infants were tested but excluded from analyses
due to failing to complete the study because of fussiness (2)
or refusing to share on the pre-test and all test trials (13).

Materials
Food. Four sets of food pairs were used in the experiment.
The pairs were broccoli and Goldfish crackers, celery and
rice puffs, cucumbers and Cheerios, and green peppers and
wheel-shaped infant crackers.
Toys. Two sets of toys were used during the training
sessions; each set consisted of one type of animal and one
type of vehicle in a transparent container. The sets of toys
were 4 trucks and 4 dogs, and 4 planes and 4 monkeys. The
toys within each type were not identical; they varied in color
and shape.

Procedure, Design and Predictions
All infants were tested individually in a quiet lab setting.
They sat in a high chair in front of a table and their parent
sat in a chair beside them. Before the study began, two
experimenters played a passing game with the infant. This
allowed the infant to warm up to the experimenters and to
ensure that they could share with the experimenters. The
warm up consisted of each experimenter passing a toy (e.g.,
a ball or toy keys) to the infant and asking him/her to pass it

579

back by placing it in the experimenters' hands.
Pre-test. The pre-test was based on Repacholi & Gopnik
(1997). Experimenter 1 slid a plate of food consisting of a
few pieces of vegetables and snacks (e.g. raw broccoli and
Goldfish crackers) towards the infant and encouraged the
infant to try some. The experimenter gave the infant a 45
second time frame to taste the foods and the experimenter
determined which of the two foods the infant preferred. We
used the same coding as in Repacholi & Gopnik (1997) to
determine food preferences on all trials (pre- and post-tests).
Inter-coder agreement for preferences was 91%. When the
infant's preference was determined, the experimenter took
out a container consisting of the same foods the infant had
tried. The experimenter then demonstrated that she liked the
food that the infant did not show a preference for and was
disgusted by the food that the infant preferred. The
experimenter showed her preferences by saying, e.g.,
"Eww! Crackers! I tasted the crackers! Eww!", and "Mmm!
Broccoli! I tasted the broccoli! Mmm!". The experimenter
showed a liking and disliking towards each food three times
and she did this using facial expressions based on the
descriptions of Ekman & Friesen (1975). Next, the
experimenter placed broccoli on one side of a tray and
Goldfish crackers on the other, placed her hand with her
palm up towards the infant, said, “can you give me some?”
and slid the tray towards the infant. The infant was given
45s to pass food to the experimenter. If the infant gave the
experimenter the food that the experimenter showed a
preference towards, then the infant passed the pre-test. If the
infant gave the experimenter the food that she disliked, or
did not provide the experimenter with any food, then the
infant failed the pre-test.
Training Trials. Infants who failed the pre-test were
introduced to either the DDT or the N-DDT condition.
Infants in the DDT condition saw two experimenters liking
and disliking different toys and infants in the N-DDT
condition saw them liking and disliking the same toys.
Training proceeded as follows: Training trial 1 occurred
right after the pre-test. During training trial 1, Experimenter
1 put a jar of toys (e.g., dogs and trucks) onto the table and
subsequently pulled out three toy of one type (e.g., dogs)
and expressed liking towards them. Then the experimenter
pulled out three toys of the other type (e.g., trucks) and
expressed dislike towards them. The dialogue and facial
expressions used were similar to that used during the pretest. The experimenter expressed her preferences by saying,
"Yay! A dog! I got a dog! Yay!", and "Eww! A truck! I
picked up a truck! Eww!". Once Experimenter 1 expressed
her emotions for each type of toy three times, Experimenter
2 took over. Experimenter 2 showed liking and disliking
towards the same toys as Experimenter 1 if the infant was in
the N-DDT condition (e.g., liked dogs and disliked trucks)
and she showed liking and disliking towards the opposite
toys as Experimenter 1 if the infant was in the DDT
condition (e.g., liked trucks and disliked dogs).
Training trial 2 involved Experimenter 2 and the infant. It
was similar to the pre-test, except that it involved a different

set of food (e.g., celery and puffs) and excluded the testing
part of the pre-test. Experimenter 2 gave the infant a plate of
food and determined which food the infant preferred within
45s. In the DDT condition, the experimenter then
demonstrated that she preferred the food that the infant
disliked and disliked the food that the infant preferred. In
the N-DDT condition, the experimenter demonstrated that
she liked and disliked the same foods as the infant. The
infant was not asked to share any food with the
experimenter, as this was a training trial and not a test.
Training trial 3 was identical to training trial 1, but with a
different set of toys (e.g., monkeys and planes).
Experimenter 1 expressed liking to one type of toy and
dislike towards the other type of toy. Experimenter 2 had a
turn expressing her emotions towards each of the toys. She
expressed happiness and dislike towards the same toys as
Experimenter 1 if the infant was in the N-DDT condition
and expressed happiness and dislike towards the opposite
toys as Experimenter 1 if the infant was in the DDT
condition.
After
Experimenter
2
finished
her
demonstrations, infants completed training task 1.
Experimenter 2 put one of each type of toy on both sides of
a tray (e.g., a monkey on right, a plane on left), placed her
palms face up towards the infant, pushed the tray towards
the infant and asked the infant to share one with her. The
infants were given 45s to share a toy with the experimenter.
Once the infant shared a toy with Experimenter 2,
Experimenter 1 had a chance to ask the infant to share with
her the toy that she liked. Training trial 4 was a repetition of
training trial 3 and included a training task that was identical
to the one completed after training trial 3.
The purpose of the training tasks, where infants were
asked to share one of two toys with each experimenter, was
simply to ensure that the infants did not get bored and
continued to share throughout the study. We did not expect
that infants would remember which experimenter preferred
which toy and in fact we found that infants did not reliably
remember the experimenters’ preferences in either condition
of Experiment 1 or in Experiment 2 (all p’s > .25 for
ANOVA’s examining infants’ passing behavior based on
the experimenters’ choices).
Post-training test 1 immediately followed training. It was
identical to the pre-test, except with different food (e.g.,
cucumbers and Cheerios). Once the infant shared a food on
post-test 1, the first day of the study was complete.
Infants returned on Day 2 to complete post-training test 2.
Infants again warmed up with Experimenter 1. This was
followed by post-training test 2, which was identical to the
pre-test and post-training test 1, but with a different set of
food (e.g., green peppers and wheel-shaped crackers).2
2

The first 10 infants in both training conditions saw the same
food from training trial 2 on post-test 2. We switched this to a new
food type to ensure that any improvement in infants’ performance
on Day 2 in DDT could not be explained by already being familiar
with those foods. There were no differences in the data between
infants who saw repeated food versus a new pair of foods (when
entered into an ANOVA, all p’s > .5).

580

Design The foods used on each trial were randomized (some
infants saw broccoli and Goldfish on the pre-test, some on
training trial 2, some on post-training test 1 and some on
post-training test 2). The side of the tray that each food item
appeared on during the sharing part of the pre-test and posttraining tests was randomized. For training trials, if
Experimenter 1 liked animals and disliked vehicles in the
first training trial, she would continue to like animals and
dislike vehicles in subsequent training trials. For half the
participants, Experimenter 1 liked animals and for the other
half, Experimenter 1 liked vehicles. This was crossed with
half of the infants seeing dislikes expressed first and half
seeing likes expressed first. None of these counterbalancing
factors led to any systematic differences in the data (when
entered into ANOVAs, all p’s > .5 for these factors).
Predictions We predicted that infants in the DDT condition
would be more likely to offer the experimenter the correct
food on the post-tests than infants in the N-DDT condition
even though both conditions provided infants with practice
in considering other people's preferences and desires. In the
N-DDT condition, infants saw two experimenters liking the
same objects – this does not provide the infants with any
information that allows them to learn that different people
can have different mental states. In the DDT condition,
infants saw two experimenters display different preferences
from each other, which would provide a great deal of
evidence to suggest that different people can have different
preferences.

training with appropriate evidence can result in significant
changes to children’s explicit Theory of Mind.
But why did infants in the DDT condition only
demonstrate advances in understanding on Day 2 of the
experiment, during the second post-training test? We see at
least two possible explanations. One possibility is that posttraining test 1 served as a final training trial, giving infants
the minimum number of examples required to change their
model of how preferences work (i.e., to learn that they apply
to the individual). A second possibility is that a night of
sleep resulted in improved learning of this general
knowledge about other’s minds, allowing infants to pass the
test on Day 2 but not on Day 1. We will address these
possibilities more fully in the General Discussion.
Before we can speculate as to why children appeared to
learn something new about preferences in the DDT
condition, we must first investigate an alternative
interpretation of the Experiment 1 data. It is possible that the
infants in the DDT condition did not learn that preferences
are diverse, but instead learned something less conceptually
powerful like, "In this game I’m playing, people always get
opposite things, so I should just give the other person the
thing that I didn’t take". If this is the case, then the
participants did not learn that preferences are specific to the
individual; they learned to play a game of opposites. We ran
a second experiment to tease apart these explanations.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 explored the alternative interpretation that
infants in the DDT condition of Experiment 1 only learned
to give the experimenter the opposite food from what they
liked. Infants completed the same training as in the DDT
condition of Experiment 1 but with a “matched” trial on
post-training test 2. In a matched trial type, the experimenter
demonstrates the same preference as the infant, instead of
demonstrating opposite preferences. In this case, if infants
in Experiment 1 DDT condition learned that preferences are
specific to the individual, and that is why they tended to
share the correct food with the experimenter on posttraining test 2, then they should give the experimenter the
food she likes even though this is also the food that the
infant likes. Conversely, if infants in the DDT condition of
Experiment 1 learned through the course of the session that
people should simply always be given opposite things to
their partner, then they will give the experimenter the food
that they themselves do not like on post-training test 2, even
though the experimenter demonstrates that she likes the
food that the infant also prefers. We maintained the exact
same procedure as in the DDT condition of Experiment 1,
including using an “unmatched” trial type for post-training
test 1, as the effect was observed only in post-training test 2
and so every aspect of the experimental session must remain
the same until that point.

Experiment 1: Results and Discussion
Of the initial 55 infants who participated in the
experiment, 15 passed the pre-test by giving the correct food
(p < .01, binomial, significantly fewer than chance), 34
infants shared the incorrect food, and 6 infants shared
nothing, replicating past findings (Repacholi & Gopnik,
1997). This confirms that, in general, infants below 18
months are inclined to share the item that they themselves
prefer, not the item for which another person has shown a
preference.
For the 40 infants who failed the pre-test and continued to
training, post-training test 1 performance was identical
across training conditions (DDT: 7/20 correct; N-DDT: 7/20
correct). Interestingly, performance differed by training
condition for post-training test 2 (DDT: 15/20 correct; NDDT: 7/20 correct, X2(1, N=40)=6.46, p=.01). Only the
performance on post-training test 2 for infants in the DDT
condition was significantly above chance (p=.04, binomial).
Our results suggest that the type of information provided
during training was crucial to infants’ learning about diverse
desires. When infants were provided with a large number of
instances indicating that two different people can like
different things, they appeared to learn to share the item that
they disliked but the experimenter preferred. However,
infants' performance did not improve when they saw
preferences that were not diverse: infants in the N-DDT
condition did not share the correct food with the
experimenter on any post-training tests. This suggests that

Experiment 2: Methods
Participants
Participants were 29 infants and, as in Experiment 1, only

581

children who failed to give the correct food on the initial
pre-test continued to training with 20 infants tested in the
full training procedure (mean age = 15.5 months; Range =
14.4 months to 17.0 months). An additional 10 infants were
tested but not included in data analyses due to failing to
complete the study because of fussiness (1), parental
interference (1) or refusing to share anything with the
experimenters on all test trials (8).

likely to share the opposite food than infants in Experiment
2, where they would have been incorrect in doing so.
Overall, most infants gave the experimenter the food that
she preferred (and that the infant also preferred) on posttraining test 2 (this was not significantly different from
chance using a binomial test). Though we would have
expected infants to share the correct food at higher than
chance levels in this “matched” trial, we suspect that the
non-significant result is due to a lack of statistical power
caused by having relatively few participants for binomial
statistics. In general, the percentage of infants offering the
correct, “matched” food on this trial is very similar to the
percentage of younger infants who did so in Repacholi &
Gopnik (1997) (65% vs. 72%, respectively).
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to eliminate the
possible explanation that participants in the Experiment 1
DDT condition only learned to give the experimenter the
opposite food of what they themselves wanted. Comparison
of Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that this was not the case, as
infants shared the food that they preferred in Experiment 2
and did not reflexively give the experimenter the opposite
food following training.

Materials
Food. The food was the same as in Experiment 1 except that
the wheel-shaped crackers were replaced with Animal
Crackers. This was done because we could no longer find
the wheel-shaped crackers.
Toys. The sets of toys were 4 hippos and 4 trucks, and 4
cats and 4 planes. Again, all of the toys within an individual
type were slightly different in shape and/or color.

Procedure and Design
The experimental procedure, counterbalancing and
randomization were identical to Experiment 1 DDT.
Predictions We predicted that infants would perform at
chance on post-training test 1, as they did in Experiment 1.
If infants give the experimenter the correct food on post-test
2 (the food that both the experimenter and the infant like),
then this will suggest that infants in Experiment 1 did not
simply learn to play a game of opposites but instead learned
that preferences are diverse.

General Discussion
Together, these findings show that infants younger than
18 months can learn about the subjectivity of preferences
when provided with appropriate training. Before infants
were exposed to any training, they provided an adult with
the food that they personally liked and not one the
experimenter liked, presumably because they incorrectly
believed that preferences are universal. However, when
provided with diverse preferences during training, infants
were able to reason correctly about another person’s
preferences, providing the experimenter with the food that
she liked. In contrast, the infants who only saw congruent
expressions of liking and disliking options did not learn to
reason correctly about another person’s preferences, and
continued to give the experimenter the food that they
themselves preferred, regardless of the experimenter’s
preference.
Experiment 2 helped to clarify these findings, providing
evidence that infants did not simply learn to always give the
experimenter the opposite of what they themselves desire.
Post-training test 2 of Experiment 2 was a “matched” trial,
meaning that the experimenter showed the infant that she
liked the same food as the infant. Because the majority of
infants gave the experimenter the food that the experimenter
(and the infant) liked, we can be confident that infants in
Experiment 1 learned that preferences are diverse. Taken
together, our results suggest that infants learned through
training about the diversity of desires, moving from a less to
a more sophisticated understanding of other’s preferences.
On a broader level, these findings suggest that young
children can learn from experience to make an important
advance in explicit reasoning about Theory of Mind.
One concern regarding these data is the relatively low
statistical power that results from our experimental design

Experiment 2: Results and Discussion
Again we replicated the findings from Repacholi &
Gopnik (1997), as 9/29 infants passed the pre-test (p =.06,
binomial, marginally significantly fewer than chance), 18
infants shared the incorrect food and 2 infants shared
nothing.
Six out of 20 infants were correct on post-training test 1
and 13 out of 20 were correct on post-training test 2, both
not significantly different from chance (p = .12 and p = .26,
respectively).
The critical comparison is between infants’ performance
on post-training test 2 in the Experiment 1 DDT condition
and in Experiment 2. This comparison addresses whether
infants in Experiment 1 simply learned to play a game of
opposites and would have shared the opposite food type to
their own preference regardless of what the experimenter
demonstrated on post-test 2. For this analysis, we coded
infants’ performance in terms of whether they gave the
experimenter the opposite food to what the infant preferred
(which is correct in Exp 1 DDT but incorrect in Exp 2). We
gave infants a score of 1 for sharing the opposite food and a
score of zero for sharing the same (non-opposite) food. This
coding resulted in a score of 7/20 for post-training test 2 in
Experiment 2 and 15/20 on post-training test 2 in the DDT
condition of Experiment 1. Using a Fisher’s Exact test, we
found that infants’ performance on these trials was
significantly different from one another, X2(1, N=40)=6.46,
p=.01, suggesting that infants in Experiment 1 were more

582

and the small sample size for each experiment. Although the
results in the Experiment 1 DDT condition were significant,
it will be prudent to replicate these findings. This replication
experiment is currently underway in the lab.
An interesting finding in these experiments is that the
participants performed identically during the pre-test and
post-training test 1, but performed significantly above
chance on post-training test 2 in Experiment 1. Both tests
occurred after training and we had not predicted this pattern
of results, so we now return to the question of why we only
saw improvement on post-training test 2.
One possible explanation for this improved performance
on post-training test 2 is that post-training test 1 might act as
another piece of evidence to train the infants to better
understand diverse preferences. That is, post-training test 1
gives infants yet another trial in which the experimenter
demonstrates that she likes the opposite food to the infant. It
is possible that this extra trial is what allows the infants to
learn that preferences are subjective. This possibility can be
examined by manipulating the number of training trials, to
include an additional trial before post-training test 1 on Day
1. Related to this, we can also examine what type of
evidence is most informative – evidence that involves firstperson experience such as training trial 2 and post-training
test 1, or training trials that involve observing two actors
display diverse preferences. By manipulating the number
and type of training trials across various conditions in future
experiments, we can answer these questions.
Another possible explanation for the improved
performance only on Day 2 is the role of memory
consolidation in sleep. Post-training test 2 occurs the
following day, whereas post-training test 1 occurs on the
same day as the training trials. Therefore, a potentially
critical difference between the two tests is sleep. Research
has shown that sleep is important for the consolidation of
memories, and improvements in children’s and infants’
learning is correlated with longer and more intense sleep
(Wilhelm, Prehn-Kristensen & Born, 2012). For example,
Hupbach, Gomez, Bootzin, and Nadel (2009) found that
when 15-month-old infants napped after they were exposed
to an artificial language, they were more likely to remember
the general grammatical pattern of that language 24 hours
later, compared to infants who did not nap. It is possible that
the infants in our experiment performed better on posttraining test 2 because they had slept. To address the sleep
hypothesis, one could conduct an experiment similar to
those here, except with the entire procedure occurring on the
same day. After infants complete post-training test 1, half of
the infants would take a nap and half would experience a
similar delay without taking a nap. Following this, all
infants would complete post-training test 2. If the infants
who napped perform better than those who do not, then this
would suggest that sleep consolidation is a crucial aspect of
their improved performance.

particular model of how children attribute preferences to
others, namely that appropriate training regarding the
diversity of desires could result in infants undergoing a
significant shift in conceptual development (Lucas et al.,
2014). We found that following exposure to different people
demonstrating divergent desires, infants were able to move
from a model of universal preferences to a model that
allows for the individualization of preferences. The success
of this training procedure more broadly shows that early
advances in Theory of Mind could be due to experience.
Acknowledgments
We thank Justine Hoch and Sophie Bridgers for an immense
amount of help with data collection and infant recruitment.
We also thank Elizabeth Attisano, Emily McIntosh, Meghan
McGrath, Julia Heunis, Christen Calsada, and Gina
Mandracchia for assistance with data collection. Thanks
also to the parents and infants for their participation.
References
Ekman, P., &. Friesen, W. (1975). Unmasking the face: A
guide to recognizing emotions from facial clues.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Fawcett, C., & Markson, L. (2010). Children reason about
shared preferences. Developmental Psychology, 46(2),
299-309.
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. (1992). Why the Child's Theory
of Mind Really Is a Theory. Mind & Language, 7, 145171.
Hupbach, A., Gomez, R. L., Bootzin, R. R., & Nadel, L.
(2009). Nap-dependent learning in infants. Developmental
Science, 12(6), 1007-1012.
Kushnir, T., Xu, F., & Wellman, H. M. (2010). Young
children use statistical sampling to infer the preferences of
other people. Psychological Science, 21(8), 1134-1140.
doi: 10.1177/0956797610376652
Lucas, C. G., Griffiths, T. L., Xu, F., Fawcett, C., Gopnik,
A., Kushnir, T., … Hu, J. (2014). The child as
econometrician: A rational model of preference
understanding in children. PLoS ONE, 9(3), e92160.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0092160
Ma, L., & Xu, F. (2011). Young children’s use of statistical
sampling evidence to infer the subjectivity of preferences.
Cognition, 120(3), 403-411
Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early reasoning
about desires: Evidence from 14- and 18-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 33(1), 12-21.
Wellman, H. M., & Woolley, J. D. (1990). From simple
desires to ordinary beliefs: The early development of
everyday psychology. Cognition, 35(3), 245-275.
Wilhelm, I., Prehn-Kristensen, A., & Born, J. (2012). Sleepdependent memory consolidation – What can be learnt
from
children?. Neuroscience
&
Biobehavioral
Reviews, 36(7), 1718-1728.

Conclusion
Research on children's desire-based reasoning has
persisted for decades. Here we examined a prediction from a

583

