Learning a Center-Embeddding Rule in an Artificial Grammar Learning Task
Won Jae Shin (wonjaeshin@alumni.nd.edu)
Kathleen M. Eberhard (keberhar@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA
Abstract
Beginning with Fitch and Hauser (2004), a number of studies
have used the Artificial Grammar Learning task to investigate
learning rules generating hierarchical structural relations
among sequences of elements that are characteristic of the
grammar of human languages. Studies that have examined the
learning of a center-embedding rule (AnBn rule) exemplified
by the sentence, The dogs the girl the boys like feeds bark
incessantly have provided mixed results. We present the
results of three experiments that demonstrate learning when
training occurs incrementally (e.g., Lai & Poletiek, 2011) and
requires feedback when testing with a grammaticality
judgment task. We also use a novel completion task, which
demonstrated learning both with and without feedback. In all
cases, not all participants learned the rule.
Keywords:
embedding

Artificial

grammar

learning

task,

center-

Introduction
Over the past decades, the Artificial Grammar Learning
(AGL) paradigm has been an important methodology for
investigating children and adults' ability to learn
grammatical rules that underlie the hierarchical embedding
of natural language. The AGL paradigm uses a set of rules
to generate meaningless sequences of letters, syllables, or
other elements. The sequences are presented to participants
during a training phase, and, then learning is tested typically
with novel sequences presented for grammaticality
judgments. The participants' ability to both accept
grammatical sequences and reject ungrammatical ones is
considered evidence of learning the underlying rule.
Following several previous AGL studies the, the current
experiments examined adults' learning a recursive centerembedding rule with the notation AnBn. It creates
hierarchical dependencies like in the sentence, The dogs the
girl the boys like feeds bark incessantly. AGL studies have
yielded mixed findings concerning adults' ability to learn the
AnBn rule when it requires what we refer to as subcategory
dependencies. That is, A and B refer to two different
categories and the superscripted numbers refer to dependent
A and B subcategories (e.g., the occurrence of an element
from subcategory A1 requires the occurrence of an element
from subcategory B1).
Fitch and Hauser (2004) were among the first to test
learning of the AnBn rule by humans as well as primates.
Their A and B categories were recordings of 16 different
CV syllables, with 8 A category syllables recorded in a
female voice and 8 B category syllables recorded in a male
voice. Grammatical sequences simply had an equal number
of A and B syllables (n = 2 or 3) and no repetitions of token

syllables. Participants listened to a recording of 30
grammatical sequences without any explicit learning
instructions. Afterwards, they performed a same-different
judgment task (without feedback) consisting of novel
grammatical sequences with n = 2, 3, or 4 (the latter testing
generalization). The ungrammatical sequences reversed the
order of the AB categories or had alternating AB syllables.
The human participants (but not the primates) readily
distinguished the grammatical and ungrammatical sequences
(89% correct) as well as judged 84% of grammatical
sequences with n = 4 as being "same".
However, a study by Perruchet and Rey (2005) failed to
find evidence that humans learn the AnBn rule when it
creates sequences with non-adjacent dependencies thereby
reflecting a hierarchical structure. Like Fitch and Hauser,
their A and B categories consisted of synthesized recordings
of 16 different CV syllables, with the 8 A category
recordings having higher pitch than the 8 B category
recordings. Unlike Fitch and Hauser, each A category
syllable was matched to a B category syllable creating AB
item dependencies. Thus, given a dependency between ba
(A category) and lo (B category), if ba occurred first in a
sequence then lo occurred last. The sequences had 1- or 2embeddings (n = 2 or 3), with no repetitions of token
syllables. Participants listened to 32 sequences during an
exposure period without explicit learning instructions.
Afterwards, they were given a same-different judgment task
(with no feedback) consisting of novel grammatical
sequences and ungrammatical sequences created by
scrambling the order of the B syllables (thereby violating
AB item dependencies). In addition, half of both the
grammatical and ungrammatical sequences had alternating
high-low pitch thereby violating the pitch pattern. The
results showed that the participants' same-different
responses were based on whether the test sequences' pitch
pattern was consistent with the exposure sequences and not
on whether the order of the B category syllables reflected
the center-embedded dependency.
A number of subsequent AGL studies with only human
participants have provided mixed evidence of learning the
AnBn rule (Bahlmann, Gunter, & Friederici, 2006;
Bahlmann, Schubotz, & Friederici, 2008; de Vries,
Monaghan, Knecht, & Zwitserlood, 2008; Lai & Poletiek,
2011). Most studies used the syllables shown in Table 1 in
which the A and B categories were distinguished by the
syllables' vowels and the three AB dependent subcategories
were based on the initial consonants.
Unlike Perruchet and Rey (2005) the subsequent studies
presented the AnBn sequences visually, with each syllable

2164

presented one at a time for a duration ranging from 300 ms
to 800 ms across studies and with an interstimulus interval
ranging from 0 ms to 200 ms. The studies also differ from
Perruchet and Rey (2005) in several other important ways:
(1) Participants were explicitly instructed to try to learn the
rule underlying the grammatical sequences, (2) the training
sequences were presented in a series of blocks each ending
with a grammaticality judgment test, and (3) participants
received feedback on their grammaticality judgments.
Although the subsequent studies differ from each other in
a number of ways, the mixed findings appear to be due to
two differences: the nature of the ungrammatical test
sequences and whether training was incremental. In the case
of the ungrammatical test sequences, as shown in Table 2,
the violation involved a subcategory dependency, in which a
B-category syllable was replaced with a syllable from
another subcategory (Bahlmann et al. 2006; Bahlmann et al.,
2008; Lai & Poletiek, 2011) and/or it involved scrambling
the order of the of the dependent B category syllables (de
Vries, et al., 2008; Perruchet & Rey, 2005). de Vries et al.
argued that scrambled sequences are necessary to test
participants' learning of the hierarchical center-embedding
structure because they contrast with grammatical sequences
specifically with respect to that structure. Ungrammatical
sequences with a subcategory dependency violation can be
rejected using a counting strategy, namely, for every
syllable in the first half of a sequence that begins with b-, d-,
or g-, there must be a syllable in the second half that begins
with p-, t-, or k- respectively. This strategy would correctly
reject the ungrammatical sequence bedegikopopu because
the de requires either to or tu in the last three syllables.
However, the strategy would incorrectly accept the
scrambled sequence bedegikopotu.
Table 1: Syllables representing the A and B categories
and subcategory dependencies in de Vries et al. (2008
Experiment 2), Bahlman et al. (2008), Lai & Poletiek
(2011), and Experiments 1-3.
A Category (-e, -i) B Category (-o, -u)
A-B Dependent Subcategories
A1 be, bi
B1 po, pu
2
A de, di
B2 to, tu
3
A ge, gi
B3 ko, ku
Of the subsequent studies using the same or similar
materials shown in Table 1, only de Vries et al. (2008) used
scrambled test sequences, and doing so showed no evidence
of learning the AnBn rule. Bahlman et al. (2008) as well as
Lai and Poletiek (2011) used test sequences with a
subcategory violation which were reliably distinguished
from grammatical sequences. In addition, unlike de Vries et
al., both Bahlman et al. (2008) and Lai and Poletiek (2011)
employed incremental training that began with 0-embedding
sequences. In fact, Lai and Poletiek found no evidence of
learning the AnBn rule with random training or with
incremental training that began with 1-embedding

sequences. Thus, learning the AnBn rule appears to require
first learning the subcategory dependencies, which is
facilitated by exclusive initial training with the 0-embedding
sequences. Once the subcategory dependencies are learned,
they provide a scaffolding for learning the structural
dependency (e.g., Elman, 1993). Learning the subcategory
dependencies is more difficult with random training,
especially if it does not include 0-embedding sequences, as
in the case of de Vries et al. (2008). The aim of Experiment
1 was to verify the importance of incremental training and
presented scrambled ungrammatical test sequences.
Table 2: Examples of grammatical & ungrammatical test
sequences with 0-, 1-, or 2-embedding levels (LVL)
presented in various studies. Ungrammatical sequences with
a subcategory violation were used in Bahlmann et al. (2008)
and Lai & Poletiek (2001). Scrambled sequences were used
in de Vries et al. (2008) and Experiment 1. Violations are
indicated by bold.

LVL
0
1
2

Grammatical
A1B1 bepo
A 1A 3B 3B 1
begekupu
A 1A 2A 3B 3B 2B 1
bedigikotopu

Ungrammatical
Subcategory Violation
A1B3 beko
Subcategory
Violation
Scrambled
A 1A 3B 3B 2
A 1A 3B 1B 3
bigikotu
bigipuko
A 1A 2A 3B 3B 1B 1 A 1A 2A 3B 3B 1B 2
bedegikopopu
bedegikopotu

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was a replication of Lai and Poletiek's (2011)
incremental and random training conditions, each consisting
of 12 blocks. For both training conditions, the
grammaticality judgment task at the end of each block
included either Lai and Poletiek's ungrammatical test
sequences with a subcategory violation or scrambled
ungrammatical test sequences. If learning occurs in the
Incremental condition with scrambled test sequences then it
would provide evidence that participants learned the AnBn
rule rather than a counting strategy. A final test block with
3- and 4-embedding sequences also was presented to assess
participants' ability to generalize the rule (e.g., Fitch &
Friederici, 2012). Incremental training that begins
exclusively with the 0-embedding level should facilitate
learning the AB subcategory dependencies, which, in turn,
should enable learning the AnBn rule. Once the rule is
learned, there should be consistently high accuracy on the
grammaticality judgment task at the end of each block.
Therefore, we examined the individual participants'
performance on the grammaticality judgment task across the
blocks to assess whether those who learned the AB
subcategory dependencies also subsequently learned the
AnBn rule. We also had participants provide written
descriptions of the rule at the end of the experiment.

2165

Method
Participants Sixty-four undergraduate students enrolled in
Psychology courses participated and received course credit.
All were native English speakers.
Materials and Design The materials consisted of the six A
Category and six B Category syllables, and subcategory
dependencies shown in Table 1. The 144 training sequences
created from the syllables by Lai and Poletiek (2011) were
used and consisted of an equal number of 0-, 1-, and 2embedding sequences, with two, four, and six syllables,
respectively. Across the entire training set, each syllable
occurred with an equal frequency.
The training sequences were presented in 12 blocks with
12 sequences per block. In the Incremental training
condition, the 0-, 1-, and 2-embedding sequences were
presented in three stages each with four blocks. In the
Random training condition, each block had an equal number
of 0-, 1-, and 2-embedding sequences in a random order.
In both the Incremental and Random training conditions,
each block ended with a test block. The test blocks consisted
of 12 sequences, four for each level of embedding (two
grammatical and two ungrammatical). The grammatical
sequences were novel except for the 0-embedding sequences
because all possible combinations were presented during
training. The type of training condition was crossed with
type of ungrammatical test sequence (subcategory violation
or scrambled) yielding four conditions. The same
grammatical test sequences were presented in all four
conditions. The ungrammatical sequences in the
subcategory violation condition were the same as Lai and
Poletiek's (2011). Their 0-embedding ungrammatical
sequences with a B subcategory violation were also
presented in the Scrambled test condition. However, the
ungrammatical 1- and 2-embedding test sequences were
created by correcting the subcategory dependency violation
in Lai and Poletiek's ungrammatical sequences and then
reversing the order of the last two B category syllables (see
Table 2).
The final generalization test block, consisted of 12 3embedding and 12 4-embedding sequences, half of which
were ungrammatical. The longer sequences necessitated
having two A-category syllables from the same subcategory;
however, there were no repetitions of the same token. The
ungrammatical test sequences representing the Subcategory
Violation and the Scrambled conditions were created in the
same manner as the shorter ungrammatical test sequences
representing these conditions.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the four experimental conditions and tested individually in a
small room. They sat in front of a monitor and a keyboard
with two keys labeled "Y" and "N". They were told that they
would see sequences of syllables that were generated by a
rule and that their task was to try to learn the rule. They
were informed that the sequences would be presented in 12
training blocks each ending with a test block presenting

sequences that were generated by the rule and sequences
that were not. They were instructed to press the "Y" or "N"
key after each test sequence to indicate whether it was
generated by the rule.
As in Lai and Poletiek's (2011) experiment, each training
sequence was preceded by a fixation cross displayed for 500
ms in the center of the computer screen. Then each syllable
of a sequence was displayed one at a time in the center of
the screen for 800 ms with no delay between syllables. The
last syllable was immediately followed by the fixation cross.
Each training block ended with a message instructing the
participant to press the spacebar to begin the test block. The
test sequences were presented in the same manner as the
training sequences, except that the last syllable of a
sequence was followed by the question "Does the sequence
conform to the rule that generated the training sequences?"
Following the participants' "Y" or "N" key response,
feedback was presented in the form of "Correct" or
"Incorrect" displayed for 500 ms.
The test blocks ended with a message instructing the
participant to press the spacebar to begin the next training
block, or in the case of the last test block, a message
instructing the participant to press the spacebar to begin a
final test block (the generalization test). After the
experiment, the participants completed a survey that asked
them to describe the rule that generated the training
sequences. The survey also included 10-point rating scales
for indicating their level of effort and questions about
handedness and left-familial handedness. The entire
experimental session lasted about 30 minutes.

Results and Discussion
The accuracy of each participant's responses to the
grammatical and ungrammatical test sequences was
measured by calculating A' using Stanislaw and Todorov's
(1999) equation. A' is a nonparametric version of d' that is
calculated from the hit and false alarm rates to take into
account a "yes" or "no" response bias. Unlike d', A' can be
calculated when a participant's hit or false alarm rates are 1
or 0. An A' value of 1.0 corresponds to perfect accuracy and
a value of 0.5 corresponds to chance.
Mean A' values in the four conditions were calculated
from the participants' responses to all 168 test and
generalization sequences. The mean A' values in the two
Incremental training conditions were .66 (Subcategory
Violation) and .67 (Scrambled) and were higher than the
mean A' in the two Random training conditions, which were
.56 (Subcategory Violation) and .55 (Scrambled). The mean
A' values were submitted to a 2X2 randomized ANOVA
with type of ungrammatical sequences (Subcategory
Violation or Scrambled) and type of Training (Incremental
or Random) as between-subjects variables. Only the main
effect of Training was significant (F(1,60)= 10.98),
reflecting higher accuracy in the Incremental condition than
in the Random condition. One-sample t-tests comparing the
participants' overall A' against the chance value of 0.50 were
significant in all conditions for the 0-embedding sequences

2166

but the overall A' values for the 1- and 2-embedding
sequences were significantly greater than chance only in the
Incremental conditions (A' range .61 - .65), consistent with
Lai and Poletiek's original findings.
The similar results in the two Incremental conditions
provides evidence that participants learned the AnBn rule
rather than a counting strategy. Additional evidence comes
from the Incremental conditions' higher A' for the 3- and 4embedding sequences in the final generalization test. Both
A' values in the Scrambled condition were significantly
greater than chance (A'= .72, t(15)= 3.94 for 3-embedding
and A'= .65, t(15)= 2.23 for 4-embedding). Only the A' for
the 3-embedding sequences was above chance in the
Subcategory Violation condition (A'= .74, t(15)= 4.92, and
A'= .54, t< 1 for 4-embedding). The mean A' for the
generalization sequences in the two Random conditions
ranged from .55 to .58 and were not greater than chance.
(a)
1.0

Mean A'

0.8

0-LVL
1-LVL
2-LVL
3-LVL
4-LVL

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
1.0

(b)

0.8
Mean A'

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Block
Figure 1: Mean A' for each level of embedding (LVL) in
each test block averaged over participants in the Incremental
condition in Experiment 1. Figure (a) means of the 9
participants who achieved a A' =1.00 for the 0-embedding
items by block 6, and (b) the other 23 participants' means.
None of the participants in the Random conditions
accurately described the rule. Six participants in the
Incremental conditions accurately described the rule and
tthree others provided the correct AB subcategory
dependencies, though they did not elaborate on the
embedding relation. Four of these participants were in the
Incremental-Subcategory Violation condition and five were
in the Incremental-Scrambled condition. All nine had an A'
greater than .90 for the 24 test sequences in the last three
blocks, and all had an A' greater than .80 for the 24
generalization sequences. Figure 1a shows the mean A' for

these nine participants for each test block and for each level
of embedding. These participants' had a mean A' = 1.00 for
the 0-embedding sequences by the 6th block and mean A' =
.95 for the 1- and 2-embedding sequence by the 9th block,
providing evidence that learning the AB subcategory
dependencies facilitated learning the AnBn rule. For
comparison, Figure 1b shows the mean A' values for the
other 23 participants in the Incremental conditions. There
mean A' for the 0-embedding test sequences peaked at .67 in
block 3.

Experiment 2
A limitation of the AGL paradigm for investigating the
learning of the AnBn rule is that much of the learning may
occur in the test blocks when both positive and negative
examples of the rule are presented with feedback on the
participants' judgment. In addition, the sequential
presentation of individual syllables of the test sequences
required participants to retain them in working memory to
make judgments. Thus, inaccurate judgments may be due in
part to memory errors. Experiments 2 and 3 addressed these
limitations by replacing the grammaticality judgment test
with a production test that required participants to provide
completions to sequences consisting of just the A-category
syllables. Specifically, test sequences consisting of one,
two, or three A-category syllables representing the first half
of sequences with 0-, 1-, or 2-embeddings, respectively,
were displayed with underscores indicating the number of
B-category syllables that were to be entered for a
completion response. Participants entered their completions
by pressing keys that were labeled with the complete set of
A- and B-category syllables, even though correct responses
required only B-category syllables. The A-category
syllables in the 1- and 2-embedding test items were from
different subcategories. Thus, correct completions required
providing B syllables from the dependent subcategories and
in the correct order. Like Experiment 1, the final test block
included 3- and 4-embedding items to assess generalization
of the rule. Each test sequence was displayed until the
participant finished entering a completion for it, thereby
eliminating the need to maintain the sequence in memory.
The participants also were asked to describe the rule at the
end of the experiment. The training blocks were identical to
the Incremental conditions in Experiment 1.

Method
Participants Sixteen undergraduate students enrolled in
Psychology courses participated and received course credit
in exchange. All were native English speakers.
Materials and Design The training materials were identical
to Experiment 1. However, the testing materials were
different. Each test block had 12 sequences, four with one,
two, and three A category syllables, corresponding to the
first half of 0-, 1-, and 2-embedding sequences, respectively.
The final test block had 24 additional sequences, 12 with
four A category syllables and 12 with five A category

2167

syllables, testing generalization to 3- and 4-embeddings,
respectively. The test sequences representing 1- and 2embeddings contained A-category syllables from different
subcategories (e.g., gibide). The test sequences in the final
block representing the 3- and 4-embeddings consisted of at
least one A syllable from each subcategory, but no more
than two from the same subcategory, which were different
tokens (e.g., bedegegibi). Each A-category syllable occurred
equally frequently across the entire set of test sequences.
The organization and order of presentation of the training
and testing materials were identical to Experiment 1's
Incremental-Scrambled condition.

block and 1.00 by the 7th block. The decrease in their Match
proportions for the 1- and 2-embedding items coincides with
an increase in their Correct proportions, reflecting their
learning the correct ordering of the B syllables. In contrast,
Figure 2b shows that the other 10 participants' mean Match
proportion for 0-embedding items peaked at .67 in the 4th
block (the last 0-embedding training block) and no increase
in their mean Correct proportions for the 1- and 2embeddings across any blocks.

1.0
0.8

Procedure The same procedure as Experiment 1 was used
except for the test at the end of each block. Participants
were told that it was a sequence-completion task in which
the first half of syllable sequences would be presented, and
they were to type the second half by selecting from the
labeled keys on the keyboard. On each test trial, a whole test
sequence was displayed in the center of the screen with
underscores indicating the number of syllables that were to
be typed for a completion (e.g., de __, bidige __ __ __). The
test sequence remained visible until the participant typed the
required number of syllables by pressing labeled keys on the
keyboard and the return key after the last syllable. Then,
feedback was displayed for 500 ms. The same survey as
Experiment 1 was given at the end of the experiment, which
asked participants to describe the rule.
Scoring Completions to 0-embedding test items were
scored as Match if they had a correct B subcategory
syllable. Completions to the 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-embedding
items were scored as Correct if both the dependent B
subcategory syllables and their order were correct. They
were scored as Match if only the dependent B subcategory
syllables were correct.

Results and Discussion
For each participant, the proportion of Match and Correct
completions were calculated for the 0- 1-, and 2-embedding
sequences over the four test blocks corresponding to the
three incremental training stages. A 3X2 repeated measures
ANOVA on the Correct proportions with Stage and
Embedding (1 or 2) as factors yielded a significant main
effect of Stage (F(2,30)= 10.50, p< .001), reflecting an
increase in the Correct proportions across each stage (.10,
.30, and .45). Neither the main effect of Embedding nor the
interaction was significant (Fs< 1.00).
Consistent with Experiment 1, the individual participants'
performance (Figure 2) showed that learning the AnBn rule
depended on learning the AB subcategory dependencies. Six
participants' Correct proportions for 1- and 2-embedding
items in the last three test blocks was above .80 as well as
their Correct proportions for the 3- and 4-embedding
generalization items. Five accurately described the AnBn
rule. Figure 2a shows that these 6 participants' mean Match
proportion for the 0-embedding items was .92 by the 3rd

(a)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1
1.0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 Gen
Correct (1-&2-LVL)
Match (1-&2-LVL)
Match (0-LVL)
Correct (3-&4-LVL)
Match (3-&4-LVL)

(b)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1

2

3

4

5

6 7 8
Block

9 10 11 12 Gen

Figure 2: Mean proportions of Correct completions (correct
B syllable dependency & order) and Match completions
(correct B syllable dependency only) in each test block and
for each embedding level (LVL) in Experiment 2. Figure (a)
mean proportions of the 6 participants who achieved a 0LVL Match proportion of 1.00, and (b) mean proportions
for the other 10 participants.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 investigated the effect of feedback in the
test blocks on learning the AnBn rule by eliminating it. There
were two conditions that contrasted the type of test:
grammaticality judgment (identical to Experiment 1's
Incremental-Scrambled condition) or completion (identical
to Experiment 2).

Method
Participants The participants were 32 students enrolled in
Psychology courses who received a course credit. All were
native speakers of English.
Materials and Design The training and test sequences for
the Grammaticality Judgment condition were the same as in

2168

Experiment 1's Incremental-Scrambled condition. The
training and test sequences for the Completion condition
was the same as in Experiment 2.
Procedure The procedure for the Grammaticality Judgment
condition was the same as Experiment 1's IncrementalScrambled condition, except that participants' response to
the test sequences was followed by a 500 ms blank screen
instead of feedback. Likewise, the procedure for the
Completion condition was the same as Experiment 2 except
there was a 500 ms delay after the participant pressed the
return/enter key.

Results and Discussion
Grammaticality Judgment Condition In contrast to
Experiment 1, no learning of the AnBn rule occurred. The
overall mean A' for 0-embedding test sequences was greater
than chance (t(15) = 2.41, p< .05, two-tailed), but not the
mean A' for the 1- and 2-embedding test sequences nor the
3- and 4- embedding generalization sequences (t < 1.0). The
highest mean A' (.64) was for the 0-embedding test
sequences in the first training stage, which decreased to
chance level in the subsequent two stages. One participant
had an A' > .80 for the 1- and 2-embedding test sequences in
the last 3 blocks and for the generalization sequences, but
did not accurately describe the rule.
Completion Task Condition The participants' Correct
proportions were analyzed with a 3X2 repeated measures
ANOVA with Stage and Embedding (1 or 2) as withinsubject factors. There was a main effect of Stage (F(2,30)=
5.70, p= .008), with higher proportions in stage 3 (.29) than
stages 1 and 2 (.03 and .23, respectively). Neither the main
effect of Embedding nor the interaction was significant (Fs<
1). Four participants (25%) showed evidence of learning the
AnBn rule, with a mean Correct proportion of .97 for the 1and 2-embedding items in the last three blocks and for the 3and 4-embedding generalization items. They also accurately
described the rule. Similar to the 6 participants in
Experiment 2, their average Match proportion for the 0embedding items was 1.00 by the 7th block at which point
there mean Correct proportion for the 1- and 2-embeddings
was .96.

General Discussion
The current set of experiments provides additional
support for Lai and Poletiek's (2011) finding that learning
the AnBn rule in AGL studies is facilitated by incremental
training that begins with 0-embedding sequences, which
support learning the AB subcategory dependencies. This
learning, in turn, allows individuals to determine the centerembedding structure. The current study also eliminated the
use of a counting strategy by presenting scrambled
sequences as ungrammatical items.
Presenting a grammaticality judgment task at the end of
each training block allows one to track the course of
learning, but it also is a primary source of the learning when

feedback is provided. When feedback is eliminated, as in
Experiment 3, no learning of the AnBn rule occurred despite
incremental training.
Experiment 2 and 3's completion tasks revealed that once
the AB subcategory dependencies were learned, individuals
hypothesized a symmetrical structural rule (i.e., crossdependency, as in A1A2B1B2) as reflected in an increase in
their Match proportions for the 1- and 2- embeddings during
the first training stage. Receiving feedback on the
completion responses in Experiment 2 facilitated learning
the correct center-embedding structure. However, 25% of
the participants in Experiment 3 managed to learn this
structure without feedback.
Across the 3 experiments, the percentage of participants
who showed evidence of learning the rule ranged from 25%
to 38%, indicating individual differences in explicitly
learning structural dependencies. The differences may be
related to those observed in implicit statistical learning (e.g.,
Kaufman et al., 2010).
In conclusion the current study provides additional
evidence for the conditions that support learning the abstract
hierarchical structural relations generated by a centerembedding rule.

References
Bahlmann, J., Gunter, T. & Friederici, A. (2006).
Hierarchical & linear sequence processing: An
electrophysiological exploration of two different grammar
types. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1829-1842.
Bahlmann, J., Schubotz, R., & Friederici, A. (2008).
Hierarchical artificial grammar processing engages
Broca's area. Neuroimage, 42, 525-534.
Elman, J. (1993). Learning & development in neural
networks: The importance of starting small. Cognition,
48, 71-99.
Fitch, W. & Hauser, M. (2004). Computational constraints
on syntactic processing in a nonhuman primate. Science,
303, 377-380.
Fitch, W. & Friederici, A. (2012). Artificial grammar
learning meets formal language theory: an overview. Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. B, 367, 1933-1955.
Kaufman, S., et al. (2010). Implicit learning as an ability.
Cognition, 116, 321-340.
Lai, J., & Poletiek, F. (2011). The impact of adjacentdependencies & staged-input on the learnability of centerembedded hierarchical structures. Cognition, 118, 265273.
Perruchet, P., & Rey, A. (2005). Does mastery of centerembedded linguistic structures distinguish humans from
nonhuman primates? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12,
307-313.
de Vries, M., Monaghan, P., Knecht, S., & Zwitserlood, P.
(2008). Syntactic structure & artificial grammar learning:
The learnability of embedded hierarchical structures.
Cognition, 107, 763-774.

2169

