Let’s Get Physical: Thinking with Things in Architectural Design
Daniel Smithwick (djs2@mit.edu)
Department of Architecture / International Design Center
265 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

David Kirsh (kirsh@ucsd.edu)
Cognitive Science
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

Abstract
To study the cognitive role that tangible objects play in design
thinking, we gave 17 architects and novice students a set of
blocks and asked them to design their dream house. Although
the blocks seem simple they are filled with perceptual
surprises. We regard manipulating blocks as a form of
physical thinking because through interaction designers
increase the dimensionality of their design space. This
happens because a) perceptual ambiguity leads to multiple
semantics - multiple ways of identifying what shapes are out
there, and b) kinesthetic and other forms of non-visual
interaction enables designers to feel inertia, mass, force and
gravity and thereby encounter blocks and their relations in
additional ways. The effects of tangibility and enactive forms
of perception is that the design space expands, often leading
architects to more divergent thinking. Physical interaction
broadens the basis of creativity.
Keywords: multimodal interaction; extended cognition;
architectural design; blocks world; design thinking; creativity

Introduction
Much research has been done on how designers think by
sketching on paper or tablet (Suwa and Tversky, 1997;
Bilda and Demirkan, 2003); considerably less has been done
on how they think with physical objects (Kim and Maher
2008; Maher et al, 2014), either when making a model of a
nearly completed structure or in the early conceptual phases
of design. Our goal in this qualitative study is to understand
how architects make use of physical blocks to arrive at an
early conception of a building design. Seventeen subjects
were positioned in front of a 4’ x 4’ wooden model of a
generic building site (Figure 1). Their task was to design
their dream house from 3D printed blocks scattered on the
site. We report here on how the blocks were used to
facilitate creative design thinking. We found trends that
suggest more experienced designers exhibit physical
behaviors that distinguish them from novices. In addition,
we argue that these interactive strategies enable forms of
thought that would be hard if not impossible to reach
otherwise.

wood, plastic, and rockite (a casting material) to construct
complex assemblies by performing operations like folding,
joining, pouring, cutting, and layering using tools as
different as knives, laser cutters, hammers, jigs, clamps, and
3D printers. In our study we abstract from the making
process and reduce architectural model making to picking
and placing physical blocks. This limits the range of
possible forms but highlights the nature of tangible
interaction as designers move blocks against each other,
drag them over the site, build assemblies and so on.
When architects make physical models – especially when
exploring design possibilities – we believe they are literally
thinking with those objects. They are not just manipulating
objects and inducing internal representations, as if only by
working with those inner elements can we think. Our view,
like Andy Clark’s (2013), is that cognition extends beyond
the brain to include physical manipulations and
transformations. Sometimes brains drive thinking forward
and sometimes the events happening around us drive
thinking forward. If our coupling is tight enough the
simplest explanation of why thought unfolds as it does will
inevitably include our manipulation of epistemically

Background
Architects make many types of physical models including
massing models, concept models, detail models, section
models and many more. They use materials like paper,
Figure 1: Architectural model-making as block assembly

2236

charged objects. Such manipulations have been called
epistemic to differentiate them from actions that are
performed on things that satisfy pragmatic goals such as
eating, running from danger, driving to work, etc. (Kirsh
Maglio, 1994). Our work here is a baby step toward
understanding how a few blocks can be used to think
creatively about architectural design solutions.

Design Task Experiment Setup
In Figure 2 we show the site on which the subjects were to
build their structure and the blocks provided. Subjects were
given up to 15 minutes to complete the task of designing
their dream house with the blocks. They were informed that
they could use as many or as few of the blocks provided,
and as much or as little of the site as needed. Nothing
specific was said about what would constitute a completed
structure, or how the product would be judged, however, we
informed each subject at the beginning that they were to
describe their design verbally at the end of the task.

Why Parallelepiped Blocks
Instead of using simple cube shaped blocks, we gave the
subjects parallelepipeds. These shapes are close enough to
cubes to look familiar and be useful in a construction task,
but different enough to offer surprises and allow for a
variety of spatial relationships, an important aspect of
architectural design. This is achieved through the
asymmetrical nature of the parallelepiped. When a
parallelepiped is rotated 90 degrees, or when a subject
repositions him or herself, the shapes that are in view are all
different. This contrasts with a cube, where because of its 48
symmetries, each 90° rotation, whether in the X, Y, Z or
diagonal axes, yields the same shapes and appearance
(Figure 3).

Figure 3: Shading changes unpredictably along with face
shapes on the parallelepiped under rotations while it remains
constant on the cube under the same rotations.

Practice Phase with the Blocks
Before the dream house design task subjects were given an
opportunity to familiarize themselves with the blocks
through a series of manipulation tasks (See Figure 4). It
was noteworthy that even expert subjects did not find these
tasks easy, often taking several minutes and over 25% not
completing the task correctly.

Figure 2: The design task site and block type counts

Figure 4: Practice tasks for familiarizing the subjects
with the blocks.

2237

however we have not broken down the coding scheme
further.

Method
We used video-based protocol analysis and concurrent voice
out loud methods to codify the subjects’ interactions over
time and relate them to general thoughts expressed by the
subjects as they completed the task. Such methods are used
in design research to identify different types of expertise; to
establish criteria for measuring creativity; and to provide
empirical support for developing new design tools (Gero
and McNeill, 1998). Each video was watched and manually
coded following the completion of all of the experiments.

Table 1: Coding scheme for physical interactions in the
dream house design task.
Inspectional
Interactions
Ins.B
Manipulates
block(s) in space

Participants 6 experts, 6 novice students, and 5 nonarchitecture students were selected for participation. The
expert group included 4 men and 2 women with a mean age
of 36. All experts were professionally trained practicing
architects with 4-8 years of teaching experience at the
college and graduate level.
The novices were either sophomores or juniors all
enrolled in the same architectural design department. The
novice group included 5 women and 1 man with a mean age
of 20.
The non-architectural design students were all
undergraduates enrolled at the same university as the novice
students, however they were from different departments.
This group included 2 women and 3 men with a mean age of
20.
Coding Scheme As this is a novel analysis of the physical
interactions exhibited by architectural designers in early
stage design, a vital first step is to establish a coding scheme
that captures behaviors at a broad enough level to be
applicable to related research and future studies, and yet
specific enough to identify behaviors and strategies unique
to architectural design. Our scheme in Table 1 creates a
framework that establishes ten interaction types that occur
between different parts of the body (hands, head, and full
body), the blocks, and the site. The illustrations in Figure 5
convey three different interactions visually.
The ten interaction types are grouped within three
categories: inspectional, exploratory, and transitional.
Inspectional interactions do not directly support the
assembly of a configuration of blocks. For example, as seen
in Figure 5A, Ins.B, is an interaction type in which the
subject picks up a block off the surface of the site and
manipulates it in space. In this case, the subject is focused
only on the block’s properties such as its shape, shading, or
weight. This can be distinguished from an exploratory
interaction such as Ex.B.H (Figure 5B) in which the subject
is building a configuration of blocks on the site while also
reorienting his head. In this situation, relationships between
multiple blocks and the site are being explored. Both of
these categories can be distinguished from transitional
interactions. For example, with Tran.B the subject is
holding a block but is neither constructing a configuration
nor inspecting it through manipulation (Figure 5C). Rather
he may be looking for what to do next with the block in
hand. Variations within the interaction types may exist

Ins.H
Reorients
head in relation to
site
Ins.FB
Repositions full
body in relation to
site

Exploratory
Interactions

Transitional
Interactions

Exp.B.site
Organizes blocks
in relation to site

Trans.B
Holding block(s)
between moves

Exp.BB.site
Manipulates
blocks in relation
to each other on
site
Exp.BH
Manipulates
blocks on site
while reorients
head
Exp.B.FB
Manipulates
blocks on site
while repositions
full body

Trans.H
Reorients head
while holding
block(s)
Trans.F.Bo
Repositions full
body while holding
block(s)

Figure 5: Illustrations of interaction types from the coding
scheme. (A) Ins.B subject manipulates block in space; (B)
Ex.B.H subject manipulates blocks on site while reorienting
head; and (C) Tran.B subject holds blocks between moves.

2238

Initial Results
We cannot make statistical claims from our small sample
size; however, we can present some qualitative findings that
suggest differences in how experts and novices approached
the dream house design task. Figure 6 includes renderings of
the final design solutions produced by three experts, three
novices, and three non-architecture students.
For example, one novice designer described her process
as one of finding blocks to represent typical house-hold
features: “I’m using this [block] as the entrance…and I’m
going to use these [blocks] as the grass and flowers…and
these [wireframe blocks] will be windows” (See 1-N in
Figure 6).

Table 2: Interaction times for a novice and an expert. Not all
interaction types are shown so total will not equal 100%.
Ins.B

Ins.H

Ex.BB.site

Ex.BH

Novice 1 - N
(% of total
time)

16

0

62

8

Expert 9-E
(% of total
time)

2

17

47

26

time spent interacting during the dream house task. What is
interesting to note is the difference between time spent on
interactions that either directly support the assembly of a
configuration or involve inspection of a single block vs.
time spent on interactions that may provide multiple
viewpoints such as Ins.H and Ex.BH.

Discussion: Multiple Semantics

Figure 6: Subset of final solutions for dream house design
task. E=expert; N=novice; O=non-designer
Experienced architects had a slightly different approach.
Experts commented on the effect of moving shapes around
to explore relationships between multiple blocks and the
site. For example, one expert remarked, “I didn’t
intermingle the blocks because I like the way the red ones fit
together. It’s more controlled for me. I still really like the
ability to make a single figure that has a lot of
interior/exterior spaces. I can’t go through it and say what’s
my bedroom, what’s my living room…but as a plain figure I
like it and can imagine it occupied in many ways” (See 9-E
in Figure 6).
The key difference is the generative approach taken by
the expert and the representational approach taken by the
novice architecture student. Manipulation for the expert is
more like visual-kinesthetic experimentation rather than
executing a preconceived idea. This difference may also be
highlighted in the interaction protocols of the novice and
expert discussed above. Table 2 shows results of their time
spent on different interaction types as a percentage of total

Advanced architects use terms such as negative space,
symmetry, groupings, inside-outside relations, figureground, and more to characterize how they visually see
connections between shapes. Because of this large variety of
ways of seeing, they inevitably resort to sketches and
physical models to help them envisage and constrain what a
structure will look like from different vantage points, and
how inhabitants engaged in different types of activities will
move in and around a space, seeing it this way and that.
This process of envisioning through interacting with
models is central to architectural thinking. Many of the tools
that architects use exist primarily to help them see and
understand the spatial, perceptual and functional properties
of shapes. These stimulate ideas and reveal possibilities.
When a visualization supports interaction – i.e. where it
is possible to change viewing angle, or zoom up close, or
put more blocks on site – more things can be seen and so
there are more opportunities for discovery (Pike et al, 2009).
Our study supports this claim as we found that our expert
subjects moved themselves and blocks frequently to see
possibilities and to pick up design ideas.
One provocative explanation of the power of physical
exploration is that it facilitates perceptual plurality.
According to Stiny (2006) every shape is relentlessly
ambiguous. A cube sitting motionlessly on a surface that is
seen as a cube one moment the next may be seen as
something with 3 visible square faces; looking more closely
the faces may be seen as trapezoidal, or even as shapes
containing triangles. We are free to change what we see
almost at will. See Figure 7. Motive, interest, attention
and nuance leads to seeings of all sorts. The psychological
basis for such differences in phenomenal experience
presumably lies in saccadic change, altered expectations,
and on-going thoughts. Regardless of cause, though, the
implication is that what is there to be seen is not driven by a
single semantics. There are as many versions of what is
there as there are ways of seeing. According to

2239

Goodman, “There are many ways the world is, each true
description captures one of them” (1960).
One way to understand this diversity of appearances is to
think of blocks world as supporting indefinitely many
semantics. A semantics maps syntactical elements onto an
interpretation. In one semantics, the focus may be the 2D
shapes visible from volumes. In another, vertices may be an
entity that carries meaning. In architectural massing
models the structure in its broadest strokes is the focus.
Blocks already are representations at the massing level
but when put together they can merge to form a new mass.
So there is a massing semantics. In yet other semantics, the
elements that are attended to and assigned interpretation
may be the lines and planes between structures – a
negative space semantics. The power of multiple
semantics is that the same collection of stuff on a table
may be perceived and interpreted multiply, thereby
throwing up hints that are hard to anticipate. It also suggests
that accounts of creativity that rely only on heuristic or even
stochastic search in a design space may miss the wildcard
that comes with perceptual richness and unlimited
ambiguity. Perceptual diversity means we can change the
search space, blend it, and redefine it.

Figure 7: Shapes are relentlessly ambiguous. What is Shape
composed of? Is it 3 X’s (A); 3 clipped hexagons (B); or 1
triangle and 3 small V’s (C)? (Adapted from Stiny, 2006).

Value of Multimodal Interaction
Another value of physically working with blocks is that we
can
probe emerging
structures
tactilely
and
kinesthetically. The object of visual exploration is the
visible; the object of manual exploration is the tangible and
movable. Sometimes these complement each other. For
instance, when playing with blocks it is natural to bring two
faces together and translate one over the other. When the
edges meet it is natural to consider rotating them as if on
hinges. We might spin a block on its vertex on the surface of
another. Each of these physical operations has a nice
counterpart in the formal theory of shapes and volumes
(Stiny, 1980). We can see these relations visually and so we
might not need the benefits of touching our models to
wonder whether they might give us design ideas, though the
complementarity is helpful.
But sometimes it may be easier to stumble on generative
ideas by working with things physically. Consider limits. A
standard heuristic in solving problems is to examine the
behavior of a system at its limits. When we make blocks
touch as completely as they can, or when they touch only on
an edge or a point, we are exploring limits. When we start

with two blocks behaving as if hinged on a shared edge and
then we rotate them around that edge from one extreme to
the other – like a door opening wide and closing shut – we
are exploring limits. Exploring forces in the world naturally
leads one to explore limits. Keep pushing until you can’t
anymore. At first this may seem just a vision
complementary action. But such a world highlights
compliance and inertia, and compliance and inertia are not
visual concepts.
Accordingly, they may give rise to thoughts we might not
consider when thinking visually (Martin and Schwartz,
2005). For instance, when a block becomes unstable there is
a discontinuity that is immediately felt. Given the
interaction between shape, center of mass, and world, these
discontinuities—which may be visually beautiful because
we may sense a tension—are nonetheless virtually
impossible to locate visually. We need to find them
haptically first and then we see them.

The Role of Mediating Structures in Thought
Playing with blocks is about working with external objects
that can mediate thought. For Vygotsky the “rational,
intentional conveying of experience and thought to others
requires a mediating system, the prototype of which is
human speech” (Vygotsky, 1962, p. 6). Vygotsky also held
that “works of art; writing; schemas; diagrams; maps and
mechanical drawings” (Vygotsky, 1981, p. 137) are
semiotic systems that can mediate thought too. What is used
outside can be internalized for use inside. Hence visual
mental images in addition to auditory images can mediate
inner thought. Yet why stop there? Why not talk about
physical objects, such as blocks or shapes as mediators in
spatial or manipulative cognition? Presumably these too
give rise to inner kinesthetic mediators that function when
we are thinking about spatial and manipulative activities.
Our conjecture is Vygotskian in spirit with a distributed
twist: when people work with an object mechanically they
operate as a joint system to cognitively probe a domain.
Blocks are tools of thought, much like writing and working
with maps are tools, but blocks are absorbed into the bodies
of their users so that a) the block deforms the user’s body
schema, (Kirsh, 2013) and b) body and block become
as cognitively active as gesture. If humans can think with
gesture they can think with blocks or many of the other
objects they might hold.

Conclusion
By creating a playground for architects to develop design
ideas about a dream house we hoped to learn something
about the cognitive role that tangible objects play in design
thinking. The stakes are high. Beyond the value that pure
inquiry holds for science, technologists want to understand
what ‘cognitive extra’ comes from manipulating physical
things, especially for creative cognition. They want to
incorporate these factors into digital systems for architects
to work with. Architects want new technical systems to
expand design potential in terms of novel processes and

2240

products.
We found that even relatively simple volumes have a
visual complexity that surpasses what most architects can
anticipate and that manipulating objects is essential to see
the shapes that emerge. Manipulation is vital in cases where
balance and tension is important. As so many others have
said, design ideas come from exploration and opportunistic
discovery. Because of the relentless ambiguity of shapes
opportunistic discovery of an unanticipated shape or relation
can lead to reframing ideas about the space of possible
shapes and relations, which in turn can lead to new design
ideas.
Our experience with blocks highlights some key
drawbacks of working with non-tangible things. Chiefly
these have to do with thinking about load, resistance,
balance, force and inertia. We found that even with 3D
objects it can be hard to build block towers out of
parallelepipeds – not because the shapes are especially
complicated but because it is hard to predict the center of
mass and the effects of putting one more block on the pile. It
is important to feel the give and take, the sense that the pile
might soon fall. See Stack in Figure 4. With fingers and
hands it is easy to find nuanced ways to nudge a block or
shift several together. Subjects seem to be able to think
about stability intuitively.
By contrast, when building a tower of blocks in 3D
modeling software it is hard to predict stability and even
hard to find the actions to put blocks in the right
orientation. Most of the manipulations that our subjects do
with real blocks – rotating, flipping, aligning faces, edges
and corners—is clumsy and disorienting in software. That
affects train of thought. Moreover, architects regularly move
their body and head position to look at structures while
simultaneously manipulating shapes. This is a key
interactive strategy that helps develop one’s sense of space
that is unavailable in visualization software.
For these and other reasons we think that using
tangible objects to think with is a central part of
architectural creativity that should be expanded
(Brillhart, 2011). The way to augment architectural
thought is through physical computation: using robots,
environmental sensors and integrated electronics to
increase our manipulative power. With new bodies we
will have new thoughts.

Acknowledgments

Analog. In (eds) Anne Cormier, Annie Pedret, and
Alberto Perez-Gomez at the 99th Annual Meeting of the
Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture,
Montreal, Canada, 422-429.
Clark, A. (2011). Supersizing the Mind. Oxford University
Press, London.
Gero, J., and McNeill, T. (1998). An approach to the analysis
of design protocols, Design Studies, 19, pp. 21-61.
Goodman, N. (1960). The Way the World Is. Review of
Metaphysics 14 (1):48 - 56.
Kim, J. and Maher, M. (2008). The Impact of Tangible User
Interfaces on Designers' Spatial Cognition, Human–
Computer Interaction, 23:2, 101-137.
Kirsh, D., and Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing
epistemic from pragmatic action, Cognitive Science,
Volume 18, Issue 4, pp. 513-549.
Kirsh, D. (2013). Embodied Cognition and the Magical
Future of Interaction Design. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction, Vol 20, No1, Article 3.
Maher, M., Gonzalez, A., Grace, K., and Clausner, T.
(2014). Tangible Interaction Design: Can we Design
Tangibles to Enhance Creative Cognition? Sixth
International Conference on Design Computing and
Cognition, June 23-25, London, UK.
Martin, T., and Schwartz, D. (2005). Physical Distributed
Learning: Adapting and Reinterpreting Physical
Environments in the Development of Fraction Concepts.
Cognitive Science, 29, pp. 587-625.
Pike, W., Stasko, J., Chang, R., O'Connell, T. (2009). The
Science of Interaction. Information Visualization, Vol 8,
263-274.
Suwa, M. and Tversky, B. (1997). What architects see in
their design sketches: implications for design tools.
Human factors in computing systems: CHI’96, ACM.
New York, pp. 191–192.
Stiny, G. (1980). Kindergarten grammars: designing
with Froebel’s building gifts. Environment and
Planning B. Vol 7, 409-462.
Stiny, G. (2006). Shape: Talking about Seeing and
Doing. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and Language.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1981). The instrumental method in
psychology. In J. V. Wertsch (Ed.), The Concept of
Activity in Soviet Psychology, pp. 134-143. Armonk,
NY: Sharpe.

The authors thank George Stiny for his feedback on an early
draft and conversation on ‘relentless ambiguity’. We also
thank the MIT-SUTD International Design Center for
funding the research.

References
Bilda, Z. and Demirkan, H. (2003). An insight on designers’
sketching activities in traditional versus digital media.
Design Studies 24, 27–50.
Brillhart, J., (2011). Drawing Towards a More Creative
Architecture: Mediating between the Digital and the

2241

