Linguistic Modality Affects the Creation of Structure and Iconicity in Signals
Hannah Little (hannah@ai.vub.ac.be), Kerem Eryılmaz (kerem@ai.vub.ac.be)
& Bart de Boer (bart@arti.vub.ac.be)
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussel, Belgium
Abstract
Different linguistic modalities (speech or sign) offer different levels at which signals can iconically represent the world.
One hypothesis argues that this iconicity has an effect on how
linguistic structure emerges. However, exactly how and why
these effects might come about is in need of empirical investigation. In this contribution, we present a signal creation
experiment in which both the signalling space and the meaning space are manipulated so that different levels and types of
iconicity are available between the signals and meanings. Signals are produced using an infrared sensor that detects the hand
position of participants to generate auditory feedback. We find
evidence that iconicity may be maladaptive for the discrimination of created signals. Further, we implemented Hidden
Markov Models to characterise the structure within signals,
which was also used to inform a metric for iconicity.
Keywords: Linguistic structure; Combinatorial structure; Signal spaces; Iconicity; Hidden Markov Models

Introduction
One of the central interests to the field of language evolution is what initially motivated the emergence of structure
in language, and how that structure manifests itself. Experimental work in laboratory settings using artificial languages
is a dominant exploratory tool within the field, primarily focussing on signals built from pre-discretised blocks and the
emergence of compositional structure, where meaningful elements combine to make bigger meaningful elements (e.g.
Kirby, Cornish, and Smith (2008)). However, the scope of
some experiments has started to shift to investigate the emergence of combinatorial structure, where meaningless building blocks combine to make meaningful units, using continuous signal spaces, for example Verhoef, Kirby, and De Boer
(2014), which argues that phonemes emerged as the result of
cognitive learning biases within cultural transmission.
In the current study, using a novel signalling space proxy,
we manipulate both the structure of the signalling space, and
the structure of the meaning space, to tease out how the dynamics between a signal space and a meaning space can motivate the emergence of structure and how that structure is
defined. We are interested in how much structural emergence
can be explained by physical mapping problems, in order to
isolate what aspects of emerging structure are the result of
more cognitive mechanisms.

Hypotheses
We are testing two related hypotheses: 1. The dimensionality
of a signal space, or modality, will affect the emergence of
signal structure, and 2. Ability to recourse to iconicity will
also inhibit emergence of signal structure.
This first hypothesis is grounded in more than one observation. First, with more signal dimensions at our disposal

within a modality, the more signal distinctions that can be
made. Hockett (1960) outlined that as soon as the amount of
semantic distinctions outnumbers the number of signal distinctions, then we need a level of phonological (or combinatorial) structure. Second, the more similar the structure of a
signal space to that of a meaning space, the easier it is to map
meanings to signals directly, making iconic or compositional
systems, where there is a one to one mapping between signal and meaning space, more likely than combinatorial ones,
with meaningless building blocks. Dimensionality of a signal
space will affect how similar it is to the structure of a meaning
space. In natural languages, the sign modality has many more
signal dimensions available than the spoken modality, and humans can visually perceive simultaneously presented aspects
of a signal in a way that the auditory system can not (Sandler et al., 2011), meaning that it is easier to map signed signals onto highly complex meaning spaces than spoken ones.
There are no known spoken languages without a level of combinatorial structure. However, recent evidence has shown that
emerging sign languages can exist without a level of combinatorial structure, such as Al Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language
(ABSL) (Sandler, Aronoff, Meir, & Padden, 2011). Considering the role of linguistic modalities with respect to their signal
dimensionality in the emergence of structure is worth investigating.
The second hypothesis, that iconicity will inhibit emergence of signal structure, is related to the first, as when a
signal space and a meaning space have matching dimensionality, then it is easier to iconically map one onto the other.
De Boer and Verhoef (2012) built a mathematical model
which explores how iconic signal-meaning mappings are optimal when signal and meaning spaces have matching dimensionality, and when there is a mismatch, then more conventionalised structural strategies are needed. However, it is important to keep in mind that the iconicity within this model
was relative, where there is a correlation between signals and
meanings in such a way that similar meanings will be represented by similar signals. Relative iconicity is usually not observable from individual signals without seeing the rest of the
system. Examples include sound symbolism, where “glimmer” isn’t intuitively iconic, until one considers the correspondence between “gl” sounds (e.g. glitter, glam, glow)
and shiny things. Relative iconicity is distinct from absolute iconicity, where a signal represents a referent directly,
e.g. representing the form of a referent directly in a gesture
(terminology from Monaghan, Shillcock, Christiansen, and
Kirby (2014)).
Drawing from the evidence from ABSL, Sandler et al.

1392

(2011) hypothesised that emerging languages using the manual modality may have more holistic signals than a spoken equivalent, before combinatorial structure becomes necessary, because of the ability to use “iconically motivated
signs”. Further evidence on this matter comes from Roberts
and Galantucci (2014) who present an experiment using a stylus on a surface that continually moved downwards in a constant motion so that participants could only manipulate the
horizontal dimension (i.e. as in Galantucci (2005)). Importantly, Roberts and Galantucci (2014) manipulated the meaning space, rather than the signal space, in order to affect the
iconicity of signals. Within the experiment, participants were
asked to communicate a variety of meanings which were either squiggly lines, which could be represented through absolute iconicity with the modality provided, or circles coloured
various shades of green, which could not be iconically represented. The experiment showed that the signals used for
circles were made up from repeated elements, while the lines
retained iconicity. However, this experiment only shows the
effect of iconicity on structure at two extreme ends of the
iconicity continuum, i.e. comparing absolute iconicity with
an example where no mapping is possible.

Our Experiment
Our experiment tests if relative iconicity, rather than absolute iconicity, affects the emergence of structure within signals. Relative iconicity is much more prevalent in spoken
language, where absolute iconicity is much more possible in
the signed modality. In our experiment, we manipulate both
the signal space that participants use to generate signals, and
the meaning space which participants describe using their signals. In manipulating both, we affect the mapping between
the two in different ways. We manipulate the dimensionality
of both signal and meaning spaces, generating a dimensionality mismatch, which creates a mapping problem. Affecting
the dimensionality of our signal space is a very simple way to
model the differences between different linguistic modalities
with different levels of dimensionality. Obviously, modalities
for natural languages have a lot more dimensions than we use
in this study, but as with any model, in order to isolate individual effects, simplicity is key. We also manipulate the meaning
space, where meanings either differed continuously (making
an intuitive mapping onto the continuous signal space), or the
meanings were designed to be perceived as discrete.

Methods
Participants Participants were recruited at the VUB in
Brussels. 55 participants took part in the experiment, 27 male,
28 female. Participants had an average age of 24. Participants
were assigned to conditions randomly.
Signals Participants created signals using a “Leap Motion”
device, an infrared sensor designed to detect hand position
and motion. The sensor was used to detect a continuous signal space within which participants could gesticulate to produce audio signals. Depending on condition and phase within
the experiment, signals could be manipulated in their pitch,

volume, or both. In phases where the signal could be altered
in both pitch and volume, they were associated with the horizontal and vertical dimensions respectively. In phases where
the signal could be altered in either pitch or volume, only one
spatial dimension was used. Participants were given auditory
feedback, but no visual feedback, other than seeing their hand
position. Participants were given clear instructions on how to
use the sensor, and time to get used to the mapping between
their hand position and the auditory feedback in each phase
of the experiment.
Conditions The conditions in our experiment differed in
the meaning space which participants were asked to create
signals for. The meaning space in both conditions consisted
of a set of squares that differed along dimensions which were
either continuous in one condition, or discrete in the other. In
phases where the meaning space only differed on one dimension, five squares only differed in either size (in the continuous condition) or colour (in the discrete condition). In phases
where it differed on two dimensions, nine squares differed
either in both size and different shades of grey (in the continuous condition), or in both colour and texture (in the discrete
condition) (see Fig. 1).
Procedure Participants were given instructions on how to
generate signals using the leap motion device. They used one
hand above the device to generate signals. There were three
phases of the experiment, each phase consisted of a practice
round and an experimental round, and each round consisted
of a signal creation task and a signal recognition task.

Figure 1: The meaning spaces used in phases 1:2 and 2:2 in
the discrete condition and in the continuous condition.

Phases
In all phases participants saw the entire meaning space before
beginning. In the signal creation task, they were presented
with squares one by one and recorded signals using the leap
motion. Participants were explicitly told which signal dimension(s) they were manipulating.
Phase 1:1 In the first phase participants were asked to create signals for a meaning space with 5 squares which only
differed in one dimension (size or colour depending on condition). In this phase, participants could only manipulate the
signal with one signal dimension, which was counterbalanced
by randomly assigning participants to start with either pitch
or volume. Which signal dimension the participant started

1393

with was later controlled for in the analysis.
Phases 1:2 In phase 1:2, participants described a twodimensional meaning space with the squares differing in size
and shade in the continuous condition, or colour and texture
in the discrete condition (Fig. 1). They used the same onedimensional signal space used in phase 1:1 (see fig. 2).
Phases 2:2 In phase 2:2, participants were to describe the
same two-dimensional meaning space as in phase 1:2, but this
time with a two-dimensional signalling space where the signals differed in both pitch and volume (Fig. 2).
Counterbalancing Participants were randomly assigned to
do either phase 1:2 or 2:2 first. Whether phases had matching dimensionality between signal and meaning spaces, or a
mismatch, was used as a variable in our analysis. However,
strategies will depend on what participants’ have dealt with
previously within the experiment. If they solve the dimensionality mismatch problem before being provided with the
two-dimensional signal space, they may find it easier to continue with an already established strategy, than generate a new
one taking advantage of both dimensions.

squares. However, there was still some strategies involving
different movement types, frequencies and speeds.
In the discrete condition, participants were more likely to
attempt other forms of iconicity. Some associated the different colours with emotions or objects in the world like “a beating heart” or “the waves of the sea”, and then tried to make
signals which corresponded to these things. However, participants were most likely to use patterns, speeds or frequencies
of repeated elements.
From self-reporting, participants who saw phase 1:2 first
were more likely to use the same signal dimension throughout than to change the strategy to take advantage of both dimensions. This was a significant association (χ2 (1) = 4.2,
p < 0.05). Also, participants were significantly more likely
to perform better at the recognition tasks if they had strategies
(M=83% correct), than if they didn’t have strategies throughout (M=52% correct) (t(19) = -5, p < 0.001).
Signal Recognition Task Which condition participants
were in had an effect on how well participants performed in
the signal recognition task 1 . Participants were significantly
better at the recognition tasks if they were in the discrete condition (M=82% correct), than if they were in the continuous
condition (M=66% correct) (t(52.7) = -3, p < 0.005).
The order in which participants received phases 1:2 and
2:2, and which signal dimension they started with (pitch or
volume), did not reliably predict participants recognition of
their signals. If a participant scored at chance level on the
signal recognition task (1), they were disqualified from the
rest of the analysis.

Measuring Structure
Figure 2: The mapping between signal space dimensionality
and meaning space dimensionality in each phase using the
meanings from the discrete condition (the continuous condition had the same mappings).
Signal Recognition task After each signal creation task,
participants did a signal recognition task. They heard one
of their signals, and were asked to identify its referent from
an array of four randomly generated possibilities. They had
immediate feedback about the correct answer. Their performance in this task was recorded for use in the analysis.
Post-experimental questionnaire After the experiment,
each participant completed a questionnaire. Questions asked
about what strategies were adopted in each phase of the experiment. The questions asked explicitly whether participants
had strategies and what they were. Answers were free form.

Results
Post-experimental questionnaire When self-reporting
their strategies, most participants gave similar answers within
the continuous condition. Most choose to use pitch, volume
or duration directly to encode size or shade using relative
iconicity. For example, quiet to loud volumes used for light
to dark shades respectively, or longer duration for bigger

We started our analysis by generating standard deviations
(SDs) for the coordinates of each signal trajectory in order
to get some sense of how much movement there is within
each signal, or whether more static strategies are used (which
might be more indicative of relative iconicity). In the discrete condition, there was a tendency for SDs of signal trajectories to be bigger than in the continuous condition (23%
on average), using a linear mixed effects analysis and controlling for participant and whether they started with pitch or
volume as random effects, we found however that this effect
was not significant (χ2 (1) = 1.9, p = 0.16). However, we did
find a significant effect of whether signals were produced in a
phase with matching dimensionality (phases 1:1 and 2:2), or
has mismatching dimensionality (phase 1:2), controlling for
the same random effects (χ2 (1) = 8.6, p < 0.005). Signal trajectories produced using the mismatch had a mean increase of
13.4% in their SD than those using mismatch.
We then created a measure for how predictable signal trajectories are. We quantised the signal coordinates using a
k-means algorithm, in order to create a list of integer values
representing a participant’s entire repertoire of signals. With
this, we estimated the marginal probability distribution of the
1 If a participant scored at chance level on the signal recognition
task (1), they were disqualified from the rest of the analysis.

1394

points on each quantised trajectory. We then used these to calculate the conditional probabilities of individual points, and
finally, the joint probability of whole signal trajectories by
taking the negative logarithm of the product of first order conditional probabilities of the points on the trajectory. We found
an effect of condition on how predictable signals were within
a repertoire, using a linear mixed effects analysis and controlling for the same random effects as above (χ2 (1) = 11.3,
p < 0.001). The continuous condition showed more predictability than the discrete condition. Also, we found an
effect of matching dimensionality, controlling for the same
random effects (χ2 (1) = 5.8, p < 0.05), signals produced using the mismatch had 16% more predictability than signals
generated without a mismatch.

Hidden Markov Models

Figure 3: Random intercepts for each phase and condition
pair. Conditions are represented as the phase presentation order).

We used a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) with continuous Gaussian emissions to model the signal repertoires of
participants. We treat HMM latent states as analogues for
phonemes, and the emissions as analogues for the surface
form. This allows us to use the number of latent states as
an index of reuse (or structure) present in the repertoires.
For each phase of a run, we trained an HMM with all the
signals used in that phase. Each signal is represented by an
array of amplitude and frequency value couples that make up
the signal. The number of latent states were determined by
training multiple HMMs in parallel and picking the one with
the lowest Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) (see Algorithm 1).
Algorithm 1 HMM training and selection

The phase-by-phase analysis of the baseline number of
states (as indicated by the random intercepts estimated for
each phase) shows that the order in which the phases 1:2 and
2:2 are presented changes the expected number of states. If
phases 1:1 and 2:2 are presented with an intermittent 1:2,
there is a monotonous increase in the baseline number of
states for each consecutive phase. However, when 1:1 and
2:2 are followed by 1:2, 1:2 ends up as the phase with the
lowest baseline number of states in the experiment (Fig. 3).

Measuring Iconicity

1: function F IT HMM(trajectories)
2:
hmm ← nil
3:
bic ← 999999
4:
nStates ← 2
5:
maxStates ← 30
6:
while nStates ≤ maxStates do
7:
for 1 : 100 do
8:
hmm0 ←HMM(nStates)
9:
for trajectory in trajectories do
10:
hmm0 ←BAUM W ELCH(hmm’, trajectory)
11:
12:
13:
14:

regression indicated significant random intercepts for participants and the interaction of condition (i.e. order of presentation) and phase, although adding random slopes did not improve the model.

if BIC(hmm0 ) < bic then
hmm ← hmm0
bic ←BIC(hmm’)
nStates ← nStates + 1
return hmm

In order to validate that the model is relevant to participant success, we ran a mixed-effects regression on the participant signal recognition scores while controlling for condition, phase and participant. We used the normalized number
of states (a real number in range [0,1], calculated by dividing
the number of states of each HMM with the highest number
of states in the group) as it was a slightly better predictor than
the absolute number of states.
We found higher the number of states in an HMM, higher
a participant’s score (R2 = 0.604, β = 0.086, p < 0.01). The

In the continuous condition, it was easy to develop regression
methods to demonstrate similarities between the signal space
and the meaning space. Meaning dimensions were coded to
reflect the continuous way in which they differed, e.g. the
smallest square had a value of 1 while the biggest square had a
value of 5. The signal trajectories were reduced to simple descriptive metrics, such as the mean coordinate value on each
dimension, and the number of time frames reflecting its duration. Across all signals from all participants in the continuous
condition, the mean coordinate value of the first dimension
that a participant saw (either pitch or volume) was significantly correlated with shade of grey. We showed this using
a mixed linear model, controlling for participant number and
whether they started with pitch or volume as random effects
(χ2 (1) = 341, p < 0.001). Again, across all signals in the
continuous condition, using a mixed linear model, controlling for the same random effects, duration of the signal was
significantly correlated with the size of square (χ2 (1) = 103,
p < 0.001). Each square size increased the signal by 75 time
frames±7(std errors).
A problem arises when we try to use the same metrics to
measure iconicity within the discrete condition, as it doesn’t
make sense to assign values to non-ordinal meaning dimensions. To tackle this, we developed a method that uses our
HMM model in combination with the signal repertoire and
the meaning space, to index iconicity. Some meanings in the

1395

discrete condition are more similar to one another than others, e.g. a blue square is more similar to another blue square
with a different texture, than it is to a green square with a
different texture. We try to exploit this to generalise our notion of iconicity to the discrete cases, as well as making it
algorithmic.
To measure iconicity within our results, we used Viterbi
paths from the HMMs to reduce signals to a discrete sequence
of states. This is an analogue of reducing a continuous speech
signal of an uttered word to the string of phonemes which underlies it. A pair-wise distance matrix was then generated
for the signal repertoire using Levenshtein distances between
their Viterbi paths, representing how different each signal is
in terms of number of “phoneme” changes necessary to get
from one to the other. Then, the meanings were put into a
pair-wise distance matrix with one another, to get a comparable measure of how many steps of “semantic” changes it takes
to get from one meaning to the other. Mantel’s test of matrix
correlation was then run between the two distance matrices
to obtain an index of how phonemic changes mirror semantic changes, or how relatively iconic the repertoire is, in the
form of a correlation coefficient between 0 and 1. If the null
hypothesis that there is no correlation between the two matrices can be rejected we tagged that repertoire as iconic. Otherwise, we tagged it non-iconic, regardless of the estimated
magnitude of the correlation.
Our preliminary analysis of this measure indicated we
should expect it to produce some false negatives, i.e. iconic
repertoires tagged as non-iconic2 , but our data is too limited
to analyse this measure’s effectiveness adequately using classical statistics, so we built a Bayesian model to test it. The
number of repertoires getting tagged “iconic” is represented
by a Binomial distribution with a uniform prior on the parameter piconic , which is the p parameter for the distribution, or
the probability of something getting tagged “iconic”. piconic
was estimated separately for discrete (pdiconic ) and continuous
(pciconic ) cases, and for each phase.
The expected pciconic − pdiconic difference overall was positive, with 97.25% of the probability density above 0 (Figure 4). Although 0 does fall into the 95% credible interval,
considering the overall distribution, it is reasonable to expect pciconic > pdiconic . In other words, the continuous condition
produces more relatively iconic inventories than the discrete
case. Comparing phases within conditions using this measure
did not indicate any significant trends.

Discussion and Conclusion
We were interested in two related hypotheses; 1. whether the
dimensionality of a signal space or modality will affect the
emergence of structure of signals, and 2. whether iconicity
will inhibit emergence of signal structure.
First, we found support that dimensionality had an effect on
the variance within signals, with signal trajectories produced
2 Although it is beyond the scope of this paper, one reason for
this is that our measure is confined to discovering linear correlations
only.

Figure 4: The posterior probability distribution of pciconic −
pdiconic estimated by MCMC, as a histogram of the MCMC
trace. The 95% credible interval is [−0.006, 0.331], and the
mean is 0.158. The figure shows that we can expect signals
to be tagged iconic more often when they are formed in the
continuous condition.
using the signal-meaning dimension mismatch having higher
SDs. Greater variance indicates fewer, more distinct building blocks, which was also evident from the random slopes
of the regression between number of HMM states and participant score. These results indicate not only that larger semantic spaces often cause more building blocks to be used,
but also that the type of signals produced depends on the
mapping between the semantic space and the signal space.
Modulating the order in which matching and mismatching
phases are presented changes the participant performance significantly, as shown in Figure 3. This effect arises from the
strategy change required between phases with matching or
mismatching spaces. When people gain experience in consecutive matching phases, the repertoire they bootstrap for the
following mismatiching phase becomes heavily compressed,
as indicated by the low baseline for the number of states.
However, when participants have to solve the mismatch problem first, there is an increase in the baseline with every phase,
despite participants being able to employ their strategy from
phase 1:2 in phase 2:2. This result contradicts what participants self reported in the questionnaire, where they have used
the space in phase 2:2 maximally, no matter what the order of
phases.
Second, we aimed to inform theories relating to the effect
signal-meaning mappings have on the emergence of linguistic
structure. We found support that when relative iconicity was
possible, the majority of participants encoded size with duration, leaving them to encode shade with the signal dimension
they were first exposed to. However, in order to compare the
iconicity present in the continuous condition with that present
in the discrete condition, we developed our own iconicity index, using HMMs. We found that signal repertoires in the
continuous condition were more often tagged as iconic than

1396

in the discrete condition. However, we did have problems including false negatives and the failure to confidently establish
a difference between the phases in the continuous condition,
demonstrating the need for further work. To complement the
results on iconicity, we found that signals produced in the discrete condition, where relative iconicity was not possible, had
greater variance than in the continuous condition, and also
had significantly less predictability. We had initially thought
that signals and repertoires with more repeated elements (or
structure) would be more predictable, as they would be comprised from elements repeated throughout a repertoire, in the
same way that phonotactic rules make natural languages more
predictable than random strings of phonemes. However, our
results suggest that a static signal will always be more predictable than one with movement, so perhaps predictability is
not the best measure for structure here.

a structured meaning space in our experiment has meant
that participants have generated signal structure which corresponds directly to the meaning space, something which our
post-experimental questionnaires also confirmed. We plan
to run further experiments where there is less internal structure within the meaning space in order to perhaps generate
something more analogous to phonological structure. How
iconicity affects the emergence of structure at both a combinatorial and compositional level is something we are very
interested in pursuing, and we are currently planning future
signal creation experiments with further manipulations to the
signal and meaning space, as well as exploring these ideas
within the context of communication and transmission. We
also plan to further develop our metrics and models for use
in analysing the results of our experiments, as well as helping
inform parameters for new experiments.

Further to the evidence pertaining directly to our hypotheses, we found that participants were better at recognising their
signals in the discrete condition, than in the continuous condition. One might think that having a one to one mapping
between signal and meaning would make a signalling system more intuitive, and perhaps easier to be productive with.
However, the pressure against iconic systems in the discrete
condition may have pushed participants to make more exaggerated differences between their signals within their chosen
strategies. Further to this, signals that rely on relative iconicity are likely to be easier to confuse with each other, making
them maladaptive for discrimination between signals. This
fits in with findings from Monaghan, Mattock, and Walker
(2012) where sound symbolism was found to be beneficial to
category learning, but not beneficial for learning individual
words.

Acknowledgments

Our experiment has shown that the physical aspects of different linguistic modalities, or signal space proxies, can affect
the structure which can emerge. These effects are very important to consider before we can isolate the cognitive effects
which experimental work in language evolution is trying to
characterise (Verhoef et al., 2014). We have developed a new
paradigm to address these questions, as well as new methods to measure structure within continuous signals. However,
HMMs still present two limitations; 1. HMMs do not explicitly model time spent in each state, which some participants
used as a strategy, and 2. Gaussian HMMs do not emit signals
that are continuous in the signal space, which is a feature of
the signal space proxy we use. We plan to address these issues
by using explicit duration and autoregressive HMM flavours,
which will allow more thorough comparison of the model and
the modelled repertoire, since such HMMs can emit passable,
continuous signals with explicit timing.
We have also considered the nature of the structure which
we have seen emerging in our study. In previous experimental work, artificial languages have been shown to emerge to
mirror the structure in a given meaning space (e.g. Kirby et
al. (2008)), which would be considered compositional structure as each building block is meaningful. Having such

We would like to thank the financial support of the European
Research Council project, ABACUS (283435).

References
De Boer, B., & Verhoef, T. (2012). Language dynamics in
structured form and meaning spaces. Advances in Complex
Systems, 15(3), 1150021-11150021-20.
Galantucci, B. (2005). An experimental study of the emergence of human communication systems. Cognitive science, 29(5), 737–767.
Hockett, C. F. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific American, 203, 88-111.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental approach
to the origins of structure in human language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(31), 10681–
10686.
Monaghan, P., Mattock, K., & Walker, P. (2012). The role of
sound symbolism in language learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
38(5), 1152.
Monaghan, P., Shillcock, R. C., Christiansen, M. H., & Kirby,
S. (2014). How arbitrary is language. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B.
Roberts, G., & Galantucci, B. (2014). The effect of iconicity on the emergence of combinatorial structure: an experimental study. In A. Cartmill Erica, S. Roberts, H. Lyn, &
H. Cornish (Eds.), The evolution of language: Proceedings
of the 10th international conference (evolangx) (Vol. 10,
pp. 503–505). World Scientific.
Sandler, W., Aronoff, M., Meir, I., & Padden, C. (2011).
The gradual emergence of phonological form in a new language. Natural language & linguistic theory, 29(2), 503543.
Verhoef, T., Kirby, S., & De Boer, B. (2014). Emergence
of combinatorial structure and economy through iterated
learning with continuous acoustic signals. Journal of Phonetics, 43, 57–68.

1397

