Linguistic input overrides conceptual biases: When goals don’t matter
Nicholas A. Lester (nlester@umail.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics, South Hall 3432
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Abstract
Previous research has suggested the presence of a cognitive
goal bias, which favors the linguistic and non-linguistic
(mnemonic) encoding of goals of motion over sources. The
present corpus-based study tests the limits of the goal bias by
comparing the path-encoding tendencies of English come and
go in young children’s and adults’ naturalistic speech. Both
verbs can occur with source and goal adjuncts; however, they
differ in their presuppositional structure, such that come
presupposes a goal while go presupposes a source. This
difference in presupposition might lead adult speakers to
inhibit goal-encoding for come via the Gricean maxim of
quantity. As input, this might lead young children to acquire
different path structures for go and come, even before they
have mastered conversational-pragmatic abilities. Descriptive
statistics replicate earlier findings of a general goal bias for
both verbs. However, the results of more detailed regression
analyses suggest that go exhibits a stronger goal bias than
come for children and adults. Moreover, children from ages 23 persist in inhibiting goal mentioning for come at rates
similar to adult usage. This effect holds even while goal
expressions for go are becoming more complex. These
findings suggest that statistical patterns in the input can
override non-linguistic biases, even during early lexical
acquisition.
Keywords: Goal bias; child language; usage-based grammar;
motion deixis.

Introduction
Understanding how children acquire language requires in
part an understanding of how linguistic forms come to be
associated with non-linguistic conceptual content during
word learning. Some researchers have argued that children
accomplish this task by exploiting conceptual homologies,
or isometries in the representations and behaviors of nonlinguistic and linguistic systems. These homologies aid
children by splitting the conceptual landscape into readymade sites for the mapping of linguistic forms. The
relationships established by these homologies resemble the
linking rules proposed by Jackendoff (1990), who would
argue further that they are available from birth. One
homology which has figured prominently in recent debates
is known as the goal bias. The goal bias constitutes a
domain-general attentional preference for encoding the endpoints of motion as opposed to the sources. In language,
one consequence of the goal bias is that goal landmarks are
mapped by default into the adjunct prepositional phrase (PP)
of motion predicates. By contrast, source landmarks in these
predicates are only usually mentioned in conjunction with a
goal landmark or not at all. The goal bias could thus guide
children’s acquisition of motion verbs by providing them a
point of constancy for the interpretation of path-relevant

adjunct PPs and adverbials.
In order for the goal bias to prefigure mapping relations
during word learning, it must operate from a very early age.
Support for early appearance of the goal bias comes from
the fact that pre-linguistic infants as young as 12 months old
have shown a preference for attending to changes in goals
over changes in sources (all else being equal) in preferential
looking paradigms (Lakusta, Wagner, O’Hearn, & Landau,
2007). This effect persists in memory tasks for older
children (3-7 years old) and adults (Lakusta & Landau,
2005; Lakusta & Landau, 2012; Papafragou, 2010), and so
appears to be a stable component of the human cognitive
apparatus.
The simplest demonstration of a linguistic goal bias in
English comes from the fact that goals tend to be mentioned
more frequently than other path components in naturalistic
speech. In the only major corpus study to examine motion
verbs specifically, Stefanowitsch and Rohde (2004) found
higher overall rates of goal-mentioning than source
mentioning across a number of motion verbs in a corpus of
journalistic writing. Similar findings have been reported
from experimental elicitation tasks, in which both children
and adults were more likely to mention goals than sources
when prompted to describe short video clips of motion
events with equally salient goal and source landmarks
(Lakusta & Landau, 2005; 2012; Papafragou, 2010).
More recent evidence suggests that the goal bias is more
robust for language than for memory, drawing the notion of
a strict isometry into question. Lakusta and Landau (2012;
Exp. 3) showed participants motion events involving the
incidental motion of inanimate themes (moving entities).
Participants’ memory for contrasts was equally reliable for
goals and sources. However, when asked to describe the
events, they remained more likely to refer to goal landmarks
than to source landmarks. This finding held for both adults
and children.
Some evidence, however, suggests that the goal bias may
be overridden in certain contexts for language and memory.
For example, when Stefanowitsch and Rohde (2004) looked
at goal-mentioning rates for individual verbs (instead of the
aggregate values), they found a great deal of variation, with
some verbs showing no goal bias at all. But what could
drive such variation? Stefanowitsch and Rohde attribute it to
a combination of lexical semantics and pragmatic
knowledge. Lakusta et al. (2007) suggest that situational
factors may play a role. They found that by increasing the
visual salience of source landmarks within a motional scene,
they could eliminate the non-linguistic goal bias effect in
12-month-olds. Therefore, children appear able to shift
attention between goals and sources in response to

1308

contextual pressures. These shifts could account for the
variation observed by Stefanowitsch and Rohde if different
verbs become associated with situations involving lowsalience goals or high-salience sources. Lakusta and Landau
(2012) speculate about the potential sources of these
attentional shifts beyond perceptual asymmetries. They
suggest that presupposition may be a factor, such that
presupposed path elements will not be mentioned (a la the
Gricean maxim of quantity). This possibility is also
suggested by Stefanowitsch and Rohde, who attribute their
observed source bias for fall to presuppositions about the
nature of gravity.
Lester (2014) tested the prediction that lexical (as
opposed to contextual) presuppositions influence path
mentioning by comparing adults’ use of source and goal
adjuncts with the English deictic motion verbs come and go.
Come has been analyzed as presupposing the goal of
motion, inasmuch as the goal must be construable as an
extension of the speech act’s deictic center or ‘here’ space
(e.g., MOVE (x, TO (HERE)). Go, on the other hand,
presupposes the source of motion (e.g., MOVE (x, FROM
(HERE); Talmy, 2000). In line with predictions, Lester
found that adults did exhibit a significantly more
pronounced goal bias for go than for come.
Another point of controversy concerns whether the goal
bias operates the same in children as adults. Lakusta and
Landau (2012) predict that children should mirror adults in
their goal-mentioning. In their words, “‘proto-goals’ and
‘proto-sources’ for children may be quite similar to those for
adults, and thus there will be few developmental differences
in how sources and goals are mapped into syntax” (p. 24).
However, their own findings show that in some cases, the
goal bias persists in child language (and to some extent,
memory) where it disappears for adults (Exp. 2). In fact, the
children showed a goal bias in every linguistic task reported
in that study. Therefore, it may be that children are more
susceptible to the goal bias than adults, in which case they
should start out by mapping goals exclusively (regardless of
motion verb). This hypothesis also meshes with theories of
language acquisition which specify innate linking rules
responsible for ensuring successful mapping of
phonological form to conceptual unit (e.g., Jackendoff,
1990). Yet another possibility is that children’s path
mentioning is a direct reflection of the patterns contained in
the linguistic input. This hypothesis makes the same
ultimate predictions as Landau and Lakusta’s ‘samesystem/same-behavior’ proposal, but has the advantage of
explaining the source of possible variations in goal bias (like
those observed by Stefanowitsch and Rohde, 2004).
In the next section, I formalize several predictions
regarding the effects of lexical presupposition on children’s
developing path encoding skills and the extent to which
these effects can be attributed to general biases, patterns in
adult speech, or a combination of both.

Hypotheses
If children indeed leverage the goal bias during the learning
of motion verbs, then we should expect them to produce
more goal mappings for all verbs in the early stages of
acquisition. We should expect this because the child would
not have any reason to guess against the goal bias when
selecting between a source- or goal-interpretation of a given
verb-landmark combination, and so should not yet be
sensitive to verb-specific variations in such pairings. Regier
(1996) makes the same prediction, but from a different
theoretical perspective. He suggests that goals are
perceptually and mnemonically more accessible in situated
events of language use. As children puzzle out the meaning
of a motion verb that has just been uttered, they might more
readily associate that verb with the goal configuration due to
a kind of recency effect in working memory (the goal
having been the last relevant perceptual input). In either
case, the prediction can be formulated as in H1:
H1: Children should exhibit an initial goal bias for come
and go, but the former should decrease over time while
the latter should increase or stay constant
As a counter to H1, consider the input-driven position that
language use shapes conceptual representation. According
to this position, statistical patterns in the linguistic input
should dictate children’s path-encoding, regardless of the
goal bias. This prediction is presented as H2:
H2: Children at even the earliest stages of syntactic
development should exhibit a goal bias for go but not
for come
H2 would receive the strongest support from a correlation
between goal bias and verb identity with no corresponding
interaction of verb and age. This would indicate that verbs
can differ in goal bias but that children’s path mentioning is
identical to adults’ path mentioning. In the more realistic
scenario, verb identity will interact with age, though the sign
of the difference in goal bias between come and go in the
child data should match that of the adult pattern. This result
might suggest the presence of more general constraints on
the length and complexity of children’s spontaneous
utterances, though the utterances do approximate the adult
usage.

Data
The child data for this study were culled from the
Manchester subcomponent of the CHILDES database
(Theakston et al., 2001). The Manchester corpus contains
approximately 2.1m words of transcribed recordings of
naturalistic speech, including 580,472 words of child speech
from 12 children (n(female) = 6; figures adopted from Li &
Fang, 2011). Children’s initial ages in the sample ranged
from 1;8.22 to 2;0.25. MLU estimates ranged from 1.06–
2.27. The data capture spontaneous interactions arising
during free play activities with the child’s own toys or with

1309

a special set of investigator-supplied toys. One-hour
recordings were taken twice in every three-week period over
the course of one year. This sample was selected for several
reasons. First, it constitutes a relatively dense sample, which
is crucial for establishing realistic developmental
trajectories. Second, it captures the earliest stages of
syntactic development and so is well suited to test for the
heightened sensitivity to the goal bias predicted by H1.
Third, the activities from which the speech was sampled
naturally lend themselves to increased motion verb use
(playing with trains, cars, etc.). Fourth, we know from prior
research that children at these ages have not mastered the
complexities of deictic reference and presupposition (Clark
& Garnica, 1974). Therefore, any differences in path
mentioning cannot be attributed to the children formulating
but omitting goals in conformity to the maxim of quantity.
I retrieved all instances of all inflectional variants of
come and go from the child corpus. To account for the
possibility of non-standard forms in the child speech, (e.g.,
overgeneralization errors such as comed or goed), I relied on
the Manchester corpus’ error annotation, which
conveniently includes tags for the target (standard) form
after each non-standard productionThis search yielded 1975
tokens of come and 5043 tokens of go.
I next removed all false hits from the child data. This
mainly consisted of removing locative and affiliative uses of
go.
Locative uses consisted of instances of (some
identifiable fragment of ) the fixed expression Where has X
gone? These instances can be paraphrased by ‘Where is X?’
Therefore, while they may impose enough of a motional
construal to exhibit effects similar to ‘fully’ motional
tokens, I omit them here for the sake of simplification.
Affiliative uses of go were more tricky to identify, and so
were labeled more conservatively. In an affiliative function,
go expresses the proper relation between an entity and a
location, as in the expression The salt goes in the cupboard.
The children in this sample often used go in this way when
orienting objects within the play-space (e.g., This barn goes
here) or when expressing properties of the objects to the
interlocutor (e.g., Cows go in the barn). Again, as the
motional status of these utterances is suspect, they were
omitted from the present analysis. I also removed any
uninterpretable utterances (utterances with ### indicating
that the transcriber was unable to determine what was said;
truncated utterances, as in He went in the) and any complex
clauses involving come or go (as in Come get this or Go and
shop in town). This process left me with 1860 tokens of
come and 4123 tokens of go.
For the adult baseline, I took the data from Lester (2014),
which consisted of a proportional random sample of all
literal translation motion uses of come and go as retrieved
from the roughly 3.2-m-word spoken component of the
Open American National Corpus (OANC). The spoken
OANC consists of a sample of the SWITCHBOARD corpus
(telephone conversations on set topics between strangers;
approx. 3 m words) and the entirety of the Charlotte
Narrative and Conversation Collection (face-to-face

conversations and conversational narratives; approx.
198,000 words). This sample contains 454 instances of
come and 1417 instances of go.
I annotated the data for a number of variables
characterizing features of the theme, source, trajectory, and
goal. In addition, I annotated each instance with a speaker
identification label (child’s name for Manchester data;
OANC filename for the adult data) in order to account for
the non-independence of the data points.

Descriptive stats
Overall relative proportions of mentioning for goal and
source landmarks, ignoring their relative distribution within
clauses are presented in Figure 1.
As has been observed in previous studies, Figure 1 reveals
that a general goal bias (i.e., collapsing across verb types
and ages) holds in the form of a greater overall token
frequency of goals as opposed to sources. Figure 1 also
shows a relatively strong goal bias for go in both child and

Figure 1: Relative proportions of use of goal (g) and
source (s) landmarks
adult speech, with numbers consistent with those reported in
Stefanowitsch & Rohde (2004; shown in the final column of
Table 1). However, for come, the adults exhibit a weaker
goal bias than go, and the children exhibit no goal bias
whatsoever. This latter finding is particularly surprising
given the logic underlying H1: children are not influenced
more heavily by the goal bias but actually seem to resist it
when the adult usage presents the potential for a meaningful
contrast (i.e., the fact that come is 16 times more likely than
go to appear with a source). In the following two studies, I
attempt to explore these verb-specific effects in more detail.
Study 1 focuses on the child data, looking within the
longitudinal scale of the Manchester sample to test the
strength of the goal bias across early periods of acquisition
(H1). Study 2 compares the aggregated child data (ignoring
the Manchester-internal time-scale) to the adults to
determine whether differences in child path-mentioning can
be attributed to adult usage (H2). For both studies, I
operationalize goal bias as the difference in length (in
orthographic characters) of any source landmark NP from
that of any goal landmark NP within the same clause. When
a clause did not contain a source or goal landmark, a value

1310

Figure 2: Goal bias as a function of the interaction of speaker age (in days) and verb (come, go)
of 0 was assigned. Positive values indicate a goal bias, while
negative values indicate a source bias within a given clause.
This operationalization improves on that used in previous
analyses (e.g., Stefanowitsch and Rohde, 2004) by going
beyond simple frequency of mentioning to provide an
estimate of the relative complexity of the path expressions.

Study 1: Path-mentioning in child speech
As a first step, I investigate whether children are more
susceptible to the goal bias, as suggested by the data in
Lakusta and Landau (2012; Exp 2), and by nativist models
of language acquisition like that proposed in Jackendoff
(1990). The latter argue that linking rules between
conceptual and syntactic structures (e.g., agents  subject
roles; patients  object roles) are ready from birth to guide
successful mapping of forms into concepts (and on into
syntactic frames). Lakusta and Landau found partial support
for this position: in some contexts, children show a more
pervasive goal bias across motional contexts than adults.
This position was formalized with respect to the
developmental trajectories of come and go in H1.
I test this possibility in the context of the deictic motion
verbs come and go, whose adult use contrasts sharply in
goal bias (Lester, 2014). If H1 is correct, then these verbs
should both begin with equally large goal biases, only
eventually differentiating go as a goal bias and come as a
non-goal bias verb. If linguistic input drives children’s
usage more so than innate conceptual biases, then children’s
use of come and go should be different from the start, and
possibly follow different trajectories.

Results 1
I fitted a linear mixed-effects model with the goal bias index
as dependent variable; age estimates (in days), lemma (come
or go), and their interaction as fixed effects; and speaker ids
as random effect (intercepts only). A hierarchical backwards

elimination of factors revealed that the maximal model,
consisting of the two-way interaction between age and
lemma, plus the two lower level main effects, could not be
reduced any further (age:lemma: F = 12.0396, p<0.001).
Closer inspection revealed a significant main effect for age
(F = 23.5018, p<0.001) but not lemma (F = 0.9828, p =
0.322), indicating that the influence of word type on the
goal bias index only becomes apparent when considered
longitudinally. The significant two-way interaction is
illustrated above as Figure 2.
Figure 2 plots the goal bias index (in characters) on the yaxis and the age spectrum (in days) attested in the
Manchester corpus on the x-axis. The left panel shows the
developmental trajectory of come; the right panel shows the
same for go. The left panel shows no change in g, with
sources and goals maintaining steady, close competition.
The right panel shows a relatively stable increase in goal
bias as the children age, with goals outweighing sources
early, and with this difference increasing over time.

Discussion 1
This pattern of results does not support H1: the goal bias is
clearly not the sole determinant of path description in
children’s early use of come and go. Rather, the fact that
path encoding is treated differently for these verbs provides
support for Lakusta and Landau’s (2012) suggestion that
presuppositions might drive patterns of mentioning. As
Lester (2014) found for adults, children’s path mentioning
for come and go appears to be determined by their
complementary
path-based
presuppositions:
come
presupposes goals and so occurs with them less frequently
than sources; the opposite is true for go. Additionally, the
persistence of the divide across the developmental span
studied here suggests that children acquire this lexical
contrast quite early, hinting at an input-driven effect. It may
be that children simply encode the same types of paths that
they have heard encoded with particular verbs, and that

1311

Figure 3: Goal bias as a function of the interaction of speaker type (chi(ld), adult) and verb (come, go)
children are sensitive to differences in the distributions of
path-mentioning independent of the goal bias.
Turning to the individual verbs, the pattern for go (Fig. 1,
right panel) could arise for several reasons. First, it might be
that the proportional relationship between goal and source
landmark encoding is maintained (or at least not reversed)
during the general developmental trend towards longer path
descriptions overall. A positive slope under these
circumstances would indicate (a) that goals were
consistently longer than sources by a particular margin (e.g.,
‘goals are always 2.5 times longer than sources’) or (b) that
either goals or sources grow somewhat faster, but that this
rate is fixed. However, there are good reasons to suspect
that neither of these is the case. Chief among these is the
fact that children simply do not produce multiple path
components in a single clause. Therefore, the means
reported here do not reflect competition within the clause,
but asymmetries in the complexity of mentioning of isolated
sources and goals. Goal landmarks tend to get longer
(perhaps due to general expansion of NP complexity) while
sources continue to be omitted. Go therefore exhibits a
standard goal bias, as expected based on Stefanowitsch and
Rohde (2004) and Lester (2014).
The flat, low developmental slope for come suggests two
things. First, come does not exhibit much of a goal bias
ever. Second, this lack of a goal bias is not influenced by
the children’s increasing ability to produce more complex
path descriptions. That is, neither goals nor sources offer
themselves as loci for the development of landmark
encoding in come clauses. Children’s path-mentioning in
come clauses is thus completely resilient to any influence of
goal bias in general and in developmental terms.

change over time (contra H1). The question remains,
however, to what extent this lexical mediation is a direct
reflection of adult patterns of use (H2, above). To
investigate this question, I added the adult data to the child
data from Study 1, collapsed age into a binary class (adult
vs. child) and performed a similar analysis. If adults and
children behave similarly, this will be evidence that
statistical biases in linguistic input can override conceptual
biases.

Results 2
I fitted a second linear mixed-effects model with the goal
bias index as dependent variable; speaker (child, adult) and
lemma as fixed effects; and speaker IDs as random effect
(intercepts only). A hierarchical backwards selection
procedure revealed that the maximal model, consisting of
the two-way interaction between speaker and lemma, plus
the two lower level main effects, could not be reduced any
further (lemma:speaker: F = 12.55, p<0.001). Closer
inspection revealed a significant main effect for speaker (F
= 9.51, p<0.01) and lemma (F = 446.39, p <0.001). The
significant interaction is illustrated as Figure 3 above.
Figure 3 plots the mean goal bias scores for come and go
for adults (left panel) and children (right panel). Both adults
and children use longer goal descriptions relative to source
descriptions in go clauses as opposed to come clauses
(accounting for the significant main effect of lemma).
However, children showed reliably lower goal bias scores
compared to adults for both verbs (main effect of speaker),
with a more drastic difference arising for go than come
(interaction of speaker and lemma).

Discussion 2

Study 2: Path-mentioning in child and adult
speech
The data from Study 1 suggest that the goal bias is strongly
lexically mediated, and that the strength of the goal bias can

H2 was supported by these findings: in general, the patterns
of usage in adult speech match the child-language data
better than the universal-goal-bias position. The fact that an
interaction between lemma and speaker did arise is likely

1312

due to a general limitation on children’s ability to produce
path descriptions (that is, the higher go mean in the right
panel of Figure 2 may be approaching the goal bias ceiling
for children). Otherwise, the children reflect the same
lexical contrast as the adults, even those contrary to the goal
bias. Moreover, while we can attribute the adult pattern to
Gricean strategies governing presupposition and omission,
children at this age have not yet mastered these abilities.
This suggests that the input (situated experience of language
use) drives the acquisition of come and go above and
beyond the underlying conceptual bias.

General Discussion
The results reported here have shown that the goal bias can
be overridden by principled differences in the use of verbs
otherwise fully grammatically licensed to occur with both
goal and source adjuncts. Moreover, they demonstrated that
this overriding effect of the linguistic input was present
from the earliest ages (around 20 months).
This study is the first to confirm the presence of a goal
bias in the naturalistic conversational speech of children, as
well as the first to consider longitudinal data for individual
children. In this way, I expand on the between-group
analyses of Lakusta & Landau (2012). Adopting a
longitudinal perspective revealed an interaction between
goal bias and lexical semantics such that each motion deictic
verb develops a distinctive path-structural representation.
Here, as predicted in Lakusta and Landau (2012), lexical
variation in path-mentioning is sensitive to pragmatic
presupposition. The contrasts in the presuppositional
structure of deictic paths in come and go lead to statistical
biases in the linguistic input, which become lexicalized
components of the verbs’ meanings over the course of
development. Moreover, these linguistic biases are fully
capable of overriding any ‘hardwired’ conceptual biases.
The clear role of naturalistic input suggests that the effects
observed by Lakusta and Landau could also receive an
input-driven explanation (as opposed to invoking innately
specified architecture for co-mapping forms across different
semantic domains). Below, I introduce some possibilities
for exploring this question further.

Future directions
This discussion opens up a variety of avenues for further
exploration of goal bias and language acquisition. A first
step might be to apply the methodologies used here to a
wider array of verb types, including especially manner-ofmotion verbs. In this way, one could determine whether the
goal-inhibiting effects found for come are a fluke of deictic
motion, or whether usage is the primary determinant for
other verbs, as well. Also, cross-linguistic comparison of
verb and path types both in adult and child speech would
help to address questions of innateness vs. social/statisticallearning.
More psycholinguistic data is necessary to understand the
verb-specific expectations about path component

‘attentional worthiness.’ One way to get at this issue would
be to use an eyetracking paradigm. For instance, one could
investigate preferential looking patterns within an array of
landmarks while participants (adults and young children) are
presented with recordings of various motion event
descriptions. These studies would address the on-line
comprehension of linguistic motion events relative to visual
stimuli, and so present a more direct picture of the task
faced by children acquiring these expressions.

References
Clark, E. V. & Garnica, O. K. (1974). Is he coming of
going? On the acquisition of motion deictic verbs.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13,
559-572.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Lakusta, L. M. (2005). Source and goal asymmetry in nonlinguistic motion event representations (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore.
Lakusta, L., & Landau, B. (2005). Starting at the end: The
importance of goals in spatial language. Cognition, 96, 133.
Lakusta, L. & Landau, B. (2012). Language and memory for
motion events: Origins of the asymmetry between source
and goal paths. Cognitive Science, 36(3), 517-544.
Lakusta, L, Wagner, L, O’hearn, K., & Landau, B. (2007).
Conceptual foundations of spatial language: Evidence for
a goal bias in infants. Language learning and
Development, 3(3), 179-197.
Lester, N. (2014). The comings and goings of come and go
(and move). Paper presented at the American Association
for Corpus Linguistics (AACL) 2014, Flagstaff.
Li, H. & Fang, A. C. (2011). Word frequency of the
CHILDES corpus: Another perspective of child language
features. ICAME, 35, 95-116.
Papafragou, A. (2010). Source-Goal Asymmetries in
Motion Representation: Implications for Language
Production and Comprehension. Cognitive Science, 34,
1064-1092.
Regier, T. (1996). The human semantic potential: Spatial
language and constrained connectionism. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Stefanowitsch, A. & Rohde, A. (2004). The goal bias in the
encoding of motion events. In G. Radden & K. Panther,
Studies in linguistic motivation (249-268). New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a cognitive semantics, Volumes
1/2. MIT Press: Cambridge.
Theakston, A. L., Lieven, E. V. M., Pine, J. M., & Rowland,
C. F. (2001). The role of performance limitations in the
acquisition of verb-argument structure: an alternative
account. Journal of Child Language, 28, 127-152.

1313

