Linking Joint Attention with Hand-Eye Coordination – A Sensorimotor Approach to
Understanding Child-Parent Social Interaction
Chen Yu and Linda B. Smith (chenyu, smith4@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, and Cognitive Science Program, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, 47405 USA
Abstract
An understanding of human collaboration requires a level of
analysis that concentrates on sensorimotor behaviors in which the
behaviors of social partners continually adjust to and influence
each other. A suite of individual differences in partners’ ability to
both read the social cues of others and to send effective behavioral
cues to others create dyad differences in joint attention and joint
action. The present paper shows that infant and dyad differences
in hand-eye coordination predict dyad differences in joint
attention. In the study reported here, 51 toddlers and their parents
wore head-mounted eye-trackers as they played together with
objects. This method allowed us to track the gaze direction of
each participant to determine when they attended to the same
object. We found that physically active toddlers align their
looking behavior with their parent, and achieve a high proportion
of time spent jointly attending to the same object in toy play.
However, joint attention bouts in toy play don’t depend on gaze
following but rather on the coordination of gaze with hand actions
on objects. Both infants and parents attend to their partner’s
object manipulations and in so doing fixate the object visually
attended by their partner. Thus, the present results provide
evidence for another pathway to joint attention – hand following
instead of gaze following. Moreover, dyad differences in joint
attention are associated with dyad differences in hand following,
and specifically parents’ and infants’ manual activities on objects
and the within- and between-partner coordination of hands and
eyes during parent-infant interactions. In particular, infants’
manual actions on objects play a critical role in organizing parentinfant joint attention to an object.
Keywords: joint attention, eye tracking, perception and action

Introduction
Everyday human collaborative behavior, from maintaining
a conversation to jointly solving a physical problem, seems
so effortless that we often notice it only when it goes awry
(Shockley, Richardson, & Dale, 2009). Many contemporary
theories of social interaction, collaboration, and joint
attention concentrate on internal representations and
inferences from those representations For example, one
common psychological explanation of how we manage to
(typically) work so well together is called “mind-reading”
(Baron-Cohen, 1997). The idea is that we form models of and
make inferences about the internal states of others; for
example, along the lines of “He is looking at the object and
so must want me to pick that up.” However, it is not at all
clear that such mental models about the states of others – and
inferences from such internal representations – can explain
the real-time smooth fluidity of such collaborative behaviors
as everyday conversation or joint action depends on
coordinated adjustments on the time scales of fractions of
seconds. Accordingly, there is growing interest (de Barbaro,

Johnson, Forster, & Deak, 2013; Hasson, Ghazanfar,
Galantucci, Garrod, & Keysers, 2012; Pereira, Smith, & Yu,
2008; Richardson, Dale, & Tomlinson, 2009; Shockley,
Santana, & Fowler, 2003) in more micro-analytic studies of
just what happens – in real time – as individual agents
interact. These new approaches concentrate on the real-time
dynamics of the behaviors of collaborating social partners –
rapid shifts of eye movements, head turns, and hand gestures
– and how they co-organize across partners in an interaction.
Within these newer approaches, an understanding of human
collaboration requires a level of analysis that concentrates on
sensorimotor behaviors in a complex dynamical system in
which the behaviors of social partners continually adjust to
and influence each other.
Here we focus on momentary looking behavior in
coordination with hand actions. Eye gaze is a micro-behavior
tightly tied to one’s internal attentional state (Baron-Cohen,
1997; Frischen, Bayliss, & Tipper, 2007) and used by
partners in social interactions to establish common ground
and smooth social engagements (Argyle, 2007). The
importance of gaze following to developmental process is
well documented: individual differences in infants’ and
children’s ability to coordinate visual attention with a social
partner is correlated with individual differences in language,
social, and cognitive development (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2005;
Mundy & Gomes, 1998). Considerable research also suggests
that both adults and infants are highly attentive to
instrumental hand actions of their social partners (Land &
Hayhoe, 2001). We know less about how attention to hands
may interact with gaze following.
The present study tests the hypothesis that infant’s success
in visually attending to the same object with their parent
depends on hand-eye coordination within the infant and
between the infant and parent. The hypothesis was suggested
by the results from a prior study of how parents and 12-month
old infants coordinate visual attention (Yu & Smith, 2013).
In that study, parents and infants played with multiple toys at
a time while both of them wore head-mounted eye tracking
systems that measured the momentary gaze of each partner
and provided a precise measure of the coordination of visual
attention. Consistent with findings from a growing number of
studies (Aslin, 2009; Deák, Krasno, Triesch, Lewis, &
Sepeta, 2014; Franchak, Kretch, Soska, & Adolph, 2011;
Frank, Vul, & Saxe, 2012; Yoshida & Smith, 2008), the
fixation data indicated that in this active context, infants
rarely looked to their parent’s face, a fact that precludes gaze
following by the infant as a contributing factor to joint
attention. Further, the dynamics of parent and infant attention
to objects during the interaction were very different: parents
rapidly shifted eye gaze among all the visual targets while

2763

infants generated longer and stickier looks on objects (Smith,
Yu, & Pereira, 2011; Yu & Smith, 2012). Despite these
differences in gaze patterns, parents’ and infants’ visual
attention was often coordinated such that they were fixated
on the same object at the same time. Moreover, the two
partners appeared to shift attention to an object nearly in
unison suggesting between-partner coordination at the
sensorimotor level. The gaze pattern from both partners
indicated that joint attention moments were often formed by
one partner handling an object and the other looking to those
hand actions.
In the present paper, we used a method similar to that in the
previous dual eye-tracking study of 12 month olds and their
parents (Yu &Smith, 2013). However, here we collected a
larger sample; the infant participants ranged in age from 11
to 24 months in an effort to capture individual differences in
object manipulation and socially-coordinated visual
attention. We focused on the second year of life because past
research suggests that during this age period, infants become
increasingly active and autonomous and individual
differences in motor behavior and joint attention become
noticeable (Landa, Gross, Stuart, & Faherty, 2013).

Method
Participants. The final sample consisted of 51 (24 male
infants) parent-infant dyads with the infants ranging in age
from 11 to 24 months (mean = 17.92, SD= 4.15); 14
additional dyads began the study but the infants refused to
wear the measuring equipment. The children were recruited
from a population of working and middle class families in a
Midwestern town.
Stimuli. There were 6 unique novel “toys” constructed in the
laboratory and pilot-tested to be interesting and engaging to
infants. Each novel toy was a complex object made from
multiple and often moveable parts and were of similar size,
on average, 288 cm3. These were organized into two sets of
three so that each object in the set had a unique uniform color.
Experimental setup. Parents and toddlers sat across from
each other at a small table (61cm × 91cm × 64cm). Parents
sat on the floor such that their eyes and heads were at
approximately the same distance from the tabletop as those
of the toddlers, a posture that parents reported to be natural
and comfortable. Both participants wore head-mounted eye
trackers (positive science, LLC; also see Franchak et al.,
2011). Each eye-tracking system includes an infrared camera
– mounted on the head and pointed to the right eye of the
participant – that records eye images, and a scene camera that
captures the events from the participant’s perspective. The
scene camera’s visual field is 90 degrees, providing a broad
view but one less than the full visual field --approximately
170o (Smith, Yu, Yoshida, & Fausey, 2014). Each eye
tracking system recorded both the egocentric-view video and
eye-in-head position (x and y) in the captured scene at a
sampling rate of 30 Hz. Another high-resolution camera
(recording rate 30 frames per sec) was mounted above the
table and provided a bird’s eye view that was independent of
participants’ movements.

Procedure. One experimenter played with the infant while
another experimenter placed the eye-tracking gear low on the
forehead at a moment when the infant was engaged with the
toy. To collect calibration points for eye tracking, the
experimenter directed the infant’s attention toward an
attractive toy. This procedure was repeated 15 times with the
toy placed in various locations on the tabletop to ensure a
sufficient number of calibration points. To calibrate the
parent’s eye tracker, the experimenter asked the parent to
look at one of the objects on the table, placed close to the
toddler, and then repeated the same procedure to obtain at
least 15 calibration points from the parent. Parents were told
that the goal of the experiment was to study how parents and
toddlers interacted with objects during play and therefore
they were asked to engage their toddlers with the toys and to
do so as naturally as possible. Each of the two sets of toys
was played with twice for 1.5 min, resulting in 6 minutes of
play data from each dyad. Order of sets (ABAB or BABA)
was counterbalanced across dyads.
Data processing. Four regions-of-interest (ROIs) were
defined: the three toy objects and the partner’s face. These
ROIs were coded manually by a coder who watched the firstperson view video with a cross-hair indicating gaze direction,
frame-by-frame, and annotated when the cross-hairs
overlapped any portion of the four ROIs. Thus, each dyad
provided two gaze data streams containing four ROIs (3
objects, partner’s face) as shown in Figure 1. The second
coder independently coded a randomly selected 10% of the
frames with 95% agreement. Also shown in Figure 1 is a
measure of sustained joint attention that will be described in
detail in the following section.

Figure 1. An overview of raw and derived data. Top: two gaze
data streams from child and parent include four regions of interest
– three toy objects and the partner’s face. Bottom: Sustained
visual attention (highlighted by dotted lines) is derived based on
child’s and parent’s gaze data.

Results
Individual gaze patterns and joint attention
Figure 1 shows a representative example of the raw
gaze data streams for one dyad and Table 1 provides the
summary statistics of several measures of infant and parent
fixations for the entire sample, including overall looks, looks
to faces and looks to objects. For each type of looking
behaviors, we report three measures: 1) percentage of total
looking time to ROIs, 2) frequency with which these looks
were formed (in rate/min), and 3) mean duration of looks (in
sec). For all measures, correlations with age were small and

2764

not significant, with one exception (proportion of time infants
looked at the ROIs versus “off-task”), the lack of an overall
age effects is consistent with a period of rapid developmental
change in which individuals progress at different rates and
thus a period of marked individual differences (see, Smith,
Yu & Pereira, 2011; Yu & Smith, 2012, 2013). However
infants and their parents differed considerably and reliably on
all measures: Infants and parents spent a high proportion of
time fixating the ROIs but parents spent more total time
overall than infants (Mparent=82.58%, Minfant=75.76%) and
exhibited more attentional switches between objects and
faces (Mparent=61.29 switches per min, switches per minute)
than infants (Minfant=25.46). Infants, in contrast, had longer
unbroken fixations on the ROIs than did the parents
(Mparent=806ms, Minfant=1825ms), showing the “stickiness”
often observed in infant and toddler attention during object
play (Kannass, Oakes, & Shaddy, 2006; Yu & Smith, 2013).
Finally and consistent with past findings (Yu & Smith, 2013),
infants rarely looked to their parents’ face during the play
session (Mparent=34.03%, Minfant=11.61%).
We used the method developed by Yu & Smith (2013) to find
joint attention episodes. We first determined –frame by
frame – the frames in which parents and infants fixated on the
same ROI. Meaningful shared attention should last some
amount of time longer than a frame (33msec) but might also
Table 1. Parent and infant differences in fixations on the defined
ROIs: the three objects and each other’s face.

include very brief looks elsewhere. Therefore, a joint
attention (JA) bout was defined as a continuous alignment of
parent’s and toddler’s fixation to the same ROI that lasted
longer than 500 msec and included segments of fixations that
were to the same object but separated by brief looks away by
one partner of no longer than 300 msec. Examples of the sodefined joint attention bouts from one dyad’s gaze streams
are shown in Figure 1.
Column 1 of Table 2 summarizes a set of statistics on
joint attention measures across the whole sample: the
percentage of overall time in joint attention to any ROI, the
frequency with which joint attention bouts were formed (in
rate/min), and the mean duration of these bouts (in sec).
These same statistics are provided for the two subcomponents
of overall joint attention – mutual gaze and joint attention to
an object. Overall, parents and toddlers looked at the same
object at the same time over 34.72% of the play session;
however, there were substantial dyad differences -- joint
attention episodes varied from near 14% to over 63% of the
play session.
As a first indicator of the potential importance of hand
actions, across dyads, 82.34% of joint attention moments on
a visual object, the target object was manually contacted by
at least one partner. In contrast, the percentage time in which
an object was being manually contacted by one partner in
non-joint attention moments was only 43.67% (t(100)=29.40,
p<0.001, d=6.07). Moreover, infants were holding the jointly
attended object 45.23% of time (SD=5.63%) and parents
were holding the jointly attended object 37.72% of time
(SD=5.81%). In brief, the target object was always in one of
the social partners’ hands at JA moments; and during those
moments, infants held it more than parents did (t(100)=5.85,
p<0.001, d=1.17).
6

Low and High JA groups
We partitioned the dyads into those with high and low
incidence of JA bouts using a median split of the overall
percentage of joint attention time. Columns 3 and 4 of Table
2 provide the statistics for the two defined groups for the
measures of percentage of JA time, frequency of JA bouts
and duration of JA bouts. Because the two groups were
defined by the overall percentage of time in joint attention,
the expectation is that they would differ on all the
components contributing to this overall measure. As shown
in column 5 of Table 2, this is generally true with the
exception of measures of mutual gaze, a low frequency
behavior in the present study, and one that at least in the
context of active toy play may not be linked to the likelihood
of joint attention (see also Yu & Smith, 2013). High and Low
JA dyads also did not differ in the frequency with which
parents looked to infant faces, Mhigh=22.77, Mlow=20.23,
t(49) < 1.00, nor in the frequency with which infants looked
to parent faces, Mhigh=4.56, Mlow=4.94, t(49) < 1.00. The
High JA infants were older than the Low JA infants but the
difference was not reliable; the mean age of the High JA
infants was 18.78 months (SD = 4.24) and the mean of the
Low JA infants was 19.8 months (SD=3.91), t(49) = 1.61,

2765

p=.113. Thus, neither age nor gaze following seems to be a
determining factor of individual differences in joint attention.
The next set of analyses speak directly to the hypothesis
that dyad differences in joint attention are related to withinand between-partner hand-eye coordination. By hypothesis,
object manipulation matters in establishing joint attention
because partners look to their own hand actions on objects
and to the hand actions of their partner. To test this
hypothesis, we measured the proportion of total play time that
gaze was fixated on a hand-held object. Hand-eye
coordination was measured by combining gaze and hand
streams, frame by frame, to determine whether the visually
attended object at a moment was manually handled by a
partner. With gaze and hand streams from both partners, this
yielded four measures: infant hand-eye coordination, parent
hand-eye coordination, infant eye to parent hand, and parent
eye to infant hand. Figure 2 shows the main results.
Consider first the case in Figure 2(a) which coincides with
a hand-following path to joint attention: the infant was
handling an object and the parent was not touching any
object. High and Low JA infants differed in the degree to
Table 2. Measures of Joint Attention Low and High Joint
Attention (JA) Dyads.

which they looked at the own manual actions on objects, with
high JA infants looking at their own object handling more
than Low JA infants. High and Low JA parents also differed,
with High JA parents being more attentive to the hand actions
of their infants than Low JA parents. These conclusions were
confirmed via a 2 (JA group) X 2 (Participant) analysis of
looking behavior for the cases when the (only) infant was
handling an object. The analysis revealed only two main
effects – Low versus High JA, F(1,98) = 12.11, p<0.001, ηp2
= 0.08, and Parent versus Infant, F(1,98)=18.37, p<0.001, ηp2
= 0.16. Across both groups, infants looked at their own hand
actions more than did their parents, but High JA infants and
High JA parents looked more at the object handled by infant
self, than did Low JA infants and Low JA parents. These
findings provide support for the main hypotheses from the
infant side of manual actions: Infants who are more likely to
achieve joint attention bouts with their parents not only
manually act on objects more, but they also look more to their
own hand actions. Moreover, they have parents who visually
follow the hand actions from those infants to an object more
than the parents of Low JA infants.
Figure 2(b) reports the patterns for another handfollowing path to joint attention when the parents were in
manual contact with an object (and the infants were not). A
2 (high vs. low JA group) x 2 (parent gaze vs. child gaze)
analysis of variance was conducted with no significant main
effects or interactions found (Fgroup(1,98)=3.56,p=0.06;
Fagent(1,98) = 0.17,p=0.67, n.s.; Finteraction(1,98)=0.11,p=0.73,
n.s.). This indicates that both parents’ and toddlers’ attention
to what the parent held was not related to whether they had
more or fewer joint attention bouts. Overall, the results from
the first two cases – infant holding and parent holding -suggest that dyad differences derive from differences in
infant hand actions on objects and from parent visual
responses to those hand actions from infants. That is, the

Figure 2. The proportion of total time child and parent visually
fixate the target object, when the child is handling the target and
the parent is not manually in contact with an object (A), when the
parent is handling the target object the child is not handling any
object (B), when the child is handling the target and the parent is
handling another object (C); and when the parent is handling the
target and the child is handling another object (D).

2766

principal individual differences appear due to differences in
the pathway through child holding and parent following.
Figure 2(c) and (d) show the findings from the more
complicated case in which the infant and parent are each
holding different objects: To which object do the partners’
look? For the objects held by the infant, a 2 (JA group) x 2
(Participant – parent/infant) ANOVA indicated a main effect
of JA group (F(1,98) = 6.87, p<0.01, ηp2 = 0.08), and
participant (F(1,98)=15.74, p<0.001, ηp2 = 0.14), but no
interaction (F(1,98) = 0.09, p=0.75, n.s.). High JA parents
and infants paid more attention to the objects being handled
by the infant than did Low JA parents and infants. The same
analyses with respect to the object handled by the parent
revealed only a significant effect of JA group (F(1,98) =
10.48, p<0.005,ηp2 = 0.11) with parents and infants in the
High JA dyads attending more to the objects handled by the
parent than did Low JA infants and parents. There was no
difference between parent and infant looking to parent hands,
nor the interaction between the two main factors (F(1,98)
=1.13, p=0.29,n.s.; Finteraction(1,98)=0.51, p = 0.47, n.s.).
Thus, in the context when the two partners present multiple
competing objects in play, High JA infants and parents
manage to find a joint solution to selecting an object for
attention and attend to the object held by either partner more
than do Low JA infants and parents.
These results provide clear support for the hypothesized
role of hand following in parent-infant joint attention and a
source of individual differences in the development of joint
attention in the second year of life. More specifically, High
and Low JA dyads are distinguished by infant manual
activity, infant attention to their own hand actions, parent
attention to infant hand actions, and the joint resolution of
competition when the two partners are holding different
objects.

General Discussion
The period between 1 and 2 years of age is a time of
rapidly emerging motor, attentional and social skills.
Consistent with periods of significant developmental changes
(Thelen & Smith, 1994), the observed dyad differences in
joint attention were larger than age differences. Further,
during this period of development and in the context of joint
play with multiple toys, success in joint attention was
differentially predicted by different behaviors for infants and
parents. The infant behavior most strongly associated with
dyad success in joint attention was coordination of eyes and
hands when handling an object. The parent behavior most
critical to joint attention was attention to the infant’s hand
actions. Further, parent attention to the infant’s hands was
strongly correlated with infant hand-eye coordination during
object manipulations. This last fact suggests that parents
whose infants were more coordinated attended to their
infant’s hand actions more than parents whose infants were
less coordinated and thus whose hand actions were less
predictive of the infant’s looking behavior. The importance
of the result is this: For parents to effectively follow their
infant’s attention, infants must send readable signals; for the
hand-following path, that signal requires coordinated hands

and eyes so that the easy-to-see hand location can reliably
signal looking behavior. The finding that individual
differences in joint attention were due principally to the path
of infant acting and parent following rather than the path of
parent acting and infant following aligns with a large
literature on parental responsiveness and the positive effects
of parents following on the infant’s interests in several
developmental domains (Bornstein & Tamis-LeMonda,
1989). Within this context, the present results also highlight
the critical importance of the infant’s developing
sensorimotor system in providing readable cues that parents
can follow.
A larger idea behind this research is that the sensorimotor
coordination of parents and infants as they jointly interact
with objects teaches infants how to rapidly read and respond
appropriately to social signals, and how to use their own
behavior to send signals to their parent. Because hand actions
on objects provide precise and readily perceived cues as to
the target of interest, hand actions –and attentional responses
to hand actions – may play a critical role in training more
precise gaze following (Ullman, Harari, & Dorfman, 2012).
By hypothesis, parents who effectively scaffold joint
attention with their infants during object play provide the
kind of coherent context in which the relevant signals and
behavioral responses to those signals are discovered. Thus,
parent-infant dyads who for whatever reason have difficultly
coordinating attention in object play may put the infant at risk
for poorer developmental outcomes. If, as the present results
imply, weaker hand-eye coordination on the part of the infant,
limits parent ability to effectively scaffold joint attention,
then poor hand-eye coordination could cascade into longer
term consequences in social development and language
learning.
The present proposal about the role of object
manipulation and eye-hand coordination in joint attention are
also relevant to the well-documented but not well-understood
link between atypical sensorimotor development and atypical
social and language development. More specifically, infants
at risk for significant delays in social and language
development have been reported to show atypical patterns of
early sensorimotor development include delayed and unusual
manual interactions with objects (Baranek, 1999; Koterba,
Leezenbaum, & Iverson, 2014; Provost, Lopez, & Heimerl,
2007). If this current proposal is correct – that the infant’s
own object manipulation skills are a limiting factor in
developing social interactions. Thus, the present findings
suggest one route through which atypical sensorimotor
development may impact social development and joint
attention. In addition, the present findings offer new and
testable hypotheses about how the development of socially
coordinated attention is supported by – as well as supports –
other developmental achievements.

Acknowledgments
We thank Seth Foster, Melissa Elston, Char Wozniak, Steven
Elmlinger for collection of the data. This research was
supported by National Institutes of Health R01 HD074601
and R21 EY017843.

2767

References
Argyle, M. (2007). Social interaction: Aldine.
Aslin, R. N. (2009). How infants view natural scenes
gathered from a head-mounted camera. Optometry and
Vision Science, 86(6), 561-565.
Baranek, G. T. (1999). Autism during infancy: A
retrospective video analysis of sensory-motor and social
behaviors at 9–12 months of age. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 29(3), 213-224.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1997). Mindblindness: An essay on autism
and theory of mind Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Bornstein, M. H., & Tamis-LeMonda, C. S. (1989). Maternal
responsiveness and cognitive development in children.
New
Directions
for
Child
and
Adolescent
Development(43), 49-61.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2005). The development of
gaze following and its relation to language
Developmental Science, 8(6), 535-543.
de Barbaro, K., Johnson, C. M., Forster, D., & Deak, G. O.
(2013). Methodological Considerations For Investigating
the Microdynamics of Social Interaction Development.
Autonomous Mental Development, IEEE Transactions on,
5(3), 258-270. doi: 10.1109/TAMD.2013.2276611
Deák, G. O., Krasno, A. M., Triesch, J., Lewis, J., & Sepeta,
L. (2014). Watch the hands: infants can learn to follow
gaze by seeing adults manipulate objects. Developmental
Science, 17(2), 270-281. doi: 10.1111/desc.12122
Franchak, J. M., Kretch, K. S., Soska, K. C., & Adolph, K. E.
(2011). Head-Mounted Eye Tracking: A New Method to
Describe Infant Looking. Child development, 82(6),
1738-1750.
Frank, M. C., Vul, E., & Saxe, R. (2012). Measuring the
Development of Social Attention Using Free‐Viewing.
Infancy, 17(4), 355-375.
Frischen, A., Bayliss, A. P., & Tipper, S. P. (2007). Gaze
cueing of attention: visual attention, social cognition, and
individual differences. Psychological bulletin, 133(4),
694-724.
Hasson, U., Ghazanfar, A. A., Galantucci, B., Garrod, S., &
Keysers, C. (2012). Brain-to-brain coupling: a mechanism
for creating and sharing a social world. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 16(2), 114-121.
Kannass, K. N., Oakes, L. M., & Shaddy, D. J. (2006). A
longitudinal investigation of the development of attention
and distractibility. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 7(3), 381-409.
Koterba, E., Leezenbaum, N. B., & Iverson, J. M. (2014).
Object exploration at 6 and 9 months in infants with and
without risk for autism. Autism, 18(2), 97-105.
Land, M., & Hayhoe, M. (2001). In what ways do eye
movements contribute to everyday activities? Vision
Research, 41(25-26), 3559-3565.
Landa, R. J., Gross, A. L., Stuart, E. A., & Faherty, A. (2013).
Developmental trajectories in children with and without
autism spectrum disorders: the first 3 years. Child
development, 84(2), 429-442.

Mundy, P., & Gomes, A. (1998). Individual differences in
joint attention skill development in the second year. Infant
behavior and development, 21(3), 469-482.
Pereira, A. F., Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2008). Social
coordination in toddler's word learning: interacting
systems of perception and action. Connection Science,
20(2-3), 73-89.
Provost, B., Lopez, B. R., & Heimerl, S. (2007). A
comparison of motor delays in young children: Autism
spectrum disorder, developmental
delay,
and
developmental concerns. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 37(2), 321-328.
Richardson, D. C., Dale, R., & Tomlinson, J. M. (2009).
Conversation, gaze coordination, and beliefs about visual
context. Cognitive Science, 33(8), 1468-1482.
Shockley, K., Richardson, D. C., & Dale, R. (2009).
Conversation and coordinative structures. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 1(2), 305-319.
Shockley, K., Santana, M., & Fowler, C. (2003). Mutual
interpersonal postural constraints are involved in
cooperative conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29(2),
326-332.
Smith, L., Yu, C., Yoshida, H., & Fausey, C. M. (2014).
Contributions of Head-Mounted Cameras to Studying the
Visual Environments of Infants and Young Children.
Journal of Cognition and Development(just-accepted).
Smith, L. B., Yu, C., & Pereira, A. F. (2011). Not your
mother's view: The dynamics of toddler visual
experience. Developmental Science, 14(1), 9-17.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems
approach to the development of cognition and action
(Vol. 10): MIT Press.
Ullman, S., Harari, D., & Dorfman, N. (2012). From simple
innate biases to complex visual concepts. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 109(44), 1821518220.
Yoshida, H., & Smith, L. B. (2008). What's in view for
toddlers? Using a head camera to study visual experience.
Infancy, 13(3), 229-248.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Embodied Attention and Word
Learning by Toddlers. Cognition, 125(2), 244-262.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2013). Joint Attention without Gaze
Following: Human Infants and Their Parents Coordinate
Visual Attention to Objects through Eye-Hand
Coordination. PLOS ONE, 8(11).

2768

