Making Moves: How Sex and Race are Detected from Biological Motion
Brian A. Eiler (eilerbn@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Rachel W. Kallen (rachel.kallen@ uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Michael J. Richardson (richamo@ucmail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati,
ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA
Abstract

with others (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995). This approach has
been valuable since social psychological research has
clearly demonstrated that categorical person knowledge
(e.g. race, sex), behavioral knowledge (e.g. relationship
history, exposure, prior behavior), and dispositional
characteristics (e.g. personality, attitudes, self-esteem)
interact to allow for adaptive behavior in the service of
effective social exchange (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995;
Macrae & Quadflieg, 2010; Kenny, 2004).
A criticism of this perspective is that we do not fully
understand how perceptual processes influence social
cognition because explanations have been limited to
representational accounts—abstract representations and
disembodied cognitive processes are assumed to underlie
social perception (Macrae & Quadflieg, 2010). Moreover,
this traditional approach does not sufficiently recognize the
role of coordination and action in social cognition, even
though movement and coordination directly impact
outcomes of social interaction such as rapport, liking, and
person perception (e.g. Hodges & Baron, 2007; Marsh,
Richardson, & Schmidt, 2009; Richardson, Marsh, &
Schmidt, 2010; Runeson & Fryholm, 1983). As such,
research is needed that addresses how perceptual-motor
processes, including the movement coordination between
interacting individuals, reveal social information during
ongoing and dynamic social interaction with others. By
understanding how motor processes reveal information
about others and about the interaction itself, we can better
conceptualize social cognition as an emergent outcome of a
coupled system of co-actors in which perception, action, and
cognition are irreducible and dynamically intertwined. As
such, social cognition could be conceptualized as emerging
from the mutual constraints and functional couplings
amongst these processes, agents and environment, and
agents themselves.

Humans are able to successfully detect characteristics about
others that serve to guide interaction, yet the source of this
information is unclear. We hypothesized that biological
motion specifies sex and race as these invariant categorical
characteristics often guide interaction. Results indicated that
movement kinematics are necessary but not sufficient for sex
detection and that race is detectable when movement is
produced by Caucasians but not African Americans, and only
when kinematic information is embedded in body structure.
These results imply that social psychological perspectives on
person perception should be integrated with ecological
psychological perspectives on affordances in order to
understand social cognition.
Keywords: social cognition; kinematic specification of
dynamics; person perception; biological motion

Introduction
Humans are perpetually embedded within social context. As
such, we are all potential interaction partners. A smile in
passing, a short conversation with a stranger while standing
in line, playing a game with friends, a dance, a marriage
proposal, a surgical team performing an emergency
procedure—we interact with others in a myriad of different
ways. While interactions vary with regard to familiarity,
complexity, purpose, and duration, the tasks we perform
together allow us to accomplish shared goals and maintain
various types of relationships. It is also necessary that we
accurately detect social information. This information
allows us to distinguish among those we interact with and
provides feedback on how interactions might unfold over
time. We also use this information to coordinate with one
another, such that tasks are accomplished effectively and
appropriately. Yet, there is not one prototypical social
interaction. This is not to say that social interactions are not
random or non-deterministic. On the contrary, social
interactions are functionally defined and guided by timeevolving and goal directed behavior (e.g. type of interaction,
need for social belonging), that allows us to understand and
organize the world in terms of others and their relationship
to us. Traditional social psychology suggests that social
cognition, defined as an implicit and highly automatic
information processing activity, guides ongoing behavior

Social Cognition
The traditional understanding of person perception is that
we develop schemas for interaction by integrating isolated
pieces of information about ourselves, others, and
behavioral actions in order to predict future behavior and
understand social interactions with others (Macrae &

638

Quadflieg, 2010). In support of this interaction-based
approach Kenny (2004) has found that people utilize both
categorical and behavioral information to make target
judgments and to predict how someone will act given a
specific context, and, that we integrate these information
sources to form individualized schema. Here, categorical
information refers to nonverbal behaviors, appearance
characteristics, stereotypes based on group membership, or
other immediately detectable cues that place individuals into
general categories. Behavioral information is functionally
defined in that there is meaning attached to an individual’s
actions. Because people are capable of detecting
information about others at zero acquaintance (when they
have never met a person before), it is reasonable to
hypothesize that there is invariant information (e.g., sex;
race) available that individuals are sensitive to and that this
information initially informs our interactions with others.
The zero acquaintance or “thin slices” paradigm requires
participants to view a short (less than 5 minute) visual
sample of a target, and make judgments about the
categorical and behavioral information that applies to them
(Ambady, Bernieri, & Richeson, 2000). Thin slices
successfully predict a wide variety of variant and invariant
characteristics including: affect, personality traits,
interaction motivation, social relationships between actors,
bias, job performance, quality of relationship, gender,
sexual orientation, and others (see Ambady, Bernieri &
Richeson, 2000 for review). Interestingly, individuals who
move more are more accurately and reliably judged than
less expressive individuals (Ambady, Bernieri, & Richeson,
2000). Also, contrary to expectation, longer behavioral
samples (4-5 minute) do not result in greater accuracy than
shorter samples of 200-400 ms. Yet, it is well known that as
interaction time increases the utilization of variant
behavioral information compared to invariant categorical
information also increases (Ambady, Bernieri & Richeson,
2000). Together, these findings suggest that brief
movements supply information that is integral to accuracy
and reliability of judgments when forming person
perceptions, but additional information is gained from social
interaction extended in time.
People may also bring individual variability into
situations, including judgments others from thin slices.
Hirschberg and Jennings (1980) have proposed that we
attend to our interpersonal environment in ways that
correspond to our self-perceptions (e.g. personality traits).
They have demonstrated that our opinions about ourselves
may impact how we judge others—that salient
characteristics of our identity my impact those judgments
(Hirschberg & Jennings, 1980). More recently, it has been
shown that evaluator characteristics during clinical
personality assessments demonstrate the same types of
effects (Miller, Rufino, Boccaccini, Jackson, & Murrie,
2011). More generally, these effects are consistent across
individual perceivers (Wood, Harms, & Vazire, 2010),
lending credibility to the idea that individual differences

may be considered a type of invariant characteristic in
person perception.
While categorical information is often invariant, for
example, individuals do not often change their race or sex,
this information implies variant behavioral characteristics
associated with belonging to these categories and used to
form interaction schema. Yet, we know little about how
these processes overlap or how these characteristics are
specified. This begs the question, can we detect these
characteristics, and if so, what information facilitates
accurate detection?
Macrae and Quadflieg (2010) have argued that person
knowledge is perceptual and we detect both of these types
of information. To be clear, invariant person knowledge
refers to stable cues that are not context specific, like sex,
race, age, or other visual information and is analogous to
categorical information described above. Variant person
knowledge, like behavioral information, is a medium that
propagates social information and includes dynamic cues
like eye gaze direction and head-body orientation.
Importantly, both invariant and variant person knowledge
are integrated in order to maintain stable understandings of
other conspecifics and interact effectively (Macrae &
Quadflieg, 2010). Thus, it is possible that we may extend
the thin slice literature by exploring what information might
be available in human movement.

Biological Motion and Person Perception
One promising area of research that provides a methodology
for testing informational specification of invariant
categorical person knowledge is biological motion. First
described by Johansson (1973), point light displays have
been used to identify the type of detectable characteristics
available in biological motion quite broadly. A point-light
(PL) display is a dynamic video that reduces whole body
movement to bright markers placed on major joints. Point
light displays retain kinematic information while
eliminating all other sources of person knowledge
(Johansson, 1973). Because movement is determined by
kinematics (mechanics of motion) and motion is explained
by dynamics (properties of objects that are causally
involved in the course of movement), individuals perceive
causality by detecting dynamic properties that specify what
can be done with a moving object, including other
individuals (Runeson & Frykholm, 1983). This implies that
a portion of person knowledge may be derived from human
motion because what we can do with another human is often
closely associated with socially relevant information that
helps to guide interaction (e.g. sex or race).
Indeed, prior research has shown that socially relevant
information can be detected from movement, specifically
from gait dynamics. Kozlowski and Cutting (1977)
demonstrated that the sex of a walker could be detected
from a dynamic point light display. Cutting and Kozlowski
(1977) found that information in gait using PL displays
allowed subjects to categorize strangers and friends
accurately. Gait dynamics also impact trait impressions of

639

Method

power, happiness, and youthfulness, masculinity,
easygoingness and approachability (Montepare &
Zebrowitz-McArthur, 1988). Yet, research that examines
how other types of social behaviors (e.g. dancing, playing
sports, etc.) specify categorical or behavioral characteristics
(e.g. race, personality, liking etc.) is needed in order to
make a stronger claim that person characteristics are
perceptual in nature. As such, we argue that movement
guides accurate person perception and we are able to detect
both variant and invariant information from biological
motion.

The current project implemented a within subjects design
with stimulus type (point light and depth array) as the
primary independent variable. Sex and race detection
sensitivity served as the primary dependent variables.
Participants were asked to judge avatars being designed for
use in a virtual reality game in order to disguise the actual
purpose of the experiment and minimize bias. All
experimental procedures and materials were approved by
the University of Cincinnati Institutional Review Board.

Participants

Current Study

Subjects (N = 27) participated in exchange for partial course
credit. Subjects were all right handed and free from any
known neurological or musculoskeletal disorder and had
normal or corrected to normal vision. The majority of
participants were white (89.7%), female (72.4%), and
ranged in age from 17 to 44 years old (M = 19.4).

Overall, the previous research suggests that movement
produces information that may guide initial interaction by
specifying target characteristics. However, it is unclear how
biological motion is used to make accurate predictions about
targets in terms of person knowledge, and what target
characteristics are detectible from movement kinematics in
more ecologically valid tasks beyond gait. Furthermore,
while various types of target characteristics can be detected
from biological motion, to date, no studies have addressed
whether race is specified by kinematics. Moreover,
individuals do not only encounter the movements of joints
on a screen—we come across a set of embodied joints that
have a characteristic shape and outline in addition to
kinematics. As such, research that addresses whether a
moving body devoid of facial features and skin complexion
allows for successful detection of invariant person
characteristics adds to our understanding of how movement
makes person knowledge discoverable. In the current study
we will address these issues by employing two types of
movement displays. First, a point light display that is height
normalized and shows the movements of the major joints as
dots on a screen, and second, a grey scale depth display
using the Xbox Kinect, which displays body structure and
outline, but no other identifying characteristics like facial
structure, skin complexion or hair. All movement displays
will show movement from individuals between 5’9” and 6’
tall actors.
The current study tested the hypothesis that movement
underlies social cognition because movement produces
kinematic information that specifies invariant person
knowledge. Additionally, we sought to identify whether
variables important for person perception (sex and race)
were detectable at zero acquaintance, and what type of
information was required to do so (i.e. kinematics alone vs.
body structure in addition to kinematic information). We
hypothesized that sex and race would be detectable at zero
acquaintance from kinematic information alone and
kinematic information plus body structure, but that accuracy
would be greater with additional information about body
structure. We also predicted that individual difference
variables would be related to detection accuracy (e.g. mood,
personality, sociability, status).

Procedure
Participants completed a questionnaire assessing
demographic variables and individual differences and
practiced making avatar judgments upon entering the lab
and after providing informed consent. Subsequently,
participants viewed a total of 48 pre-recorded movements
produced by eight actors and recorded by the Xbox Kinect
displayed on a 50” computer monitor. Each video stimulus
was 15 seconds in duration and displayed one of three
movements (walking in place, jumping jacks or side-to-side
shuffle steps) produced by each actor. Each actor (2 black
men, 2 black women, 2 white men, and 2 white women) had
his or her movements recorded at an earlier date to create
each stimulus. Point light displays and depth array displays
were matched such that the same movement data produced
by the actor for each movement created both types of
stimuli. Participants viewed 24 point light stimuli and 24
depth array stimuli in blocks. Video type was
counterbalanced and no order effects were observed.
Immediately following each video, participants filled out a
questionnaire on an iPad to indicate their judgments of the
target (i.e., sex, race).

Results
We employed several data analysis techniques in order to
determine participants’ sensitivity and ability to accurately
detect sex and race. We used signal detection theory and
calculated d-prime (d’), a signal-to-noise sensitivity
measure, for each participant as a function of sex, race, and
stimulus type. We tested these values against zero to
determine if participants were able to successfully predict
target characteristics above chance levels. We used a oneway repeated measures ANOVA to determine if stimulus
type was related to accuracy. Finally, we correlated
sensitivity measures with individual difference variables in
order to determine if participants’ sensitivity was related to
dispositional characteristics.

640

Sex Detection

below. In light of the sex detection results and because race
does not seem to be detectable from these movements we
did not test for the effects of movement type on d’.

We hypothesized that participants would be able to
accurately detect sex from both types of stimuli, but would
be more accurate when viewing the depth array. Results
partially supported this hypothesis. Results from an one
sample t-test (against a d’ value of 0) indicated that
participants were able to accurately detect sex above chance
levels from point light displays if the movement was
produced by a female, t(24) = 2.584, p = .016, but not if the
movement was produced by a male (p > .05). When viewing
the depth array, participants were able to successfully detect
both male, t(25) = 18.173, p < .001, and female, t(25) =
19.739, p < .001 above chance levels. Furthermore, results
of a paired samples t-test indicated that there was a
significant difference in detection accuracy between
stimulus type when detecting males, t(23) = -11.798, p <
.001, and females, t(23) = -14.212, p < .001, such that
participants were more accurate in detecting sex from the
depth array in both cases. Figure 2 summarizes these
patterns.
We also tested the effects of stimulus type on sex
detection using a one-way repeated measures ANOVA. All
results were non-significant (all p’s > .21). This indicates
the type of movement the participants viewed did not
impact detection sensitivity to sex. Together, these results
indicate that it is not a specific movement type driving sex
detection in the current study.

Figure 2. Sensitivity to race as a function of stimulus type.

Individual Differences
We also hypothesized that participants’ dispositional
characteristics would be related to their ability accurately
detect sex and race. We calculated bivariate correlations
between d’ values and individual difference scores to
determine if any dispositional characteristics (e.g.
personality traits or sociality) were associated with detection
sensitivity. We found that several dispositional
characteristics were significantly associated with d’ values,
which are summarized below (Table 1). In general,
participants’ mood at the time of the experiment and selfreported friendliness impacted race detection, while
personality (openness to experience) and self-perceived
status impacted sex detection from kinematic information.
Table 1: Correlations between sensitivity and individual
difference variables (*p < .05, **p < .001)
d '	  female	  (PL)
d '	  male	  (PL)
d '	  male	  (DA)
d '	  Cauc	  (PL)
d '	  Afr.	  Am.	  (PL)
d'	   Afr.	  Am.	  (DA)

Figure 2. Sensitivity to sex as a function of stimulus type.

Race Detection
We also expected that participants might be able to
successfully detect race from both point light and depth
array stimuli, but that they would be more sensitive in the
depth array condition. Overall, however, the result did not
support this hypothesis. Participants were unable to detect
either race (Caucasian or African American) from the point
light displays (all p’s > .05). For the depth array,
participants were able to accurately detect race above a
chance level if the stimulus depicted the movements of
someone Caucasian, t(23) = 2.097, p = .047, but not if the
movements were produced by an African American
individual (p > .05). Results are summarized in Figure 3

Openness
.523*

High	  Status

Friendliness	   Good	  Mood

-­‐.451*
-­‐.525*
-­‐.525*

-­‐.424*
-­‐.424*
.534**

Discussion
Individuals are embedded within a rich social context. Other
people provide a potentially infinite number of possible
interactions, yet there is structure to the way we understand
others and how we interact with them. We accomplish
shared goals and form complex and unique relationships
with others. Interaction is guided by both invariant
categorical and variant behavioral information that function
to differentiate individuals from one another and guide
interaction norms. We need to belong, and, as such, we

641

often parse the world in terms of the social relationships we
have with others.
A long history in social psychology has understood social
cognition as an information processing activity that is rather
implicit, yet integrates variant and invariant person
knowledge and organizes this information in order to
effectively interact with others. On the other hand, a long
history in ecological psychology posits that we interact with
others in terms of what we can do with or what others afford
us (Gibson, 1979). This perspective argues that what we do
with others is a function of information detection, rather
than processing, in which information is detectable from
energetic invariants (e.g. biological motion) that specify
particular possibilities for interaction.
Yet, these two traditions are not mutually exclusive or
contradictory. Here, we attempted to illustrate how these
two perspectives can reinforce one another by examining if
movement provides the energetic information that specifies
particular invariant categorical characteristics important for
social cognition—sex and race. Additionally, we attempted
to tease apart what information is available in kinematics
alone (by displaying joint movements devoid of all other
bodily cues to sex and race) from what can be detected from
movement in the absence of other socially relevant invariant
information (e.g. facial structure, hair, skin tone) by
displaying kinematics embedded in body structure. We
hypothesized that, in general, social cognition likely
emerges from the mutual constraints and functional
couplings between co-actors embedded in a social
environment (Marsh, Richardson & Schmidt, 2009) and that
it was likely that rather than an actor simply detecting
behavioral possibilities from a static object via their own
movement (Gibson, 1979) social information is specified by
the movement of others and modulated by individual
differences in detection ability. We found that the
relationship between biological motion and invariant
categorical information about targets is not clear-cut.
For sex, kinematics alone seems to provide information
for accurately detecting females, as prior work has
demonstrated. Yet, in support of our hypotheses, providing
some body structure drastically improves detection accuracy
for both males and females. This provides initial evidence
that kinematics are necessary, but not sufficient for
successful recognition of sex, although it could be an issue
of statistical power as to why we were unable to fully
replicate Kozlowski and Cutting (1977). Additionally, we
found that movement type was not related to the sensitivity
to sex. This seems to indicate that there may be information
in movement that specifies sex more broadly. Although
some work exists that implicates hip to waist ratio and gait
patterns like hip sway and shoulder swagger as specifying
characteristics for sex detection (Johnson & Tassinary,
2005), determining additional biological constraints that
might specify sex (e.g. center of mass or specific joint
movement) would be useful. Our work is also novel in light
of prior research that has demonstrated a bias toward male
sex recognition from biological motion both temporally and

in frequency of categorization (Johnson, Iida, & Tassinary,
2012). Additionally, it would be valuable to explore how
movements associated with stereotypical female activities
(e.g. loading a washing machine vs. fixing a car) are linked
to detection sensitivity.
These results imply that neither traditional social
psychological research suggesting representation of
categorical knowledge, nor ecological suggestions that posit
all information is contained in movement are correct in and
of themselves. As such, future research on how sex is
perceived and used during social interaction must address
and integrate both of these perspectives. Additionally, future
research should address perceiver characteristics that might
influence sex detection such as sexual orientation. As many
of our participants were female, it also would be appropriate
to determine if group status (same sex vs. different sex)
impacts the degree to which participants are sensitive to
target sex or if gender identification maps onto movement in
a similar manner to biological sex.
As for race detection, the results are even less clear. Our
results suggest that race is only detectable with body
structure, and perhaps only when produced by Caucasian
individuals. Prior research has yet to As race is an invariant
categorical characteristic that is socially constructed and
irreducible to skin complexion, these results are not
insignificant. Participants predicted that targets were
Caucasian more frequently than they predicted that targets
were African American. The demographic composition at
the university or geographically is likely to impact both
familiarity with and perceived representation of non-white
individuals, thus researchers should take this into account
when generalizing as to whether or not race is detectable
from movement. Furthermore, because the majority of our
participants were white, it could be the case that individuals
are more sensitive to their racial in-group, although we were
underpowered and could not test this assumption
statistically. Finally, it could be the case that because race is
less biologically constrained than sex (e.g. men and women
have a different center of mass due to skeletal and body
proportion differences) and it may be the case that race
perception has more to do with how people think people of
different racial categories are likely to move. This suggests
that implicit biases or stereotypical racial associations
should be examined in future studies.
Finally, we attempted to address the question of what
people bring to the situation; what individual differences are
likely to affect sex or race detection? While some
correlations exist between sensitivity to race and sex, we are
reluctant to make any strong conclusions from these
relationships. The presence of moderately strong
associations precludes us from dismissing them entirely, but
for now we only suggest that individuals’ dispositional
characteristics are a likely influence on the ability to detect
sex and race from human movement. It could also be the
case that methodological characteristics of the study (e.g.
order of the questions in the survey) made these
characteristics salient. Future research should address

642

additional individual difference variables on sex and race
detection to determine which, if any, moderate or mediate
sensitivity scores.

Perception and Psychophysics, 21(6), 575-580. DOI:
10.3758/BF03198740
Macrae, C.N. & Quadflieg, S. (2010). Perceiving people. In
S.T. Fiske, D.T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook
of Social Psychology Volume II (p. 428-463). Hoboken,
New Jersey: John Wilkey & Sons.
Marsh, K. L., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt, R. C. (2009).
Social connection through joint action and interpersonal
coordination. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 320-339.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01022.x
Miller, A.K., Rufino, K.A., Boccaccini, M.T., Jackson,
R.L., & Murrie, D.C. (2011). On individual differences in
person perception: Raters’ personality traits relate to their
psychopathy checklist-revised scoring tendencies.
Assessment,
18(2),
253-260.
DOI:
10.1177/1073191111402460
Montepare, J.M. & Zebrowitz-McArthur, L. (1988).
Impressions of people created by age-related qualities of
their gaits. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
55(4), 547-556. DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.55.4.547
Richardson, M. J. Marsh, K. L., & Schmidt, R. C. (2010).
Challenging egocentric notions of perceiving, acting, and
knowing. In L. F. Barrett, B. Mesquita, and E. Smith.
(Eds.). The Mind in Context. (pp. 307-333). New York,
NY: Guilford.
Runeson, S. & Frykholm, G. (1983). Kinematic
specification of dynamics as an informational basis for
person-and-action perception: Expectation, gender
recognition, and deceptive intention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 112(4), 585-615.
DOI: 10.1037/0096-3445.112.4.585
Wood, D., Harms, P., & Vazire, S. (2010). Perceiver effects
as projective tests: What your perceptions of others say
about you. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
99(1), 174-190. DOI: 10.1037/a0019390

Conclusion
The research described here suggests the following. First,
that sex is detectable from biological motion and that body
structure plays a significant role, above and beyond joint
kinematics. This is the case for multiple types of
movements, indicating that gait is not the only specifying
action for sex. Second, that race may be detectable for
members of one’s in-group or more easily with familiarity
and experience, but is likely not a result of biological
constraints on movement or kinematics. Third, that
individual differences seem to be related to detecting both
sex and race, thus identifying the pertinent factors that
impact sensitivity is needed. Overall, we have provided
initial evidence that both the social and ecological
perspectives on social cognition can contribute to our
understanding of how we perceive and identify the
characteristics of others that impact our interactions with
them.

References
Ambady, N., Bernieri, F.J., & Richeson, J.A. (2000).
Toward a histology of social behavior: Judgmental
accuracy from thin slices of the behavioral stream. In
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology Vol. 32
(Mark P. Zanna, Ed.), 201-271.
Gibson, J, J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin
Greenwald, A.G. & Banaji, M.R. (1995). Implicit social
cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes.
Psychological Review, 102(1), 4-27. DOI: 10.1037/0033295X.102.1.4
Hirschberg, N. & Jennings, S.J. (1980). Beliefs, personality,
and person perception: A theory of individual differences.
Journal of Research in Personality, 14, 235-249. DOI:
10.1016/0092-6566(80)90031-8
Hodges, B.H. & Baron, R.M. (2007). On making social
psychology more ecological and ecological psychology
more social. Ecological Psychology, 19(2), 79-84. DOI:
10.1080/10407410701331918
Johnson, K.L., Iida, M., & Tassinary, L.G. (2012). Person
(mis)perception: Functionally biased sex categorization of
bodies. Proceedings of the Royal Society, Biological
Sciences, 279, 4982-4989. DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2012.2060
Johnson, K.L. & Tassinary, L.G. (2005). Perceiving sex
directly and indirectly: Meaning in motion and
morphology. Psychological Science, 16(11), 890-897.
DOI: 10.111/j.1467-9280.2005.01633.x
Kenny, D.A. (2004). PERSON: A general model of
interpersonal perception. Personality and Social
Psychology
Review,
8(3),
265-280.
DOI:
10.1207/s15327957pspr0803_3
Kozlowski, L.T. & Cutting J.E. (1977). Recognizing the sex
of a walker from a dynamic point-light display.

643

