Memory Processes of Sequential Action Selection
Franklin P. Tamborello, II (franklin.tamborello.ctr@nrl.navy.mil)
National Research Council Postdoctoral Research Associate
Washington, DC, USA

J. Gregory Trafton (greg.trafton@nrl.navy.mil)

U. S. Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Ave SW
Washington, DC 20032 USA

Erik M. Altmann (ema@msu.edu)

Michigan State University, 316 Physics Rd, Rm 298A
East Lansing, MI 48824 USA

Abstract
We have devised a unified framework with which we
can make predictions about several types of human
error—omissions, perseverations, and PCE—across
multiple tasks with data collected from multiple labs.
Previously we have demonstrated this model for PCE
from two tasks (Tamborello & Trafton, 2013). Now we
demonstrate it for omissions and perseverations in
Altmann, Trafton and Hambrick’s (Altmann, Trafton, &
Hambrick, 2014) UNRAVEL task.
Keywords: memory; architecture; cognitive model;
action selection; error

Introduction
Error is a common occurrence in everyday and in working
life. Studying human error is important not only for what it
reveals about the normal operation of cognitive mechanisms
but also because with increasing capability and complexity
of our technological systems (e.g., transportation, power
generation) the amount of damage that can result from error
is magnified. But studying human error is difficult because
of the variability of error behavior. Furthermore, error often
arises from the dynamic interactions of several cognitive
processes that normally perform very reliably.
We have devised a unified framework which explains
multiple types of human error—omissions, perseverations,
and postcompletion error (PCE)—across multiple tasks with
data collected from multiple labs. A unified framework is
important because one cognitive system, i.e. the human
mind, produces all error types. Obtaining the correct
explanation for one error type then acts as a constraint for
explaining other error types. Furthermore, if we are to
predict error in complex task environments then multiple
error types must fall naturally out of the theory. This model
mainly draws upon two previous works, the working
memory hypothesis of Byrne and Bovair (Byrne & Bovair,
1997) and Memory for Goals (Altmann & Trafton, 2002).
Our model predicts error to occur as a combination of a
limited-capacity to spread activation from working memory
to long term memory as well as goal decay. Previously we
have demonstrated this model for PCE from two tasks
(Tamborello & Trafton, 2013). Now we demonstrate it for

omissions and perseverations in Altmann, Trafton, and
Hambrick’s (2014, 2015) UNRAVEL task.
The UNRAVEL task is a sequential memory task in which
subjects perform a two-choice decision regarding features of
a simple alphanumeric display. UNRAVEL is an acronym
for the stimuli features subjects must respond to, such as
that one item is Underlined or italicized, the letter is Near to
or far from the beginning of the alphabet, etc. It is in several
ways an ideal tool for studying sequential behavior because:
• Subjects must adhere to the prescribed sequence,
• Each decision has only two options,
• Each of the fourteen potential responses is indicated by a
unique letter of the alphabet so that intended but incorrect
actions are easily inferred,
• The interface provides no cues that may aid subjects’
recall of their current position within that sequence,
• It is well-suited to frequent interruptions.

Interruptions
The context we focus on is post-interruption resumption
of a task. With the rapid rise of communication technologies
that keep people accessible at all times, issues of
interruptions and multitasking have become mainstream
concerns. For example, Time magazine (Wallis, 2006) and
the New York Times (Thompson, 2005) both reported
stories about interruptions and multitasking and how they
affect performance. The information technology research
firm Basex issued a report on the economic impact of
interruptions, which they estimated to be around $588
billion a year (Spira, 2005). Given the prevalence of
interruptions, building systems that can help remind an
individual what they were doing or where they were in a
task can have a large impact on productivity.
Being interrupted also greatly increases the number of
errors (Trafton, Altmann, & Ratwani, 2011). People will
frequently repeat a step that has already been performed or
skip a step that needs to be performed after an interruption.
Sometimes these errors are irritating (e.g., ruining a meal by
leaving out a crucial ingredient), but sometimes they can
have disastrous consequences (e.g., taking medicine twice or
not configuring the flaps for airplane takeoff).

2338

Theories of Action Selection and Error
Working Memory Capacity Patterns of error types
constrain explanations of memory processes involved in
action selection, and a few computational theories of
memory have attempted to explain specific error types.
Byrne and Bovair (Byrne & Bovair, 1997) explained
postcompletion error as a function of limited-capacity
working memory. They addressed high and low working
memory demand as well as individuals’ high and low
working memory capacities. Their model assumed a
hierarchical goal representational structure. This was based
on a GOMS (Card, Moran, & Newell, 1983) analysis of an
experiment task also reported in their study. Their CAPS
model (Just & Carpenter, 1992) propagated activation
necessary for retrieval of step representations downward
from the task supergoal to subgoals to individual steps.
Subgoals had to have their activations maintained above a
certain threshold in order for them to remain accessible.
Crucially, the main goal of the procedure would be satisfied
before it was time to perform the postcompletion step. The
presence of other information to maintain in an active state,
in this case a three-back memory task, taxed the system to
capacity such that it failed to maintain the postcompletion
subgoal above threshold.
Memory for Goals Another account of systematic error,
Memory for Goals (Altmann & Trafton, 2002), posits that
we encode episodic traces of our goals as we complete
tasks. Each goal is encapsulated in an episodic memory,
which sparsely represents a behavioral context at the time of
its encoding. The strength of these memories decay over
time such that it may be difficult to remember the correct
point at which we resume a task after an interruption.
Memory for Goals provides a process-level theory for why
certain types of errors are made during a well-learned task
as a consequence of retrospective, episodic memory
(Altmann & Trafton, 2007; Ratwani & Trafton, 2010;
Trafton, Altmann, & Ratwani, 2009). Memory for Goals
implies that people are able to retrieve suspended goals
successfully if and only if there are cues that prime them
(Altmann & Trafton, 2002).
The Remember-Advance Model Altmann et al.
developed a formal model of the UNRAVEL task describing
it as a two-phase retrieval process. The model carried over
no task context from step to step in any sort of buffers or
working memory. Instead, at the beginning of each step it
retrieved an episodic encoding of the last action it
performed. It then used that memory as the cue for an
associative retrieval from long-term memory of the action to
perform for the current step of the task. Perseverations
occurred due to interference in the retrieval of the episodic
codes during the first retrieval phase. Omissions were a
consequence of associative interference during the
prospective phase of retrieval.
ACT-R Process Model We developed our computational
process model using the ACT-R 6 cognitive architecture
(Anderson, 2007; Anderson et al., 2004). ACT-R is a hybrid
symbolic and subsymbolic computational cognitive
architecture that takes as inputs knowledge (both procedural
and declarative about how to do the task of interest) and a
simulated environment in which to run. It posits several

modules, each of which perform some aspect of cognition
(e.g., long-term declarative memory, vision). Each module
has a buffer into which it can place a symbolic
representation that is made available to the other modules.
ACT-R contains a variety of computational mechanisms and
the ultimate output of the model is a time stamped series of
behaviors including individual attention shifts, speech
output, button presses, and the like. It can operate
stochastically and so models may be non-deterministic.
Like the Remember-Advance Model, ours uses a twophase retrieval process. Unlike the Remember-Advance
Model, it only uses the retrospective phase for resumption of
an interrupted task. Prospective retrieval is accomplished by
storing a task state representation as the contents of a set of
buffers as a working memory capacity. Associative
activation spreading from those buffers to long-term
declarative memory retrieves the next step in the sequence.
One of the benefits of embodying a theory in a
computational architecture, such as ACT-R, is that it allows
researchers to develop and test concrete, quantitative
hypotheses and it forces the theorist to make virtually all
assumptions explicit. To the extent that the model is able to
simulate human-like performance the model provides a
sufficiency proof of the theory. Furthermore, the constraints
on model development imposed by the cognitive
architecture are critical for building a cumulative science, an
enterprise not traditionally one of cognitive science’s strong
suits (Anderson, 2002; Newell, 1973).

The UNRAVEL Task
Method
Participants Three hundred Michigan State University
undergraduates participated for credit toward course
requirements or payment of $10. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of three interruption duration conditions.
Design and Materials Figure 1 illustrates two example
stimuli from the UNRAVEL task. Stimuli always consisted
of one letter and one numeral, always with one inside a box
in the center of the display and the other either above or
below, one item was always either italicized or underlined,
and one item in red or yellow. Aside from those constraints,
items were presented in random order.
Procedure The experiment presented a display such as in
Figure 1. Subjects were to remember which step of the
UNRAVEL sequence they were currently on and to respond
to the stimulus appropriately. As soon as subjects pressed a
key indicating one of the fourteen potential responses, the
experiment advanced to the next trial.
The experiment did not indicate to subjects when they
erred. Sequence errors were coded with respect to the
previous step. For example, if steps U, R, and A were
performed in succession, R would be a +1 sequence error,
because N was skipped, but A would be correct, because A
follows R in the UNRAVEL sequence.
Participants worked in one of three between-subjects
conditions according to duration of the interruption: one,
two, or three consecutive interruption task trials. On
average, the interruptions lasted 13, 22, or 32 seconds,

2339

PLACEKEEPING MODEL

54

(a) Sample stimuli for UNRAVEL task:
Stimulus 1

Stimulus 2

base level activation, that memory has high activation at the
time that it is encoded. As time passes, that memory’s
strength decays and this decay serves a function. This allows
old episodic memories to decay to unretrievability so that
they do not interfere with the retrieval of new memories. As
the model continues task execution and time passes, newer
episodic memories are encoded. Newer memories with
strong activations keep getting stored in memory while old
memories’ activation strengths decay gradually until those
memories can no longer be reliably retrieved. But decay
occurs gradually so that relatively recent episodes still have
Figure 1. Left: The underlined numeral “9” is displayed in
some small chance of interfering with the most recently
red in this example experiment display. Right: The italicized
(b) Choice rules and candidate responses for UNRAVEL task, and responses to the stimuliencoded
in (a): episode.
letter “X,” is yellow in this example.
When the model is interrupted, it immediately tries to
!"#$%&#"#'(%'#)*$+"'#,*-+.
0)&6.6)("'
remember the last UNRAVEL step it executed, which is
/("$
3"#$%&#"#
01%.2"'3-+"#
/,*-+-#'4
/,*-+-#'5
respectively, depending upon how quickly subjects
encoded in one of these episodes. The model tries to retrieve
!
"completed
#
$%&'&$()'*#+*!,-)'.#,)-*/'*#,*0(&.#$+
#
the interrupting transcription typing task. "
1
, The
2
.)3)'*#+*1)&'*(/*/'*4&'*2'/5*+(&'(*/2*&.6%&7)(
,
2one of these breadcrumb memories. Retrieval provides a
experiment
entailed 4 trial blocks with
10
8
'
9
$%&'&$()'*#+*8)-*/'*:)../;
'
9renewal of activation to the retrieved memory, effectively
interruptions each, averaging 6 trials between each
<
&
7
$%&'&$()'*#+*<7/=)*/'*>)./;*(%)*7/?
7
&resetting its decay process. Because the model has limited
interruption. Results appear together with the model results.
@
=
$
.)3)'*#+*@/;).*/'*A/,+/,&,(
$
$capacity within its buffers, it must dedicate those buffers to
B
)
/
-#C#(*#+*B=),*/'*D-/
)the interrupting task. However, it can to some extent
Model
E
.
5
-#C#(*#+*E)++*(%&,*/'*F/')*(%&,*G
5
.interleave operations for two separate tasks, in this case the
interrupting task and rehearsal (Salvucci & Taatgen, 2008).
The model works by incorporating and coordinating two
Throughout the interruption, the model performs this
distinct systems underlying prospective and retrospective
(c) Sample stimulus for interrupting task:
threading of rehearsal with the interrupting task as an
memory. Those systems are associative spreading activation
explicit rehearsal strategy. The model diverts just sufficient
(Anderson et al., 2004) and functional decay (Altmann,
cognitive resources from the interrupting task to keep the
2002), respectively.
episodic memory of the primary task active enough to
provide a good chance of its retrieval at resumption.
Correct Behavior
The model uses rehearsal as a means to preserve reference
A task like UNRAVEL requires prospective memory to
to
a particular piece of information across time. Each time it
remember what comes next and retrospective memory to
retrieves
a memory, that memory’s activation is
remember what was done last. Our model uses these two
strengthened
(Altmann & Trafton, 2002; Anderson, 2007;
memory processes during the two phases of the UNRAVEL
Anderson
et
al.,
2004). Meanwhile, other memories not used
task, selecting the next step and remembering where it left
during
rehearsal
decay. This decay serves a function, which
off sample
(Figure
2). Both
Figure 1: (a) Two
stimuli
for theprocesses
UNRAVELare
taskactivation-based,
(the 9 is red and thethough
X is yellow).
is
to
limit
retrospective
interference caused by other
they differ in how they use memory activation.
memories.
(b) Response mappings
for the the
UNRAVEL
responses
for the
two sample
stimuli in (a).
Selecting
next task,
stepandMost
trials
function
using
By threading rehearsal (Salvucci & Taatgen, 2008), the
prospective memory to remember what step comes next. We
model
can maintain easy access to a memory despite its
(c) Sample stimulus
for
the
interrupting
task,
after
four
letters
have
been
typed.
assume that action selection is a prospective memory task.
need
to
apply the limited resources of its buffers to the
We use ACT-R’s spreading activation mechanism to
interruption
task. When the interrupting task ends, the model
implement prospective memory. Furthermore, activation
no
longer
requires
its limited buffer resources be dedicated
propagates from active buffer contents to long-term memory
to
that
task,
and
so
it can again put them to use on the main
according to what we assume to be learned association from
UNRAVEL
task.
To
resume the UNRAVEL task, the model
each context to its subsequent action (Botvinick & Plaut,
again
retrieves
its
episodic
memory. Having done so, it uses
2004). During selection, the current step serves as a context
the
reference
to
a
step
of
UNRAVEL
contained within the
which cues subsequent steps.
episodic
memory—the
last
UNRAVEL
step performed—to
Resuming post-interruption With a task like
start
the
next
cycle
of
that
task’s
execution.
UNRAVEL, wherein participants must resume after having
been interrupted, it is necessary to remember the last action
performed and then to use that memory to continue task
execution. Resumption trials, that is, those trials
immediately following an interruption, require the
retrospective retrieval of the last step of the UNRAVEL
sequence that was performed. Of course, subjects in the
UNRAVEL task are instructed to expect interruptions
frequently.
Our model constructs a sort of breadcrumb trail as it
executes the UNRAVEL task. Upon completion of each
step, the model creates a memory uniquely encoding that
one instance of the trial event. Using ACT-R’s concept of

Error Behavior
Errors arise out of the interaction of transient activation
noise—an architectural feature of ACT-R—with the
processes of normal task execution. Each of the two
processes functions differently, and so the effects of their
combinations with retrieval activation noise produces the
two different sequence error types, omissions and
perseverations.
Omission We assume that association is somewhat
imprecise in that there is not a clean one-to-one mapping of
cue to target. Instead, some association “bleeds” over from

2340

Retrospective
Memory

Prospective
Memory

Rehearsal

Associative
Spreading Activation

Resumption

Action
Selection

Model Results
We used our model to simulate data from 1,000 subjects.
This large number of model runs allowed effects to
converge on the model’s true predictions. The model’s
means closely matched those of the participants, R2 = .87,
F(1, 34) = 227, p < .001. Figure 3 plots the model’s means
against the participants’ means and 95% confidence
intervals.

Discussion
The combination of single-phase associative prospective
retrieval for normal task execution and dual-phase
functional decay retrospective retrieval with the prospective
retrieval explained the pattern of omissions and
perseverations quite nicely. Furthermore, because this is the
same model we used to explain PCE in Byrne and Bovair’s
working memory capacity task and Ratwani et al.’s
interruption task, it means that PCE is functionally identical
to the omissions in this task with the exception that those
steps happen to be functionally isolated within their tasks.

Transient
Activation
Noise

Perseverations

Omissions

Normal Task Execution

Figure 2. Associative spreading activation is the prospective
memory process underlying selection of correct actions.
When transient activation noise, a fundamental property of
human memory, spikes during prospective retrieval it can
lead to an omission. Likewise, the model implemented
retrospective memory by an explicit rehearsal strategy that it
threaded with the interrupting task. Spikes in transient
activation noise during retrospective retrieval sometimes
caused perseverations.
the target to a handful of subsequent items, with each
subsequent item receiving less association than the one
coming before it in sequence. The model may omit a step
when transient noise is such that it simultaneously
suppresses activation of the correct next step and enhances
activation of one of these subsequent items.
Furthermore, we assume that the model retains some
representation of its task context in active buffers during its
task execution. We assume, as Altmann and Trafton (2007)
have shown that people must rebuild such representations
gradually at resumption. For the model this means that it has
less retrieval activation available to spread for its first
prospective retrieval attempt after the interruption. With the
relative amount of activation provided by noise larger in this
case, the model is more likely than normally to retrieve the
representation for an action that should come one or two
more steps in the future.
Perseveration The most recently performed step has the
highest base level activation because it was referenced most
recently. However, the next most recently referenced step
still has a high, albeit less so, base level activation level.
Noise can temporarily make the next-most-recently
performed step more active than the most recently
performed step. Typically this happens at interruption onset,
when the model begins its rehearsal. It then rehearses an
incorrect, but near action (i.e. from one or two steps back).

Perseverations Subjects appear not to have perseverated
reliably during normal task execution. This is consistent
with the process model’s single-phase prospective retrieval
mechanism for action selection.
Omissions UNRAVEL subjects exhibited at 1% rate of
omission errors, even when the experiment did not interrupt
them. Our process model explains this effect as a product of
a relatively high ratio of associative spreading activation to
retrieval noise during normal task execution. In this
condition, the model operates with a representation of the
current task context in two of its active buffers. These
representations serve as the cues to prime associative
retrieval. Two buffers supply more retrieval activation to the
memory most associated to the current context than does
one buffer alone.

Interruption and Resumption
Perseverations The model uses decay to mitigate
retrospective interference. However, decay takes time, and
so the most recent one or two episodic codes may, with
transient noise, have enough activation to interfere with the
memory of the current task context. For this reason, the
error-triggering interference tends to occur at the onset of
rehearsal. The interruption occurs, the model retrieves an
episodic code but because of interference that code is from
one or two steps prior. Now that that older code has been
strengthened by a retrieval instance it is the most active
episodic code and so it is retrieved in each subsequent
rehearsal cycle and at resumption.
Omissions For the process model, we assume that gradual
rebuilding of task context representation (Altmann &
Trafton, 2007) means that during resumption the model
operates with less associative activation to spread than
during normal task execution. The process model does this
at resumption by copying the contents of the retrieved
episode to only one of its active buffers. Then the model
attempts prospective retrieval of the next step. However,

2341

Model

Human

Figure 3. Human (solid lines, circle points) and model (dashed lines, square points) results for the UNRAVEL task. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals for human data.
with only one buffer providing associative activation, the
ratio of activation spreading to long-term memory versus
noise is lower than it is during normal task execution. This
means that spikes in noise are more likely to make other,
slightly less-associated memories more active than the
memory encoding the correct next step. When the model
retrieves one of these other memories, it then omits the next
correct step.

Comparison with Remember-Advance
The Remember-Advance model claims that for normal task
execution people perform the same two-phase retrieval that
they use for resumption. This means that for each step
people must recall what they did last step. The implication
here is that people do not retain a current task context
representation in any sort of working memory-like buffer.
The process model somewhat simplifies assumptions
underlying task execution relative to the RememberAdvance model. The process model uses two-phase retrieval
sparingly because, time-wise, it is expensive, and even
small-scale time costs matter (Gray & Boehm-Davis, 2000).
Instead, for normal task execution it is a simpler explanation
and provides for more efficient task execution for the model
to retain some task context representation in an available
working memory capacity. This arrangement is congruent
with the body of research supporting ACT-R, including Gray
and Boehm-Davis’ finding that milliseconds matter.

Explicit Rehearsal Strategies
But it incurs this expense because of a necessity brought
about by two factors: 1) it must persist state information

over a longer duration than what decay would allow, and 2)
it does not have the working memory capacity to retain this
information and accomplish its interrupting task. One
solution is to at interruption onset pack away task state
information into a form that can be retrieved later (an
episodic memory), use just a little bit of cognitive resources
to rehearse throughout the interruption, and at resumption
retrieve that episode and use it to reload the task context
information to the active buffers.
Theories like ACT-R and Threaded Cognition are useful
tools for exploring topics such as rehearsal in a busy task
environment. With those two theories, we were able to
constrain the space of possible rehearsal strategies to the one
used by the model: immediate retrieval followed by
subsequent retrievals at .52 second intervals.
Interruption duration impacts resumption performance
because with every rehearsal iteration, there is a chance that
an incorrect episodic memory could be retrieved. By ACTR’s base-level learning mechanism, every time a memory is
retrieved, its activation is strengthened. Typically this
manifested in the model’s behavior when the model would,
at rehearsal onset, retrieve by mistake an episodic memory
from one or two trials ago rather than from the justcompleted trial. Although this would often lead to the model
rehearsing the wrong memory from the outset, a mistaken
rehearsal later on could also lead to error.

References
Altmann, E. M. (2002). Functional decay of memory for
tasks. Psychol Res, 66(4), 287-97. doi:10.1007/
s00426-002-0102-9

2342

Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2002). Memory for goals:
An activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26(1),
39-83. Retrieved from Google Scholar.
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2007). Timecourse of
recovery from task interruption: Data and a model.
Psychonomic Bulletin &amp; Review, 14(6), 1079-1084.
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2015). Brief lags in
interrupted sequential performance: Evaluating a model
and model evaluation method erik M. Altmann michigan
state university. International Journal of HumanComputer Studies. Retrieved from Google Scholar.
Altmann, E. M., Trafton, J. G., & Hambrick, D. Z. (2014).
Momentary interruptions can derail the train of thought. J
Exp Psychol Gen. doi:10.1037/a0030986
Anderson, J. R. (2002). Spanning seven orders of
magnitude: A challenge for cognitive modeling. Cognitive
Science, 26(1), 85-112. Retrieved from Google Scholar.
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind exist in
the physical universe? New York, NY: Oxford University
Press. Retrieved from Google Scholar.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review, 111(4), 1036-60. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.111.4.1036
Botvinick, M., & Plaut, D. C. (2004). Doing without schema
hierarchies: A recurrent connectionist approach to normal
and impaired routine sequential action. Psychol Rev,
111(2), 395-429. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.111.2.395
Byrne, M. D., & Bovair, S. (1997). A working memory
model of a common procedural error. Cognitive Science,
21(1), 31-61. Retrieved from Google Scholar.
Card, S. K., Moran, T. P., & Newell, A. (1983). The
psychology of human-computer interaction. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Freedman, M. L., & Martin, R. C. (2001). Dissociable
components of short-term memory and their relation to
long-term learning. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 18(3),
193-226. doi:10.1080/02643290126002
Gray, W. D., & Boehm-Davis, D. A. (2000). Milliseconds
matter: An introduction to microstrategies and to their use
in describing and predicting interactive behavior. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 6(4), 322-335. doi:
10.1037//1076-898X.6.4.322
Gunzelmann, G., Anderson, J. R., & Douglass, S. (2004).
Orientation tasks with multiple views of space: Strategies
and performance. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 4(3),
207-253. Retrieved from Google Scholar.
Hanten, G., & Martin, R. C. (2000). Contributions of
phonological and semantic short-term memory to
sentence processing: Evidence from two cases of closed
head injury in children. Journal of Memory and
Language, 43(2), 335-361. Retrieved from Google
Scholar.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity theory of
comprehension: Individual differences in working
memory. Psychological Review, 99, 122-149. Retrieved
from Google Scholar.
Martin, R. C., & Freedman, M. L. (2001). Short-term
retention of lexical-semantic representations: Implications

for speech production. Memory (Hove, England), 9(4-6),
261-80. doi:10.1080/09658210143000173
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Newell, A. (1973). You can’t play 20 questions with nature
and win: Projective comments on the papers of this
symposium. In W. G. Chase (Ed.), Visual information
processing (pp. 283-308). New York: Academic Press.
Retrieved from Google Scholar.
Ratwani, R. M., & Trafton, J. (2010). A generalized model
for predicting postcompletion errors. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 2(1), 154-167. doi:10.1111/j.
1756-8765.2009.01070.x
Salvucci, D. D., & Taatgen, N. A. (2008). Threaded
cognition: An integrated theory of concurrent
multitasking. Psychological Review, 115(1), 101-30. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.115.1.101
Spira, J. B. (2005). The high cost of interruptions. KM
World, 14(8), 1. Retrieved from Google Scholar.
Tamborello, F. P., & Trafton, J. G. (2013). A long-term
competitive process model of a common procedural error.
In Proceedings of the 35th annual conference of the
cognitive science society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Thompson, C. (2005). Meet the life hackers. New York
Times Magazine. URL: Http://www. Nytimes. Com/
2005/10/16/magazine/16guru. Html (29th December
2011). Retrieved from Google Scholar.
Trafton, J. G., Altmann, E. M., & Ratwani, R. M. (2009). A
memory for goals model of sequence errors. In Proc. 9th
international conference of cognitive modeling. Retrieved
from Google Scholar.
Trafton, J. G., Altmann, E. M., & Ratwani, R. M. (2011). A
memory for goals model of sequence errors. Cognitive
Systems Research, 12, 134-143.
Wallis, C. (2006). The multitasking generation. Time
Magazine, 167(13), 48-55. Retrieved from Google
Scholar.

2343

