Memory Capacity Limits in Processing of Natural Connected Speech:
The Psychological Reality of Intonation Units
Heather Elizabeth Simpson (hsimpson@umail.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of California – Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, 93106 USA

Fermı́n Moscoso del Prado Martı́n (fmoscoso@linguistics.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of California – Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
Abstract

be a fundamental unit of spoken language, that represents the content of a speaker’s focus of consciousness at
the moment of verbalization, is restricted to representing
one piece of new information, and is usually limited to
a small number of words, about three or four in English
(Chafe, 1994). This definition would seem to equate the
IU to the spoken-language instantiation of a capacitylimited short-term store, but this claim has never been
directly tested.
IUs represent coherent intonational contours, defined
by a complex of prosodic cues. The major cues to IU
boundaries include: changes in speech rate, certain types
of abrupt pitch change, and pauses. The IU is comparable to the intermediate prosodic phrase in the hierarchy
defined by Pierrehumbert and Beckman (1988). A sample transcript sentence, with IU boundaries indicated by
line breaks with punctuation, is provided below.

Many theories of memory propose some type of shortterm store limited in capacity to a small number of information chunks. However, although short-term verbal memory is generally considered to be a crucial
component of language processing, the relevant information chunk level that may define capacity limits in
ecologically-valid spoken language has never been investigated. The Intonation Unit (IU), an intermediate-level
prosodic phrase, has been theorized to be a fundamental
unit of spoken language, the focus of a speaker’s mental
processing. This suggests that IUs might play a role as
the relevant unit representing “chunks” of spoken language. We report the results of an experiment investigating the role of IUs in short-term memory in a serial
recall task. We found a significant non-linear effect of
stimulus size in IUs, but not clauses. We conclude that
Intonation Units are the primary linguistic unit used for
chunking spoken language input in memory.
Keywords: short-term memory; working memory capacity; information chunks; memory capacity; serial recall; verbal recall; sentence processing; prosody; attention

Introduction

Anyway,
this girl must only weigh like,
a hundred and ten pounds.

Short-term memory is generally acknowledged to be a
crucial part of processing verbal information (e.g. Miller,
1956; Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; McElree, 2000; Lewis,
Vasishth, & Van Dyke, 2006). However, memory for
spoken language naturally produced in context, the only
type of language primary to development and universal
across cultures, has gone virtually unstudied. Theories
of short-term memory that propose a form of capacitylimited short-term storage (e.g. Miller, 1956; Broadbent, 1975; Mandler, 1985; Cowan, 2000, 2008; Baddeley, 2000; McElree, 2000; Jonides et al., 2008) acknowledge that in continuous complex input such as spoken
language, capacity limits would be attested in terms of
chunks of highly-associated items, but the nature of such
chunks in natural spoken language has not yet been investigated.
The Intonation Unit (IU), an intermediate-level
prosodic phrase defined by Chafe (1979, 1994) and
DuBois, Cumming, Schuetze-Coburn, and Paolino
(1992), is a strong candidate for a linguistic unit
that may correspond to the relevant chunk level for a
capacity-limited memory. The IU has been theorized to

Psycholinguistic accounts of memory have focused primarily on syntactic structure and written language, and
as such have often implicitly assumed that the clause or
sentence unit is the important higher-level unit in memory for connected discourse (e.g., Sachs, 1967; Bransford
& Franks, 1971). However, sentence processing research
has provided evidence that prosodic grouping can affect
syntactic processing (e.g., Pynte & Prieur, 1996; Schafer,
1997; Kjelgaard & Speer, 1999). In addition, the few
memory studies that have investigated both syntactic
and prosodic grouping have found effects of both clauses
and prosodic phrases on recall performance (Jarvalla,
1979; Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 1976).
Jarvalla (1979) summarizes a set of experiments testing recall for portions of recorded readings of written
passages. Each tested portion ended in two seven-word
clauses, and the final clause either stood alone as a sentence or formed a sentence with the previous clause.
When the passages were presented with normal prosody,
the final clause was recalled nearly perfectly (96% byword average recall) regardless of its sentence status,
but the previous clause was recalled much better if it was

2206

part of the same sentence (81% vs. 49%). When prosodic
information was removed through a reading done in a
monotone and controlled pace, the sentence boundary effect was weakened considerably, with the previous clause
recall in both conditions at around 50%, but the average
recall of the final clause remained high (88-91% vs. 96%).
Therefore, it seems the effect of the sentence boundary
was largely dependent on prosodic information, as would
be expected due to its status as a combination of syntactic and prosodic information (Chafe, 1994), but there
was a strong effect of the clause unit both with and without prosodic information.
In contrast, Marslen-Wilson and Tyler (1976) showed
that the effect of prosodic boundary remained even in the
absence of syntactic information. They presented stimuli
ending in two eight-word clauses, with three conditions:
normal prose, a semantically-degraded condition, and a
syntactically-degraded condition. In the semanticallydegraded condition, the words in the passage were replaced with randomly-chosen frequency-matched ones
from the same word class. In the syntactically-degraded
condition, the passage used in the first condition was
further scrambled through random re-ordering of the
words. The stimuli in these two conditions were read
with prosody matched to the normal prose condition.
The degraded conditions had lower overall recall performance, with average recall in the final eight-word group
at 86%, 75%, and 68%, for the normal, semantic, and
syntactic conditions, respectively; but the most dramatic
effect was the reduction in recall for the prior eight-word
group, with performance at 79%, 43%, and 6%. This
indicates that prosodic information was relied upon to
group the stimuli into smaller chunks when other sources
of information were not available.
There is also evidence for the influence of prosodic
grouping on memory from more traditional short-term
memory tasks such as serial recall of digits (Frankish,
1995; Saito, 1998). Frankish (1995) found that pitch
patterns mimicking natural prosodic grouping contours
significantly improved recall of nine-digit lists, but pitch
contours taken from familiar melodic structures did not
facilitate recall.
The results of prior research suggest important roles
for both clause-level chunks and their prosodic analogues
in memory for spoken language. However, none of these
studies directly compared the effects of syntactic and
prosodic grouping of the same stimuli, even though there
is a wealth of evidence that language exhibits complex
hierarchical prosodic organization that is not isomorphic
to syntax (Beckman, 1996; Shattuck-Hufnagel & Turk,
1996; Cutler, Dahan, & van Donselaar, 1997). IUs often
match up with clause boundaries, about 60% of the time
in the conversational English speech analyzed by Chafe
(1994), so they are likely to be the closest analogue to
clauses in prosodic organization, but they are clearly dif-

ferent from clauses. For example, the sample transcript
sentence provided above contains three IUs, but only a
single clause.
We conducted an experiment which addresses this
issue by directly comparing number of words, IUs,
and clauses as predictors of recall performance using
naturally-produced spoken language stimuli. We assume
that the complexity and unpredictable length of these
stimuli made sub-vocal rehearsal during stimulus presentation improbable, and thus, following Cowan (2000,
2008), a ’pure’ capacity limit should be observable as a
discontinuity in verbatim recall performance at a certain
number of chunks. This discontinuity may appear either
as a recency effect or effect of total stimulus size, but
the recency effect may not be reliable due to interference from recall of the earlier portions of the stimulus.
The experiment methodology is described below, followed by a discussion of the algorithm used to score participant responses, and finally the statistical modeling
results and discussion. The results will shed light on the
role of IUs and clauses in memory, and will provide a
new source of evidence for the debate over short-term
memory capacity limits.

Experiment
Methods
Materials Stimuli consisted of 54 audio clips selected
from the Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken American English (SBCSAE) (DuBois et al., 2000-2005). The SBCSAE corpus contains audio files of naturally-produced
spoken English with accompanying detailed transcriptions. The Stanford Parser (version 3.2.0 1 ) was used to
automatically derive syntactic parses for the transcripts
of the SBCSAE corpus. The transcripts and their parses
were then automatically processed using R scripts to extract IU, clause, and word counts for each continuous
portion of uninterrupted speech from a single speaker.
Clause counts were derived from the number of S nodes
in the parse for that portion. IU counts were derived
from the Intonation Unit boundaries provided in the
SBCSAE corpus. This information was used to select 54
stimuli, which were intended to represent a low, medium,
and high range for number of IUs, clauses, and words,
with two examples per combination. The number of IUs
was used as a starting point, and the low, medium, and
high ranges of clauses and words were selected from the
available potential stimuli within that IU range. Other
considerations, such as the general clarity of the stimulus, also constrained stimulus choice. Table 1 below
shows stimulus length ranges for each of the three linguistic units.
1
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml,
cessed 06/20/2013

2207

ac-

Table 1: Stimulus length ranges

IUs
Clauses
Words

Low IU
(n=18)
2-4
1-8
4-40

Med IU
(n=18)
5-10
2-7
10-44

High IU
(n=18)
14-17
8-28
49-99

Participants 113 undergraduates recruited from introductory linguistics courses participated in the experiment. Students received extra credit in their courses as
compensation for their participation.
Procedure Stimuli were presented on a desktop computer over high-quality over-ear headphones. OpenSesame (Mathôt, Schreij, & Theeuwes, 2012) was used to
create the experiment interface. Participants were given
verbal and written instructions explaining that their task
would be to listen to a series of audio clips on a computer,
and after each one, to transcribe what they remembered
hearing into a text file. The instructions explicitly asked
them to include everything that they remembered hearing, even if they thought it did not make sense or they
weren’t sure how to spell something. The text file used
for transcription was separate from the experiment interface to allow full word processor-style manipulation of
the text, which was not possible in the experiment design
software used. Participants were explicitly instructed to
minimize the transcription text file window while the
clip was playing, so that they would not be tempted to
start transcribing while listening to the clip. The 54 test
stimuli were presented in random order, preceded by one
audio clip used as a training phase.
The participant was instructed to alert the experimenter or research assistant of any confusion or issues
with the task after the training clip. This clip was the
same for all participants and it was not included in the
analysis.

Results
Participants’ transcripts were reviewed by a research assistant to fix formatting errors and unambiguous misspellings (e.g. “taht” instead of “that”). Transcripts
were then processed automatically to extract the transcript for each clip and link it to trial order information
taken from the experiment interface. Problems with processing the text files due to remaining formatting errors
or missing information led to exclusion of data from 12
of the participants, so the total number of transcripts
used in the analysis was 101.

Scoring
A script was created using the Python programming language to automate comparison of participant transcripts
to the gold standard (GS) transcript, the original tran-

script from the SBCSAE corpus representing the written equivalent of the audio stimulus. Scoring against
the GS transcript was designed to be an exact serial recall measure. On the first pass, any word with no exact
match in the GS was scored as incorrect. All indices
of exact-string-matched words in the GS were identified
and stored. In the second pass, for each transcript word
in order, the GS word with the lowest serial position
was taken to be the correct match, and then was removed from the list of indices. This would ensure that,
for example, if there were three instances of the in the
GS and in the participant’s transcript, they would be
matched to the GS in the same relative order. On the
third pass, the algorithm reviewed relative position order information for matches. Each match was compared
to the most recent previous match (if any), and scored
as incorrect either if the previous match had a higher GS
word position, or if the previous match was more than
20 positions lower, unless the following match was also
greater than 20 positions ahead, indicating that the participant omitted a large portion of the stimulus but is
now correctly recalling a later portion. This third pass
accounted for errors where the participant correctly recalled part of the clip but in a displaced order, and scoring errors where a match was attributed incorrectly (e.g.
if the word the was used instead of a in a particular
noun phrase, it would be quite likely to have a string
match to another instance of the from another part of
the transcript, requiring two sequential string matches
to validate a jump in position match helps to minimize
this type of error). The performance of this algorithm is
very good as a measure of ordered exact word matches,
based on spot-checking of the output by the author.

Analysis
A generalized additive mixed-effects logistic regression
was used to predict the likelihood of retrieval for each
word in the stimulus based on its length in Words, IUs,
and Clauses. The dependent variable was a binary value
for each stimulus word for each participant, indicating
whether that participant correctly recalled that word in
their transcript. Serial word position (i.e. number indicating it was the n-th word in stimulus) was included
to control for primacy and recency effects on recall. IU
position was not included in the final model due to high
levels of collinearity. Clause position was not included
due to the difficulty of defining clause membership for
fragments (e.g. “When h- when he in fact”), discourse
markers, (e.g. y’know ) and filled pauses, (e.g. um).
The effects for length of stimulus in words and IUs,
as well as the positional effects for word were found to
be significant. The effect of length of the stimulus in
clauses was nonsignificant, as the 95% point-wise confidence intervals computed by the model included 0 for all
values of clause count. The random effects for subject
and stimulus were found to have a normal distribution.

2208

The significant non-parametric fixed effects from the
model are plotted in Figure 1. The y-axis indicates the
strength of the effect of that variable on by-word recall,
values above 0 indicate a significant positive effect, and
values below 0 indicate a significant negative effect.
Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows the size of the smoothed
effect of IU count on by-word recall as a function of IU
count values. There is one significant positive portion
of the effect curve at IU counts of less than 3-6, with
the rest of the IU count values having 95% confidence
intervals that cover the 0 line. This indicates that having a low-IU stimulus has significant positive effect on
recall, but after the first 3-6 IUs, adding more IUs to the
stimulus does not have a significant effect on recall.
Panel (b) shows the size of the smoothed effect of word
count on by-word recall as a function of word count values. The effect for word count appears to be significant
but linear, with high positive effect on recall for low word
counts and high negative effects on recall for high word
counts.
Panel (c) shows the size of the smoothed effect of word
position on by-word recall as a function of word position
values. Word position exhibited a strong recency effect,
as shown by the positive values for its effect on recall
for words at the end of the stimulus (low word position
values), with a fairly flat function after that, until the
highest word position values. The significant negative
effect at high word position values would indicate an
anti-primacy effect, where the words at the beginning
of the stimulus were less likely to be recalled. However,
it should be noted that serial position was computed
on raw positional values, and since the stimuli were of
different lengths, this is probably due to relatively poor
recall for the beginning of very long stimuli as compared
to medium or low stimuli.

Discussion
The results indicate that Intonation Units play an important role in the short-term retention of verbal information in spoken language. The number of IUs was found
to have a significant positive effect on recall performance
when there are a small number of IUs in the stimulus, but
to have no significant effect for stimuli with more than
3-6 IUs. This result fits well with accounts of short-term
memory capacity that assume a limit in terms of a small
number of chunks, such as the 3-5 item limit in Cowan
(2000).
Clauses do not appear to play a significant role in recall of naturally-produced spoken language, with no significant effect found for number of clauses in the stimulus. Previous findings of significant effects of clause
boundaries on recall (e.g. Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 1976;
Jarvalla, 1979) may be a side-effect of the overlap between clause and IU boundaries in written-style language.

The word level findings were generally in line with
findings from other serial recall studies. The shape of
the word position function resembles the usual logarithmic function found for classic short-term memory tasks
(Rubin & Wenzel, 1996), with a strong recency effect leveling off at around 7-10 words, the classic ‘magic number’
from (Miller, 1956) oft-cited as an estimate of short-term
memory capacity. Since the current stimuli are expected
to have strong associations above the word level, this effect is expected to represent what (Cowan, 2000) terms
‘compound STM’, a short-term memory containing multiple chunks of information, rather than a pure capacity
limit estimate. In line with this assumption, the finding of a linear effect for word count indicates no such
discontinuity in memory capacity in terms of stimulus
size.
This linearity of the word count effect suggests that
the negative effect from adding more words to the stimulus is due to factors such as intra-stimulus interference,
rather than a privileged short-term capacity defined at
the word level. Since the lowest word count included was
4 it is possible a discontinuity could be observed at lower
word counts, but as discussed earlier, capacity limit theories would predict that items in short-term memory
would consist of higher-level chunks in connected discourse.
The findings in the current study provide evidence,
for the first time, that the IU plays a significant role in
the memory representation of spoken language, and that
the clause does not play a significant role. The results
are most consistent with an explanation for short-term
memory based on a capacity-limited focus of attention
(e.g. Cowan, 2000), where IUs would serve as the unit of
information defining that capacity, though they do not
rule out interference-based explanations (e.g. Nairne,
1988, 2002) that have been used to account for performance discontinuities at the word level. The finding
that prosodic grouping is significantly more important
than syntactic grouping in predicting natural spoken language recall calls for a reassessment of the importance
of prosody in language processing.

2209

(b)

0.5
-1.5

-0.4

-1.0

-0.2

-0.5

0.0

s(WCount)

0.2
0.0

s(IUCount)

0.4

1.0

0.6

0.8

(a)

5

10

15

20

IUCount

40

60

80

100

WCount

0.0
-0.5

s(WordPosition)

0.5

1.0

(c)

0

20

40

60

80

100

WordPosition

Figure 1: Plot of significant non-parametric estimated effects on recall including 80% and 95% point-wise confidence
intervals for (a) Effect of size of stimulus in IUs, (b) Effect of size of stimulus in words, (c) Effect of word position
in the stimulus (0 = most recent)

References
Baddeley, A. D. (2000). The episodic buffer: A new
component for working memory? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4 , 417-423.
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working memory. In G. Bower (Ed.), Recent advances in learning
and motivation (Vol. 8). Academic Press.
Beckman, M. E. (1996). The parsing of prosody. Language and Cognitive Processes, 11 , 17-67.
Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1971). The abstraction
of linguistic ideas. Cognitive Psychology, 2 , 331-350.
Broadbent, D. E. (1975). The magic number seven after fifteen years. In A. Kennedy & A. Wilkes (Eds.),
Studies in long-term memory. Wiley.
Chafe, W. (1979). The flow of thought and the flow of
language. In T. Givón (Ed.), Discourse and syntax.
New York: Academic Press.
Chafe, W. (1994). Discourse, consciousness, and time:
The flow and displacement of conscious experience in
speaking and writing. Chicago: The University of

Chicago Press.
Cowan, N. (2000). The magical number 4 in short-term
memory: A reconsideration of mental storage capacity.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24 , 87-185.
Cowan, N. (2008). What are the differences between
long-term, short-term, and working memory? Progress
in Brain Research, 169 , 323-338.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D., & van Donselaar, W. (1997).
Prosody in the comprehension of spoken language.
Language and Speech, 40 (2), 141-201.
DuBois, J., Chafe, W., Meyer, C., Thompson, S. A.,
Englebretson, R., & Martey, N. (2000-2005). Santa
barbara corpus of spoken american english, parts 1-4.
Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium.
DuBois, J., Cumming, S., Schuetze-Coburn, S., &
Paolino, D. (1992). Discourse transcription. Santa
Barbara Papers in Linguistics, 4 .
Frankish, C. (1995). Intonation and auditory grouping in
immediate serial recall. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
9 , 5-22.

2210

Jarvalla, R. (1979). Immediate memory and discourse
processing. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 13 , 379-420.
Jonides, J., Lewis, R. L., Nee, D. E., Lustig, C. A.,
Berman, M. G., & Moore, K. S. (2008). The mind
and brain of short-term memory. Annual Review of
Psychology, 59 , 193-224.
Kjelgaard, M. M., & Speer, S. R. (1999). Prosodic facilitation and interference in the resolution of temporary
syntactic closure ambiguity. Journal of Memory and
Language, 40 , 153-194.
Lewis, R. L., Vasishth, S., & Van Dyke, J. A. (2006).
Computational principles of working memory in sentence comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
10 (10), 447-454.
Mandler, G. (1985). Cognitive psychology: An essay in
cognitive science. Erlbaum.
Marslen-Wilson, W., & Tyler, L. K. (1976). Memory
and levels of processing in a psycholinguistic context.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 2 , 112-119.
Mathôt, S., Schreij, D., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). Opensesame: An open-source, graphical experiment builder
for the social science. Behavior Research Methods,
44 (2), 314-324.
McElree, B. (2000). Sentence comprehension is mediated
by content-addressable memory structures. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 29 (2), 111-123.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: some limits on our capacity for processing
information. Psychological Review , 63 (2), 81-97.
Nairne, J. S. (1988). A framework for interpreting recency effects in immediate serial recall. Memory and
Cognition, 16 (4), 343-352.
Nairne, J. S. (2002). Remembering over the short-term:
The case against the standard model. Annual Review
of Psychology, 53 , 53-81.
Pierrehumbert, J. B., & Beckman, M. E. (1988).
Japanese tone structure. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Pynte, J., & Prieur, B. (1996). Prosodic breaks and
attachment decisions in sentence processing. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 11 , 165-191.
Rubin, D. C., & Wenzel, A. E. (1996). One hundred
years of forgetting: A quantitative description of retention. Psychological Review , 103 (4), 734-760.
Sachs, J. S. (1967). Recognition memory for syntactic
and semantic aspects of connected discourse. Perception and Psychophysics, 2 (9), 437-443.
Saito, S. (1998). Effects of articulatory suppression on
immediate serial recall of temporarily grouped and intonated lists. Psychologica, 41 , 95-101.
Schafer, A. J. (1997). Prosodic parsing: The role
of prosody in sentence comprehension. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Massachusetts
Amherst.

Shattuck-Hufnagel, S., & Turk, A. E. (1996). A prosody
tutorial for investigators of auditory sentence processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 25 (2), 193246.

2211

