Memory distortions resulting from a choice blindness task
Philip Pärnamets (philip.parnamets@lucs.lu.se)
Lars Hall (lars.hall@lucs.lu.se)
Lund University Cognitive Science, Lund University,
Box 192, S-221 00, Lund, Sweden.

Petter Johansson (petter.johansson@lucs.lu.se)
Swedish Collegium for Advanced Study, Linneanum,
Thunbergsvägen 2, S-752 38 Uppsala, Sweden.
Lund University Cognitive Science, Lund University,
Box 192, S-221 00, Lund, Sweden.
Abstract
Using a choice blindness paradigm, it is possible to switch
decisions and outcomes in simple choice tasks. Such switches
have been found to carry over into later choices, hypothesized
to be mediated by beliefs about earlier decisions. Here we
investigated participants’ memories for stimuli in a simple
choice blindness task involving preferential choices between
pairs of faces. We probed participants’ recognition and source
memory following a round of choices where on some trials
participants were presented with the opposite face to the one
they actually selected. We found no effect on recognition
memory accuracy. Source memory was impaired such that
participants failing to detect the manipulation later
misremembered recognized non-chosen faces as being
previously chosen. The findings are discussed in the light of
self-perception theory and previous work on how beliefs
affect memories for choices.
Keywords: choice blindness; memory; decision making;
preference

Choice blindness
Choice blindness is the finding that people can be blind to
mismatches between decisions and outcomes during simple
choice situations. For example, in Johansson, Hall, Sikström
& Olsson (2005) participants made preferential choices
based on attractiveness between pairs of faces printed on
playing cards. Following their choice, the experimenter
presented the chosen card and asked the participants to
motivate their choice. However, on some trials, using a
surreptitious technique from close-up magic, the participants
ended up with the card opposite of their choice. Participants
were not only blind to this switch in the vast majority of
trials, but also proceeded to confabulate reasons for choices
they had never made.
Choice blindness is a robust effect and the basic findings
have been replicated in a wide range of domains, from
gustatory choices between the taste of jams and smell of tea,
to attitude judgments on divisive political issues on the cusp
of a national election. Together, the literature on choice
blindness shows that humans are capable of a surprisingly
high degree of cognitive flexibility in light of changing
environmental feedback. Choice blindness, additionally,
puts pressure on any cognitive architecture positing strong
intention monitoring mechanisms for preferential choices
(cf. Hall & Johansson, 2008). Instead, these findings

indicate that intention and agency are actively constructed in
tandem with the feedback that the agent receives during and
immediately following choice.
One important extant question concerning choice
blindness is to understand why participants fail to detect the
false feedback about their choices. One proposed possible
reason has been that social demand effects in the
participant-experimenter interaction lead to participants
refraining from reporting when detecting the false feedback.
Recently, using a computerized choice blindness task,
psychophysiological correlates, such as pupil dilation and
eye-movement patterns, were found to differ markedly
between detected and non-detected trials. This indicates that
detection registers as a differentiable event in the cognitive
system, and consequently that participants’ acceptance of
the manipulation can be taken at face value (Pärnamets,
Hall, Strandberg, Balkenius & Johansson, 2015a).
However, another possible factor in participants failing to
detect manipulations might be that they fail to encode the
choice options properly. In the present study, following a
first block of choice trials, participants were given a
recognition memory task involving one of the original faces
and a foil option. This allowed us to compare recognition
rates for manipulated and non-manipulated trials, as well as
for detected and non-detected trials following an earlier
choice blindness manipulation. If participants indeed fail to
encode the options prior to accepting the false feedback, we
can expect to see much lower recognition rates for nondetected trials, while observing similar recognition rates for
detected and non-manipulated trials. If, however, failure to
encode the choice options is not a factor determining
detection, there should be no difference in recognition rate
between non-detected and non-manipulated trials.

Choice blindness, preference change and source
memory
Experiencing the choice blindness manipulation has been
shown to carry downstream effects on participants’ later
choices. For example, one study found that participants’
ratings of initially non-chosen faces, following false
feedback, increased when rated a second time (Johansson,
Hall, Tärning, Sikström & Chater, 2014). Similarly, when
given a second round of choices, participants were more

1823

likely to switch their preference to the option they had been
manipulated to believe they originally preferred. This effect
was primarily driven by preference change in the nondetected manipulated trials (Johansson et al., 2014). This
preference change effect was recently expanded to group
choices. Participants formed dyads and made mutual
choices about future flatmates, presented as faces on a
screen. On some trials, dyads were given false feedback
about their mutual choices, with detection rates as low as
35%. When given a second round of choices, dyads were
more likely to switch preference for previously manipulated
trials, this despite there being two members available to
monitor and remember the original preference (Pärnamets et
al., 2015b). It has been hypothesised that beliefs about
choices, formed during the post-choice feedback, drive the
effects on preferences described.
People’s memory of past choices tends to be
systematically distorted in favor of previously selected items
(Mather, Shafir & Johnson, 2000). For example, after first
choosing between two options, such as apartment rentals,
and later prompted to recall features of the options, people
tend to attribute more positive features to chosen options
and more negative features to non-chosen options. This bias
in source monitoring might occur due to differential
processing of options (for example via attentional
mechanisms) during both encoding and retrieval of
memories. By inducing false beliefs about which option had
been chosen, one week after the original choice had been
made, Henkel and Mather (2007) were able to demonstrate
that belief in having made a previous choice might function
as a mediating factor for this bias. In the study, participants
exhibited the same attribution errors for originally nonchosen options as non-manipulated participants normally
exhibit for chosen options. This result indicates that it is
primarily the process of retrieval rather than the encoding
that is responsible for the bias observed.
In the context of the choice blindness paradigm, there is
mixed evidence concerning possible effects on participants’
memories as a result of the false feedback concerning
choices. One recent study indicated that memories for normviolating behaviors might be influenced (Sauerland et al.,
2013). There participants filled in a questionnaire
concerning the frequency of past behavior involving
transgressions such as cheating on tests or stealing kitchen
utensils. While participants exhibited high detection rates
for subsequent manipulations of their reports (~85%),
undetected manipulations were later integrated into
participants reports during a follow-up test. Norm-violating
behaviors represent events with considerable affective force
that can be expected to be strongly encoded in the first
place. However, in a later study involving numerical ratings
of female faces found that later recall accuracy of those
ratings was unaffected by false feedback (Sagana, Sauerland
& Merckelbach, 2014). This suggests that acceptance of the
choice blindness manipulation need not impair later
memories concerning the original choice.

In the present study, to begin to disentangle the
mechanisms involved in post-choice preferential change, we
examined the relationship between detection in a choice
blindness task and later source memory accuracy for the
options presented. Following a first recognition memory
task, participants were given a second source memory task
on the selected option from the recognition task. Participants
were asked to identify if the recognized face was their
original choice or not. We hypothesized that participants
would misattribute their original preference to the believedto-be chosen option for manipulated trials. Such a result
would support the notion that beliefs about previous
choices, rather than preferential adjustment through the act
of choice, is what drives preference change over time (cf.
Bem, 1967).

Method
Participants
We recruited 37 participants (26 female, 11 male) from the
student population at Lund University, with an average age
of 25.0 (SD = 8.2).

Procedure
The experiment had two phases, both consisting of 36 trials
(see Fig. 1). In the first phase participants made preferential
choices between pairwise presented face pairs. The pairs
were presented in random order. At the start of each trial,
two playing card were presented on-screen lying face down.
After 0.5s the cards rotated so as to flip face up. The faces
were displayed for 2s before flipping back. Once the
animation was complete participants selected their preferred
face by clicking on the corresponding card. The selection
was marked by a colored rectangle surrounding the card of
their choice (see Fig. 1). Participants were then asked to
indicate their confidence in their choice on a 1-7 scale. This
task lasted for at least 7s regardless of how fast participants
responded. Once the occlusion time had passed the chosen,
highlighted, card would flip back face-side up. Participants
were then asked during this feedback screen to provide
additional information about their choice: “You chose the
face above. Why did you choose this face?”. Six facial
features were provided as responses, “mouth”, “eyes”,
“nose”, “proportion”, “skin”, and “shape”. In addition, a
seventh response was provided: “I actually prefer the other
face”. Participants selected one face by clicking on it.
Following a 2s pause the next trial started.
After the completion of the first phase, participants did an
unrelated filler task which lasted approximately 15 minutes.
Following the filler task, the second phase commenced.
During each trial, participants were shown two faces: one
face from one of the original face pairs, and one face not
presented previously. The original face was randomly
selected from the two previous options, meaning
participants saw either the originally chosen or non-chosen
face. The new face, which was a morph between one of the
faces previously presented and a different non-presented

1824

face (details described under Stimuli below). Participants
were asked to select which face of the two they recognized
from the first phase of the experiment. This was the
recognition memory task. Once participants selected one
face, the other disappeared, and they were asked if this face
was the one they had originally chosen. This was the source
memory task. There was a 2s pause between each trial.

Choice blindness manipulation
In 8 of the 36 trials during the first phase, the chosen face
was not displayed during the feedback screen. Instead the
non-chosen face was displayed. We refer to such trials with
false feedback about the participants’ choice as manipulated
trials and the other trials with veridical feedback as nonmanipulated trials.
We operationalized detection of the false feedback as
when participants clicked the “I actually prefer the other
face” button (‘other preference’ button). Such trials are
referred to as detected trials and manipulated trials where

participants clicked any of the facial features are referred to
as non-detected trials. A pilot study was conducted prior to
running the present study testing this operationalization. We
found that participants rarely clicked ‘other preference’
apart from on manipulated trials, and post-test interviews
confirmed that participants use of the ‘other preference’
button coincided with them consciously being aware that the
presented face was not their original choice.
The first six trials were always non-manipulated.
Following those first trials, manipulated and nonmanipulated trials were presented in random order with the
condition that two manipulated trials never immediately
followed one another.

Stimuli
Both male and female faces were used, but in same gender
configurations.
To construct the stimuli, face quadruples were constructed
in the following manner (see also Fig. 2). First face pairs

Figure 1. Overview of experiment [a] Choice phase. Participants are presented with two faces for 2s and then select
their preferred option. The chosen face is presented during a feedback screen where participants are asked to indicate
which facial feature of the chosen face contributed most to their decision. On manipulated trials (8/36; pictured) the
non-chosen face was presented as chosen. [b] Memory phase. Participants were presented with a recognition task
where one face from the original pair was shown together with a foil. Participants were asked to indicate which face
they had seen during the choice phase. Following their selection participants were asked to indicate if the recognized
face was their originally non-chosen or not [source memory task].

1825

Figure 2. Example of stimuli. AA and BB are faces from
the original database while AC and BC are morphs created
to function as foils.
were selected from a larger database (Johansson et al.,
2005). From these pairs of primary faces (labelled AA and
BB in Fig. 2), two more faces were constructed by
morphing the AA and BB face with a third face (CC, not
shown) unique to each quadruple, resulting in two new
faces, AC and BC. Morphs were created using Fantamorph
software (Abrosoft Co., 2010).
Face pairs for the first phase of the experiment were
determined at the start of the experiment from each
quadruple. Participants always choose between one of the A
and one of the B faces. Since the morphed faces, due to the
invariable smoothing that occurs during their construction,
might stand out compared to the original photos (i.e. AA
and BB), the stimulus during the choice phase could be
between any of the following pairings: AA & BB, AA &
BC or AC & BB. In half the trials the first phase choice
involved one of the morphed faces. For the recognition
memory task in the second phase participants chose between
either both the A* faces or both the B* faces. This design
was chosen to make the recall task more difficult for
participants, allowing us to probe if participants’ failure to
detect might be related to a failure to encode the original
choice options.
Face pairs were presented in a randomized order during
each experiment, ensuring that any face pair was eligible for
choice blindness manipulation. This was to achieve roughly
equal amounts of detected and non-detected trials for
subsequent analysis.

Detection rates
Participants detected the manipulation in 62.8% of trials.
Average by participant detection rate was 5.0 (SD = 2.7).
This matched our expectations from piloting, for this
specific set of stimulus items, and allowed us to have
similar amounts of both detected and non-detected trials for
further analysis.

Results
Recognition memory
Overall recognition rate was high, with participants
correctly recognizing the target face in 89.4% of trials.
There was no difference in recognition mesmory accuracy
comparing manipulated (91.2%) with non-manipulated trials
(88.9%; Fisher’s Exact Test, OR = 1.30, p = .285).
Similarly, examining only the manipulated trials, there was
no difference in accuracy comparing detected trials (92.5%)

Figure 3 Source memory accuracy for manipulated and
non-manipulated trials (left) and for non-detected and
detected [manipulated] trials (right). Error bars depict 95%
confidence intervals.
with non-detected trials (89.1%; Fisher’s Exact Test, OR =
1.50, p = .396).
Preference and accuracy Overall accuracy improved if the
recognition pair included the originally chosen face, with an
accuracy rate of 93.1% when the originally chosen face was
present and 85.1% when it was not (Fisher’s Exact Test, OR
= 2.36, p < 10-5).
We compared the effect of the presence of the preferred
face between manipulated and non-manipulated trials using
a logistic regression with Presence and Trial Type as factors
including an interaction term. Non-manipulated trials and
absence of chosen face were taken as reference levels. The
model was significant compared to a null model (χ2(3) =
53.04, p < 10-10), and a model without an interaction term
(χ2(1) = 29.27, p < 10-7). The analysis indicated a significant
interaction between Presence and Trial Type (b = 2.69, OR
= 14.7, p < 10-5), as well as significant effects of Presence
(b = -1.30, OR = 0.27, p = .011), and Trial Type (b = -1.71,
OR = 0.18, p < .001). Participants were more accurate
in recognizing the face provided in the feedback, both on
trials in which this feedback was veridical (94.8%) as well
as when false feedback was given (96.2%), than they were
in recognizing the face only shown once during the initial
choice (veridical feedback: 82%, false feedback: 87.3%).
We also compared the detected with non-detected trials
using a logistic regression with Presence and Detection as
factors. The model had better fit than the null model (χ 2(2) =
8.89, p = .012), and adding an interaction term did not
improve fit (χ2(1) = 0.14, p = .706). We found a significant
effect of Presence (b = -1.31, OR = 0.22, p = .011) but not
of Detection (b = 0.42, OR = 1.53, p = .31). Participants’
memory performance was highest when the originally
preferred face was not present both for detected (96.3%) and
non-detected trials (95.9%). When the originally preferred
face was present accuracy was 89.4 % for detected trials and
83.6 % for non-detected trials.

1826

Source memory
Overall accuracy for the source memory query was 74.5%.
Source memory accuracy was higher following an accurate
recognition memory response (76.5%) compared to when
not (57.4%; Fisher’s Exact Test, OR = 2.41, p < 10-5).
Source memory accuracy was higher for non-manipulated
trials (78.1%) compared to manipulated trials (61.8%;
Fisher’s Exact Test, OR = 2.20, p < 10-7, see Fig. 3). Within
manipulated trials, source accuracy was higher during
detected trials (72.6%) compared to non-detected trials
(43.6%; Fisher’s Exact Test, OR = 3.40, p < 10-6, see Fig.
3).
Response types To better understand how source memory
might be affected by the prior choice blindness task we
analyzed the distribution of responses available to the
participants borrowing terminology from a signal detection
framework. We classified all responses as being a True
Positive, True Negative, False Positive, or False Negative.
We then restricted our analyses to those trials where
participants had made an accurate recognition memory
response, as in the other case participants were already
holding false beliefs about the queried face. Finally, since
the relative distribution of all types of responses will be
affected by the overall accuracy (proportion True
responses), we compared the relative proportion of
responses within each category, i.e. relative amount of True
Positives compared with True Negatives and relative
amount of False Positives with False Negatives.
For incorrect source memory responses, we found no
difference between manipulated trials (49.5% False
Positive) and non-manipulated trials (50.2% False Positive;
Fisher’s Exact Test, OR = 1.03, p = 1). Similarly, there was
no difference for the correct responses comparing
manipulated trials (54.9% True Positive) and nonmanipulated trials (59.3% True Positive; Fisher’s Exact
Test, OR = 1.20, p = .304).
Comparing within the manipulated trials, participants had
a higher rate of False Positive responses for non-detected
trials (58.2%) compared to detected trials (38.1%; Fisher’s
Exact Test, OR = 2.24, p = .066). There was no difference
between the rates of True Positives comparing non-detected
trials (65.1%) with detected trials (51.5%; Fisher’s Exact
Test, OR = 1.75, p = .157). However, both these analyses
suggest a higher rate of Positive response during nondetected trials. We tested this directly and found a higher
Positive response rate for non-detected trials (61.2%)
compared to detected trials (48.3%; Fisher’s Exact Test, OR
= 1.69, p = .04).

Discussion
Using both recognition and source memory tasks we
investigated participants’ memories for previously
encountered choice options in the context of a choice
blindness manipulation.
Overall, participants performed the recognition memory
task with a high degree of accuracy. Importantly,

participants’ accuracy did not differ between manipulated
and non-manipulated trials or between detected and nondetected trials. This suggests that acceptance of the choice
blindness manipulation is not due to a general failure of
participants to attend to or encode the choice options. Our
results are in line with previous findings indicating that
recall accuracy for ratings is not affected by choice
blindness
manipulations
(Sagana,
Sauerland
&
Merckelbach, 2014).
Further analysis showed that participants were better at
recognizing the choice option which had been presented to
them during the feedback portion of the choice trials. This
suggests that the prolonged exposure during the feedback
portion of the trial has a predominant effect on accuracy (cf.
Reynolds & Pezdek, 1992), rather than any preferential
encoding of the chosen face. Merely, mentally refreshing a
visually presented scene has found to have effects on
memory similar to actual representation (Yi, Turk-Browne,
Chun & Johnson, 2008). One interpretation of the findings
might be that presenting one option a second time overrides,
in manipulated trials, attempts to recall the actual chosen
option, which participants arguably successfully do when
detecting the false feedback. To address this issue fully and
more extensively probe how recognition memory interacts
with the choice feedback, future work should modify the
false feedback portion, to include a condition where both
faces are presented to participants. By combining with a
measure of visual attention, exposure to the options could be
precisely quantified and the recognition probe would
become more sensitive to any differential encoding between
detected and non-detected manipulated trials.
Source memory accuracy, the ability to classify a
recognized face as previously having been chosen or not,
was found to be adversely affected by the choice blindness
manipulation. This lower accuracy during manipulated trials
is primarily attributable to participants’ performance during
non-detected trials. In fact, strikingly, for these trials,
participants performed worse than they would have, had
they been randomly guessing! This provides evidence that,
not only are later choices affected by choice blindness
manipulations, but also explicit memories about those
choices. This is significant because on alternative accounts
of what drives preference change through choice, those
effects arise through post-choice preferential adjustment
which are not linked to beliefs or later memories.
Considering the types of responses participants made,
revealed that the differences in source memory accuracy
were due to misattributing the non-chosen face as chosen.
We found that participants responded with a positive
response to a much higher degree during non-detected trials
compared to detected trials. This means that participants
often thought the recognized face also was their chosen,
which in turn translates into the higher False Positive rate
for non-detected trials. Participants’ source memory is thus
selectively distorted as a result of accepting the false
feedback, even though their overall capacity to recognize
previous encountered stimuli is largely unaffected. One

1827

objection might be that participants do not process the faces
enough for veridical source monitoring to occur. However,
we observed high source accuracy in the non-manipulated
trials suggesting that the experimental task is sufficient in
the regard. Nevertheless, future studies could test this
further by varying the stimulus and task, beyond facial
preference, to generalize and expand on the findings
presented here
Human visual long-term memory is highly detailed and
capable of retaining a large number of details for thousands
of newly acquired objects (Brady, Konkle, Alvarez & Oliva,
2008). Given this, the memory task in the present study was
relatively simple and the high recognition task accuracy
reflects this. On the other hand, source monitoring has been
hypothesized to be underpinned by evaluative and
reconstructive processes distinct from those involved in
recall and recognition (Johnson, Hashtroudi & Lindsay,
1993; Yonelias, 1999). One component which has been
implicated in studies of memory misattribution for choices
is self-perception, that is, the general finding that attitudes
and preferences are constructed partly on the basis of
external cues (Mather, Shafir & Johnson, 2000; Bem, 1967).
Similarly, in the recent literature on preference change
through choice, different experimental paradigms involving
blind choices and choice blindness have suggested that
beliefs mediate preference shifts (Egan, Bloom & Santos,
2010; Sharot, Velasquez & Dolan, 2010; Johansson et al.,
2014; Pärnamets et al., 2015b). Together with these
findings, this suggests that common mechanisms might be
involved in how both preferences and memories are affected
post-choice.
Better understanding how beliefs about past choices shape
memories for past options is an important step towards
understanding the mechanisms of preference change as well
as how interactions and feedback from the environment
shape these processes. The current results indicate high
degrees of flexibility for source attributions coexisting with
stable memories of previously encountered options.

Acknowledgments
We thank S. Sikström and C. Balkenius for helpful
discussions. PJ was supported by Bank of Sweden
Tercentenary Foundation and The Swedish Research
Council (2014-1371). LH was supported by Bank of
Sweden Tercentenary Foundation (P13-1059:1) and The
Swedish Research Council (2011-1795).

References
Bem, D.J. (1967). Self-perception: An alternative
interpretation of cognitive dissonance phenomena.
Psychological Review, 74(3), 183-200.
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T., Alvarez, G. A., & Oliva, A.
(2008). Visual long-term memory has a massive storage
capacity for object details. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 105(38), 14325-14329.
Egan, L. C., Bloom, P., & Santos, L. R. (2010). Choiceinduced preferences in the absence of choice: Evidence

from a blind two choice paradigm with young children
and capuchin monkeys. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46(1), 204-207.
Hall, L., & Johansson, P. (2008). Using choice blindness to
study decision making and introspection. In P.
Gärdenfors, & A. Wallin (Eds.), A Smorgasbord of
Cognitive Science. Nora, Sweden: Nya Doxa.
Henkel, L. A., & Mather, M. (2007). Memory attributions
for choices: How beliefs shape our memories. Journal of
Memory and Language, 57(2), 163-176.
Johansson, P., Hall, L., Sikström, S., & Olsson, A. (2005).
Failure to detect mismatches between intention and
outcome in a simple decision task. Science, 310(5745),
116-119.
Johansson, P., Hall, L., Tärning, B., Sikström, S., & Chater,
N. (2014). Choice blindness and preference change: You
will like this paper better if you (believe you) chose to
read it!. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 27(3),
281-289.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993).
Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114(1), 3-28.
Reynolds, J. K., & Pezdek, K. (1992). Face recognition
memory: The effects of exposure duration and encoding
instruction. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 6(4), 279-292.
Mather, M., Shafir, E., & Johnson, M. K. (2000).
Misremembrance of options past: Source monitoring and
choice. Psychological Science, 11(2), 132-138.
Pärnamets, P., Hall, L., Strandberg, T., Balkenius, C., &
Johansson, P., (2015a). Looking at choice blindness:
Evidence from eye-tracking and pupil dilation.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Pärnamets, P., von Zimmermann, J., Hall, L., Raafat, R.,
Chater, N., & Johansson, P. (2015b). Collective choice
blindness and preference change through choice.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Sagana, A., Sauerland, M., & Merckelbach, H. (2014).
Memory impairment is not sufficient for choice blindness
to occur. Frontiers in Psychology, 5(449). doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00449
Sauerland, M., Schell, J. M., Collaris, J., Reimer, N. K.,
Schneider, M., & Merckelbach, H. (2013). “Yes, I Have
Sometimes Stolen Bikes”: Blindness for Norm‐Violating
Behaviors and Implications for Suspect Interrogations.
Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 31(2), 239-255.
Sharot, T., Velasquez, C. M., & Dolan, R. J. (2010). Do
decisions shape preference? Evidence from blind choice.
Psychological Science, 21(9), 1231-1235.
Yi, D. J., Turk-Browne, N. B., Chun, M. M., & Johnson, M.
K. (2008). When a thought equals a look: Refreshing
enhances perceptual memory. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 20(8), 1371-1380.
Yonelinas, A. P. (1999). The contribution of recollection
and familiarity to recognition and source-memory
judgments: A formal dual-process model and an analysis
of receiver operating characteristics. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25(6), 1415-1434.

1828

