More Than a Blood Pump: An Experimental Enquiry of the Folk Theory of the
Heart
Haotian Zhou (zhouhaotian@uchicago.edu)
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

John T. Cacioppo (jcaciopp@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

transformation she supposedly had experienced somehow
went to the heart.
Why did Ms. Sylvia so readily revise her theory of the
heart yet refuse to entertain the possible involvement of the
lung transplant in her apparent metamorphosis? Perhaps, she
might have already tacitly believed that the heart, aside from
functioning as a blood pump, is also the seat of the mind
even prior to the surgery. In other words, her uncanny
experience did not so much revise her lay theory of the heart
as reinforced her old belief.

Abstract
The present research sought to address an intriguing yet
heretofore unanswered question with the tools of
experimental psychology: Do people today still subscribe to
the outdated folk belief that the heart is a mental organ,
governing certain, if not all, aspects of mental life—a belief
we termed cardiopsychism? The results from multiple
experiments provided converging evidence for the conclusion
that cardiopsychism is still very much alive in the minds of
modern people. Aside from demonstrating the continued
presence of cardiopsychism, we explored both the antecedent
and consequence of holding this misconception. Through
cross-cultural comparison, we found evidence suggesting that
the conventionalized heart-expressions people speak might be
responsible for perpetuating cardiopsychism. In addition, our
hypothetical scenario study indicated that the perseverance of
cardiopsychism might be more than just an innocuous glitch
but could have real-world impacts.

Could cardiopsychism still be alive?

Keywords: folk belief; cross-cultural comparison; language;
cognitive linguistics; belief perseverance

Introduction
In 1988, Claire Sylvia, a former ballerina, received the
heart of a young man killed in a car accident. Following the
surgery, she had the uncanny experience that the young
man’s psychological characteristics had transferred to her. A
decade later, Ms. Sylvia published an instant best-seller
titled A Change of Heart, chronicling her personality
transformation which she believed was set into motion by
the heart transplant. In book’s preface, she summarized how
this experience compelled her to revise her understanding of
the heart (Sylvia & Novak, 1998):
All my life I have been told despite the
protests of poets and murmuring of mystics,
the human heart is just a pump. An incredibly
important pump but only a pump…
According to this view, which is the accepted
one in contemporary Western medicine, the
heart contains no feelings and carries no
wisdom, no knowledge and no memories. … I
used to believe these things, but today I know
differently (p. II).
Despite the title, Ms. Sylvia in fact received not only the
heart but also the lungs from the same donor during the
same operation. Yet, all the credits for the personality

In the present research, we refer to the belief that the heart
is causally responsible for some, if not all, mental activities
and states as cardiopsychism, a term coined by combining
cardio (i.e. heart) and psyche (i.e. soul or mind).
Cardiopsychism is a folk theory with a long pedigree.
Among its earliest champions, one finds such revered names
as Plato, Aristotle and Confucius. For the most part of the
recorded
history—both
Western
and
Eastern—
cardiopsychism of various shapes and forms were widely
accepted and had greatly influenced both cultural and
medical practices (Yu, 2009). The impact of one particular
brand of cardiopsychism of the Western tradition, i.e. the
heart is the seat of emotions and true self, is still palpable in
the realms of arts and literature.
Despite its decorated past, cardiopsychism has been
debunked by science since Renaissance. Medical
observations and scientific research all point to the
irrefutable conclusion that the brain rather than the heart is
where the action is, as far as the mind is concerned. Yet,
Ms. Sylvia’s memoir, an unabashed endorsement of
cardiopsychism, was able to resonate with the public some
15 years after its publication. A reader posted these thoughts
about the book in 2013, ―It does not surprise me that there is
so much memory and personality in the heart … too bad
medical science is not more open to what people are telling
them of their experience.‖ This observation inspired the
focal question of the present research: To what degree have
modern people outgrown the misconception of the heart as
a mental organ?
Psychological research on belief perseverance showed
that people tend to hold on to erroneous beliefs even when
confronted with information that contradicts or undermines
the basis of those beliefs (Anderson, 2007; Winer et al.,
2002). Given the prominence and prevalence of

2823

cardiopsychism throughout the history, it would not be
surprising to find that people today still conceptualize the
heart according to cardiopsychism despite the mounting
scientific evidence to the contrary. In fact, in 1999 a 15year-old British girl was forcibly given a heart transplant
against her will because she feared that she would lose her
own unique identity (Dyer, 1999).
Note that it is possible for the same individual to believe
in cardiopsychism while simultaneously acknowledging that
the heart is merely a mechanical pump. According to the
research on implicit cognition (Greenwald et al., 2002), it is
not uncommon for people to hold conflicting beliefs
concurrently. Thus, even if people today explicitly proclaim
their allegiance to the scientific view, it does not necessarily
mean they have wholeheartedly rejected cardiopsychism.
We next examine extant research with data pertinent to the
question of whether cardiopsychism is still a living belief.

Extant evidence
In an early study, Kuhn and colleagues (1987) found that
31% of the heart transplant candidates they interviewed
expressed fantasies of personality change due to donor’s
heart. More recently, Inspector and colleagues (2003) found
that about half of the heart-transplant recipients they studied
expressed concerns about acquiring the donor’s personality
characteristics along with the heart. However, not only did
both studies focused exclusively on a special population,
namely transplant patients, they did not compare the heart
with other internal organs; therefore it is unclear whether
these patients’ thoughts were specific about the heart not.
In contrast, Sanner (2001) interviewed respondents
sampled from the general public and queried their thoughts
about both the heart and other organs. She wrote (2001)
―informants feared that they would be influenced by the
donor [in terms of personality], above all if one were to
receive a heart.‖ However, her interview was unstructured
and her hermeneutic approach to content analysis was
susceptible to researcher’s own bias and belief.
A study conducted by Hood and colleagues (2011) did
provide some preliminary experimental evidence for the
continued presence of cardiopsychism amongst people
today. The researchers found that college students were less
willing to accept a heart transplant from a murderer than
from an upstanding citizen. However, it was unclear
whether participants’ aversion toward receiving the
murderer’s heart was due to the fear of acquiring the
murderer’s personality or the discomfort with being
associated with the murderer in any manner.
Instead of questioning informants directly, some cognitive
linguists sought to show that cardiopsychism is still alive by
analyzing the lexicons of the languages people speak. The
reason why linguistic analysis could potentially answer a
psychological question is language often reflects the
underlying conceptual structure of its speakers ( vecses
Koller, 2006; Wierzbicka, 1997).
Niemeier (2003) analyzed the conventionalized heartexpressions in modern English and found these expressions

(e.g. being one’s heart’s desire, softhearted) are more or less
rooted cardiopsychism. A parallel analysis of the heartexpressions in modern Chinese yielded similar findings (Yu,
2009). Though modern science has long rejected
cardiopsychism, the linguistic expressions people speak
have yet to be updated to reflect the current scientific
knowledge. Instead, these expressions, at least as far as their
literal meanings are concerned, continue to advocate the
heart’s special status as a mental organ. Both Niemeier
(2003) and Yu (2009) proposed that when people grow up
in the midst of these prima facie pro-cardiopsychism
expressions, they would at least tacitly accept
cardiopsychism as a valid theory of the heart.
There is little doubt that linguistic-expressions can reveal
the living beliefs of its speakers (e.g. Winer et al., 2002).
But conventionalized expressions might also just be
conventions. In other words, it is possible that the corpus of
heart-expressions, in both Chinese and English, might be no
more than the conceptual fossils from the past, reflecting an
archaic conception that no one believes in today. It seems
that the jury is still out regarding the current status of
cardiopsychism. Thus, we attempted to find some tentative
answer to this question through controlled experiments.

Experiment 1: What do Others Believe?
In a pre-test (n = 266), we found that the overwhelming
majority (96%) of our target population, Amazon
Mechanical Turk workers (MTurkers for short), know about
the scientific view that emotion and personality are the
products of the brain rather than the heart. This raised the
concern that even if people do believe in cardiopsychism,
they might opt to give the socially desirable (i.e.
scientifically correct) answer when directly asked. To
circumvent this issue, we leveraged egocentrism to uncover
people’s true belief.
In the domain of social inference, egocentrism refers to
people’s tendency to anchor on what they know about their
own minds when inferring the thoughts of others (see Tamir
& Mitchell, 2013). Prior research had exploited egocentrism
to assess people’s true opinions regarding sensitive issues
(e.g. racial stereotype) to which they are less likely to give
honest answers (e.g. Cuddy et al., 2009).

Participants and Procedure
166 MTurkers who lived in the United States and selfreported speaking English at home completed an online
study. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
three between-subject conditions (focal organ: heart vs. liver
vs. bladder). Participants read two ostensible scientific
statements and estimated the percentage of Americans
believing in each one.
The first statement was the same across all conditions and
served as the control. Specifically, participants estimated the
percentage of Americans who believe that even a simple
handshake can transmit HIV viruses. The second,
experimental statement was different across the conditions.
Specifically, participants estimated the percentage of

2824

Americans who believe that emotions are generated not in
the brain but in the heart (or liver or bladder)—depending
on the focal organ condition participants were assigned to.
If people did believe in cardiopsychism to some degree,
then their estimates for the experimental statement would be
higher when the focal organ was the heart than the other two
organs. In contrast, participants’ estimates for the control
statement should be the same across all the conditions.

Results and Discussion
A 2 × 3 mixed ANOVA revealed a significant two-way
interaction, F(2,161)=19.54, p<0.01. For the control
statement, participants in all three focal organ conditions
made very similar estimates (Mheart = 20%, Mliver =
16.4%, Mbladder = 19%), F(2,162) = 0.73, p = 0.48.
In contrast, participants’ estimates for the experimental
statement were significantly different across the conditions
(Mheart= 27.7%, Mliver = 7.2%, Mbladder = 7.6%), F(2,
162) = 43.56, p<0.01. The heart-condition participants
reported higher estimates than those in the other two
conditions, F(1,107)=49.10, p<0.001; which did not differ
from each other F(1, 109) = 0.14, p = 0.71.
Assuming participants’ estimates were driven by
egocentrism, our finding that participants thought more
people would regard the heart as the seat of emotion than
other organs can be taken as evidence of their personal
endorsement of cardiopsychism. However, egocentrism is
not necessary for solving social inference problems (Ames,
2004), therefore participants’ estimates might not be
indicative of their private belief. Thus, in the next
experiment we sought for less equivocal evidence with a
different paradigm.

Experiment 2: Will Your Soul Be Moved?
According to Bloom (2005), most people intuitively
conceptualize the self as primarily mental in nature yet
occupying a spatial location. Thus, if people believe that at
least part of the mind is located in the heart, then when the
heart is relocated to a different spatial location, they should
feel that the self is moved as well.

Participants and Procedure
126 English-speaking MTurkers who lived in the United
States completed an online study. Participants’ task was to
indicate where they felt their Self was under different
circumstances.
All participants completed 3 trials, involving 3 different
circumstances. In all trials, participants first imagined an
organ was removed from their body and transplanted to a
person named HZ. Then they marked where they felt like
their Self would be relocated on a straight line anchored on
the two ends by their own body and HZ’s body respectively.
The left end (i.e. participant’s body) of the straight line was
coded as 1 and the right end (i.e. HZ’s body) as 100. The
body parts implicated in the three trials were the heart,

hands and lungs respectively. The order of the trials was
randomly determined for each individual participant.

Results and Discussion
If participants believed in cardiopsychism, then they
would the Self farther away from their own body when their
heart was transplanted into HZ’s body than either the hands
or lungs. A within-subject ANOVA on the location of the
Self confirmed this prediction, F(3,363)=122, p<0.001.
Pairwise comparison revealed that participants located the
Self farther away from their own body when the heart was
transplanted (M=39.4) than either the lungs (M=27.9) or the
hands (M=27.1). These results lend further credence to the
claim that cardiopsychism is still a living belief.

Experiment 3: Can You Make Robots Feel?
In this experiment, we employed yet another paradigm to
probe people’s lay theory of the heart. In addition, we
attempted to cue participants of the scientifically correct
view to see if the vestige of cardiopsychism could still be
uncovered under a more stringent condition.

Participants and Procedure
146 MTurkers who lived in the United States and selfreported speaking primarily English at home completed an
online study. We employed a 2 (cue position: first vs. last) ×
2 (focal organ: heart vs. lung) mixed design where the cueposition was the between-subject factor. All participants
first read the same passage inspired by the movie Robocop.
Briefly, participants were told that many people feel queasy
about having robots replace human beings as the police out
of the concern that robots do not understand human values
and cannot feel human emotions. Then participants were
presented with the following hypothetical scenario:
At least in theory, one way to enable emotion
and conscience in robots is to create cyborgs
by replacing some human parts with machine
while preserving other human parts. Next, you
will be presented with several human parts
one by one. For each human part, please rate,
on the basis of your intuition, the degree to
which it must be preserved to prevent any
noticeable negative impact on the capacity of
the cyborgs for emotion and conscience.
Participants then judged one by one how indispensable
each of the three focal organs–namely, the brain, the heart
and the lungs–is on a 1-to–10 scale. Participants assigned to
cue-first condition judged the brain’s indispensability first;
while those assigned to cue-last condition judged the brain
last. The order in which they judged the heart and lungs was
randomized. Note that the indispensability rating for the
brain was not reported because the brain was included only
to remind participants of the mind’s real physical substrate.

2825

to the perseverance of cardiopsychism by verifying whether
the difference between the functions the Chinese and the
English speakers believe the heart can perform paralleled
the differences between the folk models implied by the their
respective heart-expressions.

Results and Discussion
If participants believed in cardiopsychism, they would
regard the heart as more indispensable than the lungs for
preserving the cyborgs’ capacity for feeling and values. This
is indeed what we found. A 2 (cue position: first vs. last) × 2
(focal organ: heart vs. lungs) mixed ANOVA on the
indispensability ratings reveal only a significant main effect
of organ type, F(1,73)=62.53, p<0.01. The heart was
deemed more indispensable than the lungs regardless of
whether participants were reminded of the brain’s status as
the true physical substrate of the mind or not (Figure 1).
The first three experiments together provided converging
evidence for the continued presence of cardiopsychism in
people’s mind today. We next turned the attention to
ascertaining why cardiopsychism was able to persevere
despite long being refuted by science.

Participants and Procedure
The native English speakers were 122 MTurkers who
lived in the United States and self-reported speaking
primarily English at home. The native Chinese speakers
were 125 native Chinese speakers recruited from the
Chinese online survey platform, Sojump, which served as
the data source for several recent cross-cultural psychology
studies (e.g. Kreuzbauer et al., 2014). All participants were
told that they would first learn about some new information
and then make some intuitive judgment in light of the newly
acquired information. Participants from both cultures were
randomly assigned to one of the four conditions of a 2
(information topic: heart vs. lungs) × 2 (judgment topic:
emotion vs. cognition) between-subject design.
Participants first learned that a recently discovered
chemical is effective at treating viral and bacterial infection
of the heart (or lungs)—depending on the information-topic
condition. Then participants in the judgment-on-emotion
condition rated how possible it is to use this chemical to
treat emotional disorders, such as depression, anxiety and
irritability; whereas those in the judgment-on-cognition
condition rated how possible it is to use this chemical to
treat cognitive disorders, such as memory loss and low
attention span. The possibility rating was always made on a
–4 (absolutely impossible) to +4 (absolutely possible) scale.

Figure 1: Mean ratings of different conditions.

Experiment 4: How does the Chinese Heart
Differ from its English Counterpart?

Results and Discussion

As alluded to earlier, the conventionalized heartexpressions in modern Chinese and English are mostly
rooted in cardiopsychism (Niemeier, 2003; Yu, 2009). That
is, the literal meanings of these expressions are tantamount
to messages advocating the mental capacities of the heart.
Thus, people living in these linguistic communities are
surrounded by prima facie endorsements of cardiopsychism.
This creates an ideal milieu for cardiopsychism to
insidiously implant itself firmly in people’s belief system.
As research on the illusory truth effect has shown, simply
exposing people to a claim could increase the perceived
truth of this claim (e.g. Hawkins & Hoch, 1992). This is the
case even when the claim was explicitly flagged as false
initially (e.g. Skurnik, Yoon, Park, & Schwarz, 2005).
If the linguistic input did contribute to the perpetuation of
cardiopsychism, then the specifics of the cardiopsychism
should differ between two linguistic communities whose
heart-expressions imply different folk models of the heart.
According to lexical analysis by Yu (2009) and Niemeier
(2003), the folk model implied by modern Chinese heartexpressions ascribes to the heart both cognitive and
affective functions; whereas its English counterpart
considers the heart as governing primarily emotion but not
cognition. Thus, we could test if linguistic input contribute

To facilitate interpretation, we analyzed data for the two
judgment-topic conditions separately.

Figure 3: Possibility ratings for different conditions.
Judgment concerning emotional disorders. After
standardizing the possibility ratings within each culture, we
ran a 2 (culture: American vs. Chinese) × 2 (information
topic: heart vs. lungs) ANOVA. Only a main effect of
information topic emerged, F(1, 121)=19.84, p<0.001.
When judging the possibility of using the chemical to treat
emotional disorders, both Chinese and English gave higher

2826

ratings when the chemical supposedly can treat cardiac
infection than pulmonary infection (Figure 3 left panel).
Judgment concerning cognitive disorders. A similar 2 × 2
ANOVA on the standardized possibility ratings revealed a
significant two-way interaction, F(1,118)=4.33, p=0.04.
When judging the possibility of using the chemical to treat
cognitive disorders, Chinese speakers gave higher ratings
when the chemical supposedly can treat cardiac infection
than pulmonary infection; whereas English speakers were
indifferent (Figure 3 right panel).
This experiment showed that the cardiopsychistic belief of
Chinese speakers seemed to differ from that of English
speakers in a manner as foreshadowed by lexical analysis.
Specifically, though both Chinese and English speakers
regarded the heart as a feeling organ, only Chinese regarded
the heart as a thinking organ. Therefore, the results of the
present experiment were consistent with the hypothesis that
linguistic input might have played a causal role in
perpetuating cardiopsychism. In the next experiment, we
examined whether believing in cardiopsychism may have
some real-world consequences.

since the human organs are scarcer, they would need to pay
a premium if they prefer the human XXX. Then participants
answered this question: ―I would choose the human XXX as
long as its cost is NO MORE than _?_% of the cost of the
pig XXX.‖ Participants’ answers to this question constituted
the critical dependent variable. A response larger than 100%
would suggest that the participant placed a premium on
human transplants. In addition, higher premium were
evidence for stronger resistance to xenotransplants.

Results and Discussion
We first analyzed participants’ attitude toward the social
trend described in the prime passage with a 2 × 2 ANOVA.
Only the main effect of the prime-type was significant,
F(1,133)=35.02, p<0.001. While participants were largely
indifferent toward the increase in support for capital
punishment (M = – 0.25); they clearly considered the
decrease in scientific thinking a bad thing (M = –2.39).
These results suggested that the scientific-thinking-prime
passage successfully conveyed a sense of disapproval
toward unscientific thinking.

Experiment 5: Would You Accept a Pig Heart?
The shortage of donated organs has prompted scientific
investigation into the possibility of xenotransplantation, i.e.
transplanting non-human, usually pig, organs to humans
(McLean & Williamson, 2005). A question with policy
implication is whether cardiopsychism may lead to stronger
resistance toward xenotransplantation of the heart than other
organs. We addressed this question in the present study.

Participants and Procedure
136 English-speaking MTurkers living in the United
States completed an online study. Participants were assigned
to one of the four conditions of 2 (prime type: scientificthinking vs. control) × 2 (focal organ: heart vs. liver) design.
Participants first read a short passage that differed across
the prime-type conditions. Participants in the scientificthinking-prime condition read a stern criticism of the
decline of scientific thinking among Americans. This
passage was intended to convey disapproval of unscientific
thinking so that participants might attempt to give
scientifically-sanctioned answers to relevant questions. In
contrast, participants in the control-prime condition read a
neutral description of the increase in support for capital
punishment among Americans. After the prime passage,
participants were asked to rate the degree to which they
thought the social trend described in the passage was a bad
or good thing. They made their ratings on a –4 (extremely
bad) to +4 (extremely good) scale.
Afterwards, participants completed a seemingly unrelated
task, where they were asked to imagine that in some distant
future the technology for xenotransplation of pig organs is
well established and they happen to need a XXX transplant.
XXX was replaced by either the heart or liver depending on
the focal organ condition. Participants further learned that
they could choose between a human XXX or a pig one; but

Figure 4: Premium for transplants of human origin.
To analyze the critically dependent variable, we applied
square-root transformation to correct for the skewness
before conducting a 2 × 2 ANOVA on the transformed
responses. Only the main effect of focal organ was
significant F(1,133)=7.48, p=0.007. As shown in Figure 4
with the untransformed response, participants were barely
willing to pay any premium for the human transplant when
the liver was concerned. Yet, when the heart was concerned,
participants were willing to pay a large premium for the
human transplants. These results suggest that people were
more resistance toward xenotransplant when the heart is at
stake. Moreover, this prejudice against the pig heart was not
attenuated even when people were prompted to think
scientifically.

Summary and General Discussion
The question that motivated the present research was: Is
the outdated misconception of the heart as a mental organ
(i.e. cardiopsychism) still a living belief in people’s minds?
With an assortment of varied paradigms, we gathered
converging evidence for a positive answer to this question.

2827

At this juncture, it would be remiss not to compare
cardiopsychism with another folk theory of human
psychology, i.e. psychological essentialism (essentialism for
short). Essentialism is the belief that some invisible internal
essence determines a person’s psychological characteristics
and behaviors (Gelman, 2003). Moreover, according to
essentialism, this hidden essence can be passed onto others
via different kinds of physical contacts including transplant.
It is clear that people believing in essentialism should also
consider the heart to be causally responsible for certain
mental properties on the merits of the essences it contains.
Thus, it could be argued that cardiopsychism might just be
special manifestation of essentialism.
Essentialism entails that the essence permeates throughout
the body but does not specify on how exactly the essence is
distributed. Thus, although essentialism implies that the
transfer of any body part from one individual to another
should cause the recipient to take on some of the donor’s
characteristics (Meyer et al., 2013), it is mute on whether
one part is would be more effective at transmitting essence
than the other. Therefore, essentialism alone would not
predict heart-favoritism, i.e. people would impute more
mental power to the heart than any other organs of similar
size. However, it is still possible that essentialism is the
precondition for cardiopsychism.
Having established the perseverance of cardiopsychism,
we took a first step toward understanding why this outdated
belief was able to survive refutations from the scientific
community. Via cultural comparison, we found that though
both native Chinese and English speakers believe in
cardiopsychism; they differ in what mental functions they
tacitly believe the heart can perform. Moreover, this
difference corresponds to the difference revealed by
contrasting the literal meanings of the heart-expressions of
the two languages. Thus, the exposure to conventionalized
heart-expressions that are yet to catch up with the modern
science seems responsible, at least partially, for perpetuating
cardiopsychism. Nonetheless, due to the correlational nature
of cross-cultural approach, further studies are needed to
further investigate what help preserve cardiopsychism.
In the present research, we found evidence consistent with
the notion that cardiopsychism might pose a particular
obstacle to the acceptance of xenotransplant of the heart.
Future studies can also explore how cardiopsychism might
be harnessed to achieve greater social good.

References
Ames, D. R. (2004). Inside the mind reader’s tool kit:
projection and stereotyping in mental state inference.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(3), 340.
Anderson, C. A. (2007). Belief perseverance. Encyclopedia
of Social Psychology, 109–110.
Bloom, P. (2005). Descartes’ Baby: How the Science of
Child Development Explains What Makes Us Human.
New York: Basic Books.
Cuddy, A., Fiske, S. T., Kwan, V. S. Y., Glick, P.,
Demoulin, S., Leyens, J.-P., Ziegler, R. (2009).

Stereotype content model across cultures: Towards
universal similarities and some differences. British
Journal of Social Psychology, 48(1), 1–33.
Dyer, C. (1999). English teenager given heart transplant
against her will. British Medical Journal, 319(7204), 209.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. Oxford University
Press.
Greenwald, A. G., Banaji, M. R., Rudman, L. A., Farnham,
S. D., Nosek, B. A., & Mellott, D. S. (2002). A unified
theory of implicit attitudes, stereotypes, self-esteem, and
self-concept. Psychological Review, 109(1), 3.
Hood, B. M., Gjersoe, N. L., Donnelly, K., Byers, A., &
Itajkura, S. (2011). Moral contagion attitudes towards
potential organ transplants in British and Japanese adults.
Journal of Cognition and Culture, 11(3-4), 3–4.
Inspector Y, utz I,
David D. (2003). Another person’s
heart: magical and rational thinking in the psychological
adaptation to heart transplantation. The Israel Journal of
Psychiatry and Related Sciences, 41(3), 161–173.
vecses, Z.,
oller, B. (2006). anguage, mind, and
culture: a practical introduction. New York: Oxford.
Kreuzbauer, R., Chiu, C., Lin, S., & Bae, S. H. (2014).
When Does Life Satisfaction Accompany Relational
Identity Signaling A Cross-Cultural Analysis. Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 45(4), 646–659.
Kuhn W, Myers B, Brennan A, Davis M, Lippmann S, Gray
LA Jr, & Pool Ge. (1987). Psychopathology in heart
transplant candidates. Journal of Heart Transplantation,
7(3), 223–226.
McLean, S., & Williamson, L. (2005). Xenotransplantation:
law and ethics. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.
Meyer, M., Leslie, S.-J., Gelman, S. A., & Stilwell, S. M.
(2013). Essentialist beliefs about bodily transplants in the
United States and India. Cognitive Science, 37(4), 668–
710.
Niemeier, S. (2003). Straight from the heart-metonymic and
metaphorical. Metaphor and Metonymy at the Crossroads:
A Cognitive Perspective, 195.
Sanner, M. A. (2001). People’s feelings and ideas about
receiving transplants of different origins – questions of
life and death, identity, and nature’s border. Clinical
Transplantation, 15(1), 19–27.
Sylvia, C., & Novak, W. (1998). A Change of Heart: A
Memoir. New York: Grand Central Publishing.
Tamir, D. I., & Mitchell, J. P. (2013). Anchoring and
adjustment during social inferences. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 142(1), 151.
Wierzbicka, A. (1997). Understanding Cultures through
Their Key Words: English, Russian, Polish, German, and
Japanese. New York: Oxford University Press, USA.
Winer, G. A., Cottrell, J. E., Gregg, V., Fournier, J. S., &
Bica, L. A. (2002). Fundamentally misunderstanding
visual perception: Adults’ belief in visual emissions.
American Psychologist, 57(6-7), 417–424.
Yu, N. (2009). The Chinese heart in a cognitive perspective
culture, body, and language. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

2828

