Music Reading Expertise Modulates Hemispheric Lateralization in
English Word Processing but not in Chinese Character Processing
Tze Kwan, Li (saralis@hku.hk)
Janet H. Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
627 Jockey Club Tower, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR
Abstract
Recent research has shown that expertise in English and music reading both rely more on left hemisphere (LH) processing
whereas Chinese character processing is more bilateral. Accordingly, music-reading expertise may influence hemispheric lateralization in English word processing more than in Chinese processing due to stronger competition in LH processing.
Here we recruited musicians and non-musicians in a divided
visual field study of English word and Chinese character naming. In English word processing, whereas non-musicians
showed a typical right visual field (RVF)/LH advantage, musicians showed a left visual field (LVF)/right hemisphere
(RH) advantage and responded significantly faster than nonmusicians in both the LVF and the center position. This effect
may be due to competition for LH processing between music
and English reading expertise, making musicians’ English
word processing more right-lateralized. In contrast, in Chinese character naming, both musicians and non-musicians
showed a similar bilateral pattern. This result suggests that
music reading experience may have differential influences on
the processing of different languages, depending on their similarities in the cognitive processes involved.
Keywords: Music reading expertise; English reading; Chinese reading; lateralization; visual word processing

Introduction
Recent research has shown that different perceptual expertise domains may influence each other. For example,
Gauthier et al. (2003) showed that car perception interfered
with concurrent face perception in car experts, but not in car
novices, suggesting that car and face expertise share common neural mechanisms. Similarly, formal music training
has been reported to enhance musicians’ nonmusical cognitive abilities (Schellenberg, 2005) and hemispheric interconnectivity (Ono et al., 2011). For example, in a line bisection task, musicians were shown to have a bilateral representation of visuo-spatial attention, while non-musicians
tended to be more right-lateralized (Patston et al., 2006).
Consistent with these findings, a recent neuropsychological review revealed that 11 out of 16 representative cases of
music reading deficiency due to brain lesion in the LH
showed music reading difficulties accompanied by word
reading difficulties (in alphabetic languages; Hebert & Cuddy, 2006), suggesting that music and alphabetical language
reading may share common neural mechanisms. Indeed,
recent studies have suggested that cognitive processes involved in music reading expertise tend to be left- lateralized
(Segalowitz, Bebout & Lederman, 1979). LH processing has
shown to be analytic (Bradshaw & Nettleton, 1981), which
facilitates decoding of music notations into motor responses

with auditory feedback. This decoding process is similar to
the grapheme–phoneme correspondence in alphabetic languages (e.g. English). This idea has been further confirmed
by visual half-field experiments: Musicians showed an
RVF/LH advantage in chord reading and an LVF/RH advantage for random dot pattern recognition (Salis, 1980;
Segalowitz et al., 1979). Also, similar to English word reading, the left-to-right reading direction of music notations
may also contribute to a better reading performance in the
RVF/LH due to perceptual learning, since the readers are
more likely to recognize new words/notations in the RVF
(Brysbaert & Nazir, 2005). In short, music notation reading
processes are shown to be more left lateralized. Thus, if
different expertise domains can influence each other, musicreading expertise may influence cognitive tasks that require
LH processing more, such as English word processing, as
compared with other cognitive tasks that are more rightlateralized/bilateral such as Chinese character processing.
In the research on visual word recognition, a RVF/LH advantage has been consistently reported in English word processing (Brysbaert & d’Ydewalle, 1990). It has been argued
to be due to the requirement of decomposing words into
letters/graphemes and mapping them to corresponding phonemes for pronunciation during learning to read (e.g., Hsiao
& Lam, 2013). In addition, due to our habitual left-to-right
reading direction, English words are more likely to be recognized in the RVF, leading to an RVF/LH advantage due
to perceptual learning (Brysbaert & Nazir, 2005).
In contrast to English word processing, Chinese character
processing tends to be more right-lateralized (Tzeng et al.,
1979) or bilateral (Tan et al., 2001) due to its unique logographic orthography. Each Chinese character is regarded as
a morpheme and corresponds to a syllable in the pronunciation, and components of a character do not correspond to
phonemes in the pronunciation. Since there is no graphemephoneme correspondence in Chinese, decomposition of a
character into components is not required. This may account
for the LVF/RH advantage in Chinese orthographic processing observed in the literature (e.g., Tzeng et al., 1979;
Tan et al., 2001; Hsiao & Lam, 2013). In contrast, an
RVF/LH advantage is typically found in Chinese phonological processing (Hsiao & Cheng, 2013). These results
showed that Chinese character processing tends to be more
bilateral, involving a LVF/RH advantage in orthographic
processing and an RVF/LH advantage in phonological processing. Different from English and music reading, Chinese
can be read in all directions (left to right, right to left, or

1344

vertically). Perceptual learning thus may have less influence
in Chinese reading regarding lateralization effects.
Since English word and music notation reading expertise
both involve LH lateralization, we hypothesize that there
may be neurocomputational resource competition between
them in those who have expertise in both domains, such as
musicians who are also expert English readers. Consequently, as compared with non-musicians, musicians may show
reduced LH lateralization in English word processing due to
their music reading expertise. In contrast, since Chinese
character processing is more bilateral/right-lateralized as
compared with English word processing, musicians who are
also expert Chinese readers are less likely to have neurocomputational resource competition with Chinese character
processing. They may show similar lateralization effects to
non-musicians regardless of their music reading experience.
To test these hypotheses, we investigate how music reading
expertise influences hemispheric lateralization effects in
English word and Chinese character naming. This study will
demonstrate how different expertise domains influence each
other in terms of cognitive processing.

Methods
Participants
Participants were 60 Cantonese (L1)-English (L2) bilinguals
from Hong Kong, whose age ranged from 18 to 29 (M = 22,
SD= 2.7). They had similar college education background.
They were classified as musicians (n= 30) and nonmusicians (n= 30), with 15 males and 15 females in each
group. Musicians were well-trained pianists, who started
music training at age 3-9 (M= 5.7, SD= 1.8). All of them
were piano teachers, music undergraduate/ postgraduate
students, or church piano players. They had attained grade 8
piano or above in the graded music examinations of the Associated Board of The Royal Schools of Music (ABRSM),
with 8-22 years experience in piano playing (M= 15.8, SD=
4) and regular music reading hours per week (M= 9, SD=
11.4). In contrast, non-musicians did not receive any music
training. All participants were right-handed and had normal
or corrected to normal vision and started learning English as
a second language at age 3.6. Except for their music training
background, musicians’ and non-musicians’ linguistic background, handedness, and working memory performance
were closely matched, as shown in a letter–number sequencing task (WAIS-III, Wechsler, 1997; musicians: M = 12.1;
non-musicians: M = 11.7, t(58) = .586, n.s.).

Materials
The materials consisted of four types of stimuli: English
words, Chinese characters (symmetric characters and SP
characters, i.e., phonetic compounds with a semantic radical
on the left and a phonetic radical on the right), music notations (notes, chords) and Tibetan strings.
Four- to six-letter English words (n=108) were selected
from the SUBTLEX-US corpus (Brysbaert, New
& Keuleers, 2012). To control for the information distribu-

tion of the word stimuli, the same number of high frequency
words and low frequency words were selected within the
informative beginning and informative end subsets in Bryden et al. (1990).
As for Chinese character stimuli, Hsiao and Cheng (2013)
found that naming Chinese characters with different structures had different visual field asymmetry effects due to
information distribution within the characters. Thus, to control for the influence from asymmetric information distribution within characters, here we used symmetric characters as
the stimuli. In addition, we included another type of character that is the most dominant in the Chinese orthography, SP
characters. With a phonetic radical on the right, the information distribution of a SP character for pronunciation is
skewed to the right. According to Hsiao and Cheng (2013),
SP character processing may have an advantage in the LVF
than the RVF because the phonetic radical of an SP character is closer to the center, where the highest visual acuity
can be achieved, when being presented in the LVF than the
RVF. Here we included SP characters as a representative
type of characters in the orthography. In total 108 symmetric characters and 108 SP characters were used; both types
of character had 12.1 average number of strokes and ranged
from low to high frequency. The number of strokes and
character frequency were matched according to Ho’s (1998)
database.
For music notations, notes (n= 96; 48 pairs) and chords
(n= 108; 54 pairs), ranging from B3 to C51, were included.
All chords were common chords without accidentals (C, F,
G major, D, E, A minor and B diminished chord) in the root
position, first inversion and second inversion. Six types of
time values were selected: semibreves (4 beats), dotted minims (3 beats), minims (2 beats), crotchets (1 beat), quavers
(1/2 beats) and semiquavers (1/4 beats).
Vertical three-letter Tibetan strings (n=216; 108 pairs)
and their mirror images (n=216; 108 pairs) were included.
Mirror images were used to counterbalance the information
between the two sides of the stimuli.

Design
Participants completed an English word naming task, a Chinese character naming task, and a music note and chord
sequential matching task, and a Tibetan string sequential
matching task with the divided visual field design. The task
with music notations aimed to examine whether musicians
and non-musicians had different lateralization effects in
music notation reading when the task depended purely on
visual processing of note locations without the requirement
of motor planning as in the playing tasks used in previous
studies (e.g., Segalowitz et al., 1979). Tibetan strings were
used as a control stimulus type.
In all tasks, the design consisted of a within-subject variable: visual field (VF) location (LVF/centre/RVF) and one
between-subject variable: music expertise (musicians vs.
1

B3 to C5 ranges across two octaves from the B note below one
lower ledger line to the C note with two upper ledger lines.

1345

non-musicians). The dependent variable was the accuracy
(ACC) and response time (RT) in word reading and similarity judgments. English word length, number of strokes of
Chinese characters, word/character frequency, and stimuli
used in same and different trials were all matched across the
LVF, RVF, center-top, or center-bottom conditions in each
block. The stimulus center was 2.8° of visual angle away
from the center fixation in all VF location conditions. Participants’ viewing distance was 57 cm.
The English words were displayed in Times New Roman
font. Each English word subtended 1.5° of visual angle horizontally and 1.1° vertically. The edge of the English word
was 1.5° away from the center (Figure 1). To avoid ceiling
effects, the luminance of English word was adjusted to
59.95 cd/m2. With 210 cd/m2 background luminance, the
Weber contrast of the English word stimuli was -0.715.
The Chinese characters were in Microsoft MingLiu font.
Each Chinese character subtended a horizontal and vertical
visual angle of 1.5° x 1.6°. The edge of Chinese character
was 2° of visual angle away from the center (Figure 1). To
avoid ceiling effects, the luminance of Chinese characters
was adjusted to 153.5 cd/m2, and the Weber contrast of the
Chinese character stimuli was -0.269.
Each music note and chord subtended a horizontal and
vertical visual angle of 1.17° x 2.30°. The edge of the image
was 2.2° of visual angle away from the center (Figure 1). To
avoid ceiling effects, the luminance of notes and chords was
adjusted to 8.97 cd/m2 and 23.5 cd/m2, and the Weber contrast was -0.957 and -0.889 respectively.
Tibetan strings were displayed in Himalaya font. Each
Tibetan string subtended a horizontal and vertical visual
angle of 1.23° x 1.94°. The edge of the strings was 2.2° of
visual angle away from the center (Figure 1). To avoid ceiling effects, the luminance of the strings was adjusted to
25.85 cd/m2, and the Weber contrast was -0.877.

Procedures
In all tasks, each trial started with a fixation cross at the
centre (horizontal length: 1 mm; vertical length: 2 mm).
Participants’ eye movement was monitored through a Tobii
T120 eye tracker. After detecting the central fixation, a red
box appeared around the cross. The experimenter then
pressed a key to present the target stimulus. In the naming
tasks, Chinese characters were presented for 90 ms whereas
English words were presented for 150 ms, to minimize the
possibility of the character/word being foveated. The screen
then turned blank until participants’ response (Figure 2).
Participants were asked to read aloud the stimulus displayed
either at the LVF, center (top/bottom), or RVF as soon as
possible without moving their gaze away from the central
fixation. The ACC was recorded by the experimenter, while
the RT was measured as the time difference between the
stimulus presentation onset and the participant’s pronunciation onset, detected by a microphone.
In the sequential matching tasks, after detecting the central fixation, the first stimulus was presented either at the
LVF, center (top/bottom), or RVF (for 100 ms for notes; for
110 ms for chords; for 170 ms for Tibetan strings), followed
by a 250 ms mask. Then the second stimulus was presented
at the center with the same duration as the first stimulus; the
screen then turned blank until participants’ response (Figure
3). Participants judged whether the two sequentially presented stimuli were the same or not as quickly and accurately as possible. Similarities of notes or chords were based on
pitch only, regardless of the time value. In ‘different’ trials,
the two stimuli differed by one note/symbol. Participants
responded by pressing buttons on a response box with both
hands. ACC and RT were recorded.

Figure 2. Procedure of the word naming task
Figure 1. The position of (a) an English word and (b) a Chinese character presented in the word naming task; (c) a music note and (d) a Tibetan string presented as the first stimulus in the divided visual field sequential matching task
Experiments were conducted using E-Prime v2.0 Professional Extensions for Tobii (Psychology Software Tools,
Inc.), with a Tobii T120 eye tracker (Tobii Technology) to
ensure participants’ central fixation. A chin rest was used to
reduce participants’ head movement. Calibration was performed before the start of each block. The block order was
counterbalanced and trials were randomized across participants.

Figure 3. Procedure of the divided visual field sequential
matching task
After the tasks, a demographic and music background
questionnaire, English Handedness Inventory (Oldfield,
1971), Lexical Test for Advanced Learners of English

1346

(LexTALE, Lemhofer & Broersma, 2012) and Letter–
Number Sequencing task (WAIS- III, Wechsler, 1997) were
conducted to assess participants linguistic background,
handedness, English proficiency and working memory.

lateralization effects2, and both groups showed more bilateral processing in Chinese than in English (Figure 5).

Results
Repeated measures ANOVA was used to analyze participants’ ACC and correct RT. No speed-accuracy trade-off
was observed. For English word naming ACC, a significant
main effect of visual field was found (F(2, 57) = 16.403, p <
.001). Participants performed the best when English words
were presented in the RVF/LH. No other significant effect
was observed in ACC. In RT, a significant interaction between VF and group was observed (F(1, 58) = 3.347, p <
.05.). When we split the data by VF, musicians named English words faster than non-musicians when the words were
presented in the LVF (t(58)= -3.001, p < .05) and center
(t(58)= -2.109, p <.05), but not in RVF (Figure 4). When we
split the data by group and examined lateralization effects,
musicians named English words faster when the words were
presented in the LVF than the RVF (t(58) = 26.09, p <
.001), whereas non-musicians named words faster in the
RVF than the LVF (t(58) = 24.46, p < .001). Thus, the two
groups showed different lateralization effects in naming
English words.

Figure 4. Mean RT of English word naming between musicians and non-musicians across three VFs (error bars: +/1 SE; *** p < .001, * p < .05.)
For Chinese character naming, a significant main effect of
VF was found in both ACC (F(2, 57) = 133.503, p < .001)
and RT (F(2, 57) = 3.523, p < .05). Participants performed
the best when Chinese characters were presented in the
RVF, followed by the LVF and the center; this effect did not
interact with group. When we examined SP and symmetric
characters separately between LVF and RVF, in ACC, a
right VF advantage was found in SP characters (F(1, 58) =
4.177, p < .05), but not in symmetric characters; these effects did not interact with group. Similarly, no VF by group
interaction was observed in RT (symmetric: F(1, 58) =
2.694, n.s.; SP: F(1, 58) = .737, n.s.). Thus, musicians did
not perform significantly different from non-musicians in

Figure 5. Mean RT of Chinese character (symmetric, SP)
naming between musicians and non-musicians across two
VFs (LVF and RVF) (error bars: +/- 1 SE).
For ACC in music notation reading, a significant main effect of type of notation (note vs. chord) was found (F(1, 58)
= 28.585, p < .001). Participants processed notes better than
chords. There was also a significant main effect of group
(F(1, 58) = 120.35, p < .001): musicians showed higher accuracy than non-musicians. Also, a significant main effect
of VF (F(2, 57) = 26.877, p < .001) was found. Participants
performed similarly when the music notes/chords were presented in either the LVF or RVF but had the worst performance in the center. A significant interaction between type
of notation and group was also found (F(1, 58) = 13.944, p
< .001): musicians showed more advantage over nonmusicians in note than in chord processing. For RT, a significant main effect of type of notation (F(1, 58) = 12.984, p <
.001) was found: notes were processed faster than chords.
Also, a significant main effect of VF (F(2, 57) = 16.545, p <
.001) was found: the worst performance was observed in the
center condition. There was no significant main effect in
group, or significant interaction between VF and group.
When we split the data by VF in separate analyses of notes
and chords, musicians showed significantly faster RT than
non-musicians when the notes were presented in the center
(t(58)= -2.059, p < .05) and RVF/LH (t(58)= -2.626, p <
.05), but not in the LVF/RH (t(58) = -1.741, n.s.; Figure 6).
Thus, musicians had a significant advantage over nonmusicians in the RVF/LH and center in note reading. This
effect was not observed in chords.

2

This result was further confirmed by insignificant differences
in lateralization index (LVF - RVF)/(LVF + RVF) between musicians and non-musicians in both symmetric (ACC: t(58) = .623,
n.s; RT: t(50.79) = 1.937, n.s.) and SP characters (ACC: t(58)
=.667, n.s; RT: t(58) = .696, n.s.).

1347

Figure 6. Mean RT in the music note and chord reading
task (error bars: +/- 1 SE; * p < .05).
For the ACC in Tibetan strings, a significant main effect
of VF was found (F(2, 57) = 4.677, p < .05): participants
performed similarly when the stimuli were presented in either the LVF or RVF, and the worst in the center. There was
a marginal main effect of group (F(1, 58) = 3.922, p = .052),
but no interaction between VF and group. For RT, a significant main effect of VF was found (F(2, 57) = 15.654, p <
.001). Participants performed the worst in the center condition. There was also no main effect of group or interaction
between group and VF (Figure 7). These results suggested
that musicians did not perform significantly different from
non-musicians across the VF conditions.

Figure 7. Mean RT in the Tibetan strings reading task.
(error bars: +/- 1 SE)

Discussion
Here we examined how music reading expertise influences
hemispheric lateralization effects in English word and Chinese character naming. Since English word and music notation reading expertise both involve LH lateralization, we
hypothesized that musicians may show reduced LH lateralization in English word processing due to competition for
LH processing resources for their music reading expertise,
whereas in Chinese character processing, since it is typically
more bilateral/right-lateralized than English word pro-

cessing, there may be less neurocomputational resource
competition between music and Chinese reading expertise.
Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that in English
word processing, whereas non-musicians showed a typical
RVF/LH advantage in naming English words, musicians
showed a LVF/RH advantage and responded significantly
faster than non-musicians in both the LVF and the center
position. This effect suggests facilitation of RH English
word processing due to the resource competition between
music notation and English word processing in the LH. In
contrast, in Chinese character processing, musicians did not
perform significantly different from non-musicians in lateralization effects, and both group showed more bilateral
processing than in English processing.
Both English and music notation reading involves letters
to phonemes conversion and note-to-sound mapping
(Brown, Martinez & Parsons, 2006). This encoding process
requires analytic processing, which is dominant in the LH
(Hsiao & Lam, 2013). Moreover, based on the left to right
reading direction, perceptual learning in both English word
and music notation reading would result in a processing
advantage in the RVF and LH processing advantage. Different lateralization effects between musicians and nonmusicians have also been found in an ERP study, with
source localization data showing musicians’ bilateral activation of the fusiform (BA37) and inferior occipital gyri
(BA18) for both word and music note processing; in contrast, non-musicians demonstrated activation in the left fusiform gyrus and left inferior occipital gyrus in English word
processing, but had no obvious activation in the brain during
music note processing (Proverbio et al., 2012). This finding
is consistent with our results, showing that English word
processing was more bilateral in musicians than in nonmusicians, possibly due to potential neurocomputational
resources competition between them.
In contrast, musicians and non-musicians show similar
lateralization effects in Chinese character naming. Since
Chinese character processing is more bilateral/rightlateralized as compared with English word processing, musicians who are also expert Chinese readers may be less
likely to have neurocomputational resource competition
with Chinese character processing. Thus, our results suggest
that neurocomputational resource competition may come
from processing multiple visual object categories that rely
more on similar information processing mechanisms in the
brain (e.g., left-laterlizaed music reading expertise and
English word processing), but not in the domains that
involve less overlapping neural mechanisms (e.g., leftlateralized music reading expertise and right-lateralized/
bilateral Chinese character processing). It also demonstrates
that competition between different expertise domains depends on their similarities in terms of information processing requirements.
Here we also found that when a note recognition task
relies purely on visual processing of note locations, both
musicians and non-musicians showed bilateral processing,
although musicians were more accurate and responded

1348

faster than non-musicians. This result was consistent with
previous studies showing bilateral music note processing in
musicians (Proverbio et al., 2012). As our task was limited
to pitch judgments, it remains unclear whether reading other
information (e.g. temporal information) in music notation
can result in different lateralization effects between musicians and non-musicians. Also, we did not observed lateralization difference between musicians and non-musicians in
chord reading. This result is in contrast to Segalowitz et al.’s
(1979) study showing a strong RVF advantage in chord
processing with a piano playing task that may have involved
more left-lateralized motor planning. .
As for novel symbol string (i.e. Tibetan) processing,
musicians and non-musicians did not show lateralization
differences, which suggested they did not differ in its
underlying neural mechanism. Nevertheless, a marginal
advantage of musicians over non-musicians in ACC may
suggest benefits from music reading in symbol processing.
To conclude, this study examined how music reading expertise influences hemispheric lateralization effects in English word and Chinese character naming. In English naming,
whereas non-musicians showed a typically RVF/LH advantage, musicians showed a LVF/RH advantage and responded significantly faster than non-musicians in both the
LVF and the center positions. In contrast, in Chinese character naming, musicians and non-musicians show similar
lateralization effects regardless of their difference in music
reading experience. This difference between English and
Chinese processing may be due to stronger neurocomputational resource competition between music and English
reading expertise for LH information processing as compared with Chinese reading expertise. This result suggests
that music reading experience may have differential influences on the processing of different languages, depending
on their similarities in the cognitive processes involved.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (ECS scheme project # HKU 758412H to J.H. Hsiao).

References
Bradshaw, J. L., & Nettleton, N. C. (1981). The nature of
hemispheric specialization in man. Behav. Brain Sci., 4,
51-63.
Brown, S., Martinez, M. J., & Parsons, L. M. (2006). Music
and language side by side in the brain: a PET study of the
generation of melodies and sentences. Eur. J. Neurosci.,
23, 2791-2803.
Bryden, M. P., Mondor, T. A., Loken, M., Ingleton, M. A.,
& Bergstrom, K. (1990). Locus of information in words
and the right visual field effect. Brain Cognition, 14, 4458.
Brysbaert, M., & d’Ydewalle, G. (1990). Tachistoscopic
presentation of verbal stimuli for assessing cerebral dominance: Reliability data and some practical recommendation. Neuropsychologia, 28, 443- 455.

Brysbaert, M., & Nazir, T. (2005). Visual constraints in
written word recognition: evidence from the optimal
viewing-position effect. J.Res.Read., 28, 216- 228.
Brysbaert, M., New, B., & Keuleers, E. (2012). Adding
part-of-speech information to the SUBTLEX-US
word
frequencies. Behav. Res. Methods, 44, 991-997.
Gauthier, I., Curran, T., Curby, K. M., & Collins, D. (2003).
Perceptual interference supports a non-modular account
of face processing. Nat. Neurosci., 6, 428-432.
Hebert, S., & Cuddy, L. L. (2006). Music-reading deficiencies and the brain. Adv.Cogn. Psychol., 2, 199-206.
Ho, H. H. (1998). Hong Kong, mainland China & Taiwan:
Chinese character frequency–A trans-regional, diachronic
survey.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cheng, L. (2013). The modulation of stimulus structure on visual field asymmetry effects: The case
of Chinese character recognition. Q. J. of Exp.l Psycho.,
66, 1739-1755.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cheng, L. (2013). The modulation of stimulus structure on visual field asymmetry effects: The case
of Chinese character recognition. Q. J. of Exp. Psycho.,
66, 1739-1755.
Hsiao, J. H., & Lam, S. M. (2013). The Modulation of Visual and Task Characteristics of a Writing System on
Hemispheric Lateralization in Visual Word Recognition—A Computational Exploration. Cognitive Sci., 37,
861-890.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9, 97-113
Ono, K., Nakamura, A., Yoshiyama, K., Kinkori, T., Bundo,
M., Kato, T., & Ito, K. (2011). The effect of musical experience on hemispheric lateralization in musical feature
processing. Neurosci. Lett., 496, 141-145.
Patston, L. L., Corballis, M. C., Hogg, S. L., & Tippett, L. J.
(2006). The Neglect of Musicians Line Bisection Reveals an Opposite Bias. Psychol. Sci., 17,1029-1031.
Proverbio, A. M., Manfredi, M., Zani, A., & Adorni, R.
(2013). Musical expertise affects neural bases of letter
recognition. Neuropsychologia, 51, 538-549.
Salis D. L. (1980). Laterality effects with visual perception
of musical chords and dot patterns. Percept. Psychophys.,
28, 284-292.
Schellenberg, E. G. (2005). Music and cognitive abilities.
Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci., 14, 317-320.
Segalowitz, S. J., Bebout, L. J., & Lederman, S. J. (1979).
Lateralization for reading musical chords: Disentangling
symbolic, analytic, and phonological aspects of reading.
Brain Lang., 8, 315-323.
Tan, L. H., Liu, H. L., Perfetti, C. A., Spinks, J. A., Fox, P.
T., & Gao, J. H. (2001). The neural system underlying
Chinese logograph reading. Neuroimage, 13, 836-846.
Tzeng, O. J. L., Hung, D. L., Cotton, B., & Wang, S. Y.
(1979). Visual lateralization effect in reading Chinese
characters. Nature (London), 282, 499-501.
Wechsler, D. (1997). WAIS-III: Wechsler adult intelligence
scale. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.

1349

