Neuronal Dynamics and Spatial Foraging
Timothy M. Shea (tshea2@ucmerced.edu)
Anne S. Warlaumont (awarlaumont2@ucmerced.edu)
Christopher T. Kello (ckello@ucmerced.edu)
David C. Noelle (dnoelle@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences, SSHA
University of California Merced, 5200 North Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343 USA

rate of reorienting (Hills, 2006).
There is much debate and disagreement over which
foraging data and which aspects of search agents and
environments are more or less important for theories and
models (e.g. Viswanathan, 1999; Edwards, 2011; Planck,
Auger-Méthé, & Codling, 2013). Additionally, prior models
leave the cognitive and neural bases underlying the search
process unspecified. These shortcomings make it currently
unclear which results from the foraging literature are most
relevant to cognitive search processes.

Abstract
Foraging is an embodied cognitive process which balances the
search constraints of exploration versus exploitation. As such,
foraging strategies and mechanisms offer useful insight into
abstract forms of search such as visual search, problem solving,
and semantic recall. We performed a series of simulations
using artificial neural networks to relate metastable neuronal
dynamics to observed foraging behaviors. We show that the
velocity and tortuosity of the foraging paths are influenced by
metastable neuronal activity, while resource collection is
unaffected. These initial results indicate that neuronal
metastability may contribute to foraging behaviors but
additional mechanisms are needed to optimally exploit
environmental resources.
Keywords: foraging; neural networks; critical branching

Introduction
Foraging is an embodied cognitive process. Animals move
continuously through physical space searching for food,
mates, or other resources. Increasingly, evidence indicates
that common neurophysiological mechanisms support a
broad range of search behaviors. Thus, cognitive search tasks
such as visual search, problem solving, and semantic recall
share many of the mechanisms and constraints of foraging
(Hills, Todd, Lazer, Redish, & Couzin, 2014).
Much of the prior work on foraging has analyzed it as a
statistical process rather than the product of embedded,
interactive systems. This approach has produced effective
descriptive accounts of movement patterns but neglects the
roles of perceptual, motor, and neural mechanisms. Statistical
models have successfully characterized aspects of foraging
such as population dispersal and perseveration. Some of these
models can produce qualitatively similar patterns of
movement to those found in animal foraging data: clustered,
local movements separated by longer, straighter segments
(Codling, Plank, & Benhamou, 2008). In contrast, arearestricted search (ARS) describes the emergence of
heterogeneity in movements as arising from direct interaction
with the resources in the environment. See Figure 1 for an
example of ARS in human behavioral data. ARS is adaptive
in the sense offered by the marginal-value theorem, which
holds that foraging is optimal when the forager transitions
between resource patches as a function of the rate of success
in the current patch (Charnov, 1976). ARS can explain how
foraging animals with minimal cognitive capabilities can
approximate the marginal-value theorem by modulating the

Figure 1: An example area-restricted search produced by a
human participant foraging (blue) in a virtual environment
containing a patchy distribution of resources (black).
Reproduced from Hills, Kalff, & Wiener (2013) Figure 1C.
In the current study, we focus on the relationship between
neural dynamics and the exploratory paths agents take as they
forage. Exploration refers to patterns of movement in search
of patches of high resource density in the environment. We
hypothesize that the exploratory paths taken will be more
realistic when the neural model exhibits metastable
dynamics. Metastability is a property of dynamical systems
which attract toward synchronous or stable states but
regularly produce phase transitions between these states
(Kello, Anderson, Holden, & Van Orden, 2008; Tognoli &
Kelso, 2014). These dynamics facilitate propagation of
information through the system and support fluctuations in
activity across a wide range of scales, i.e. many small-scale
fluctuations interspersed with less common but much larger-

2140

scale fluctuations (Kozma, Puljic, Balister, Bollobás, &
Freeman, 2005). Metastable neural activity has been
proposed as a substrate around which adaptive behaviors can
be organized. To successfully account for the spatial
movement patterns of foragers, metastable neural activity
must be capable of producing complex behavioral dynamics.

Objective
Our objective was to develop a framework with which to
explore neural network models of foraging. While prior work
has explored various foraging models in detail, we know of
no attempt to relate metastable neural activity to observed
foraging behaviors. We focused on the hypothesis that
metastable patterns of activity produced by critical branching
networks would support movement patterns like those found
in nature. More generally, we initiate work on relating neural
processes to foraging behaviors, and provide code for doing
so.

Methods
We developed simulation software in which an artificial
agent forages for resources. The agent is composed of an
input model, a neural network, and an output model. The
agent is situated in a bounded two-dimensional environment
containing clusters of resources. Two groups of simulations
were conducted, one in which a critical branching process
tuned network connectivity to produce metastable neural
activity (CB) and one in which connectivity was static
(NonCB) for comparison. Neural spike times and rates,
movement paths, and resource collections were recorded and
compared between groups.
The simulation software was developed using Java SE
SDK (8u31) and the Apache Commons for statistical
functions and file processing. The software and instructions
for replicating our results can be accessed at
cogmech.ucmerced.edu/downloads.html.

Critical Branching Neural Network
Artificial neural networks can achieve metastability through
critical branching (Beggs & Plenz, 2003), which is an
objective for regulating spike propagation and maximizing
information transmission through networks. Kello (2013)
formulated a mechanism, local to spiking neurons and their
synapses, which produces critical branching at the network
level. The mechanism probabilistically assigns credit to
individual neurons for causing action potentials. The credit is
used to enable or disable synapses and achieve an average
ratio of one spike propagated for each spike produced. The
resulting homeostasis is metastable rather than stable because
ongoing synaptic switching drives the network from one
transient state to the next.
The neural network contains three layers of leaky
integrate-and-fire neurons, referred to as the source, the
reservoir, and the sink (Kello, 2013). The neuron model is
updated at fixed intervals (1 ms). The source layer contains
100 excitatory neurons. Each source neuron receives input
directly from the input model and projects synapses to the
reservoir. The reservoir contains 1,000 neurons (80%
excitatory) which project recurrent synapses within the
reservoir and feedforward synapses to the sink. The sink
contains 100 excitatory neurons and its activity drives the
update of the output model—sink neurons are required to
absorb propagated spikes during critical branching to avoid
saturation. The probability of a synapse between any pair of
projecting and receiving neurons for all pathways is 0.1.
The critical branching mechanism described by Kello
(2013) was modified for clock-based updating, but the
essence of the algorithm remained unchanged. Spikes
probabilistically (ρ = 0.05) enable axonal synapses and
disable dendritic synapses causing the local branching
ratio—the ratio of upstream to downstream spikes—to
approach 1.0. This process self-organizes across the network
to reach approximately equal mean spiking rates at the source

Figure 2: Continuous visualization of neural activity in the simulation software. (Left) Spike counts per ms for each layer of
the network (Center) Mean local branching ratio for the reservoir (Right) Spike raster plot depicting spike times in the
reservoir for the previous 500 ms

2141

and sink. See Kello (2013) for a complete description of the
critical branching algorithm and the resulting network
dynamics.

Foraging Environment
The input model generated incoming stimulation for the
neural network. The model described here was a random
spike generator which caused an action potential with a fixed
probability at each source neuron for each update cycle. The
mean firing rate in the network was equal to the product of
this probability and the number of neurons. We also tested a
sequential spike train input model, which did not
substantially affect network activity (not reported).
The output model transduced the spiking activity of the
sink to move the foraging agent. During each update, the
model counted the number of spikes in four equally-sized
subgroups of the sink. These values were then treated as the
two-dimensional velocity (positive x, positive y, negative x,
and negative y) of the agent in the subsequent interval. A
concern in many types of foraging analyses is temporal
binning which in some cases can skew movement
distributions to support models that would not be supported
by the unbinned data (Newman, 2005). Nevertheless,
movements generated on the scale of milliseconds would not
be relevant to foraging behaviors. Unless otherwise specified,
binning was performed by averaging values over 100 ms
windows to preserve the time course of the data while
removing excessive high-frequency noise.

Thus, the forager was unidirectionally coupled with its
environment. The lack of sensory information related to
position or resources is a limitation, but it was necessary to
directly explore the movement distributions produced by the
intrinsic metastable dynamics of the network. Figure 3
depicts a sample path produced with these models.
Foraging Metrics Many models of foraging are derived from
physical equations governing particle diffusion, so-called
random walks. Codling, Plank, and Benhamou (2008)
consolidates these models, providing derivations and a
variety of useful metrics. Relevant aspects of the work are
summarized below.
The probability density function for the position of a
random walk is used to derive the mean displacement and
mean squared displacement (MSD). MSD is particularly
useful as a measure of dispersal, since it assesses the degree
to which a forager has explored its environment. To calculate
the MSD for an empirical distribution, we use the following:

(1)

The foraging environment was a square with sides of
length 20,000 units. Movements which would end outside of
these boundaries were clipped. Within the environment, 500
resource patches were uniformly distributed. The number of
resources in each patch was sampled from a geometric
distribution with mean 10, to yield approximately 5,000
resources total. Resources within 10 units of the forager were
automatically collected.

2
∑𝑇
𝑡=1[𝑥(𝑡)−𝑥(0)]

𝑇

Where x(t) is the position of the forager at time t and T is
the total number of time steps observed.
Importantly, in simple random walks, steps are
independent and identically distributed, such that the
subsequent position of a forager depends only on the prior
position, not on the path of arrival. The addition of memory
to the diffusion model introduces directional correlation
between subsequent steps. Thus, correlated random walks
(CRW) tend to exhibit directional persistence, better fitting
movement data from animals, which generally prefer forward
movement to perfectly random reorientation. The directional
bias can be quantified for a foraging path consisting of a
series of discrete steps using the mean sine and mean cosine
of the turning angle. More valuable for the present work,
metrics for the rate of turning within a given path length—
the tortuosity of the path—can be derived from the series of
turning angles. Straightness-Index is one measure of
tortuosity, the ratio of gross displacement to path length.
Another metric, sinuosity, has also been applied. The
sinuosity, S, of a sequence of movements is given by:

(2)
Figure 3: Continuous visualization of a foraging path with
clustered resources and path statistics.

𝑚𝑠𝑑(𝑇) =

1+𝑐

𝑆 = 2 [𝐸(𝐿) (

1−𝑐

+ 𝑏 2 )]

−1/2

Where E(L) is the mean step length, c is the mean cosine
of the turning angle, and b is the coefficient of variation of
step lengths (Codling et al., 2008). In the present study, we
calculated MSD, straightness-index, and sinuosity of
foraging paths.
A Lèvy flight is a random walk in which step lengths
exhibit power-law scaling. This kind of foraging model was
first described empirically by Viswanathan, Afanasyev,
Buldyrev, Murphy, Prince, and Stanley using data from
albatrosses (1996). In practice, it has proven difficult to

2142

distinguish between power-law scaling and other
distributions. Clauset, Shalizi, and Newman (2009) describes
a framework for estimating power-law model parameters and
assessing the goodness-of-fit relative to alternative
hypotheses. They apply the framework to evaluate biases in
commonly used alternatives, such as simple linear regression,
and demonstrate its benefits. As a preliminary analysis, we
applied the graphical method for evaluating power-law
scaling, in which the cumulative probability distribution of a
dataset is plotted in log-log coordinates. A linear tail across
at least two orders of magnitude would be considered to
support power-law scaling (Newman, 2005).
Viswanathan (1999) presents a formal analysis and
evidence from numerical simulations that Lèvy flights are
optimal foraging strategies when resources are sparse and
randomly distributed. Alternatively, when resources are
patchy and therefore the mean resource density within and
between patches can be learned, the marginal-value theorem
predicts transitions between behavioral regimes (Charnov,
1976). To test whether different neural models lead to
different rates of resource collection, we record a resource
collection event whenever a foraging agent gets within a
fixed spatial distance from a point resource. That resource is
subsequently removed from the environment.

Interspike intervals (ISIs) for representative neurons in the
reservoir are shown in Figure 5. Note that Kello (2013)
predicts that ISIs should follow a heavy-tailed distribution.
This was graphically assessed by plotting the cumulative
probability distribution in log-log coordinates (Newman,
2005). Of note is the greatly increased variability in the
distribution of ISIs for the NonCB group.

Results
Network Activity
Spiking activity at the sink (M = 1.69, SD = 0.78) was 73%
of the source (M = 2.32, SD = 0.0048) across all simulations
(N = 16). The branching ratio of the reservoir approached 1.0
in both groups during the connectivity stabilization period.
After this period, the CB mechanism was disengaged for the
NonCB group (M = 0.927, SD = 0.063) which subsequently
exhibited greater variance (M = 0.946,
SD = 0.0059) as
shown in Figure 4.

Figure 5: Interspike interval distributions of neurons (# 0,
100, 200, 300) from the CB (red) and NonCB (green)
groups.

Foraging Path
Qualitatively, the critical branching foragers produced paths
that were more tortuous, included path crossings, and seemed
to exhibit no directional bias (Fig. 7). The non-critical
branching foragers tended to perseverate along a narrow
range of headings eliminating path crossings, minimizing
tortuosity, and introducing an apparent directional bias.
Velocity We did not find a significant difference in mean
velocity between groups (MCB = 46.89, MNonCB = 50.05) but
did find unequal variance of velocity (SDCB = 1.63, SDNonCB
= 20.3, F(7) = 0.0065, p < 0.001). Velocity distributions were
qualitatively similar, and we found no evidence of power law
scaling in step size in either group by visual inspection (see
Figure 6). This indicates that for our output model, metastable
neural activity alone is not sufficient to produce the power
law scaling of step sizes found in some empirical data.

Figure 4: Local Branching Ratio for the CB group (red) and
the NonCB group (green).

Dispersal Group dispersal of the foraging paths are shown in
Figure 7. Mean-squared displacement (MSD) was
significantly greater for the NonCB group (M = 2.54x107,
SD = 2.54x107) than for the CB group (M = 8.32x105,
SD = 5.40x105), t(7.0) = -2.74, p = 0.029. Because the mean
velocity is not significantly different between groups, this can
only be caused by the increased turning rate in the critical
branching group.

2143

Resource Collection We performed a paired, 2-tailed t-test
on number of resources collected and did not find a
significant difference between groups (MCB = 2.0,
MNonCB = 2.5, p = 0.66). While our hypothesis did not
specifically make a prediction regarding resource collection,
prior models have found relationships between straightness
of a random walk and foraging success.

Discussion

Figure 6: Velocity Histogram for CB Simulation #1 (Green)
and Non-CB Simulation #1 (Red).
Tortuosity The non-critical branching group produced
significantly straighter paths (t(7.28) = -5.17, p = 0.001) as
indexed by the ratio of displacement to path length
(Benhamou, 2004) but we did not find a significant difference
in sinuosity between groups (t(7.26) = -0.093, p = 0.93).
Because this measure may be more sensitive to high
frequency noise, this could be a result of insufficient binning.

The goal of this study was to make initial progress into
relating neural activity to patterns of movement observed in
animal foraging. We compared two groups of spiking neural
networks, one in which a homeostatic critical branching
mechanism was present and a control group in which critical
branching was disabled but other aspects of the model were
the same.
The recorded network activity agreed with results
presented by Kello (2013), in that the critical branching group
exhibited metastability at the level of neural activity. This did
indeed translate to differences in foraging paths, though not
in exactly the ways we hypothesized. The resulting effect on
foraging paths was significantly greater variation in the
direction of movement in the CB simulations. We believe the
reason for the observed increase in tortuosity is that there is a
constant shift in which neurons in the sink receive the greatest
degree of activation from the reservoir. As synapses in the
pathway from reservoir to sink are switched on or off, a new
set of neurons becomes dominant, changing the foraging
direction.
We did not identify an effect of critical branching on the
distribution of step sizes. Thus our results failed to support a

Figure 7: Group dispersal for 100 s. The non-critical branching networks exhibit little directional variability (left) resulting in
much wider dispersal but little coverage. The critical branching networks (right) demonstrate more tortuous paths which
include backtracking and clustered movements. The path of each forager is translated to the origin for easier interpretation.

2144

connection between power law scaling in neural activity and
Lèvy flights. Given that aggregated neural activity can lead
to power laws (Kello, 2013), the present results indicate that
not all aggregations will preserve this structure. This suggests
that consideration of other factors affecting spatial search or
other models of neural control will be important for
understanding the relationship between neural activity and
Lèvy foraging.
Although the foraging literature makes a variety of
predictions about the relationship between tortuosity and
optimality, we did not find any significant difference in
resource collection rate in our simulations. We attribute this
to the fact that the agents were unable to learn anything about
the resource distribution in the present study. Despite prior
literature associating random processes with optimality, we
contend that optimal foraging will require adaptive
mechanisms.
There are several promising future directions for this
research. First, qualitative pilot comparisons with several
output models demonstrated that binning the path, i.e.
summing activity over an interval to produce motion on an
ecologically plausible timescale, and applying physical
constraints (momentum, friction) significantly alter the shape
of the path. A comprehensive investigation of these factors in
the computational framework we developed could provide
insight into ongoing methodological debates.
Second, in foraging animals, tight coupling of perception
and action require immediate, implicit, and continuous
decision-making. The present study did not explore this
coupling between perception and action, and in particular did
not address how discovering a resource could be expected,
through evolved mechanisms or learning, to bias subsequent
movements. Making the foraging model sensitive to the
history of resources collected is essential to adaptive foraging
and may be responsible for some of the patterns that are
observed in animal search paths. Encoding this information
as input to the neural network would be a first step to
addressing this limitation.
Finally, foraging processes offer a valuable perspective
with which to conceptualize diverse cognitive phenomena.
For this perspective to be profitable, more work should be
done on the common neural mechanisms of search-like
processes and how to map these to complex neural dynamics.

Acknowledgements
We are extremely grateful for the contributions of members
of the Computational Cognitive Neuroscience and Cognitive
Mechanics labs at UC Merced. We would also like to thank
the anonymous reviewers for their detailed feedback.

fractal dimension? Journal of Theoretical Biology,
229(2), 209–20.
Charnov, E. L. (1976). Optimal foraging, the marginal value
theorem. Theoretical Population Biology, 9(2), 129–136.
Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R., & Newman, M. E. J. (2007).
Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM Review,
51(3), 661–703.
Codling, E. a, Plank, M. J., & Benhamou, S. (2008).
Random walk models in biology. Journal of the Royal
Society, Interface / the Royal Society, 5(25), 813–34.
Edwards, A. (2011). Overturning conclusions of Lévy flight
movement patterns by fishing boats and foraging animals.
Ecology, 92(6), 1247–1257.
Hills, T. T. (2006). Animal foraging and the evolution of
goal-directed cognition. Cognitive Science, 30(1), 3–41.
Hills, T. T., Kalff, C., & Wiener, J. M. (2013). Adaptive
Levy Processes and Area-Restricted Search in Human
Foraging. PLoS ONE, 8(4).
Hills, T. T., Todd, P. M., Lazer, D., Redish, a. D., &
Couzin, I. D. (2014). Exploration versus exploitation in
space, mind, and society. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
19(1), 1–9.
Kello, C. T. (2013). Critical branching neural networks.
Psychological Review, 120(1), 230–54.
Kello, C. T., Anderson, G. G., Holden, J. G., & Van Orden,
G. C. (2008). The pervasiveness of 1/f scaling in speech
reflects the metastable basis of cognition. Cognitive
Science, 32, 1217–1231.
Kozma, R., Puljic, M., Balister, P., Bollobás, B., &
Freeman, W. J. (2005). Phase transitions in the
neuropercolation model of neural populations with mixed
local and non-local interactions. Biological Cybernetics,
92(6), 367–79.
Newman, M. (2005). Power laws, Pareto distributions and
Zipf’s law. Contemporary Physics, 46(5), 323–351.
Planck, M. J., Auger-Méthé, M., & Codling, E. A. (2013).
Lévy or Not? Analysing Positional Data from Animal
Movement Paths. In M. A. Lewis, P. K. Maini, & S. V.
Petrovskii (Eds.), Dispersal, Individual Movement and
Spatial Ecology (Vol. 2071, pp. 33–52). Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Tognoli, E., & Kelso, J. S. (2014). The metastable brain.
Neuron, 81(1), 35–48.
Viswanathan, G. (1999). Optimizing the Success of Random
Searches. Letters to Nature, 401, 911–914.
Viswanathan, G., Afanasyev, V., Buldyrev, S., Murphy, E.,
Prince, P., & Stanley, H. (1996). Lévy flight search
patterns of wandering albatrosses. Nature, 381, 413–415.

References
Beggs, J., & Plenz, D. (2003). Neuronal avalanches in
neocortical circuits. The Journal of Neuroscience, 23(35),
11167–11177.
Benhamou, S. (2004). How to reliably estimate the
tortuosity of an animal’s path: straightness, sinuosity, or

2145

