New space-time metaphors foster new mental representations of time
Rose K. Hendricks (rhendricks@ucsd.edu)
Lera Boroditsky (lera@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Drive,
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract

number of studies have found differences on an implicit
space-time association task done with picture sequences
(Boroditsky et. al 2010; Fuhrman et al 2011). We will
refer to this task as the Orly task, named after its inventor.
On each trial, participants see two pictures presented one
at a time in the center of the screen. For example,
participants might see a photograph of Julia Roberts in
her 20s followed by a photo of Roberts as a young girl (or
of her in her 40s). Their job is to indicate whether the
second picture shows a conceptually earlier or later point
in time than the first picture. To respond participants must
press different colored buttons (for example, press blue
for “earlier” and red for “later”). For some trials the
buttons are arranged so that the “earlier” button is above
the “later” button. On other trials the mapping is
reversed.
People’s patterns of responses on this non-linguistic
picture sequence task correspond to patterns found in their
linguistic and cultural backgrounds. For example,
Mandarin makes common use of vertical spatial
metaphors that place earlier events above and later events
below. Correspondingly, Mandarin speakers are faster to
respond when the “earlier” button is above than when it is
below. English on the other hand does not have a strong
pattern of vertical metaphors, and correspondingly
English speakers show a weaker bias on the vertical axis
than Mandarin speakers in this same task.
However, in cross-cultural comparisons like this, it is
impossible to cleanly attribute differences in nonlinguistic behavior to patterns in language. In addition to
differences in metaphor use between English and
Mandarin, there are many other potential differences in
extra-linguistic aspects of cultural experience. Can
learning different spatial metaphors for time (in the
absence of other extra-linguistic differences) indeed foster
new representations of time? And if so, what is the locus
of such effects? Do the newly learned mappings reside
strictly in the linguistic sphere? Or can learning new ways
of talking about time encourage people to create new nonlinguistic representations for time (ones that are not
disrupted by verbal interference)?
Here we describe a set of studies in which we train
English-speaking participants to talk about time using
vertical spatial metaphors that are novel to English. One
group learned a mapping that placed earlier events above
and the other learned a mapping that placed earlier events
below. After mastering the new metaphors, participants
were tested in the Orly task described above. Some
participants completed the task without any other

Can learning new linguistic metaphors foster new nonlinguistic representations? We describe a set of studies in
which we trained English-speaking participants to talk
about time using vertical spatial metaphors that are novel to
English. One group learned a mapping that placed earlier
events above and the other a mapping that placed earlier
events below. After mastering the new metaphors,
participants were tested in a non-linguistic space-time
implicit association task – the Orly task. This task has been
used previously to document cross-linguistic differences in
representations of time (Boroditsky et. al 2010; Fuhrman et
al 2011). Some participants completed temporal judgments
in the Orly task without any other secondary task, while
others did so under either verbal or visual interference.
Finally, we report data from a serendipitous sample of
Chinese-English bilinguals on the same task.
Keywords: metaphor; space; time; learning; language

Introduction
Across many languages people use spatial terms and
constructions to talk about time. For example in English,
one might say "the best is ahead of us" or "let's move the
meeting forward," using the horizontal spatial relation
terms "ahead" and "forward" to talk about temporal
relations. Across languages, which spatial terms or
expressions are borrowed to talk about which temporal
relations differs. Some languages rely more on vertical
terms than English does; others put the past in front and
the future behind (reversing the mapping from the English
system) (see Boroditsky 2011 for a review). Prior work
has indeed found that cross-linguistic differences in
spatio-temporal metaphors predict cross-linguistic
differences in people's spatial representations of time
(e.g., Boroditsky 2001; Boroditsky et. al 2010; Fuhrman
et al 2011; Miles et al, 2011; Núñez & Sweetser, 2006).
For example, while both English and Mandarin use
horizontal (front/back) terms to talk about relationships
between events in time, Mandarin also commonly
employs vertical spatial terms (up/down) to talk about
time. Earlier or past events are said to be “up,” and later
or future events are said to be “down.” The critical
difference is that Mandarin uses vertical metaphors more
frequently than English does. While some vertical
metaphors for time do occur in English (e.g., “passing
knowledge down to the next generation”) these metaphors
are far less common, productive, and systematic than they
are in Mandarin.
The differences observed in language also bear out in
how people reason about time in non-linguistic tasks. A

902

Analyses

secondary task, while others did so under conditions of
either verbal or visual interference.
In a final section we analyze data on the same tasks
from a serendipitous sample of Chinese-English
bilinguals. These participants self-identified as native
English speakers prior to participating, but in a postexperimental questionnaire it was revealed they also had
experience speaking Mandarin and/or Cantonese. How
does learning a new metaphor in the lab affect
participants who have been exposed to the opposite
pattern in their natural language experience?

We fit the data with mixed effects models using Laplace
Approximation using the lmer() function within the lme4
analysis package in R (Bates, Maechler, & Dai, 2008; R
Development Core Team, 2008). We modeled both
participants and items as random effects, training
condition (whether participants learned the “earlier is up”
or “earlier is down” metaphors) and task condition
(whether the ‘earlier’ key was above or below) as fully
crossed fixed effects, and block order as a main effect. In
Experiment 2, the model also included interference
condition (none, verbal or visual) as a fully crossed fixed
effect. Results are summarized in Figure 1.

Participants & Analyses

faster when
‘earlier’ key is
ABOVE!

Participant Inclusion
Forty-one undergraduates at UC San Diego participated in
Experiment 1 and 80 participated in Experiment 2. All
participants received either payment or course credit for
their participation.
Although our experiments were advertised as recruiting
only native English speakers, the demographics of the
UCSD testing population are such that 3 participants in
Experiment 1 and 28 participants in Experiment 2 were
bilingual in Mandarin or Cantonese, as revealed in a postexperimental language background questionnaire. These
participants were excluded from the main analyses and
replaced by participants who did not have exposure to
Chinese. This was necessary because Chinese speakers
would have already had substantial exposure to vertical
metaphors for time as part of their natural language
experience. For ease of reference we will refer to
participants who reported speaking Mandarin or
Cantonese as Chinese-English bilinguals, and participants
who did not as English speakers. We analyze the data
from the sizeable sample of Chinese-English bilinguals in
Experiment 2 separately.
In addition to excluding Chinese-English bilinguals,
participants were excluded if they failed to follow the
instructions, if their performance on the training, the Orly
task, or the interference tasks (in Exp 2) was worse than 3
SDs away from the group mean, or if a computer error
prevented data from being saved.
All excluded participants were replaced to arrive at a
complete counterbalance of 32 participants in Experiment
1 and 48 participants in Experiment 2.

400!

learned Earlier is UP metaphors!
learned Earlier is DOWN metaphors!

300!

200!

100!

faster when
‘earlier’ key is
BELOW!

0!

-100!

-200!

Exp 1!

Exp 2
overall!

Exp 2
no
interference!

Exp 2
verbal
interference!

Exp 2
Chinese-English
visual
bilinguals!
interference!

Figure 1. By-subject mean RT difference (in msecs) for
picture sequence judgments (RT for ‘earlier’ key is below
minus ‘earlier’ is above). Error bars show standard error.

Experiment 1
Methods
Procedure
The study proceeded in 4 phases: 1. metaphor training
block, 2. Orly task block, 3. second metaphor training
block (identical to the first), and 4. a final Orly task block.
For a given participant, the two metaphor training blocks
were identical, but the Orly task blocks were different.
Each participant completed one Orly task block for which
the response mapping was congruent with their metaphor
training and one for which the response mapping was
incongruent. Whether the congruent or the incongruent
block occurred first was counterbalanced across
participants.
Metaphor training At the start of the experiment,
participants were told that they would learn a new way of
talking about time. First they read five example sentences
showcasing this new system of talking. For half of the
participants, earlier events were said to be above or higher
and later events were said to be below or lower (e.g.,
Thursday is higher than Friday; When you eat breakfast,
dinner is below you). This system was reversed for the
other half of participants so that instead earlier events

Inclusion of data points
For analyses of response times, we excluded trials for
which the participant provided an incorrect picture
sequence judgment, trials for which participants made
errors on the interference task (In Experiment 2), and
trials for which the reaction time was greater than 3 SDs
from the participant’s cell mean. This yielded 90.4% of
original trials for analysis in Experiment 1 and 75.4% in
Experiment 2.

903

were below/lower and later events were above/higher
(Thursday is lower than Friday; When you eat breakfast,
dinner is above you).
After participants said they understood the example
sentences, they completed 90 test trials to practice this
new system for talking about time. On each trial, they saw
a new sentence describing a temporal relation (e.g,
Lincoln was president _________ than Carter) and were
asked to fill in the correct spatial term (selecting from the
two options provided). Participants responded by typing
the missing word into the blank. If participants gave the
correct answer, the program continued to the next trial. If
the answer was incorrect, the computer provided feedback
and required the participant to correct their answer before
they could continue to the next trial. The order of the
testing sentences was generated randomly for each
participant. The keyboard for this portion of the
experiment was flat on the surface of the table so that
participants could type normally.
Orly picture sequence task After they successfully
completed the training, participants performed the Orly
task: a non-linguistic temporal judgment task. With minor
modifications, the task was the same as had been used
previously to measure natural implicit space-time
associations in English and Mandarin speakers, using the
same materials and trial design (Boroditsky et al., 2010;
Fuhrman et al., 2011).
In this portion of the experiment participants made their
responses on a keyboard mounted perpendicular to the
table surface. The keyboard contained three colored keys
arranged vertically. The top key was blue, the center was
green, and the bottom was red.
To begin each trial, participants were instructed to press
and hold the center green key. When they pressed the
green key, the first of two images appeared on the screen
(e.g., Julia Roberts in her 20s). After 2 seconds, this
image was replaced by the second image (e.g., either a
younger or older Julia). Participants were instructed to
continue holding the green key until they were ready to
make a response. For one temporal judgment block
participants were instructed to press the blue key if the
second image was conceptually earlier, and the red key if
it was conceptually later. For the other block, this
instruction was reversed, so that participants were asked
to press the blue key to indicate “later” and the red key to
indicate “earlier.” This meant that in one block the key
mapping of responses was spatially congruent with the
system of metaphors participants had learned, and in one
block the key mapping was incongruent.
In the Orly task blocks participants first completed 10
practice trials with feedback, followed by 56 main
experimental trials without feedback. Sequences were
selected in random order for each participant.
After completing all 56 trials of the Orly task,
participants returned to another block of training on the
same metaphor, and then did another Orly task block (this
time with the key-mapping reversed from their first run).

At the end of the experiment, we collected information
about participants’ language backgrounds.

Results
Overall, participants were faster to respond when the key
mapping was congruent with the metaphor they learned
(M=1275 ms) than when it was incongruent (M=1333
ms), as confirmed by a significant interaction between
task and training conditions (t(3155.25) = 2.96, p = .003).
Participants who had learned metaphors that placed
earlier events above responded more quickly in the Orly
task when the ‘earlier’ key was above (M=1312 ms) than
when it was below (M= 1393 ms). Participants who had
learned metaphors that placed earlier events below, on the
other hand, responded more quickly when the ‘earlier’
key was below (M= 1237 ms) than when it was above
(M= 1273 ms).
There was no main effect of training condition (t(33.78)
= 1.51, p = .13) or task condition (t(3156.23) = 1.15, p =
.25). There were no speed-accuracy trade-offs. In addition
to being faster on congruent trials, participants were also
numerically slightly more accurate on congruent trials
(92.5%) than on incongruent trials (91.8%). There were
no significant differences in metaphor training or Orly
task accuracies by condition (all p > .28).

Discussion
In Experiment 1 we saw that learning a new set of
metaphors for talking about time affected people’s
performance in a non-linguistic temporal reasoning task.
These results confirm that experience with metaphorical
language alone (in the absence of other extra-linguistic
cultural differences) can indeed produce the same kinds of
differences in thinking as seen between speakers of
different languages who have been naturally exposed to
different metaphors in their linguistic environment.
These results raise a further question. What is the locus
of this language-induced effect? One possibility is that
understanding and learning to use new metaphors leads
people to create new non-linguistic representations of
time. That is, while the creation of these representations
is encouraged by experience with language, the new
representations themselves are not linguistic in nature. A
different possibility is that learning these new metaphors
creates new internal linguistic routines that people engage
when reasoning about time. Experiment 2 was designed to
test between these two possibilities.
In Experiment 2 we again taught participants new
vertical metaphors for time. Then we tested them on the
Orly task with and without verbal interference. We chose
a verbal interference procedure known to interfere with
internal linguistic routines (Frank et al., 2012). In prior
work, Frank et al (2012) demonstrated that applying this
verbal interference procedure severely disrupts other
internal linguistic routines. For example, otherwise
numerate college students were not able to keep a simple
exact count of dots while performing this verbal

904

interference task. We replicated the interference
procedures from this prior work precisely, using the same
code and materials.
If the results of Experiment 1 are due to participants
adopting a new internal linguistic routine when reasoning
about time, then applying this same verbal interference
should wipe out the congruency effects we observed. On
the other hand, if learning new metaphors fosters new
non-linguistic representations, then verbal interference
should not dampen the congruency effects.
Because any secondary task imposes extra general
processing costs, we also included a visual interference
condition, calibrated for difficulty, as an extra control.
Any differences seen under verbal interference that are
due to increased general processing demands should also
be seen with the visual interference task.

Orly picture sequence task For the no interference
group, the task was the same as in Experiment 1. For the
two interference groups, participants were asked to
remember either a string of consonants or a visual pattern
while performing temporal judgments in the Orly task.
For the verbal interference group, on each trial
participants first saw a string of consonants appear
sequentially in the same location. They then pressed and
held the green button to begin an Orly task trial
(meanwhile maintaining the letter sequence they had seen
in working memory). After completing the temporal
judgment, they were prompted to type in the letter
sequence they had been rehearsing. For the visual
interference group, on each trial participants first saw a
set of blue squares appear sequentially in different
locations on a 4x4 grid of white blocks. They then pressed
and held the green button to begin the Orly task trial
(meanwhile maintaining the visual pattern they had seen
in memory). After completing the temporal judgment,
they were prompted to click the locations of the blue
squares on the grid they had seen at the start of the trial.

Experiment 2
Methods
Procedure

Results

Participants were randomly assigned to one of three
groups: no interference (a replication of Experiment 1),
verbal interference, and visual interference. The study
proceeded in the following phases: 1. interference
calibration block, 2. metaphor training block, 3. Orly task
block, 4. second metaphor training block (identical to the
first), and 5. a final Orly task block. Only participants in
the verbal and visual interference groups completed the
interference calibration block. The metaphor training
blocks were the same as in Experiment 1. The Orly task
blocks were modified to accommodate the three
interference conditions. As in Experiment 1, each
participant completed one Orly task block for which the
response mapping was congruent with their metaphor
training and one for which the response mapping was
incongruent. Whether the congruent or the incongruent
block occurred first was counterbalanced across
participants.
Interference task calibration Participants in the
interference groups first completed a calibration task to
ensure that the interference tasks were properly tuned for
individual ability. The materials and calibration procedure
were identical to those used in Frank et al (2012). The
MATLAB code to run the interference tasks was
downloaded from https://github.com/langcog/numint. A
full description of the procedure is available in Frank et al
(2012). We kept the procedures identical to this prior
work because it provides a clear precedent, showing that
this same verbal interference task, calibrated in this same
way, does strongly interfere with a linguistic cognitive
routine like counting. If our congruency effects are also
due to participants employing an online linguistic routine,
then we should find the same deleterious effects of verbal
interference.

Results of Experiment 2 replicated those of Experiment 1.
Participants were faster to respond when the spatial
arrangement of keys was congruent with the linguistic
metaphors they had learned during metaphor training
(M=1410 ms) than when it was incongruent (M=1544
ms), as reflected in a significant interaction between task
and training conditions (t(3944.5)= 4.83, p < .001).
Participants who had learned metaphors that placed
earlier events above were faster to respond in the Orly
task when the ‘earlier’ key was above (M=1386 ms) than
when it was below (M= 1562 ms). Participants who had
learned metaphors that placed earlier events below, on the
other hand, were faster to respond when the ‘earlier’ key
was below (M= 1435 ms) than when it was above (M=
1526 ms).
Importantly, participants responded faster on congruent
than on incongruent trials across all three interference
conditions. The size of the congruency effect was 105 ms
without interference, 94 ms under verbal interference, and
202 ms under visual interference. The congruency effect
observed in the verbal interference condition did not
differ from that observed without interference (there was
no 3-way interaction of training condition by task
condition by verbal interference (t(3948.5) = .91, p =
.36)). Analyses of each interference condition separately
confirmed that in all three cases, there was the predicted
interaction between training and task conditions, such that
people were faster when the task and metaphor were
congruent than when they were incongruent (all p < .001).
In addition to being faster on congruent trials,
participants were also numerically slightly more accurate
on congruent trials (94.9%) than on incongruent trials
(94.7%). There were no significant differences in
accuracy across interference type, task condition,

905

congruency, or training condition (all p > .13). In the no
interference and verbal interference conditions, accuracy
on congruent trials was slightly higher than accuracy on
incongruent trials. In the visual interference condition,
people were 0.7% more accurate on incongruent than
congruent trials, but this difference was not significant (p
= .50). We ran an additional analysis including an
accuracy covariate in the model described above. The
accuracy covariate coded each participant’s difference in
accuracy on congruent vs incongruent trials. Including
this covariate did not change the pattern of results (all
results reported as significant remained so, and no newly
significant results were revealed).
The analyses revealed main effects of both visual and
verbal interference on response times for the Orly task
(t(42.8) = 3.12, p = .003 and t(42.3) = 3.50, p = .001). As
would be expected with any secondary task, participants
were overall slower to make temporal judgments when
undergoing interference. There was also a main effect of
task condition (t(3944.5) = 2.84, p = .004); people were
on average faster to respond when the ‘earlier’ key was
above (M=1456 ms) than when it was below (1498 ms).

starting to learn both English and Chinese before age 5
(one began Chinese at 14, and one began English at 10).
Because this was an opportunistic sample, participants
were not distributed evenly across conditions by
interference type and some cells were missing
participants. As a result, we were not able to conduct
principled analyses by interference type. We did however
have interpretable samples when collapsing across
interference conditions. Thus, the mixed effects model
included task condition (whether the ‘earlier’ key was
above or below) and training condition (whether
participants learned “earlier is up” or “earlier is down”
metaphors) as fully crossed fixed effects, block order as a
main effect, and participants and items as random effects.
As other participants in Experiments 1 and 2, ChineseEnglish bilinguals showed a congruency effect as a result
of metaphor training. Participants were faster to respond
when the key mapping in the Orly task was congruent
with the metaphor they learned (M=1521 ms) than when
the response mapping was incongruent with the metaphor
learned (M=1552 ms). This was confirmed as a
significant interaction between training condition and task
condition (t(2220.68) = 2.34, p = .02). In addition to being
faster on congruent trials, participants were also
numerically more accurate on congruent (95.5%) than on
incongruent trials (94.8%). There were no significant
differences in metaphor training or Orly task accuracies
by condition (all p > .23). There was no main effect of
training condition (t(19.26) = .03, p=.98).
Interestingly, Chinese-English bilinguals showed a
main effect of key-mapping; responses were significantly
faster when the ‘earlier’ response key was above
(M=1460 ms) than when it was below (M=1613 ms), as
revealed in a main effect of task condition (t(2219.15) =
3.89, p<.001). This finding replicates prior work with
Mandarin speakers tested on the same task (Boroditsky et
al., 2010; Fuhrman et al., 2011). In Mandarin, naturally
occurring vertical time metaphors place earlier events
above and later events below.
However, recall that overall in Experiment 2, English
speakers also showed a main effect of key-mapping,
responding faster when the ‘earlier’ key was above than
when it was below. Numerically, the size of this effect
was considerably smaller in English speakers (42 ms)
than in Chinese-English bilinguals (153 ms). Is there a
significant difference by language background?
Comparing English speakers and Chinese-English
bilinguals To analyze data from participants in
Experiment 2 and data from Chinese-English bilinguals
together, we constructed a mixed effects model that
included language background (whether or not a
participant spoke any Chinese language), training
condition, and task condition as fully crossed fixed
effects, block order as a main effect, and subjects and
items as random effects.
There was an overall main effect of task condition
(t(6217.17) = 3.93, p < .001), reflecting that on average

Analyses of data from Chinese-English bilinguals
In this section we analyze the data collected from the
serendipitous sample of Chinese-English bilinguals
(excluded from the main sample analyzed above). These
data provide a rare opportunity. In general, when testing
bilinguals, one must explicitly advertise for or recruit
participants based on language experience, and
participants may therefore be more explicitly aware of
their own linguistic history and practices when they come
to the lab than they might be in their everyday lives. In
this case, participants coming into our study did not know
that their prior language experience might be of interest to
us, and we did not know their language background when
we tested them (we conducted the language background
questionnaires only after participants completed the task).
Further all of the participants self-identified as native
English speakers. As a result we have a rare serendipitous
sample of bilinguals who were unaware that their
language experience was an object of study.
Further, this sample allows us to examine what happens
when metaphor patterns in natural language experience
and metaphor patterns learned in the lab come into
conflict. In this case, participants coming into the lab have
had considerable natural language experience with
metaphors that place earlier events above. What will
happen when some of these participants are taught the
opposite pattern in our metaphor training study? Will
participants who already have a vertical representation of
time be swayed by metaphors learned in the lab?
Participants rated their own language proficiency on a
scale of 1 to 5 (with 5=fluent). On average participants
rated their English skill at 4.9 (SD=.29) and their skill in
Mandarin or Cantonese (whichever was more fluent)
as 3.35 (SD=.99). All but two participants reported

906

participants responded faster when the ‘earlier’ key was
above than when it was below. Importantly, ChineseEnglish bilinguals showed a significantly stronger “earlier
is up” bias than did English speakers, as revealed in an
interaction between language background and task
condition (t(6216.18) = 5.75, p < .001). While participants
were overall faster when the ‘earlier’ key was up, the
Chinese-English
bilinguals
showed
this
effect
significantly stronger than the English speakers.
There was also an interaction between task and training
condition (t(6216.08) = 8.12, p <.001), which reflected
that people were faster when the key-mapping in the Orly
task and the trained metaphor were congruent than when
they were incongruent. Interestingly, there was also a 3way interaction between training condition, task
condition, and language background (t(6217.15) = 2.90, p
= .004), confirming that Chinese-English bilinguals
indeed showed a significantly smaller congruency effect
than the English speakers.
The pattern of results from Chinese-English bilinguals
reveals an interesting combination pattern. We see
influence of both prior language experience and of newly
learned metaphors. Chinese-English bilinguals in this
sample were faster to reply when the ‘earlier’ key was
above than when it was below in all conditions, consistent
with the natural pattern in Chinese time metaphors.
However, this pattern was also moderated by the
metaphors learned in the lab. Those who learned
metaphors placing earlier events below showed a smaller
“earlier is up” bias than those who learned metaphors
placing earlier events above (as in Mandarin).
Further, Chinese-English bilinguals showed a smaller
congruency effect than English speakers overall. This
pattern suggests that training in the lab has a reduced
effect when it must counteract the ballast of many years
of natural language experience. For English speakers, the
metaphors included in our training were relatively novel,
and not in conflict with a strongly established metaphor
system in English. For the Chinese-English bilinguals
however, one of the metaphor training conditions was in
direct conflict with a highly conventional metaphor
system that they had already learned through natural
language experience. These findings give us a glimpse of
how learning new metaphors may interact with existing
knowledge when new and old metaphors conflict.

produce the same differences in temporal reasoning as
seen between speakers of different languages.
Further this congruency effect was not disrupted by
verbal interference. The locus of this language-induced
effect does not appear to be in the creation of new internal
linguistic routines (as for example is the case for
counting). Instead, it appears that learning new metaphors
for time fosters new non-linguistic representations.
Results from the Orly task suggest that these
representations contain some spatial properties, such as
axis (vertical) and orientation (earlier is above or below).
Future work may examine whether these representations
also include metric properties like distance.
These results suggest that experience with language can
affect thinking through qualitatively different routes. One
type of influence is through the creation of internal
linguistic routines that can participate online in the course
of thinking (as for example is the case with counting). In
other cases, experience with language can encourage
people to construct and store new non-linguistic
representations. Future work combining cross-linguistic
approaches with controlled language learning studies will
shed further light on the mechanisms through which
language experience can foster new ways of thinking.

References
Bates, D., M. Maechler and B. Dai. 2008. lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes. [R version 3.1.0
(2014-04-10).]
Boroditsky, L. (2011). How Languages Construct Time.
In Space, Time and Number in the Brain (pp. 333–341).
Elsevier.
Boroditsky, L., Fuhrman, O., & McCormick, K. (2010).
Do English and Mandarin speakers think about time
differently?
Cognition,
118(1),
123–129.
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2010.09.010
Frank, M. C., Fedorenko, E., Lai, P., Saxe, R., & Gibson,
E. (2012). Verbal interference suppresses exact
numerical representation. Cognitive Psychology, 64(12), 74–92. doi:10.1016/j.cogpsych.2011.10.004
Fuhrman, O., McCormick, K., Chen, E., Jiang, H., Shu,
D., Mao, S., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). How Linguistic
and Cultural Forces Shape Conceptions of Time:
English and Mandarin Time in 3D. Cognitive Science,
35(7). doi:10.1111/j.1551-6709.2011.01193.x
Miles, L. K., Tan, L., Noble, G. D., Lumsden, J., &
Macrae, C. N. (2011). Can a mind have two time lines?
Exploring space–time mapping in Mandarin and
English speakers. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
18(3), 598–604. doi:10.3758/s13423-011-0068-y
Núñez, R. E., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future
behind them: Convergent evidence from Aymara
language and gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison
of spatial construals of time. Cognitive Science, 30(3),
401–450.

Discussion
Participants learned new vertical metaphors for talking
about time, and then completed a nonlinguistic implicit
temporal judgment task. Although all stimuli and
responses in this task were non-linguistic, they responded
faster when the spatial arrangement of response keys was
congruent with their newly learned metaphors than when
they were incongruent. These results confirm that
experience with metaphorical language alone (in the
absence of other extra-linguistic cultural differences) can

907

