Pathways of Conceptual Change: Investigating the Influence of Experimentation
Skills on Conceptual Knowledge Development in Early Science Education
Peter A. Edelsbrunner (peter.edelsbrunner@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)

Section for Research on Learning and Instruction, ETH Zurich, Clausiusstrasse 59
8092 Zurich, Switzerland

Lennart Schalk (lennart.schalk@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)

Section for Research on Learning and Instruction, ETH Zurich, Clausiusstrasse 59
8092 Zurich, Switzerland

Ralph Schumacher (ralph.schumacher@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)

Section for Research on Learning and Instruction, ETH Zurich, Clausiusstrasse 59
8092 Zurich, Switzerland

Elsbeth Stern (stern@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)

Section for Research on Learning and Instruction, ETH Zurich, Clausiusstrasse 59
8092 Zurich, Switzerland
Abstract

In the present study, we examine which students benefit
more or less from early science education. We investigate a
potential source of inter-individual differences in knowledge
development. In particular, we investigate whether and how
elementary school students’ experimentation skills predict
conceptual knowledge development in an inquiry-based
science curriculum.

Science education aims at developing students’ knowledge of
scientific concepts and principles. However, students differ in
their prior knowledge and cognitive skills and thus follow
different learning pathways. We examined whether and how
experimentation skills predict elementary students’ pathways
of conceptual knowledge development in science education.
First to sixth grade students (N = 1275) received 15 units of
inquiry-based classroom instruction on the topic “floating and
sinking”. Students’ experimentation skills were assessed
before instruction. Their conceptual knowledge about floating
and sinking was assessed before and after instruction. Latent
profile transition analysis, a markov chain mixture model for
continuous longitudinal data, revealed that students with
higher experimentation skills were more likely to develop
proficient and consistent knowledge of floating and sinking.
We discuss theoretical implications of this finding,
advantages of mixture models to examine conceptual
knowledge development, and implications for science
education in elementary school.

Knowledge Development in Science Learning
When students enter science classrooms, they often bring
strong prior conceptions about the instructed topics derived
from their everyday experience. When these conceptions are
wrong from a scientific point of view, they are referred to as
misconceptions (Chi & Ohlsson, 2005). In the course of
science education, such misconceptions should be replaced
by scientifically correct concepts.
To replace misconceptions with scientific concepts,
processes of conceptual change have to take place.
Conceptual change encompasses powerful processes of
knowledge restructuring that are in general difficult to
achieve (Hardy et al., 2006). One such process is knowledge
integration, in which newly gained knowledge is added to
the present knowledge in a logically coherent manner (Linn,
1995). This process thus allows integrated knowledge
structures to be built up, for example by learning that
different phenomena can be explained by a single principle,
concept, or theory (Ohlsson, 2009).
Novices often have difficulties in recognizing meaningful
relations between prior knowledge and newly acquired
knowledge on a deep level (diSessa, 2008). In such cases,
newly acquired knowledge is not integrated with prior
knowledge. This lack of integration leads to fragmented
knowledge elements that are stored independently from each
other. Knowledge fragmentation decreases when students
gain sufficient conceptual understanding of a domain to

Keywords: science education; experimentation skills;
knowledge structure; knowledge development; elementary
school;

Introduction
In the past years, insights from research on conceptual
change were applied to the development of science curricula
for elementary school and early secondary school (Hardy,
Jonen, Möller, & Stern, 2006; Smith, 2007). That early,
students do usually not receive elaborate science instruction
in their regular school curricula. However, Hardy and
colleagues (2006) and Smith (2007) showed that early
science instruction can provoke long-lasting knowledge
development. These substantial and sustainable learning
gains indicate the significant potential of early science
instruction. Nevertheless, students benefit from science
instruction to different extent (e.g., Schneider & Hardy,
2013).

620

integrate knowledge pieces into coherent, more general
knowledge structures (Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992).
In some domains, students’ knowledge development does
not directly lead from misconceptions to scientifically
correct concepts. Rather, there can be partially correct
intermediate conceptions. For example, children might
assume that wooden things float and iron things sink, based
on the conception that material kind determines the floating
of objects in fluids. This assumption can explain that heavy
wooden bricks float in water and that small stones sink but
it cannot explain why iron ships float and why some sorts of
wood sink. Hence, such conceptions are sufficient to
coherently explain many observations from everyday life
but they would fail thorough scientific validation. Therefore,
they are referred to as everyday conceptions (Carey, 1992).
Altogether, conceptual change is a complex, multi-faceted
process that should be assessed in detail to obtain
fundamental understanding of students’ conceptual
knowledge development pathways in science learning.

some students in the course of instruction develop more
consistent and proficient knowledge structures than others?

Experimentation Skills
A cognitive skill that might contribute to knowledge
development in inquiry-based instruction is the
methodological understanding of experimentation. A crucial
facet of experimentation concerns varying the focal variable
while keeping all other factors constant. Following this
strategy unambiguous causal inferences can be made
(Strand-Cary & Klahr, 2008). Understanding and applying
this strategy is referred to as the control of variables
strategy, or simply as variable control. Various research has
shown that most but not all children typically develop these
skills at ages 6-10, depending on task context and number of
variables, and that these skills can be trained successfully in
teacher-guided interventions (Strand-Cary & Klahr, 2008;
Chen & Klahr, 1999; Sodian, Zaitchik, & Carey, 1991). In
observational studies, Schauble (1990, 1996) described how
experimentation skills support belief revision about causal
mechanisms. Less is known about the relation of
experimentation skills to more complex concept learning.

Modeling Conceptual Knowledge Development
Conceptual change research typically relies on assessing
qualitative data to capture the complex process of
knowledge development in science (e.g., Vosniadou &
Brewer, 1992). Schneider and Hardy (2013) suggested
complementing this approach with quantitative statistical
modeling techniques to describe trajectories of knowledge
development. They employed latent transition analysis, a
type of longitudinal mixture model, to depict third graders’
learning in an inquiry-based curriculum on the topic
“floating and sinking”. Based on extensive questionnaire
data, they evaluated students’ misconceptions, everyday
conceptions, and scientific concepts about the floating
ability of objects in water.
By employing latent transition analysis, Schneider and
Hardy (2013) could identify five knowledge profiles among
the students. The five profiles represented groups of
students that differed in their numbers of the three types of
conceptions. For example, students in one profile showed a
high number of misconceptions but low numbers of
everyday conceptions and scientific concepts, indicating a
rather low proficiency level. Another profile revealed a
group of students with high numbers of all three kinds of
conceptions, indicating a fragmented knowledge structure.
In addition, Schneider and Hardy (2013) depicted the
transitional pathways that students took in the course of the
instruction. They found a small number of transitions to
suffice for describing how students switched between the
knowledge profiles in the course of instruction.
These results emphasize the importance of investigating
interindividual differences in students’ conceptual
knowledge. The limited number of profiles and transitional
pathways indicates that knowledge development follows
idiosyncratic yet systematic patterns. However, it is still
unclear which cognitive characteristics or skills predict
students’ knowledge development. Why do some students
show less fragmented knowledge than others, and why do

The Current Study
Scientific reasoning, including experimentation skills, is
assumed to be applied in the service of conceptual change or
scientific understanding (Zimmerman, 2007). Therefore,
experimentation skills might be related to students’ concept
learning from inquiry-based instruction. To the best of our
knowledge, this assumption has not yet been tested on a
quantitative basis. In the current study, we examine the
relation between students’ experimentation skills and
knowledge development about floating and sinking in
inquiry-based
instruction.
We
hypothesize
that
experimentation skills are positively related to the
consistency and proficiency of students’ knowledge profiles.
Furthermore, we expect that experimentation skills support
learning trajectories into consistent and proficient
knowledge profiles from before to after instruction.
To investigate these hypotheses, we use latent transition
analysis as it explicitly acknowledges three crucial
assumptions about science learning. First, it acknowledges
differences in children’s knowledge. Not all students enter
classrooms with the same prior knowledge, and not all
students end up with the same knowledge after instruction.
In latent transition analysis, students are grouped into a
finite number of profiles according to differences and
similarities in their knowledge. In the present study, as in
the study of Schneider and Hardy (2013), knowledge
profiles represent groups of students that differ in their
numbers of misconceptions, everyday conceptions, and
scientific concepts about floating and sinking.
Second, latent transition analysis acknowledges that not
all students learn to the same extent. Some students might
thoroughly integrate their prior knowledge with newly
acquired knowledge in the course of instruction. Other
students might not be able to achieve a proficient state of

621

knowledge and stay at their initial knowledge level. In latent
transition analysis, this aspect is represented by estimates of
the probabilities that students stay in their initial knowledge
profile or change into other knowledge profiles from before
to after instruction.
Third, to investigate sources of differences in students’
knowledge development, covariates can be added to the
latent transition analysis. In the present study, we use this
possibility to examine how students’ experimentation skills
relate to profile frequencies before instruction and to
transition probabilities between profiles from before to after
instruction. We hypothesize that students with higher
experimentation skills show increased probabilities to
change into proficient and consistent knowledge profiles
from before to after instruction, indicating knowledge
restructuring and successful inquiry-based learning.

method to assess conceptual knowledge about floating and
sinking (see Hardy et al., 2006).
Before instruction, students additionally answered a
questionnaire assessing the understanding of variable
control (see Kuhn, 2002). The questionnaire consisted of 14
multiple choice questions (Cronbach’s Alpha = .76). Some
questions were adapted versions of classic tasks such as the
ramp-task (Chen & Klahr, 1999) and the mouse-task
(Sodian, Zaitchik, & Carey, 1991) and some were newly
developed. All questions treated domains not related to the
instructed topic. We used the sum score from the
questionnaire as an indicator of students’ basic
experimentation skills.

Statistical Analysis
We used latent profile transition analysis, a type of latent
transition analysis for continuous indicator variables, to
statistically model the data. In a stepwise procedure, we first
examined which knowledge profiles were present in the
data. In discrepancy to Schneider and Hardy (2013), we
allowed the number of profiles to differ between pretest and
posttest, to examine the possibility that after instruction
students have developed knowledge profiles that were not
present before instruction. To decide on the number of
extracted knowledge profiles, we relied on the Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC) that decreases with increasing
model fit (Nylund, Asparouhov, & Muthén, 2007).
Next, we examined relations between students’
experimentation skills and knowledge structure. We added
students’ experimentation skills to the analysis as a
covariate to estimate their associations with profile
frequencies before instruction. Finally, to scrutinize whether
and how experimentation skills predict trajectories of
knowledge development, we investigated their relation to
students’ transitions between the knowledge profiles from
before to after instruction. Additionally, age was added to
the analysis to control for its influence and to investigate
potential interactions with experimentation skills. Due to the
large sample size, we included the covariates directly into
the model instead of using a stepwise approach (see e.g.,
Nylund-Gibson, Grimm, Quirk, & Furlong, 2014).
Influences of experimentation skills on profile frequencies
and profile transitions were interpreted if extreme groups
(i.e., two standard deviations below the mean [-2SD] vs.
two standard deviations above the mean [+2SD] on
experimentation skills) differed more than 20% on the
parameters. This number was chosen data-driven, as
patterns above this cut-off stood out in comparison to the
rest.

Method
Participants
We analyzed the data of 1275 first to sixth graders (M[age]
= 8.56 years, SD = 1.30, range = 6 – 13 years) from
elementary schools in the German-speaking part of
Switzerland. The study was embedded within the Swiss
MINT Study, a longitudinal study investigating outcomes of
cognitively activating science instruction that starts in
elementary school.

Learning Materials
Students learned about the physics topic “floating and
sinking of objects in water”, encompassing the scientific
concepts of object density and buoyancy force. The
instructional materials were developed and extensively
tested at University of Munster, Germany (for details on the
materials see Hardy et al., 2006). The materials comprised
15 lessons of teacher-guided, inquiry-based classroom
instruction that can be adaptively used in first to sixth grade
classrooms. Typically, children received either one lesson
per week, or all lessons within a week. In grades 1-2, some
basic lessons were emphasized while some more advanced
lessons were omitted. The materials strongly scaffold
inquiry-based learning activities (e.g., structured hands-on
experiments) and include established instructional means
such as prior knowledge activation, self-explanations
prompts, and compare and contrast activities. Students
received the instruction by their regular class teachers. The
teachers received a full day training provided by the authors
of the study on how to use the instructional materials.

Knowledge Assessments

Results

Before and after instruction, students answered a multiple
choice questionnaire to assess their number of
misconceptions (incorrect from a scientific view), everyday
conceptions (partially correct), and scientific concepts (fully
correct) about the floating ability of objects in water. The
questionnaire has been developed in multiple pilot studies
and has been shown to provide a reliable, valid and detailed

Knowledge Profiles
Latent profile transition analyses were conducted to
examine which knowledge profiles were present in the data.
Information on model fit is provided in Table 1. The best
model fit and theoretically most sound solution were

622

obtained by extracting four profiles before instruction and
six profiles after instruction (see Figure 1). Five of the six
profiles were similar to the five profiles found by Schneider
& Hardy (2013). Accordingly, we labelled the profiles
following Schneider and Hardy. The “misconceptions”
profile characterizes students with a high number of
misconceptions but low numbers of everyday conceptions
and scientific concepts, indicating a rather low proficiency
level. The “fragmented” profile characterizes students with
high numbers of all three types of conceptions, indicating a
fragmented knowledge structure. In contrast, students in the
“indecisive” profile show low numbers of all three types.
Students in the “prescientific” profile show high numbers of
everyday conceptions and scientific concepts, and those in
the “scientific” profile show only a high number of
scientific concepts, both indicating a rather high proficiency
level. In addition, a sixth profile emerged that described
children with a high number of everyday conceptions,
labelled everyday profile. The scientific profile and the
misconceptions profile were only present after instruction,
indicating that instruction helped some students to develop
an integrated conceptual understanding of floating and
sinking, but also that some students did not benefit and even
developed misconceptions.

With increasing experimentation skills from -2SD to
+2SD, frequencies of the fragmented profile and the
indecisive profile decreased from 35.7% to 12.3% and from
53.0% to 20.7%. At the same time, frequencies of the
everyday profile and the pre-scientific profile increased
from 10.4% to 36.4% and from 0.9% to 30.6%. These
findings indicate that experimentation skills negatively
relate to the frequency of inconsistent and less proficient
knowledge profiles and positively to the frequency of more
consistent and proficient knowledge profiles. Generally,
these associations were stronger in older children, but also
evident in younger children.

Table 1: Model fit indices for the estimated models.
npro(t1) npro(t2)

cov

npar

ll

BIC

E

1

1

10

-29631

59335

1

2

2

18

-29211

58552

.80

3

3

30

-28989

58196

.80

4

4

46

-28803

57941

.81

5

5

66

-28699

57878

.77

6

6

90

-28604

57862

.80

5

6

78

-28605

57778

.79

4

6

66

-28621

57722

.78

4

6

112

-28441

57697

.80

exp age

Figure 1: The six extracted knowledge profiles after
instruction, represented by the number of different types of
conceptions that students demonstrated. Symmetric 95%
confidence intervals are depicted in gray. The
misconceptions profile and the scientific profile were only
present after instruction, all other profiles were present
already before instruction.

7
7
160 -28453 58070 .78
Note. npro(t1) = number of extracted knowledge profiles
before instruction; npro(t2) = number of extracted
knowledge profiles after instruction; cov = included
covariates; npar = number of estimated parameters; ll = loglikelihood; BIC = Bayesian Information Criterion; E =
Entropy (quality of profile separation). The finally chosen
model is marked in gray, with four profiles before
instruction, six profiles after instruction, and the covariates
(experimentation skills [exp] and age) included.

Experimentation Skills and Profile Transitions
Crucially, experimentation skills influenced six transitions
between profiles (see Figure 3). From before to after
instruction, students with higher experimentation skills
(+2SD) were less likely than those with lower
experimentation skills (-2SD) to stay in the fragmented
profile (+2SD: 19%; -2SD: 46%) or in the inconsistent
profile (+2SD: 14%; -2SD: 54%). They were also less likely
to change from the everyday profile into the scientific
profile (+2SD: 1%; -2SD: 55.0%). In addition, they were
more likely to change from the fragmented profile (+2SD:
62%; -2SD: 10%) or the everyday profile (+2SD: 47%; 2SD: 17%) into the pre-scientific profile, and from the
indecisive profile into the scientific profile (+2SD: 61%; 2SD: 0%). Most of these influences suggest that students
with higher experimentation skills are more likely to

Experimentation Skills and Profile Frequencies
Next, we controlled for age and included students’
experimentation skills in the analysis to examine their
associations with profile frequencies before instruction (see
Figure 2). Adding the covariates led to a decrease in the
BIC, indicating statistical significance (see Table 1).

623

restructure their knowledge from before to after instruction
and to change into more consistent and proficient
knowledge profiles.

Figure 3: Experimentation skills and transitions between
knowledge profiles from before to after instruction. With
increasing experimentation skills, students are less likely to
stay in the indecisive or fragmented profiles after instruction
but more likely to change from the everyday profile into the
scientific profile, from the fragmented profile and the
everyday profile into the pre-scientific profile, and from the
indecisive profile into the scientific profile.

Figure 2: Associations between students’ experimentation
skills and frequencies of the four extracted knowledge
profiles before instruction. With increasing experimentation
skills from -2SD to +2SD, frequencies of the indecisive
profile and the fragmented profile decreased, and
frequencies of the everyday profile and the pre-scientific
profile increased.

Third, children with higher experimentation skills were
less likely to stay in the same knowledge profile from before
to after instruction and they were more likely to change into
consistent and proficient profiles. This finding supports the
assumption that experimentation skills facilitate knowledge
restructuring and integration, thus supporting successful
conceptual change.
Unexpectedly, children with higher experimentation skills
had a decreased likelihood to change from the everyday
profile into the scientific profile. This finding might be
related to the small number of children with lower
experimentation skills who started in the everyday profile
but it might also indicate difficulties to get rid of everyday
concepts in the course of instruction.
To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first to
relate experimentation skills to conceptual change using
elaborate statistical models. In the teacher-guided inquiry
provided in the study, a better understanding of variable
control may have supported students in linking results from
experiments to inferential conclusions. For example, if one
wooden block floats but another another wooden block with
identical size does not, students who understand that the
experiment varied one thing at a time might infer that
different kinds of wood indeed have different floating
abilities, since all other factors were controlled. This finding
complements fine-grained analysis on this issue obtained
from microgenetic designs (cf. Schauble, 1990, 1996).
The present results suggest that to promote elementary
school students’ learning from inquiry-based instruction,

Discussion
We examined the influence of experimentation skills on
pathways of knowledge development in early science
education. We assessed experimentation skills to predict
knowledge development on the topic “floating and sinking”,
applying latent transition analysis on data from more than
one thousand elementary school students. There are three
main findings.
First, we could replicate the five knowledge profiles that
Schneider and Hardy (2012) found in a smaller sample. In
our sample of elementary school students from a broader
range of grades, we found profiles similar to those described
by Schneider and Hardy. In addition, we found a sixth
profile that characterizes students with a high number of
everyday concepts.
These
results
validate
the
generalizability of Schneider and Hardy’s findings from
Germany across samples, grades, and countries.
Second, before instruction, students with higher
experimentation skills showed decreased frequencies of the
inconsistent and least proficient knowledge profiles and
increased frequencies of the more consistent and proficient
knowledge profiles. This is a correlational finding,
corroborating the positive interrelation between cognitive
skills and conceptual knowledge in elementary school
students.

624

understanding of “floating and sinking.” Journal of
Educational Psychology, 98, 307–326. doi:10.1037/00220663.98.2.307
Kuhn, D. (2010). What is scientific thinking and how does it
develop? In U. Goswami (Ed.), Handbook of childhood
cognitive development (pp. 497-527). Oxford, UK:
Blackwell (2nd ed.)
Mayer, D., Sodian, B., Koerber, S., & Schwippert, K.
(2014). Scientific reasoning in elementary school
children: Assessment and relations with cognitive
abilities. Learning and Instruction, 29, 43–55.
doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2013.07.005
Nylund, K. L., Asparouhov, T., & Muthén, B. O. (2007).
Deciding on the number of classes in latent class analysis
and growth mixture modeling: A Monte Carlo simulation
study. Structural Equation Modeling, 14, 535–569.
doi:10.1080/10705510701575396
Nylund-Gibson, K., Grimm, R., Quirk, M., & Furlong, M.
(2014). A latent transition mixture model using the threestep specification. Structural Equation Modeling, 21, 1–
16. doi:10.1080/10705511.2014.915375
Ohlsson, S. (2009). Resubsumption: A possible mechanism
for conceptual change and belief revision. Educational
Psychologist,
44,
20–40.
doi:10.1080/00461520802616267
Schauble, L. (1990). Belief revision in children: The role of
prior knowledge and strategies for generating evidence.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 49, 31–57.
doi:10.1016/0022-0965(90)90048-D
Schauble, L. (1996). The development of scientific
reasoning in knowledge-rich contexts. Developmental
Psychology,
32,
102–109.
doi:10.1037/00121649.32.1.102
Schneider, M., & Hardy, I. (2013). Profiles of inconsistent
knowledge in children's pathways of conceptual change.
Developmental
Psychology,
49,
1639-1649.
doi:10.1037/a0030976
Smith, C. L. (2007). Bootstrapping processes in the
development of students’ commonsense matter theories:
Using analogical mappings, thought experiments, and
learning to measure to promote conceptual restructuring.
Cognition
and
Instruction,
25,
337–398.
doi:10.1080/07370000701632363.
Sodian, Zaitchik, & Carey (1991). Young children’s
differentiation of hypothetical beliefs from evidence.
Child Development, 62, 753-766. doi:10.1111/j.14678624.1991.tb01567.x
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of
the earth: A study of conceptual change in childhood.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 535–585. doi:10.1016/00100285(92)90018-W
Zimmerman, C. (2007). The development of scientific
thinking skills in elementary and middle school.
Developmental
Review,
27,
172–223.
doi:$10.1016/j.dr.2006.12.001

teachers should ensure basic understanding of
experimentation beforehand. Experimentation skills can be
directly trained with relatively low time investment (e.g.,
Chen & Klahr, 1999) as a preparatory activity in science
curricula. However, it is important to note that scientific
reasoning, including experimentation skills, is confounded
with general reasoning ability (Mayer, Sodian, Koerber, &
Schwippert, 2014). Future studies are needed to investigate
the interplay between experimentation skills and general
reasoning ability in science learning, and whether the
training of experimentation skills indeed promotes
conceptual change in subsequent inquiry-based instruction.
We found latent transition analysis to be flexible and
informative to tackle research questions and evaluate
theoretical assumptions related to conceptual change. In our
study, we extended the approach used by Schneider and
Hardy (2013) by adding covariates to the models. Thereby,
we could show that the profiles they extracted did not
merely represent sample artifacts but actually relate to
cognitive skills. Including covariates as predictors in the
models provided detailed information on the influence of
experimentation skills on knowledge development. We
propose to use similar models also in future studies.
Bayesian estimation might increase model flexibility and
ease parameter estimation from smaller samples by
incorporating information from prior studies into the models
(see e.g., Chung, Lanza, & Loken, 2008).
Overall, the present study shows the predictive value of
experimentation skills for describing pathways of
conceptual change in early science education. Higher
experimentation skills facilitate the development of
proficient science knowledge with consistent structure,
maximizing knowledge gains in early science education.

Acknowledgments
The Swiss MINT Study was initially funded by the Jacobs
Foundation.

References
Carey, S. (1992). The origin and evolution of everyday
concepts. In R. Giere (Ed.), Cognitive models of science
(pp. 89-128). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
Chen, Z., & Klahr, D. (1999). All other things being equal:
Acquisition and transfer of the control of variables
strategy.
Child
Development,
70,
1098–1120.
doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00081
Chi, M. T., & Ohlsson, S. (2005). Complex declarative
learning. In In K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.),
Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Chung, H., Lanza, S. T., & Loken, E. (2008). Latent
transition analysis: inference and estimation. Statistics in
Medicine, 27, 1834–1854. doi:10.1002/sim.3130
Hardy, I., Jonen, A., Möller, K., & Stern, E. (2006). Effects
of instructional support within constructivist learning
environments
for
elementary
school
students’

625

