Personal Change and the Continuity of Identity
Sarah Molouki (smolouki@uchicago.edu)
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637

Daniel M. Bartels (bartels@uchicago.edu)
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637

Abstract
The current research examines what types of change are
perceived as allowable versus disallowable in the self while
still maintaining a sense of personal continuity. We find that
overall, improvements are seen as more allowable than
worsening or unspecified change, although this difference
varies in magnitude based on the centrality of the trait being
considered. Additionally, valence interacts with expectations
of change, such that the differential impact of positive versus
negative change on self-continuity is largest when positive
change is expected, but is attenuated when negative change is
expected.
Keywords: psychological essentialism; change; identity; self;
self-concept; feature centrality

Introduction
Studies suggest that people distinguish between central,
more immutable features of a concept and features that are
allowed to change without fundamentally altering the
concept (Sloman & Ahn, 1999; Sloman, Love, & Ahn,
1998). The current research investigates the topic of
allowable and disallowable change in the self by asking
which kinds of features may change, and in what ways they
may change, while still preserving the perceived continuity
of the self-concept.
Essentialist ideas, such as the belief that an object is
defined by a fundamental underlying character, have mainly
been invoked as a way to describe how people think about
category membership (Gelman & Hirschfeld, 1999; Medin
& Ortony, 1989). But what defines the essence of an
individual person? There is evidence that people do not hold
a pure physicalist view of personal identity, but rather
ascribe special importance to mental content (Blok,
Newman, Behr, & Rips, 2001; Nichols & Bruno, 2010).
Research examining people’s intuitions about the
implications of stability or change in mental and
experiential content has found that greater change
undermines the perceived continuity of a person (Bartels &
Rips, 2010). Furthermore, the type of mental content
matters: for example, describing changes in a person’s
moral qualities leads to attributions of greater identity
change than changes in other mental features, like cognitive
abilities, preferences, or memories (Strohminger & Nichols,
2014).
Recent work has also uncovered asymmetries in how
people perceive the effects of positive versus negative

change on the identity of third parties. Rather than thinking
of others’ moral values and mental characteristics as
categorically immutable, people consider positive changes
in these qualities to be more allowable than negative
changes (Newman, Bloom, & Knobe, 2014; Tobia, 2015).
This pattern of judgments could arise from beliefs that the
human essence is fundamentally positive, such that positive
change allows for a clearer expression of this essence
whereas negative change detracts from it (Newman et al.,
2014; Tobia, 2015).
Taken together, the literature suggests that, when thinking
about the identity of other persons, people consider central
characteristics such as morality to be relatively immutable,
but nevertheless view positive change as more allowable
than negative change. However, it’s possible that people
might think about themselves differently from how they
think about third parties. In the current studies, we build
upon previous findings by examining people’s perceptions
about what specific types of change will disrupt or preserve
their own personal identity.

Stability, Change, and the Self-Concept
Whereas some research on the self-concept suggests that
changes in central characteristics cause a greater feeling of
disconnect from the future self than stability (Bartels &
Urminsky, 2011), other research finds that people expect
positive change throughout their life span (Busseri, Choma,
& Sadava, 2009; Haslam, Bastian, Fox, & Whelan, 2007;
Newby-Clark & Ross, 2003; Wilson & Ross, 2001). This
suggests that, rather than viewing all important features of
oneself as fundamentally immutable, people may
incorporate the expectation of some changes (notably
positive changes) into the self-concept, and might even
prefer these changes over stability. In the current research,
we systematically explore how the impact of personal
change on perceptions of one’s own identity varies based on
the domain of the characteristic that is changing, the
direction of change, and one’s existing expectations about
change or stability in that particular attribute.

The Present Studies
Across two studies, we investigate the effects of positive
and negative changes in a variety of personal characteristics
on perceptions of one’s own self-concept. In doing so, our
aims are threefold. First, we test whether the relationships

1619

between personal change and perceptions of one’s own
identity are similar to those previously discussed involving
judgments of third parties (Blok et al. 2001, Newman et al.,
2014; Strohminger & Nichols, 2014; Tobia, 2015). This is
important because people often express large and systematic
differences in how they think about themselves versus how
they think about others (Molouki & Pronin, 2014). Second,
we explore whether positive changes are generally seen as
more allowable than negative changes, or whether the effect
of positive and negative changes on identity varies
depending on the perceived centrality of the changed
feature. Finally, we explore whether there is a relationship
between the perceived effect of a given change and people’s
prior expectations regarding the likelihood of this change,
since changes in any direction that are inconsistent with
expectations may be threatening to identity.

Study 1
Study 1 explores whether people view some types of
personal change (i.e., positive change) as relatively identitypreserving, and whether this tendency is affected by the
centrality of the characteristics considered. The centrality of
a feature or characteristic is often defined as the degree to
which change in this quality would disrupt the identity of
the object possessing it (Sloman et al., 1998; Strohminger &
Nichols, 2014). Following from this view, it is possible that
whereas people may allow changes (especially
improvements) in peripheral traits, they may nevertheless
think that their core characteristics must remain stable to
maintain their sense of self. Alternatively, people might
view their personal characteristics as unidirectionally
mutable – that is, positive (but not negative) changes are
allowable for any and all characteristics without disrupting
the continuity of personal identity.

Participants
Three hundred participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk
(MTurk) completed an online survey in return for monetary
compensation. Eight participants were excluded for failing
an attention check question, leaving a final N of 292.

Stimuli
Participants were presented with a list of 40 characteristics
and were asked to imagine these changing within
themselves over time. The characteristics used in this study
were selected based on a pre-test in which we elicited
descriptors that defined personal identity from a separate
sample of 35 MTurk participants. The most frequently
mentioned concepts were selected and adapted for this
study. We also included characteristics that were found to
be important for judging the continuity of others’ identity in
previous research (Strohminger & Nichols, 2014).
To allow us to compare the results of our current study
with previous work that examined trait centrality in
judgments of third parties, we then presented the full list of
characteristics to a new sample of 70 MTurk participants,
who classified them based on the following categories:

“preferences”, “personality”, “morality”, “experiences”, and
“memories” (see Strohminger & Nichols, 2014).
Characteristics for which fewer than half of the sample
agreed on category membership were not included for use in
the current studies. Examples of selected stimuli and
corresponding categories can be viewed in Appendix A.

Method
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three
experimental conditions, in which they were told to imagine
that the listed characteristics would either (i) change
(valence unspecified), (ii) improve, or (iii) worsen over
time. They then reported the perceived impact of the
imagined change on their personal identity, by answering
the following question on a scale of 0 - 100 for each
characteristic (presented in random order):
If my (characteristic) [changes/improves/worsens], I will …
Really be myself [0] – Not at all be myself [100]
Thus, a rating of 0 meant that the stated change in a given
characteristic would be very consistent with a person’s selfconcept, whereas a rating of 100 meant that the change
would be very inconsistent with his or her self-concept.

Results
Central versus Peripheral Categories in the Continuity
of Personal Identity We tested whether change was
perceived as less acceptable overall for certain categories of
traits. Specifically, we investigated whether general
(valence unspecified) change in some categories was more
threatening to identity (i.e., caused participants to report that
they would be less themselves) than change in other
categories. Within the general change condition, we found
an overall difference across the five categories in the effect
of change on perceptions of one’s own identity continuity (F
(4, 368) = 103.22, p < .001, ηp2 =.53).
Tukey post hoc comparisons revealed significant
differences in the effect of change on identity between all
pairs of categories in our experiment (all z < 3.06, p < .02).
Specifically, changes in items classified in the category of
morality were judged to be the most inconsistent with
personal identity (M = 63.12, SD = 33.60), followed by
items classified under personality (M = 48.43, SD = 32.85),
preferences (M = 37.08, SD = 1.00), experiences (M =
31.13, SD = 30.42), and memories (M = 26.19, SD = 31.14).
Thus, our results for centrality of categories in selfjudgments are generally in agreement with findings for
third-party judgments in previous studies, where morality,
followed by personality, were respectively identified as the
two most central categories based on the effect of changes
on perceived identity (Strohminger & Nichols, 2014).1
1 Note that the stimuli for this study were specifically generated
within the context of being applicable to personal identity. This
feature of the design restricts the range of centrality, presenting
few extremely peripheral attributes. So, Study 1 represents a
conservative test of the influence of trait centrality on identity
judgments, as differences between central and peripheral traits

1620

Valence of Change There was a main effect of valence,
such that across all categories, positive changes (M = 27.04,
SD = 30.14) were seen as less identity-threatening than
either negative changes (M = 50.37, SD = 33.78) or
unspecified changes (M = 43.93, SD = 34.43; F(2, 289) =
65.37, p < .001, ηp2 = .31. The difference between the
perceived identity consequences of positive and negative
change held for all categories of characteristics, regardless
of degree of centrality (as defined by the magnitude of the
effect of general change on the self-concept). For example,
the difference in consequences for judged continuity of the
self between positive (M = 29.08, SD = 31.26) and negative
change (M = 65.85, SD = 31.96) among morality-related
characteristics (a central category) was significant (z =
14.70, p < .001). The effect of valence was also apparent for
a relatively more peripheral category (memories), with
positive changes in memory (M = 21.81, SD = 30.00) also
eliciting judgments of greater continuity than negative
changes (M = 27.73, SD = 30.93; z = 2.30, p = .04).
However, the two-way interaction between category and
valence was also significant, such that the differential
impact of positive and negative change on identity was
larger for more central categories compared to more
peripheral categories, F(8, 1156) = 28.39, p < .001, ηp2 =
.16. This effect appears to be driven by the greater identitydisrupting effects of negative, but not positive, changes in
more central categories, like morality and personality (see
Figure 1).

investigating the perceived identity of other people
(Strohminger & Nichols, 2014), people tend to think that
they would be less themselves if these central characteristics
changed than if their more peripheral characteristics were to
change.
However, we also see that this relationship does not hold
equally across all types of change. Positive change across
both peripheral and central categories of traits has a
relatively small effect on perceived identity, whereas
negative change seems progressively more threatening to
identity continuity as characteristics become more central.
This pattern is consistent with a developmental trajectory
view of the self: people may incorporate expectations of
improvement into their self-concept, thus considering
positive changes to be allowable even for their most core
characteristics. In contrast, negative changes are particularly
threatening and cause the greatest feelings of discontinuity
when they occur in the most central parts of ourselves.
Of additional note, the pattern of results for unspecified
changes mostly mirrors that observed for negative changes,
which is consistent with previous research that shows
disruptions in identity associated with general descriptions
of change (e.g., Bartels & Urminsky, 2011). It remains
unclear why people would react to unspecified change much
as they would to negative change when people’s
predominant expectations are towards positive change
(Haslam et al., 2007). One possibility is that because people
have already incorporated expectations of positive change
into their self-concept, they interpret specific mentions of
change as implying unexpected, and thus predominantly
negative, changes.

Study 2
In Study 2, we explore relationships between item centrality
(as operationalized by the categories used in Study 1) and
expectations of change. That is, whereas Study 1 examined
the perceived effects of change in central or non-central
traits, Study 2 examines whether central characteristics are
viewed as less likely to change than peripheral ones. Also,
we examine whether the differential effect of valence of
change on judgments of identity continuity observed in
Study 1 is moderated by prior expectations of change. For
example, is positive change always more identity-preserving
than negative change, or is this tendency reversed if
negative change is expected for a specific characteristic?
In order to explore these questions, we employed a 3
(expectation: improvement, worsening, or staying the same)
x 3 (imagined change: improvement, worsening, or staying
the same) repeated measures design in which participants
reported their expectations of change for a subset of
characteristics and then reported the perceived impact on
identity that would result from different types of change in
these traits.

Figure 1. Study 1 Identity Discontinuity Ratings by
Valence and Category.

Discussion
The results of Study 1 suggest that people view certain
categories of mental life (such as morality and personality
characteristics), as more central to their own self-concept
than others (such as memories, experiences, and
preferences). Paralleling results of other research

Participants and Stimuli
must be large enough to manifest across this restrictive range of
mostly central attributes.

Three hundred participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk
(MTurk) completed an online survey in return for monetary

1621

compensation. Participants were presented with the same 40
characteristics used in Study 1.

Method
Participants were presented with the list of personal
characteristics (described in Study 1) and were asked to
select fifteen in total that met the following criteria: “five
items that you most strongly expect will improve over
time,” “five items that you most strongly expect will stay
the same over time,” and “five items that you most strongly
expect will worsen over time.” After placing five
characteristics into each category, participants were asked to
rank them by placing the item they felt most strongly
represented the category at the top of each list, and items
they felt less strongly represented the category at the bottom
of each list.
Following item selection and ranking, participants were
presented with three blocks of questions in which they were
asked to imagine that their top-ranked characteristic from
each expectation category would either improve, worsen, or
stay the same (blocks and characteristics were presented in
randomized order). Participants made identity continuity
judgments using the self/not self slider question from Study
1; however, in this study the unspecified change condition
was replaced with the “stay the same” condition. So,
participants made nine such judgments, which were the
result of crossing (i) type of change (asked to imagine it
improves vs. imagine it stays the same vs. imagine it
worsens) with (ii) participants’ reported expected change
(expected to improve vs. expected to stay the same vs.
expected to worsen).

Results
Centrality and Expectations of Change A chi-square test
revealed that participants systematically differed in their
expectations about different categories of traits, χ2 (8) =
927.99, p < .001 (see Table 1). Participants were more likely
to select characteristics from relatively central categories
when asked to provide examples of traits they would expect
to remain stable (morality, personality, preferences), and
were more likely to select characteristics from peripheral
categories as those for which they expected improvement
(experiences) or worsening (memories).

Expectations of Change and Judgments of Identity A
repeated measures ANOVA revealed a main effect of the
valence of change participants were instructed to imagine, F
(2, 598) = 296.50, p < .001, ηp2 = .50, as well as a
significant interaction between expectations and valence, F
(4, 1196) = 117.53, p < .001, ηp2 = .28 (see Figure 2).
Post-hoc comparisons revealed that overall, imagining a
hypothetical worsening of characteristics predicted much
larger perceptions of identity discontinuity (M = 60.37, SD
= 33.59) than imagining improvement in these
characteristics (M = 29.02, SD = 29.86) or imagining the
characteristics staying the same (M = 28.64, SD = 29.30), z
= 26.05, p < .001. However, if people already expected a
trait to get worse, the identity-threatening effect of this
worsening was greatly mitigated, from an average
discontinuity perception of 70.76 (SD = 29.74) in the
expected improvement and stability conditions to 39.59 (SD
= 31.15) in the expected worsening condition, z = 17.22, p <
.001. Indeed, when negative change was expected for a
certain characteristic, people could equally imagine it either
improving or worsening with no differential impact on
identity judgments, z = 1.25, p =.94. In contrast, when
positive change was expected, imagining an improvement
was much more identity-preserving than imagining those
traits worsening (z = 22.01, p < .001) or staying the same (z
= 6.78, p < .001). Taken as a whole, situations where
imagined development matched expectation were less
threatening to continuity than situations where development
was contrary to expectation, z = 19.70, p < .001. See Table 2
for a comparison of the effects of imagining improvement,
staying the same, and worsening on perceived identity for
characteristics classified within each type of expected
change. Table 2 also shows the effect of each type of
expected change on perceived identity when imagining
improvement, staying the same, and worsening.

Table 1. Percentage of characteristics in each mental domain
that participants chose as examples of improvement,
stability, or worsening

Improve
Same
Worsen
χ2

Morality

Personality

Preferences

Experiences

Memories

26%
59%
15%
197.3***

35%
38%
27%
37.3***

9%
60%
32%
55.3***

49%
18%
33%

10%
14%
76%

158.3***

479.8***

Figure 2. Study 2 Identity Discontinuity
Ratings by Type of Change and Expectation

*** = p < .001; Bold values are significantly greater than 33%.

1622

Table 2. Study 2 Identity Discontinuity Ratings.

Imagined:

Improve
Stay the same
Worsen
F-value

Expectation:
Improve
18.81a (24.1)
34.16d (29.8)
69.12e (29.6)
270.31***

Stay the same
25.87b (27.7)
18.48a (25.0)
72.34e (29.8)
324.69***

Worsen
42.52c (32.3)
33.27d (30.2)
39.45c, d (31.2)
7.55***

F-value
67.30***
40.49***
133.01***

*** = p < .001; Values with different subscripts differ at p < .05 in post hoc tests adjusted for multiple comparisons

Discussion
Study 2 used a selection and classification procedure to
examine people’s expectations about the developmental
trajectory of various types of characteristics. These
expectations were examined within the context of broad
categories that differ on the basis of their centrality to the
self-concept. Although we observed the classification of
characteristics from all domains into all three trajectories
(improvement, worsening, and staying the same), the
distribution of classifications reveals that people believe that
their more central characteristics (such as moral qualities)
are less likely to change than their more peripheral
characteristics (such as memories or experiences).
Violations of these expectations may thus contribute to the
greater relative identity discontinuity reported when people
imagine that characteristics from central categories will
change (as seen in Study 1).
We also examined how violations of expectations
contribute to differential perceptions of identity continuity
associated with positive and negative changes. In Study 1,
positive change was perceived as more identity-preserving
than negative change, but we also know that positive change
over time tends to be more consistent with overall
expectations (Haslam, et al., 2007; Wilson & Ross, 2001).
We aimed to disentangle these effects in Study 2 by
crossing all levels of the type of change (improve, worsen,
stay the same) with all corresponding levels of expectations
of change. We found that although valence has a main effect
on identity judgments, greater self-continuity is also
reported when the type of change considered is consistent
with expected change. Thus, we conclude that valence and
expectation exert an interactive effect on perceived
continuity of the self-concept: positive changes (or stability)
are generally more consistent with a sense of self-continuity
than negative changes, but this is especially so when these
positive changes (stability) are consistent with expectations.

Conclusion
Every person has a unique self-concept. Although there is
considerable heterogeneity in which specific characteristics
each of us treat as most important, most or least likely to
change, etc., the current studies show general similarities
across participants in (i) which types of characteristics
people consider to be important in defining themselves and

(ii) their reactions to imagined changes in these
characteristics.
The results of Study 1 suggest that people consider
characteristics falling into the categories of morality and
personality traits to be most central to their personal
identity, whereas experiences and memory are relatively
less central. Additionally, results from both Study 1 and
Study 2 suggest that on average, people consider positive
change to be more identity-preserving than negative change.
In addition to extending these two main effects from the
domain of third party judgments to self-judgments, our
findings are the first to find that trait centrality and valence
of change interact to influence judgments of personal
continuity. That is, the centrality of a trait matters much
more to us when we are contemplating a negative change
than when we are thinking about a positive one, and
likewise, the valence of change matters much more to us
when we are thinking about a central trait rather than a
peripheral one.
These results also address the apparent contradiction
between existing lines of research on change and the selfconcept, which suggest that people expect and desire
positive change (e.g., Busseri et al., 2009; Wilson, Buehler,
Lawford, Schmidt, & Yong, 2012), but also view change in
general as disruptive to personal continuity (e.g., Bartels &
Urminsky, 2011). Specifically, we find that people seem to
view positive change (especially expected positive change)
as a distinct category that is more allowable in their own
self-development than negative change or unspecified
change. This mental segmentation of different types of
personal change allows people to hold positive expectations
for their future development while still maintaining a stable
sense of self over time. The findings of Study 2 suggest that
people may also at times adjust their expectations to
incorporate negative change, reducing the resultant
disruption of identity if these changes in fact occur.
Finally, in addition to being of theoretical interest,
identifying factors that affect the stability of the self-concept
is important because perceptions of self-continuity have
wide ranging and varied effects on people’s thoughts and
behaviors. For example, feelings of decreased continuity
between the current and future self can lead to negative
outcomes such as unethical behavior (Hershfield, Cohen, &
Thompson, 2012) and short-sighted decision-making
(Bartels & Urminsky, 2011), but can also lead to potentially
positive outcomes such as increased giving to others

1623

(Bartels, Kvaran, & Nichols, 2013). Overall, studying the
factors that influence how people think of themselves over
time can help us deepen our understanding of basic
questions about identity as well as help us predict and
explain personally-relevant behaviors across different
contexts.

References
Bartels, D. M., Kvaran, T., & Nichols, S. (2013). Selfless
giving. Cognition, 129(2), 392-403.
Bartels, D. M., & Rips, L. J. (2010). Psychological
connectedness and intertemporal choice. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 139(1), 49.
Bartels, D. M., & Urminsky, O. (2011). On intertemporal
selfishness: How the perceived instability of identity
underlies impatient consumption. Journal of Consumer
Research, 38(1), 182-198.
Blok, S., Newman, G., Behr, J., & Rips, L. J. (2001).
Inferences about personal identity. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 80-85).
Busseri, M. A., Choma, B. L., & Sadava, S. W. (2008).
Functional or Fantasy? Examining the Implications of
Subjective Temporal Perspective “Trajectories” for Life
Satisfaction. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
35(3), 295–308.
Gelman, S. A., & Hirschfeld, L. A. (1999). How biological
is essentialism. Folkbiology, 403-446.
Haslam, N., Bastian, B., Fox, C., & Whelan, J. (2007).
Beliefs about personality change and continuity.
Personality and Individual Differences, 42(8), 1621–
1631.
Hershfield, H. E., Cohen, T. R., & Thompson, L. (2012).
Short horizons and tempting situations: Lack of continuity
to our future selves leads to unethical decision making
and behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 117(2), 298-310.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. Similarity and analogical reasoning, 179195.
Molouki, S., & Pronin, E. (2014). Self and Other. In M.
Mikulincer, P. Shaver, E. Borgida, J. Bargh, et al., (Eds.),
APA Handbook of Personality and Social Psychology.
Washington, DC: APA Books.
Newby-Clark, I. R., & Ross, M. (2003). Conceiving the Past
and Future. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
29(7), 807–818.
Newman, G. E., Bloom, P., & Knobe, J. (2014). Value
judgments and the true self. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 40(2), 203-216.
Nichols, S., & Bruno, M. (2010). Intuition about personal
identity: An empirical study. Philosophical Psychology,
23(3), 293-312.
Sloman, S. A., & Ahn, W. K. (1999). Feature centrality:
Naming versus imagining. Memory & Cognition, 27(3),
526-537.

Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. K. (1998). Feature
centrality
and
conceptual
coherence. Cognitive
Science, 22(2), 189-228.
Strohminger, N., & Nichols, S. (2014). The essential moral
self. Cognition, 131(1), 159-171.
Tobia, K. P. (2015). Moral Judgment and the Teleological
Self. Unpublished manuscript.
Wilson, A. E., Buehler, R., Lawford, H., Schmidt, C., &
Yong, A. G. (2012). Basking in projected glory: The role
of
subjective
temporal
distance
in
future
self‐appraisal. European
Journal
of
Social
Psychology, 42(3), 342-353.
Wilson, A. E., & Ross, M. (2001). From chump to champ:
People’s appraisals of their earlier and present selves.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(4),
572–584.

1624

Appendix A: Examples of Stimuli Used in
Studies 1 and 2
Characteristic

Category

Degree of honesty

Morality

Values

Morality

Impulsiveness

Personality

Sense of humor

Personality

Major likes and dislikes

Preferences

Professional goals

Preferences

Life Experiences

Experiences

Friendships

Experiences

Cherished memories of
time spent with loved
ones
Knowledge of how to
ride a bike

Memories
Memories

