Physiological entrainment and behavioral coordination in a collective, creative
construction task
Riccardo Fusaroli (fusaroli@gmail.com)
Interacting Minds Center & Center for Semiotics, Jens Chr. Skous Vej 2
8000 Aarhus, Denmark

Johanne S. Bjørndahl (semjsb@hum.au.dk)
Center for Semiotics, Jens Chr. Skous Vej 2
8000 Aarhus, Denmark

Andreas Roepstorff (andreas@pet.au.dk)
Interacting Minds Center, Jens Chr. Skous Vej 2
8000 Aarhus, Denmark

Kristian Tylén (kristian@cfin.dk)
Center for Semiotics & Interacting Minds Center, Jens Chr. Skous Vej 2
8000 Aarhus, Denmark

Abstract

physiological entrainment, in particular of heart rate
(henceforth HR). The study of interpersonal HR entrainment
seems promising: it is argued to underlie the construction of
a sense of community (Konvalinka et al., 2011), to facilitate
empathy and mindreading (Levenson & Gottman, 1983;
Levenson & Ruef, 1992) and even to be predictive of team
performance (Elkins et al., 2009; Henning, Boucsein, & Gil,
2001; Strang, Funke, Russell, Dukes, & Middendorf, 2014).
However, these initial results open many questions, which
are crucial for our understanding of physiological
entrainment and its role in social interactions. Since there is
no direct coupling between hearts, which factors enable and
facilitate HR entrainment? The current literature points to
social relationships (Konvalinka, et al., 2011; Levenson &
Gottman, 1983), and the structure of task environments
(Henning, et al., 2001; Strang, et al., 2014) as important
factors. However, social interactions crucially involve
behavioral coordination, which could in turn mediate
physiological entrainment (Dale, Fusaroli, Duran, &
Richardson, 2013; Konvalinka & Roepstorff, 2012). To
what extent is HR entrainment modulated by these factors?
And how do behavioral and physiological entrainment relate
to the more phenomenological aspects of interaction, such
as perceived group competence and rapport?
To investigate these questions, we designed an
experimental study inspired by the intervention method
LEGO Serious Play (Gauntlett, 2007). Groups of
participants repeatedly collaborated to build LEGO models
illustrating their understanding of six abstract notions. The
task thus afforded the development of coordinative routines
and strategies: group members could not all build or talk at
the same time but had to find ways to coordinate their
actions, negotiate joint understanding and resolve
disagreements in order to complete the assignments
(Bjørndahl, Fusaroli, Østergaard, & Tylén, 2014, in press).

Interpersonal physiological entrainment is increasingly argued
to underlie rapport, empathy and even team performance. We
investigate the presence, temporal development, possible
mechanisms and impact of interpersonal heart rate
entrainment during collective creative LEGO construction
tasks. We observe a statistically significant presence and
increase over time of structured entrainment, which relates to
the actual unfolding and development of behavioral
coordination. Heart rate entrainment does not predict rapport
and perceived group competence, but behavioral coordination
does. Physiological entrainment, thus, should not be
considered a universal unmediated proxy for shared emotions,
empathy and collective performance. Behavioral coordination
– at least in tasks requiring forms of joint action – seems to be
a more informative proxy for both physiological entrainment
and collective experience.
Keywords: interpersonal coordination; joint action; common
ground; physiological entrainment; behavioral coordination.

Introduction
As we go through our day, we continuously engage with
other people: chats at the bus stop, joint projects at the work
place, and nurture of long term relations with friends and
family. Which processes are involved in the development of
such coordination and rapport? Recent studies have
investigated the multiple behavioral coordinative dynamics
that interacting individuals put to play - from mutual
adaptations of movements, words and prosody (Fusaroli et
al., 2012; Riley, Richardson, Shockley, & Ramenzoni,
2011; Shockley, Santana, & Fowler, 2003), to establishment
of shared routines (Fusaroli, Raczaszek-Leonardi, & Tylén,
2014; Mills, 2014) – and their role in facilitating
performance and rapport (Fusaroli & Tylén, in press; Marsh,
Richardson, & Schmidt, 2009). Moreover, a small but
growing number of studies points to the crucial role of

752

Relying on this setup, we devised three studies, to
successively investigate the previously highlighted
questions. In study 1, we focus on the presence and
temporal development of HR entrainment. In study 2 we
investigate the behavioral proxies through which HR
entrainment can be established and maintained: in particular
we assessed building and speech coordination. In study 3 we
then investigated whether physiological and behavioral
coordination enable us to predict the experience of the
interactions, in particular focusing on experiences of group
relatedness and group performance.

them but still challenging to construct in LEGOs. In
individual trials, participants sat quietly and constructed
their own models. In collective tasks participants freely
interacted to construct joint models. The experiment was
divided in two 3-concepts sessions separated by a 20 min.
coffee break. Two cameras were used to video-record the
experiment from different angles, leading to approximately
20 hours of videos (for more details on the interactions
during such collective tasks, cf. (Bjørndahl, et al., 2014, in
press)). Importantly, to answer the research questions put
forth in the introduction, we will in the following only
consider data from the collective condition.
Heart Rate Activity Polar Team2 (Polar, 2013) cheststrapped HR monitors were used to record participants’
cardiac activity as the temporal distance between beats (R-R
intervals) with millisecond accuracy. To align HR activity
across participants we generated equally sampled timeseries by estimating beats per minute every second based on
sliding 5-second windows (Wallot, Fusaroli, Tylén, &
Jegindø, 2013).
Data Analysis: Interpersonal Physiological Entrainment
Interpersonal entrainment was measured through Cross
Recurrence Quantification Analysis (CRQA), a nonlinear
and more flexible analog of cross correlation. Relying on
two time-series, CRQA reconstructs the phase space of
possible combination of states and quantifies the structure of
recurrence, that is, of the instances in which the two timeseries display similar dynamics, controlling for individual
baselines of HR (for more details on the methods, cf.
(Fusaroli, Konvalinka, & Wallot, 2014; Marwan, Carmen
Romano, Thiel, & Kurths, 2007). CRQA has been
previously used to assess HR entrainment (Konvalinka, et
al., 2011; Strang, et al., 2014; Wallot, et al., 2013) and
allows us to quantify, amongst other things:
• Level of entrainment, defined as the percentage of
values that are repeated between the two time series
(recurrence rate, RR). The higher the recurrence rate,
the more similar the range of values displayed by the
participants’ HRs.
• Stability of entrainment, defined as average length of
sequences repeated across time-series (L). The higher
the L, the more the participants tend to display
prolonged and stable sequences of HR entrainment.
Data Analysis: Surrogate vs. Real Pairs To assess the
presence of interpersonal HR entrainment we calculated
CRQA indexes in real pairs (two members of the same
group) and in surrogate pairs (two members of different
groups). All possible pairs within a group were calculated.
Per each real pair we randomly selected a participant and
paired her with a participant from a different group, thus
generating a surrogate pair. This generated 56 real pairs and
56 surrogate ones, measured during each of the 6 collective
tasks. Since we excluded HR time series in which the sensor
lost contact for more than 5 s, we ended up with a total of
653 data points (out of 672 possible). Both real and
surrogate pairs should show presence of task-based

Study 1 - Heart Rate Entrainment
In study 1, we investigate whether HR entrainment could
be observed during creative collaborative LEGO
construction tasks and whether it was driven alone by
individual task-engagement, or it developed as behavioral
collaboration between group members unfolded. We
contrasted HR entrainment in pairs of participants
interacting with each other (real pairs) and in pairs
artificially constructed by selecting participants from two
different groups, thus sharing the task, but not any actual
interactions (virtual pairs). Additionally, we assessed the
temporal development of HR entrainment across the six
construction tasks in both real and virtual pairs.
If HR entrainment is mainly driven by the structure of the
task, that is, by similarities in what all individual
participants do, real and virtual pairs should not differ.
However, if HR entrainment is connected to the
development of behavioral coordination between
participants, real pairs should display a higher degree of
coordination and an increase over time when compared to
virtual pairs.

Materials and Methods
Participants 30 participants (15 f, mean age 23.6, sd 2.6)
were recruited among students of Aarhus University and
received monetary compensation for their participation (ca.
50 $). All participants were native speakers of Danish.
Participants were organized in mixed-gender groups of four
to six.
Design and Procedure Upon arrival, a heart rate monitor
(Polar Team2) was attached to the participants. Participants
were placed around a table and familiarized with the task
through two practice trials. The actual experiment was
carried out as a two-condition within-group contrast:
collective vs. individual. Each group underwent an
interleaved series of six individual and six collective LEGO
construction tasks of each five minutes, during which their
HR entrainment was measured. In each trial, participants
were instructed to use LEGO blocks to construct their
understanding of abstract concepts: ‘RESPONSIBILITY’
(ansvar),
‘COLLABORATION’
(samarbejde),
‘KNOWLEDGE’ (viden), ‘JUSTICE’ (retfærdighed),
’SAFETY’ (tryghed) and ‘TOLERANCE’ (tolerance). The
concepts were selected to be sufficiently common in public
discourse that participants would have an opinion about

753

R2=0.16
L
R2m=0.38
R2=0.51

entrainment, but only real pairs should show interactionbased entrainment.
Data Analysis: Assessing the Presence and Temporal
Development of Physiological Entrainment In order to
assess the presence of entrainment and the impact of the
experimental manipulation, we employed mixed effects
linear models. Each index of HR entrainment (RR and L)
was separately employed as dependent variable, surrogate
vs. real, and time were used as fixed effects, pair and group
variability were used in a full random effects structure
including random slopes for all fixed effects. Notice that the
random effects structure constrains the degrees of freedom
in the same way as a multi-level repeated measures model.

Study 1 supported the hypothesis that HR entrainment is
related to actual interpersonal interaction during the
collective construction tasks. This raises the issue of which
aspects of the interactions facilitate HR entrainment. The
collective construction of LEGO models requires at least
two aspects of behavioral coordination: participants have to
discuss and agree upon their joint project, which requires
taking turns in dialogical interaction; participants have to
physically build the model and coordinate their actions, as
they cannot all manipulate the model at the same time. As
both motor and speech activity have been related to HR
activity (Beda, Jandre, Phillips, Giannella Neto, &
Simpson, 2007; Wallot, et al., 2013), we hypothesized that
their coordination might impact HR entrainment. In order to
pursue this hypothesis, Study 2 quantified building and
speech activity (BA and SA) coordination and assessed their
relation to HR entrainment.

Impact of time on HR coordination

Virtual
Real

RR

0.15

0.10

0.05

3

4

5

6

12.5

Virtual
Real

10.0

0.96
0.002*
0.11
<0.0001*

Study 2: From behavioral coordination to
physiological entrainment

0.25

2

≈0
0.2
0.11
0.05

The results suggest that HR entrainment can indeed be
found during creative collaborative construction tasks and
that it is at least partially the effect of actual interactions and
not just individual task-constraints. Indeed, if HR
entrainment was driven by presence in an analogous context
performing an analogous activity, real and virtual pairs
should not differ in their average level of entrainment and
development over time.
However, this is only true for the structure (L) and not the
level (RR) of HR entrainment suggesting that collaborative
tasks involve not just shared engagement (generally being
equally physiologically aroused), but repeated, prolonged
sequences of entrained physiology.

Presence and Development of Entrainment The stability
(but not the level) of entrainment was higher in real pairs
than in virtual pairs and shows an interaction between real
and time (cf. Figure 1 and Table 1). The interaction is driven
by an increase of stability of entrainment in real pairs
(ß=0.30, SE=0.09), but not in virtual pairs (ß=0.03,
SE=0.08).1

1

≈0
0.64
0.17
0.12

Discussion

Results

0.20

Real*Time
Real
Time
Real*Time

L

7.5

Materials and Methods

5.0

Speech and Building Coding In order to investigate the
potential mechanisms enabling HR entrainment we
quantified speech and building coordination. Two research
assistants naive to the purpose of the study carefully
screened the videos of the collective tasks and coded for
presence/absence of speech and/or building activity for each
participant on a second-by-second base.

2.5

1

2

3

Time (trials)

4

5

6

Figure 1: Level (RR) and Stability (L) of interpersonal HR
entrainment over time.

Speech and Building Coordination Speech and building
interpersonal coordination were calculated using CRQA on
the nominal (1s and 0s) time series of speech and building
activity in real pairs during collective tasks (Dale,
Warlaumont, & Richardson, 2011). CRQA allows us to
quantify the level (RR) and structure (L) of behavioral
coordination, in terms of shared engagement (RR) and

Table 1: Presence and Development of HR Entrainment
Variable
Factor
ß
SE
p-value
RR
Real
≈0
≈0
0.45
R2m=0.03 Time
≈0
≈0
0.008*
1

Analogous results were achieved when controlling for order of
condition and session effects.

754

stable patterns of coordination (L), beyond simple
behavioral synchrony – e.g. including stable patterns of
turn-taking. 56 real pairs assessed during 6 collective trials
generated 320 data points (16 had to be excluded due to
corrupted audio-video materials).
Data Analysis: Assessing the Relation of Behavioral
Coordination on HR entrainment In order to assess the
potential impact of behavioral coordination on physiological
entrainment we employed a mixed effects linear model with
each of the indexes of HR entrainment (RR and L) as
dependent variable, all 4 indexes of speech and building
coordination as fixed factors and a random intercepts for
group and pair variability (as models with random slopes
would not converge).

Impact of Behavioral Coordination on HR Entrainment

Stability of HR Entrainment (L)

12.5

7.5

5.0

2.5
4

5

6
Behavioral Coordination

7

8

Figure 3: From Behavioral Coordination to Physiological
Entrainment: model predictions against the real HR L
scores.

Results
The level of HR entrainment (HR RR) was significantly
related to the level of building (Build RR) and the stability
of speech (Speech L) coordination: the more frequent the
building and the more stable the speech coordination the
more HR entrainment. The stability of HR entrainment was
significantly related to speech coordination: the more
frequent and stable the speech coordination, the more HR
entrainment (cf. Table 2 and Figures 2&3).

Discussion
The results support the hypothesis that HR entrainment is
connected to – and possibly partially driven by - behavioral
coordination. Speech Coordination significantly and
noteworthily predicts the stability of HR entrainment (37%
of the variance explained). Building coordination
significantly, but more weakly predicts the level of HR
entrainment (14% of the variance). Given that study 1
pointed to no role for actual interactions in determining the
level of entrainment, this is not surprising. In any case,
Building and Speech coordination seem to contribute in
complementary ways to HR entrainment.

Table 2: From Behavioral to Physiological Coordination
Variable
Factor
ß
SE
p-value
HR RR
Build RR
0.23
0.12
0.045*
R2m=0.14 Build L
≈0
≈0
0.248
R2=0.23
Speech RR
0.01
0.01
0.456
Speech L
≈0
≈0
0.0013*
HR L
Build RR
2.04
4.19
0.63
R2m=0.37 Build L
-0.16
0.09
0.077
R2=0.47
Speech RR 1.77
0. 45
<0.0001*
Speech L
0.02
≈0
<0.0001*

Study 3 – Coordination, Entrainment and
Experience
Study 2 supported the hypothesis that HR entrainment is –
at least partially – driven by behavioral coordination. In
previous studies, behavioral coordination and HR
entrainment have both (although separately) been related to
the phenomenological experience of social interactions
(Konvalinka, et al., 2011; Marsh, et al., 2009). In Study 3
we explore the relation between self-declared group
relatedness and competence in the task and the different
indexes of interpersonal coordination and physiological
entrainment.

Impact of Behavioral Coordination on HR Entrainment
0.25

Level of HR Entrainment (RR)

10.0

0.20

0.15

Materials and Methods

0.10

Experience of the Collaboration In order to provide
insight on group members’ experience of the creative
collaboration, at the end of the experiment all participants
filled in a customized version of the Intrinsic Motivation
Inventory (Ryan, 1982), slightly rephrased to better capture:
i) Relatedness to the group and ii) Perceived collective
competence.

0.05

0.05

0.07

0.09
Behavioral Coordination

0.11

Figure 2: From Behavioral Coordination to Physiological
Entrainment: model predictions against the real HR RR
scores.

Data Analysis: From Coordination to Experience As
experience was measured at the level of individual
participants but referred to their experience of the group, we

755

General Discussion

calculated an individual coordination index, by averaging all
within-group pairs to which that individual participated. In
order to assess the potential impact of behavioral and
physiological coordination on experience we employed
mixed effects linear models with the 2 indexes of experience
separately as dependent variables, and the individual
indexes of interpersonal coordination as fixed factors, while
group was a random factor. As experience was assessed at
the end of the experiment, we chose to employ indexes of
interpersonal coordination from the last trial of the
experiment. The models involved 23 datapoints, as the
recordings of group 1’s last task was corrupted and one
participant from group 5 did not complete the questionnaire.

Our findings support and articulate the current literature
on HR entrainment. They corroborate the hypothesis that
collective settings involve HR entrainment, but they also
question its potential role as foundational mechanism for
shared experience, rapport and collective performance.
HR entrainment can be argued to rely on several
interacting factors. For instance, the structure of the task –
e.g. having to build a LEGO model – seems to drive the
level of HR entrainment as it impacts and constrains the
general amount of engagement and physiological arousal in
the participating individuals. However, the fine-grained
structure of the entrainment seems to be related to the actual
unfolding and development of behavioral coordination.
Indeed, behavioral coordination is a weak predictor of the
amount of HR entrainment (Building RR) and a strong
predictor of its structure (Speech RR and L). As the possible
drive of physiological entrainment, it might not be
surprising that behavioral coordination - and not
physiological entrainment - relates to experience.
The collective LEGO construction task requires
participants to develop coordinative strategies at many
levels: negotiating concepts, taking turns in speaking and in
building the models (Bjørndahl, et al., 2014, in press). By
developing shared behavioral routines, jointly regulating the
group’s action and speech (and thus indirectly respiration),
the participants become partially entrained even at a
physiological level. However, it seems to be the behavioral
routines, with their complementary roles (A speaks, B
listens; A holds the model, B adds a brick), rather than the
physiological entrainment, which are crucial to effectively
solve the task and create a constructive emotional
environment where participants feel related and competent
in what they are doing. In other words, participants do not
need to synchronize their hearts to feel related, but they
might need to coordinate their behavior in systemic ways in
order to effectively solve the task at hand. However, the
negative relation between coordination and experience
requires further studies.
The findings thus suggest that behavioral coordination
and physiological entrainment are not a universal panacea,
automatically creating shared emotions, empathy and
performance. On the contrary, the structure of the task at
hand might play a crucial role in determining which aspects
of interpersonal coordination facilitate the development of
rapport and collective performance.
Future research will have to compare tasks with different
coordinative requirements and to more precisely pinpoint
the physiological mechanisms through which behavioral
coordination impacts physiological entrainment.

Results
Self reported relatedness was significantly predicted by the
stability of building and speech coordination: the more
stable building and the less stable speech coordination, the
higher the ratings. Self reported group competence was
significantly predicted by the level of building coordination:
the less building coordination, the higher the ratings (cf.
Tables 3 and 4).
Table 3: Relatedness and Interpersonal Coordination
Beta
SE
p-value
HR RR
-69.47
122.03
0.57
HR L
2.69
3.61
0.46
BA RR
-133.05
151.02
0.38
BA L
7.80
3.59
0.03*
SA RR
4.64
13.17
0.73
SA L
-0.28
0.14
0.046*
Table 4: Group Competence and Interpersonal Coordination
Beta
SE
p-value
HR RR
0.93
69.38
0.18
HR L
-1.67
2.04
0.41
BA RR
-0.02
82.12
0.01*
BA L
3.08
2.03
0.13
SA RR
3.08
7.8
0.69
SA L
0
0.09
0.93

Discussion
The results suggest that behavioral coordination (building
and speech) is a better predictor of the phenomenological
experience of group relatedness and competence than HR
entrainment (which indeed does not significantly correlate
with experience at all). This seems to point to behavioral
coordination underlying both physiological entrainment and
experience. Both behavioral modalities seem to play a role
in creating coordinative routines and experience. However,
their role is not straightforward as higher indexes of
interpersonal coordination might have a negative impact on
the experience.

Conclusion
The findings in our study suggest that physiological
entrainment can be found in collective activities and is
influenced by a plurality of factors. However, physiological
entrainment should not be considered the unmediated proxy
for shared emotions, empathy and collective performance.

756

Behavioral coordination – at least in tasks requiring forms
of joint action – seems to be driving in complex ways both
physiological entrainment and collective experience.

Gauntlett, D. (2007). Creative explorations: New
approaches to identities and audiences: Routledge.
Henning, R. A., Boucsein, W., & Gil, M. C. (2001). Social–
physiological compliance as a determinant of team
performance.
International
Journal
of
Psychophysiology, 40(3), 221-232.
Konvalinka, I., & Roepstorff, A. (2012). The two-brain
approach: How can mutually interacting brains
teach us something about social interaction?
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6.
Konvalinka, I., Xygalatas, D., Bulbulia, J., Schjodt, U.,
Jegindo, E. M., Wallot, S., . . . Roepstorff, A.
(2011). Synchronized arousal between performers
and related spectators in a fire-walking ritual.
PNAS, 108, 8514-8519.
Levenson, R. W., & Gottman, J. M. (1983). Marital
interaction: physiological linkage and affective
exchange. JPSP, 45(3), 587.
Levenson, R. W., & Ruef, A. M. (1992). Empathy: a
physiological substrate. JPSP, 63(2), 234.
Marsh, K. L., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt, R. C. (2009).
Social connection through joint action and
interpersonal coordination. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 1, 320-339.
Marwan, N., Carmen Romano, M., Thiel, M., & Kurths, J.
(2007). Recurrence plots for the analysis of
complex systems. Physics Reports, 438, 237-329.
Mills, G. (2014). Dialogue in joint activity:
Complementarity,
convergence
and
conventionalization. New Ideas in Psychology, 32,
158–173.
Riley, M. A., Richardson, M. J., Shockley, K., &
Ramenzoni, V. C. (2011). Interpersonal synergies.
Frontiers in psychology, 2, 38.
Ryan, R. M. (1982). Control and information in the
intrapersonal sphere: An extension of cognitive
evaluation theory. JPSP, 43(3), 450.
Shockley, K., Santana, M. V., & Fowler, C. A. (2003).
Mutual interpersonal postural constraints are
involved in cooperative conversation. JEP-HPP,
29(2), 326-332.
Strang, A. J., Funke, G. J., Russell, S. M., Dukes, A. W., &
Middendorf, M. S. (2014). Physio-behavioral
coupling in a cooperative team task: Contributors
and relations. JEP-HPP, 40(1), 145.
Wallot, S., Fusaroli, R., Tylén, K., & Jegindø, E.-M. (2013).
Using complexity metrics with RR intervals and
BPM heart rate measures. Frontiers in physiology,
4.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank I.Konvalinka, L.Post, J.McGraw,
R.Rasmussen, B.S.Thomsen, and the LEGO Foundation.
The research in this paper was funded by the Danish
Council for Independent Research – FKK grant “Joint
Diagrammatical Reasoning”; the ESF EuroUnderstanding
grant “Digging for the Roots of Understanding” and the
Interacting Minds Centre, Aarhus University.

Bibliographical References
Beda, A., Jandre, F. C., Phillips, D. I., Giannella‐Neto, A.,
& Simpson, D. M. (2007). Heart‐rate and
blood‐pressure
variability
during
psychophysiological tasks involving speech:
Influence of respiration. Psychophysiology, 44(5),
767-778.
Bjørndahl, J., Fusaroli, R., Østergaard, S., & Tylén, K.
(2014). Thinking together with material
representations: Joint epistemic actions in creative
problem solving. Cognitive Semiotics, 7(1), 103123.
Bjørndahl, J., Fusaroli, R., Østergaard, S., & Tylén, K. (in
press). When agreeing is not enough. Interaction
Studies.
Dale, R., Fusaroli, R., Duran, N., & Richardson, D. C.
(2013). The self-organization of human interaction.
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 59, 43-95.
Dale, R., Warlaumont, A. S., & Richardson, D. C. (2011).
Nominal cross recurrence as a generalized lag
sequential analysis for behavioral streams.
International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos,
21, 1153-1161.
Elkins, A. N., Muth, E. R., Hoover, A. W., Walker, A. D.,
Carpenter, T. L., & Switzer, F. S. (2009).
Physiological compliance and team performance.
Applied ergonomics, 40(6), 997-1003.
Fusaroli, R., Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Rees, G., Frith, C. D.,
Roepstorff, A., & Tylén, K. (2012). Coming to
terms: an experimental quantification of the
coordinative benefits of linguistic interaction.
Psychological Science, 23, 931-939.
Fusaroli, R., Konvalinka, I., & Wallot, S. (2014). Analyzing
social interactions: Promises and challenges of
cross recurrence quantification analysis. Springer
Proceedings in Mathematics & Statistics, 103, 137155.
Fusaroli, R., Raczaszek-Leonardi, J., & Tylén, K. (2014).
Dialog as interpersonal synergy. New Ideas in
Psychology, 32, 147-157.
Fusaroli, R., & Tylén, K. (in press). Investigating
conversational dynamics: Interactive alignment,
Interpersonal synergy, and collective task
performance. Cognitive Science.

757

