Power-law fluctuations in eye movements predict text comprehension during
connected text reading
Sebastian Wallot (Sewa@Hum.Au.Dk)
Interacting Minds Centre, Department of Culture and Society, Jens Chr. Skous Vej 4
Aarhus, 8210, Denmark

Beth A. O’Brien (Beth.Obrien@Nie.Edu.Sg)
National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University, 1 Nanyang Walk
637616 Singapore

Charles A. Coey (Coeyca@Mail.Uc.Edu)
CAP Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, OH 45220 USA

Damian Kelty-Stephen (Keltysda@Grinnell.Edu)
Department of Psychology, Grinnell College
Grinnell, IA 50112 USA
Abstract
The present study investigates the relation between the
reading process and text comprehension during naturalistic
text reading. To that end, participants read easy and difficult
texts while their eye movements were recorded. After each
reading, participants filled-in comprehension questionnaires.
We investigated classical measures of the reading process
related to comprehension (fixation duration, regressive eye
movements), as well as power-law scaling in eye movements
that are indicative of degree of cognitive coordination during
reading. The results show that text difficulty led to longer
fixation durations and stronger power-law scaling in eye
movements. Moreover, the degree of power-law scaling in
eye movements was predictive of text comprehension. In line
with previous research on natural text reading that utilized the
self-paced reading method, power-law scaling turned out to
be a superior predictor of reading comprehension compared
to standard measures, suggesting that it is an effective
measure of cognitive performance in complex reading tasks.
Keywords: naturalistic text reading; connected text reading;
comprehension; power-law scaling; eye movements.

Comprehension And The Temporal
Coordination Of The Reading Process
The perceptual process of reading (reflected in reaction
times or eye movements, for example) and the cognitive
outcomes of reading (i.e., text comprehension) have largely
been studied separately. While most research on the reading
process has been concerned with the (perceptual) front-end
of the reading process, research on text comprehension has
worked on ‘back-end’ problems, such as how readers
remember texts or draw inferences based on textual
information (Carpenter, Miyake, & Just, 1995). However,
these ‘back-end’ studies usually do not incorporate ‘frontend’ process measures of reading. Most models of reading
seem to assume that the ‘early’ processes in reading (e.g.,
perceptual and lexical access processes) are fairly

independent of ‘later’ comprehension processes (McNamara
& Magliano, 2009 – but see Gough & Tunmer, 1986).
Indeed, relating process aspects of reading to text
comprehension has proven difficult: Research collecting
measures of process and comprehension on readings of the
same text is rare. The few studies that exist either do not
report relations between process and comprehension
measures (e.g., Zwaan, Magliano, & Graesser, 1995) or
report null-effects between classical process measures –
such as reading speed – and text comprehension (e.g.,
LeVasseur, Marcuso, & Shankweiler, 2008).
One of the problems is that the popular single word or
single sentence reading research paradigms are not readily
applicable to reading of naturalistic, connected texts: For
example, the effects of lexical variables play only a
marginal role in the process of text reading that is highly
non-stationary over the course of reading (Wallot, Hollis, &
van Rooij, 2013). Similarly, situation model variables that
affect comprehension in short snippets of texts do not
exhibit the same effects in reading of long, connected texts
(McNerney, Goodwin, & Radvansky, 2011).
An alternative model proposes that the process of text
reading is inherently different from situations where readers
face unconnected snippets of text. During more complex
cognitive tasks, idiosyncrasies (i.e., individual background
knowledge, learning histories, strategy use, etc.) start to
matter more, and even basic cognitive skills can assume
different roles, and compensate for one another (Rasinski,
2000). Hence, a complex cognitive task such as text reading
might be better understood as a coordinative problem, that
is, how reader idiosyncrasies and cognitive components
coordinate with each other to yield an observed level of
performance (Wallot & Van Orden, 2011).
For the case of reading in particular, a well functioning
reading process is a smoothly running process in which only
few, small perturbations (e.g., extraordinary long reading

2583

times, regressive eye movements, periods of increased
volatility reading times etc.) occur and where the text
generally exerts a regulating structure on reading behavior
(Wallot, 2014), such as measures of reaction times or of eye
movements. In particular, measures of power-law scaling in
reading times that quantify the regularity of the reading
process have recently been shown to make for superior
predictors of text comprehension compared to standard
measures such as reading speed (Wallot, O’Brien,
Haussmann, Kloos, & Lyby, 2014). However, these findings
were obtained in self-paced reading tasks in which readers
press a response key to reveal each new word. Self-paced
reading tasks show in general similar results compared to
eye movements during reading (Rayner & Pollatsek, 1994).
However, we seek now to expand the findings of Wallot et
al. (2014) to a more generic framework by investigating eye
movements during reading. Whereas Wallot et al. (2014)
used times between key presses in self-paced reading, we
used eye-tracking data for measures of the reading process.
In the following sections, we will give a brief introduction
of power-law scaling in the context of eye movements, then
describe the rationale of the study and the selection of the
dependent variables, and finally present results on the
relation between the reading process (as viewed through eye
movement measures) and reading comprehension.

differences in cognitive coordination that are, for example,
predictive of different kinds of occulomotor control
processes (Shelhamer, & Joiner, 2003), or the ability of
speeded visual search (Stephen & Anastas, 2011).

Scaling in eye movements
The present work will deal with estimating power-law
scaling from time-series of eye tracking data. Power-law
scaling denotes a power-law relation between the size of
changes in the measured variable and the frequency with
which changes of that size occur.
For the present research, we estimate scaling by detrended
fluctuation analysis (DFA - Peng, Havlin, Stanley &
Goldberger, 1995). DFA quantifies how variance of a time
series changes with time scale. It segments a time series
using nonoverlapping windows whose length indicates time
scale, and estimates the average variance per window
length. If the logarithm of the variance changes
approximately linearly with the logarithm of window size,
then the slope of this linear change estimates the Hurst
exponent (H) defining the power-law scaling relationship.
Figure 1 illustrates the analysis on a time series of reading
times.
If H ≈ 0.5, then the data points in the time series are
relatively independent of each other, conforming to white
noise and indicating the absence of temporal coordination in
the reading process. If H ≠ 0.5, then this indicates that the
time series exhibits power-law scaling properties that are
indicative of interdependence of data points across many
scales and reflective of the coordination of cognitive
processes during a task (Van Orden, Holden, Turvey, 2003).
Scaling manifests in behavioral (Coey, Wallot, Richardson,
& Van Orden, 2012) and neurophysiological (Lowen,
Ozaki, Kaplan, Saleh, & Teich, 2001) measures of eye
movements. Variations of H in behavioral and
neurophysiological measures indicate situational or habitual

Figure 1. Illustration of scaling relationships for time series
with different power-law scaling exponents. The upper time
series (pink noise, Figure 1a) exhibits a scaling exponent of
H = 1.0, indicating power-law scaling and interdependence
of values in the time series. The lower time series (white
noise, Figure 1b) exhibits a scaling exponent of H = 0.5,
indicating that the values of the time series are fairly
independent. Figure 1c shows the associated scaling plots.
Power-law scaling has been observed not only in eye
movement components, such as fixations (Aks, Zelinsky, &
Sprott, 2002) and saccades (Shelhamer, & Joiner, 2003), but
also in the fluctuations of the raw eye movement record, the
gaze step size (Stephen & Mirman, 2010), which
incorporates both, fixational and saccadic eye movements.
Figure 2 illustrates the computation of fixations and gaze
step size from a horizontal snippet of gaze positions
measured by an eye tracker during reading, exhibiting the
famous staircase of eye movements during reading (Figure
2a). Usually, fixations are extracted by applying a criterion
that dissects the different steps into their vertical and
horizontal components: saccades and fixations, respectively
(Figure 2b). In contrast, to calculate the gaze step size of the
eye movement record, the positions of the record are
differenced (Figure 2c).
Fixations are the main components of eye movements
thought to reflect cognitive processing (Rayner, 1998).
Hence, we would expect scaling in fixations time series

2584

during reading to be informative about cognitive
coordination related to reading comprehension. On the other
hand, gaze steps have been shown to capture scaling
properties of eye movements across fixations and
fluctuations (Kelty-Stephen & Mirman, 2013; Stephen &
Mirman, 2010; Wallot, Coey, & Richardson, 2015), and
hence might capture a coordination of cognitive processes
pervading throughout the components of eye movement
behavior (Wallot & Kelty-Stephen, 2014). Hence, the
present research will investigate scaling both at the level of
fixations and at the level of gaze steps.

calculated scaling exponents for fixations and for gaze step
size (see Wallot & Kelty-Stephen, 2014). We also
calculated eye-movement measures shown to reflect
comprehension processes in reading (i.e., fixation duration,
number of fixations, number of regressive eye movements –
see Rayner, Chace, Slattery & Ashby, 2006). We sought to
test whether eye movement components that have been
associated with comprehension processes in such studies
will transfer to connected text. In particular, we predicted
that better comprehension should follow from reading with
briefer fixation durations and faster overall reading times,
fewer fixations, and fewer regressive eye movements
(Rayner et al., 2006).
Moreover, we sought the same effects in eye-movement
measures that Wallot et al. (2014) had found in reading
times during self-paced reading. That is, we predicted that
better comprehension should follow from reading with
greater independence amongst eye movements. We assessed
power-law scaling in both, fixation durations and gaze-step
series, the latter measure capturing coordination of the
reading process that pervades its different components, such
as fixations and saccades (Wallot & Kelty-Stephen, 2014).

Method
Participants

Figure 2. Illustration of the calculation of fixation and gaze
step size time series based on the raw eye movement record
of positions. The horizontal gaze positions exhibit the
staircase patters during reading (Figure 2a). In order to
extract fixations, the steps are isolated according to some
criterion and summed into fixation durations (Figure 2b). In
contrast, the gaze step size is simple the differenced record
of positions (Figure 2c).

The Reading Study
As noted above, standard metrics of the reading process,
such as reading speed, have been unsuccessful at predicting
reading comprehension (e.g., LeVasseur et al., 2008).
However, eye movements allow a more fine-grained
description of the reading process, such as the quantification
of regressive eye movements. To investigate the role of
scaling in eye movement with regard to reading
comprehension at the level of fixational eye movements,
we reanalyzed the data from Wallot (2011) where
participants read an easy and a difficult text while their eye
movements were being recorded, and then filled-in
comprehension questionnaires after each reading.
To investigate the role of scaling properties of eye
movements as predictors for the reading process, we

Overall, n = 32 students participated in the study. Part of the
sample (n = 24 participants) came from research that was
part of a dissertation (Wallot, 2011). Twenty-eight were
students of the University of Cincinnati, 4 were nonstudents (average age: 27.52 years, ranging from 20 to 47
years). Twelve (37.5%) were female. All were native
speakers of English and all had normal or corrected-tonormal vision. All participants read the easy and difficult
texts on two separate occasions. Half (n = 16) read the text
by pressing a response key to reveal each new sentence in a
self-paced manner, the other half read the text screen-byscreen.1 Participants’ eye movements were recorded during
both conditions.
The eye movement recordings of four participants had to
be dropped from the analysis, because the records were
highly erratic or the eye tracker had lost the corneal
reflection too often during recording.

Apparatus And Stimuli
The texts used were the first five chapters of ‘The House
Of The Scorpion’ by Nancy Farmer and the first two
chapters of ‘Infinite Jest’ by David Foster Wallace. Both
stories were fictional dystopias, hence belonging to the
same genre. Furthermore, fictional stories were picked
because this prevented readers form utilizing specific world
knowledge during the reading of the text. Both texts had
approximately the same length, but differed in aspects of
text difficulty (see Table 1).
1

Preliminary analyses did not reveal significant effects of
presentation mode. Hence, this factor was not further pursued.

2585

The texts were presented in Courier New font (14 pt.) on
a standard 13-inch computer monitor (1280 x 1024 px.).
The program that controlled stimulus presentation was a
MatLab©
PsychophysicsToolbox
(Brainard,
1997).
Participants’ eye movements were recorded by an Applied
Science Laboratory D6© remote eye-tracking system with a
temporal resolution of 60Hz and a maximal spatial
resolution of 0.5° visual angle.
Table 1. Text characteristics.
Text Characteristic
Number of Words
Sentence Length
FK Readability index

House of the
Scorpion
12,902
M = 9.6
(SD = 5.3)
3.7

Infinite Jest
12,390
M = 20.7
(SD = 20.2)
9.3

velocity of 2° of visual angle per second between two
consecutive intervals (Abrams, Meyer, & Kornblum, 1989).
Gaze step-size was calculated as the difference of positions
in the eye movement record (Stephen & Mirman, 2010).
Scaling exponents in eye movements on the levels of
fixations, and gaze step size was determined using DFA
(Peng, et al., 1995) with a minimum bin size of 4 and a
maximum bin size of ¼ of the length of the respective timeseries (see also ‘Scaling In Eye Movements’). While the
scaling functions of fixations where linear, the scaling
functions of gaze steps revealed two distinct scaling regions,
a steep one on faster time scales (between 15ms and 21sec)
and a more shallow one on slower time scales (between
30sec and 10min) (see Figure 3). Hence, scaling exponents
were calculated separately for fast and slow time scales in
gaze steps series, yielding two values for scaling in gaze
step size per participant.

Procedure
To read each story, participants came to the laboratory two
times on two different days (presentation order was
counterbalanced across participants). During reading,
participants sat in front of the computer monitor, app. 79 cm
away from the screen. Experimenters instructed participants
that the text would be displayed either sentence-by-sentence
or screen-by-screen (this mode remained constant within
each participant, so that each participant read both stories in
the same way), and that the eye-tracker would record their
eye movements during reading.
Experimenters asked participants to read the text at their
natural reading speed. After participants finished reading,
experimenters asked participants to rate text difficulty, write
a brief summary2, and to complete a comprehension
questionnaire of which they had been forewarned. Each
questionnaire consisted of 36 statements about the text that
participants had to judge as being right or wrong.

Data Analysis
A total of 4.7% of the data were lost due to the eye tracker
loosing the eyes during reading or participants looking away
from the screen.
An acceleration-based criterion extracted fixations during
reading (Araujo, Kowler, & Pavel, 2001): Increases in
acceleration of the eye-movement record indicated the onset
of a saccade, while decreases in acceleration indicated the
end of a saccade and the onset of a fixation. The algorithm
that implemented the acceleration-criterion based separation
procedure was taken from Hidalgo-Sotelo (i.e., Rich, Kunar,
Van Wert, Hidalgo-Sotelo, Horowitz, & Wolfe, 2008) and
operated in the following way: The time-series of eyemovement positions was divided into overlapping windows
of adjacent data points with a window size of 4 (equaling 68
ms) and a step-size of 1. The acceleration threshold that
marked the onset of a saccade was set to a change in
2
Analysis of the summaries has not yet been conducted. Hence,
the are not currently incorporated into the comprehension measure.

Figure 3. Scaling function of gaze steps and associated
standard error. The scaling function exhibits two distinct
scaling regions on fast and slow time scales (black lines)
that are divided by an inflection point (black arrow).
Repeated measures t statistics tested for effects of text
difficulty on the resulting measures. Multiple regression
tested the effect of different eye movement characteristics as
predictors of the outcome measure of comprehension scores.

Results
Effects of Text Difficulty
Comprehension scores (i.e., the number of correct answers
on the multiple-choice comprehension questionnaire) were
higher for the easy text compared to the difficult text (Measy

2586

= 28.35, Mdiff = 26.34; t(27) = 3.50, p = .002) and overall
reading duration was shorter for the easy text compared to
the difficult text (Measy = 48.07min, Mdiff = 52.70min; t(27)
= -3.93, p = .001).
Compared to easy text, difficult text elicited longer
fixation durations (Measy = 202ms, Mdiff = 220ms; t(27) = 3.34, p = .003), a marginally higher number of fixations
(Measy = 6439, Mdiff = 6840; t(27) = -1.95, p = .063), but did
not result in an increased number of regressive eye
movements (t(27) = 0.19, p = .850).
Furthermore, scaling in fixations increased significantly
from easy text reading to difficult text reading (Measy = 0.55,
Mdiff = 0.58; t(27) = -2.86, p = .008). Similarly, scaling in
gaze step-size on slower time-scales increased significantly
from easy text reading to difficult text reading (Measy = 0.01,
Mdiff = 0.02; t(27) = 2.38, p = .025), but no effect was
observed in scaling on faster time scales (t(27) = 0.85, p =
423). Obviously, both scaling in fixations and scaling in
gaze step-size are sensitive to the reading of different text
difficulty levels.

Prediction of Reading Comprehension
All predictors were simultaneously entered into the
regression model, which accounted for 31.0% (adjusted R2 =
.207; F(7, 47) = 3.01, p = .011) of the variance in
comprehension scores. Inspection of variance inflation
suggested that multicollinearity between predictors was not
problematic (all VIF < 5; O’Brien, 2007).
Only the scaling exponents of fixations and scaling
exponents of the gaze steps on slower time scales turned out
to yield significant unique predictive power of
comprehension scores (see Table 2).
Table 2. Regression of comprehension scores onto
properties of eye movements during reading.
Predictor
Intercept
Fixation Duration
No. of Fixations
Regressions
Overall Duration
Scaling Fixations
Scaling Gaze Steps (Fast)
Scaling Gaze Steps (Slow)

β
.204
-.222
-.182
.177
-.289
.221
-.359

t
6.63
0.66
-0.37
-1.18
0.27
-2.11
1.36
-2.58

p
< .001
= .513
= .583
= .243
= .792
= .041
= .181
= .013

Discussion
The present findings on eye movements during natural text
reading extend and corroborate previous research that used
self-paced reading. First, they add to recent findings that
investigate the role of reading process components in
natural text reading and find that many of the aspects of
reading that seem to be important in reading of single
words, sentences, or short snippets of texts do not transfer to
reading of natural, connected texts (McNerney et al., 2011;
Wallot et al., 2013). In particular, the effects of text
difficulty on number of fixations and regressive eye

movements are greatly reduced when long, natural texts are
read compared to shorter texts (cf. Rayner et al., 2006).
Second, the present results extend findings on the relation
between reading process and comprehension: Again, when
natural texts are used, standard measures such as fixation
duration, number of eye movements, regressive eye
movements and overall reading speed do not substantially
predict reading comprehension (cf. Levasseur et al., 2008).
Both of these findings suggest that complex reading tasks
work differently from simple reading tasks. As has been
argued elsewhere (Wallot et al., 2014), the difference
between simple and complex reading tasks might lie in the
coordination of cognitive processes during reading, and that
one needs to find adequate measures of this coordination in
order to address questions such as how the reading process
in complex reading tasks reflects text comprehension.
Instead of asking how specific aspects of a text lead to
specific effects in reading behavior, one can ask a broader
question, which is to what extent does the text effect and
structure reading behavior (Wallot, 2014). One measure that
can address such questions is the degree of power-law
scaling (Van Orden et al., 2003) that can be observed in
time series of reading behavior, such as eye movements:
Power-law scaling in eye movements during reading imply
that the processes that drive eye movements during text
reading are not just a result of the local information
presented by the foveally fixated word, parafoveal and
short-term semantic priming, but are coordinated across
multiple time scales potentially spanning the whole text that
has been read up to that point.
Previous research on self-paced reading found that better
comprehension goes along with weaker power-law structure
in reading times (Wallot et al., 2014). Our results extend
those findings by showing that weaker power-law structure
in eye movements was also associated with better
comprehension. Even though the theoretical significance of
power-laws in reading is still not clear, shallower power-law
structure close to white noise might indicate a more highly
constrained reading process, which is driven primarily by
properties of the text and not by voluntary eye movements
(Kloos & Van Orden, 2010), which in turn seems to be an
indicator of high levels of reading skill (Wallot et al., 2014).
Moreover, changes in power-law scaling that relate to
reading comprehension resided mostly on slower time
scales, which fits with current theories of online
comprehension during reading that assume comprehension
processes to be slower than individual instances of word
reading, for example (Donald, 2007). However, the fact that
comprehension was reflected in eye movements by virtue of
scaling properties suggests that comprehension might not be
so much brought about by distinct cognitive components,
but by the coordination processes of the cognitive system
that integrate information across multiple time scales.

References
Abrams, R. A., Meyer, D. E., & Kornblum, S. (1989).
Speed and accuracy of saccadic eye-movements:

2587

Characteristics of impulse variability in the oculomotor
system. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 15, 529-543.
Aks, D. J., Zelinsky, G. J., & Sprott, J. C. (2002). Memory
across eye-movements: 1/f dynamic in visual search.
Nonlinear dynamics, psychology, and life sciences, 6, 125.
Araujo, C., Kowler, E., & Pavel, M. (2001). Eye movements
during visual search: The costs of choosing the optimal
path. Vision Research, 41, 3613-3625.
Brainard, D. H. (1997) The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Carpenter, P. A., Miyake, A., & Just, M. A. (1995).
Language comprehension: Sentence and discourse
processing. Annual review of psychology, 46, 91-120.
Coey, C. A., Wallot, S., Richardson, M. J., & Van Orden, G.
(2012). On the Structure of Measurement Noise in EyeMovements. Journal of Eye-Movement Research, 5, 1-10.
Donald, M. (2007). The slow process: A hypothetical
cognitive adaption for distributed cognitive networks.
Journal of Physiology – Paris, 101, 214-222.
Gough, P. B., & Tunmer, W. E. (1986). Decoding, reading,
and reading disability. Remedial and Special Education,
7, 6-10.
Lowen, S. B., Ozaki, T., Kaplan, E., Saleh, B. E. A., &
Teich, M. C. (2001). Fractal features of dark, maintained,
and driven neural discharges in the cat visual system.
Methods, 24, 377-394.
Kelty-Stephen, D. G., & Mirman, D. (2013). Gaze
fluctuations are not additively decomposable: Reply to
Bogartz and Staub. Cognition, 126, 128-134.
Kloos, H., & Van Orden, G. (2010). Voluntary behavior in
cognitive and motor tasks. Mind & Matter, 8, 19-43.
LeVasseur, V. M., Macaruso, P., & Shankweiler, D. (2008).
Promotion gains in reading fluency: a comparison of three
approaches. Reading and Writing, 21, 205-230.
McNamara, D. S., & Magliano, J. P. (2009). Towards a
comprehensive model of comprehension. In B. Ross
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (pp.
297-384). New York, NY: Academic Press.
McNerney, M. W., Goodwin, K. A. & Radvansky, G. A.
(2011). A Novel Study: A Situation Model Analysis of
Reading Times. Discourse Processes, 48, 453-474.
O’Brien, R. M. (2007). A caution regarding rules of thumb
for variance inflation factors. Quality & Quantity, 41,
673-690.
Peng, C.-K., Havlin, S., Stanley, H. E., & Goldberger, A. L.
(1995). Quantification of scaling exponents and crossover
phenomena in nonstationary heartbeat time-series. Chaos,
5, 82-87.
Rasinski, T. V. (2000). Commentary: Speed does matter in
reading. The Reading Teacher, 54, 146-151.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 372-422.
Rayner, K., Chace, K. H., Slattery, T. J., & Ashby, J.
(2006). Eye movements as reflections of comprehension

processes in reading. Scientific Studies of Reading, 10,
241-255.
Rayner, K., & Pollatsek, A. (1994). The psychology of
reading. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Reichle, E. D., Rayner, K., & Pollatsek, A. (2003). The EZ
Reader model of eye-movement control in reading:
Comparisons to other models. Behavioral and brain
sciences, 26, 445-476.
Rich, A. N., Kunar, M. A., Van Wert, M. J., Hidalgo-Sotelo,
B., Horowitz, T. S., & Wolfe, J. M. (2008). Why do we
miss rare targets? Exploring the boundaries of the lowprevalence effect. Journal of Vision, 8, 1-17.
Shelhamer, M., & Joiner, W. M. (2003). Saccades exhibit
abrupt transition between reactive and predictive,
predictive saccade sequences have long-term correlations.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 90, 2763-2769.
Stephen, D. G., & Anastas, J. (2011). Fractal fluctuations in
gaze speed visual search. Attention, Perception, and
Psychophysics, 73, 666-677.
Stephen, D. G., & Mirman, D. (2010). Interactions dominate
the dynamics of visual cognition. Cognition, 115, 154165.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T. (2003).
Self-organization of cognitive performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 331-350.
Wallot, S. (2011). The role of reading fluency, text difficulty
and prior knowledge in complex reading tasks. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Cincinnati.
Wallot, S. (2014). From ‘cracking the orthographic code’ to
‘playing with language’: Toward a usage-based
foundation of the reading process. Frontiers in
Psychology. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00891
Wallot, S., Coey, C. A., & Richardson, M. J. (2015).
Interdependence of saccadic and fixational fluctuations.
Ecological Psychology, 27, 68-86.
Wallot, S., Hollis, G., & van Rooij, M. (2013). Connected
Text Reading and Differences in Text Reading Fluency in
Adult
Readers.
Plos
One,
doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0071914
Wallot, S., & Kelty-Stephen, D. (2014). Constraints are the
solution, not the problem. Frontiers in Neuroscience, doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00324
Wallot, S., O’Brien, B. A., Haussmann, A., Kloos, A., &
Lyby, M. S. (2014). The role of reading time complexity
and reading speed in text comprehension. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, doi: 10.1037/xlm0000030
Wallot, S., & Van Orden, G. (2011). Toward a life-span
Metric of reading fluency. International Journal of
Bifurcation and Chaos, 21, 1173-1192.
Zwaan, R. A., Magliano, J. P., & Graesser, A. C. (1995)
Dimensions of situation model construction in narrative
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 21, 386-397.

2588

