Predicting Lexical Norms Using a Word Association Corpus
Hendrik Vankrunkelsven (hendrik.vankrunkelsven@student.kuleuven.be)
Steven Verheyen (steven.verheyen@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Simon De Deyne (simon.dedeyne@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Gert Storms (gert.storms@ppw.kuleuven.be)
Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Leuven
Tiensestraat 102, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Abstract

Semantic dimensions

Obtaining norm scores for subjective properties of words can
be quite cumbersome as it requires a considerable investment
proportional to the size of the word set. We present a method
to predict norm scores for large word sets from a word
association corpus. We use similarities between word pairs,
derived from this corpus, to construct a semantic space.
Starting from norm scores for a subset of the words, we
retrieve the direction in the space that optimally reflects the
norm data associated with the words. This direction is used to
orthogonally project all the other words in the semantic space
on, providing predictions of the words on the variable of
interest. In this study, we predict valence, arousal, dominance,
age of acquisition, and concreteness and show that the
predictions correlate strongly with the judgments of human
raters. Furthermore, we show that our predictions are superior
to those derived using other methods.
Keywords: Similarity; MDS; Valence; Arousal; Dominance;
Age of acquisition; Concreteness

Introduction
Lexical norm data are often asked for in psychological and
linguistic research. Word properties like valence, arousal,
dominance, concreteness, and age of acquisition (AoA), can
guide the selection of experimental materials for
manipulation or control of these crucial dimensions.
Research on priming, lexical decision, and L2 learning, for
example, often depend on the incorporation of these
variables, and others (e.g., De Groot & Keijzer, 2000;
Hinojosa, Carretié, Méndez-Bértolo, Míguez, & Pozo,
2009). Analysis of emotions also requires these norms in
certain lines of research (e.g., Fossati et al., 2003).
Obtaining norm data can be quite a challenge as they
generally require multiple human judgments for each of the
words in what are generally large sets of words. In practice,
this leads to a considerable investment of both the
researcher’s and participants’ time. The investment can be
alleviated, however, if reliable estimates of the ratings can
be obtained through different means. In this paper, we
propose and test a method for arriving at reliable proxies for
a number of basic semantic dimensions on the basis of
relatively small sets of words. Before describing the method
in more detail, we briefly discuss the semantic dimensions
we consider in our test of the approach.

Arguably the three most important affective ratings are
valence, dominance, and arousal, each of which is strongly
rooted in semantic space (Osgood, Suci, & Tannenbaum,
1957). Valence, that is, the evaluation of pleasantness, is the
affective variable most firmly present in semantic space
(Osgood et al., 1957). Dominance, also labeled as potency,
power, or control, is the second one. Arousal, an activity
determinant, is the third. In three different analyses, using
factor analysis, Osgood et. al. found that valence,
dominance, and arousal explained a considerable proportion
of the total variance of semantic meaning (valence 16% to
34%, dominance 7% to 8%, and arousal 5% to 6%).
Moreover, this finding has been shown to hold for semantic
spaces across cultures (Osgood, 1975).
Apart from the affective dimensions, we consider two
other variables that have been shown to affect word
processing and semantics: concreteness and age of
acquisition (AoA). These variables are arguably the most
essential non-affective variables based on subjective ratings
(Brysbaert, Stevens, De Deyne, Voorspoels, & Storms,
2014). Concreteness refers to how well a word can be
experienced by the senses. Easy perceivable words will lean
towards the concrete pole of this dimension and
unperceivable words will result in a rating towards the
abstract pole. Furthermore, concreteness has been shown to
be influential in memory and word processing, resulting in
the adoption of concreteness in Paivio’s dual-coding theory
(Paivio, 1971, 2013) and the semantic theory of Vigliocco,
Vinson, Lewis, and Garrett (2004).
AoA refers to the age at which a word is acquired during
the language acquisition process. AoA has been shown to be
an important variable in the organization of the mental
lexicon, explaining about 5% of the variance in lexical
decision times when other confounding variables such as
word frequency are partialled out (Kuperman, StadthagenGonzalez, & Brysbaert, 2012).

Extrapolating ratings for semantic dimensions
In light of the considerable investments required to arrive at
ratings for a semantic dimension, researchers have recently
attempted to predict lexical norm data from text corpora
(Bestgen & Vincze, 2012; Recchia & Louwerse, 2014). In
these studies, the co-occurrence of word pairs forms the
basis from which the predictions are derived. Bestgen and

2463

Vincze used the Touchstone Applied Science Associates
(TASA) corpus, which consists of high-school text on a
variety of academic topics. Recchia and Louwerse made use
of the Google Web 1 T 5-gram corpus consisting of text
from publicly accessible Web pages. These techniques
typically yield promising correlations with subjective
ratings, yet there is still room for improvement. For valence,
for example, Bestgen and Vincze report a correlation of .71
and Recchia and Louwerse report one of .82. In this article,
we present a similar method to extrapolate lexical norm data
from a smaller set of subjective ratings making use of a
large word association corpus instead of co-occurrence data.
Our method works as follows. First, a semantic space
containing the words of interest is constructed using
multidimensional scaling (MDS) with pairwise similarities
between these words as input. The word similarities are not
obtained from text corpora, but from a large-scale word
association corpus. When a set of words with known values
for a variable is included in the semantic space, it is possible
to identify a direction in the semantic space that reflects this
variable. This is done by property fitting (PROFIT) that is,
regressing the norm scores on the coordinates of the
corresponding words in the semantic space, allowing one to
retrieve the direction in the geometric space that optimally
matches the norm (Kruskal & Wish, 1978). This direction
essentially is a line in the semantic space and can be used to
project the rest of the words of interest on, providing an
estimate for this variable for each of the words in the space.
In this paper we test the quality of the described method
by comparing predicted norm scores with human data from
two large norm datasets. Furthermore, to evaluate the
robustness and cost-effectivity of the method, we vary the
size of the observed word samples on the basis of which the
norm scores are predicted for the remaining words. In the
next section, we provide more detail on the sources of data.

are the reliability coefficients we report here. The reliability
coefficients for valence, arousal, dominance, and age of
acquisition, from Moors et. al. (2013), are .99, .97, .96, and
.97, respectively. The reliability coefficients of the
concreteness ratings of Brysbaert et. al. (2014) for the five
lists of 6,000 different words ranged from .91 to .93.

Word Similarities
Similarities between word pairs were obtained using the
word association corpus reported in De Deyne, Navarro, and
Storms (2013).
The collection of word associations started in 2003 and
the most extensive version of the dataset is described in De
Deyne et al. (2013). We used associations for a set of
12,566 cue words to obtain pairwise similarities between
words. In line with our previous work, only responses that
were part of the set of cues were retained, which
transformed the cue x response matrix into a cue x cue
matrix (De Deyne et. al., 2013). Starting from this square
matrix with entries equal to the frequency with which the
column word is given as a response to the row cue word,
similarities were derived using the cosine measure (e.g.,
Landauer & Dumais, 1997) after applying a positive pointwise mutual information weighting scheme to avoid overweighting high-frequency edges between words (e.g., De
Deyne, Verheyen, & Storms, 2015). For the current study,
similarities from 3,788 Dutch words were derived, that is,
all the words that were both present in the word norms
obtained by Moors et al. (2013), 4,300 in total, and in the
word association corpus in the year 2012, that is 12,566
words. The resulting similarities were used as input for the
construction of the semantic space. From these 3,788 words
in the semantic space, 3,766 had an overlap with the
concreteness norm scores.

Semantic Space

Method
Lexical Norms
Norms for valence, arousal, dominance, and age of
acquisition for Dutch words were obtained from data
gathered by Moors et al. (2013). This dataset contains norms
for 4,300 Dutch words that were collected from 224
university students, using a 7-point Likert scale. Each
participant rated the entire set of words for one variable
resulting in a total of 32 raters per word for AoA and 64
raters per word for the other variables.
Norms for concreteness were taken from Brysbaert et. al.
(2014). This dataset has norm scores for approximately
30,000 Dutch words. Seventy-five university students rated
one of five lists of 6,000 words, so every word was rated 15
times.
The reliability of the ratings of these variables was
evaluated by applying the Spearman–Brown formula to the
split-half correlations. All reliability indices were calculated
on 10,000 different randomizations of the participants and
the means of the different outcomes of these randomizations

Nonmetric MDS (Kruskal & Wish, 1978) was employed to
configure the semantic space. This technique constructs a
multidimensional space where the resulting Euclidean
distance between word pairs is as close as possible,
inversely related, to the original similarities. Highly similar
words are thus located close together in the obtained
configuration and dissimilar words are further apart. We
used High-Throughput MDS (HiT-MDS; Strickert,
Teichmann, Sreenivasulu, & Seiffert, 2005) for its fast
processing, and we obtained configurations in 2 to 30
dimensions (seeing that the predictions reach their maxima
in 30 dimensions) to allow evaluation of an effect of
dimensionality.
The obtained semantic space can be expected to
encompass valence, arousal, and dominance, as Van
Rensbergen, Storms, and De Deyne (in press) have shown
that these variables strongly affect which concepts people
regard as related. For instance, when presented with a cueword of low arousal like ‘sleep’, people are more likely to
give an association like ‘quiet’, which is also low in
arousal/activity, than an association with high arousal like

2464

‘working’. Yet, it has not yet been established whether
concreteness and AoA are represented in the semantic
space.

Aspects of the stimulus words that did not guide the
participants in the word association task can, of course, not
be detected in the constructed semantic space, as they have
not determined the input similarities used for the MDS.
Hence, the R² when predicting variables that quantify these
aspects should be zero. The adjusted R²s of the five criterion
variables ranged from .52 to .82 (all p values < .001) in a
solution with 30 underlying dimensions, illustrating their
influence in the word association process, albeit some
variables seem to have less of an influence on the
association process than others and as a consequence, the
semantic space derived from these associations does not
fully capture these variables (e.g., AoA).

Predicting the Norms
To predict norm scores for the variables of interest, a
random subset of the words present in both the norm set and
the association norms was used to find the corresponding
direction in the semantic space that optimally predicts the
norms of this subset of words. This was done using PROFIT
where multiple linear regression is used with the norms in
question as criterion and the coordinates of the words in the
semantic space as predictors (Kruskal & Wish, 1978). The
remaining words can then be orthogonally projected on this
optimal direction and the resulting values serve as predicted
norms.
As a quality measure of the prediction, the correlation
between the predicted values and the corresponding human
ratings was calculated for all available words, excluding
those used to fit the optimal direction. For example, if 200
words were used to determine the optimal direction of the
variable in the semantic space, the remaining 3,588 words
(or 3,566 in the case of concreteness) served to calculate the
correlation. This cross-validation technique was repeated for
200 random word samples. We report the mean of the
correlation across these 200 random samples.
The sample size we primarily focus on is 200 words,
yielding a ratio of .0557 (i.e., 200/3588) for valence,
arousal, dominance, and AoA, and .0561 (i.e., 200/3566) for
concreteness, between the word sample and the set for
which scores were extrapolated. To gauge the effect of the
sample size on the quality of the prediction, we used sample
sizes of 50 to 500, with a step size of fifty.

Table 1: Adjusted coefficients of determination (R²) and
correlation coefficients (max r) for a 30 dimensional
solution. These values mark the theoretical maxima of what
this method can achieve.
# Dimensions
Valence
Arousal
Dominance
AoA
Concreteness

Results
Before looking at the results of the analysis, it is important
to appreciate that the theoretical maxima of the correlations
between the empirically gathered and the predicted norms
are not equal to 1.0, but have an upper limit that is not only
related to how well the semantic space captures the
predicted variables and the limitations of the method used
(MDS) to construct this semantic space, but also to how
reliable the human norms scores are. These maxima can be
calculated by running a multiple linear regression with all of
the data at hand. That is, by regressing all available norm
scores on the coordinates of the corresponding words
instead of using a sample of words. The root of R²
(coefficient of determination) of this regression analysis
defines this theoretical maximum, that is, the optimized
correlation of the optimal dimension and the human ratings
when all available data is used. Table 1 shows these maxima
(max r) and R²s for a 30 dimensional semantic space 1.
1

We show these coefficients for a 30 dimensional space because
this dimensionality provides good predictions as we will show
later. The coefficients are typically smaller in lower dimensional
spaces.

30
R²
.82
.63
.64
.52
.70

max r
.90
.79
.80
.72
.84

Evidently, the dimensionality of the semantic space and
the sample size employed in the prediction of the norm
scores have an impact on how well the predicted scores
correlate with the norm scores as well: the higher the chosen
dimensionality and the larger the sample size, the better the
prediction (see Figures 1 and 2).
Figure 1 depicts the mean correlations of the predictions
of 200 random samples of size 200 as a function of
dimensionality. The variability in the correlations over the
200 different samples is shown as 90% highest density
intervals (HDI) with vertical bars. The HDI’s for the
different variables indicate that the spread of these
correlations is quite small, thus making the predictions from
random samples fairly consistent.
As can be seen in Figure 1, for variables with an R² higher
than .60 (all except AoA), adding dimensions beyond 17
does not benefit the quality of the prediction substantially.
The prediction of AoA on the other hand does benefit from
adding more dimensions and does not seem to converge as
smoothly to its asymptote (The horizontal lines, next to
dimension 30, give the theoretical maxima the correlations
can reach for each variable. See Table 1).
In the rest of this paper we present results based on a
semantic space of 30 dimensions as the predictions are more
valid in higher dimensional spaces. When the quality of the
predictions cannot be assessed through comparison with
existing norm scores, we propose running MDS multiple
times using a different amount of dimensions (preferably
over 20) and then choosing the dimensionality where the

2465

adjusted R², from the linear regression used to determine a
direction in the semantic space, converges to a maximum.
However, when this R² is small, the variable under
consideration is not captured by the semantic space,
therefore, the predictions will not be trustworthy.

Figure 2: Mean correlations of the predictions of 200
random samples of size 50 to 500 with steps of 50 in a 30
dimensional space.
In Figure 2 the effect of sample size on the prediction is
illustrated for a semantic space with 30 dimensions. Clearly,
the sample size used to predict the norms can be relatively
small. Regardless of the norm variable that is predicted, the
quality of the prediction improves a lot when the sample
size increases from 50 to 100 words, but gains little beyond
sample sizes of 200, signifying the limited amount of norm
score data needed when employing this method.

Correlations

Figure 1: Mean correlations of the predictions of 200
random samples of size 200 as a function of dimensionality
for valence, concreteness, and dominance (a) and arousal
and AoA (b). The horizontal lines, next to dimension 30,
give the maxima the correlations can reach for each variable
in a 30 dimensional space. The vertical lines give the 90%
highest density intervals from the sampled distribution.

Table 2 lists the mean r between predicted scores and norm
scores of 200 random samples with sample size 200, the
means of the adjusted R²s (not of the full dataset but of the
200 random samples), and the standard deviations of these
adjusted R²s from the samples, for a 30 dimensional MDS
space, alongside predictions using text corpora from other
authors.
Valence clearly has the highest prediction quality. It has a
mean correlation of .89. Regardless of the method used for
predicting norm scores, the upper limit of this correlation is
confined to the reliability of the norm scores one is
correlating them with. For valence the split-half reliability
of the full dataset of Moors et al. (2013) is .99. The mean
prediction of arousal is .76. The split-half reliability for
arousal from the data of Moors et. al. is .97. Dominance
reaches a mean correlation of .77 using our method. Moors
et al. obtain a reliability of .96 for this variable. For AoA,
the obtained correlation is .67, while AoA obtained by
Moors et al. has a reliability of .97. Finally, concreteness
measured by Brysbaert et al. (2014) has a split-half
reliability of about .93 and a correlation of .81 is reported
here. In all cases, these predictions correlated more with

2466

human norms than comparable methods that use text
corpora (see conclusion).
Furthermore, instead of a semantic space with 3,788
words used for prediction in the aforementioned results, we
also used all the words both present in the concreteness
norm data and the association corpus (11,547 words) to
construct a 30 dimensional semantic space. The mean
correlation for concreteness using this space, using samples
of 200 words to predict the remaining 11,347 words, was
.80. This prediction is on par with the correlation of .81 we
obtained in predicting concreteness for 3566 words.
Table 2: Mean correlations (mean r) between the predictions
and human ratings based on 200 random samples of sample
size 200, the adjusted mean R²s (mean R²) used to obtain the
direction in the semantic space for the 200 samples, and the
standard deviation (SD R²) of these adjusted R²s using our
method. Correlations of predicted norms with the ANEW
norms and the Warriner norms from Bestgen and Vincze
(2012; B&V), and Recchia and Louwerse (2014; R&L).
(Val = Valence, Aro = Arousal, Dom = Dominance, AoA =
Age of acquisition, Con = Concreteness)
Method
Our
B&V
R&L

Measure
mean r
mean R²
SD R²
r ANEW
r ANEW
r Warr.

Val
.89
.81
.02
.71
.80
.82

Aro
.76
.63
.04
.56
.62
.64

Dom
.77
.64
.04
.60
.66
.72

AoA
.67
.51
.05
-

Con
.81
.70
.04
.79
-

Conclusion
We presented a method to estimate norm scores for
variables that are incorporated in a semantic space derived
from word association data. Using a relatively small set of
words for which human norm scores are known, we derived
an optimal direction in this space and by projecting the
remaining words in the space on this direction, we obtained
estimates.
The extrapolation method presented in this article is
shown to have a good validity for semantic variables that
are well embedded in the semantic space. The quality of the
estimates differs as a function of how well the semantic
space captures the predicted variables. For variables that are
well captured in the space, like valence, the obtained
predictions reach very high correlations (.89) with human
ratings, especially when considering that these predictions
are also attenuated by the not-perfect reliability of the norms
used to find the corresponding direction in space. For
variables like AoA, the predictions are clearly of lower
quality, but are stable from 21 dimensional solutions, and
from a sample size of 200, onwards.
Other techniques (see Table 2) to predict word norm
scores have been described in the literature (Bestgen &
Vincze, 2012; Recchia & Louwerse, 2014). These authors

extracted a semantic space from English text corpora and
predicted norms using the k nearest neighbors method.
Using different English norm datasets (Bradley & Lang,
1999; Warriner, Kuperman, & Brysbaert, 2013), Bestgen
and Vincze reported correlations of .71, .56, and .60, for
valence, arousal, and dominance, respectively, and Recchia
and Louwerse reported correlations of .80 and .82 for
valence, .62 and .64 for arousal, and .66 and .72 for
dominance. The method described in the current article
exceeds these alternative predictions, reaching correlations
of about .89, .76, and .77 for valence, arousal, and
dominance, respectively. Bestgen and Vincze also report
predictions for concreteness that are on par with the
predictions in this article: .79 (reported by Bestgen &
Vincze) vs. .81 (reported here).
The corpora Bestgen and Vincze (2012) and Recchia and
Louwerse (2014) used are different from the association
corpus we used here. First, they are English corpora and the
one we used is Dutch. A word association corpus in English
is available (http://www.smallworldofwords.com), with
currently over one million association responses. A
systematic comparison of the norm score predictions using
the English and the Dutch word association corpus is
planned. Second, the text corpora used by Bestgen and
Vincze, and Recchia and Louwerse are a lot bigger than the
corpus we used, making it possible to predict more words.
However, the Dutch association corpus already consists of
over 16,000 words and is constantly expanding, and similar
studies in different languages are currently on their way. It
will therefore be possible to predict norm scores for an even
larger set of stimulus words as the word association corpus
grows. Third, De Deyne, Verheyen, and Storms (2015)
demonstrated that making use of associations to capture
human judgments of similarity is superior to using text to
capture similarity. The information captured in association
corpora seems to consist of a wider array of semantic and
lexical properties, enabling the prediction of even very weak
semantic relations (De Deyne, Navarro, Perfors, & Storms,
2012). Fourth, unlike text corpora, it is straightforward to
use word association corpora to tailor norms to specific
populations (men vs. women, young vs. old) when required
(De Deyne & Storms, 2007). It suffices to employ only the
associations from members of these populations to build a
tailored semantic space. Aside from the different corpora
used, the human norm scores used to compare the predicted
norms with, were also different.
The reported estimates can still be improved upon. In this
paper we have shown how to extrapolate norm scores from
a small sample of human ratings. But, larger datasets of
human ratings are available and therefore it is possible to
include these ratings to find a more reliable direction in
semantic space used for prediction. Thus, when combining
the word-similarities of the desired set and these of a large
set of reliable norms, estimates can reach correlations that
are almost the same as the theoretical maxima. For instance,
when using 3588 of the 3788 words from Moors et. al.
(2013) to obtain this direction in semantic space, the

2467

remaining 200 words can be predicted with an accuracy of
.90, .79, .80, and .72 for valence, arousal, dominance, and
AoA, respectively. Predictions for concreteness using 3566
words from the 3766, reach a correlation of .832.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Bram Van Rensbergen and Wouter
Voorspoels, two fellow members of the ConCat (concepts
and categories) research lab at the University of Leuven, for
contributing valuable ideas. Steven Verheyen is a
postdoctoral fellow at the Research Foundation – Flanders.
This study was partly sponsored by Grant G.0436.13 of the
F.W.O.-Flanders, awarded to Gert Storms, and by an ARC
grant, DE140101749, awarded to Simon De Deyne.

References
Bestgen, Y., & Vincze, N. (2012). Checking and
bootstrapping lexical norms by means of word similarity
indexes. Behavior Research Methods, 44, 998–1006.
Bradley, M. M., & Lang P. J. (1999). Affective norms for
English words (ANEW): Stimuli, instruction manual and
affective ratings. (Tech. Rep. No. C-1). Gainesville, FL:
Center for Research in Psychophysiology, University of
Florida.
Brysbaert, M., Stevens, M., De Deyne, S., Voorspoels, W.,
& Storms, G. (2014). Norms of age of acquisition and
concreteness for 30,000 Dutch words. Acta Psychologica,
150, 80–84.
De Deyne, S., Navarro, D. J., Perfors, A., & Storms, G.
(2012). Strong structure in weak semantic similarity: A
graph based account. In Proceedings of the 34th annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 1464–
1469). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
De Deyne, S., & Navarro, D.J., & Storms, G. (2013). Better
explanations of lexical and semantic cognition using
networks derived from continued rather than single word
associations. Behavior Research Methods, 45, 480-498.
De Deyne, S., & Storms, G. (2007). Age-of-acquisition
differences in young and older adults affect latencies in
lexical decision and semantic categorization. Acta
Psychologica, 124, 274-295.
De Deyne, S., & Storms, G. (2008). Word associations:
Norms for 1,424 Dutch words in a continuous task.
Behavior Research Methods, 40, 198–205.
De Deyne, S., Verheyen, S., & Storms, G. (2015). The role
of corpus size and syntax in deriving lexico-semantic
representations for a wide range of concepts. Quarterly
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology.
doi:10.1080/17470218.2014.994098
De Groot, A. M. B., & Keijzer, R. (2000). What is hard to
learn is easy to forget: The roles of word concreteness,
cognate status, and word Frequency in foreign-language
vocabulary learning and forgetting. Language Learning,
50, 1–56.

Fossati, P., Hevenor, S. J., Graham, S. J., Grady, C.,
Keightley, M. L., Craik, F., & Mayberg, H. (2003). In
search of the emotional self: An fMRI study using
positive and negative emotional words. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 160, 1938–1945.
Hinojosa, J. A., Carretié, L., Méndez-Bértolo, C., Míguez,
A., & Pozo, M. A. (2009). Arousal contributions to
affective priming: Electrophysiological correlates.
Emotion, 9, 164–171.
Kruskal, J. B., & Wish, M. (1978). Multidimensional
scaling. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Kuperman, V., Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H., & Brysbaert, M.
(2012). Age-of-acquisition ratings for 30,000 English
words. Behavior Research Methods, 44, 978–990.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211–240.
Moors, A., De Houwer, J., Hermans, D., Wanmaker, S., van
Schie, K., Van Harmelen, A.-L., … Brysbaert, M. (2013).
Norms of valence, arousal, dominance, and age of
acquisition for 4,300 Dutch words. Behavior Research
Methods, 45, 169–177.
Osgood, C. E. (1975). Cross-cultural universals of affective
meaning. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1957).
The measurement of meaning. Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. Austin,
TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Paivio, A. (2013). Dual coding theory, word abstractness,
and emotion: A critical review of Kousta et al. (2011).
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 142, 282–
287.
Recchia, G., & Louwerse, M. M. (2014). Reproducing
affective norms with lexical co-occurrence statistics:
Predicting valence, arousal, and dominance. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68, 1–15.
Strickert, M., Teichmann, S., Sreenivasulu, N., & Seiffert,
U. (2005). High-throughput multi-dimensional scaling
(HiT-MDS) for cDNA-array expression data. In W. Duch,
J. Kacprzyk, E. Oja, & S. Zadrożny (Eds.), Artificial
neural networks: Biological Inspirations. Berlin
Heidelberg: Springer.
Van Rensbergen, B., Storms, G., & De Deyne, S. (in press).
Examining assortativity in the mental lexicon: Evidence
from word association data. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review. doi: 10.3758/s13423-015-0832-5
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Lewis, W., & Garrett, M. F.
(2004). Representing the meanings of object and action
words: The featural and unitary semantic space
hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 48, 422–488.
Warriner, A. B., Kuperman, V., & Brysbaert, M. (2013).
Norms of valence, arousal, and dominance for 13,915
English lemmas. Behavior Research Methods, 45, 1191–
1207.

2

These correlations are average correlations across 200 random
samples of the words to find the optimal direction.

2468

