Probing the mental number line:
A between-task analysis of spatial-numerical associations
Chi-Ngai Cheung (chi-ngai.cheung@emory.edu)
Vladislav Ayzenberg (vayzenb@emory.edu)
Rachel F. L. Diamond (rachel.diamond@emory.edu)
Sami Yousif (sryousi@emory.edu)
Stella F. Lourenco (stella.lourenco@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322 USA
responses for large numbers. In a variant of the magnitude
comparison task, other researchers demonstrated similar
left-to-right orientation when participants judged the
magnitude of a number presented in either the left or right
visual field (LVF/RVF) (Lavidor, Brinksman, & Göbel,
2004), which suggested that the left-small and right-large
mappings were not restricted to left/right manual responses
but that it might involve a global left-right reference frame
that cuts across modalities (e.g., hands, eyes, and so on;
Viarouge, Hubbard, & Dehaene, 2014).
Other findings have revealed that numbers bias spatial
attention in that individuals are faster at detecting a left
target when it is preceded by a centrally presented smaller
number and faster at detecting a right target when preceded
by a centrally presented larger number (Fischer et al., 2003).
Participants also show relatively more leftward bias on a
line bisection task (leftward bias being the norm for
bisecting plain/physical lines) when lines are made up of
smaller numbers compared to larger numbers (Calabria &
Rossetti, 2005). Conversely, spatial attention has also been
found to affect number processing. For instance, in a
random number generation task, participants generate more
smaller numbers when their heads are oriented leftward
compared to rightward (Loetscher, Schwarz, Schubiger, &
Brugger, 2008). Taken together, these effects provide
evidence for a relationship between numerical values and
spatial attention that is consistent with a left-to-right
oriented MNL among Westerners.
Nevertheless, not all researchers agree that the MNL
theory provides the best account of these SNAs. Proctor and
Cho (2006), for instance, suggested that SNAs in parity and
magnitude comparison tasks could be driven by polarity
correspondence (i.e., the compatibility between the polarity
[+/-] of stimulus and response categories, which facilitates
response selection). Although a plausible explanation for
classification tasks that involve binary categories, it remains
unclear how it would account more generally for SNAs
outside the context of binary category classification, such as
random number generation or number bisection. Others
such as van Dijck and Fias (2011) have argued that SNAs
are task-specific associations established within verbal
working memory (WM) rather than long-term associations
supported by a MNL.
Given the competing hypotheses, the current study was
designed to shed insight on the mechanism underlying

Abstract
The mental number line (MNL) hypothesis is that numbers
are mentally represented in spatial format, particularly in leftto-right orientation among Westerners. The MNL has
received support from various paradigms, but it remains
controversial as it is challenged by alternative models. Here
we used an individual differences approach to assess spatialnumerical associations (SNAs) across a variety of tasks. The
MNL hypothesis predicts correlations across SNA tasks
because they should tap a common MNL representation.
Control tasks were included to account for effects not specific
to SNAs. Correlation analyses revealed significant
associations across several SNA tasks, even when controlling
for general cognitive abilities or individual differences in
response time (RT). These findings provide unique support
for the MNL hypothesis, and begin to shed insight on
potential explanations that may contribute to variation in the
strength of the correlations among SNA tasks.
Keywords: Spatial-numerical associations, SNARC effect,
mental number line (MNL), polarity correspondence, working
memory, individual differences

Introduction
The associations between space and number have been
demonstrated by countless experiments across various
contexts (for a recent review, see Fischer & Shaki, 2014). A
dominant explanation for these spatial-numerical
associations (SNAs) is that numbers are mentally
represented in spatial format, also known as a ‘mental
number line’ (MNL, Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux, 1993).
The notion of a MNL, which in Westerners has been shown
to orient from left-to-right, implies a systematic, long-term
mapping between numbers and space. Zorzi, Priftis, and
Umilta (2002) further suggested a functional isomorphism
between the MNL and physical lines; that is, a common
metric underlying numerical and spatial representations.
Moreover, it has also been suggested that there is a common
system for deploying attention to both external space and
along the MNL (Fischer, Castel, Dodd, & Pratt, 2003).
The existence of a left-to-right MNL is supported by a
plethora of findings. In the classic work of Dehaene and
colleagues (1993) and related replications (Wood, Willmes,
Nuerk, & Fischer, 2008), participants made parity
judgments or magnitude comparisons of Arabic numerals by
pressing either left or right response keys. They produced
faster left responses for small numbers and faster right

357

SNAs using an individual differences approach. In this
study, a large sample of participants were given multiple
tasks, each known to elicit SNAs, so that we could assess
the between-task correlations. The MNL theory predicts
significant correlations, as the different tasks should tap a
common representation (MNL). It was less clear what to
predict from the verbal WM account, the main alternative
here. One possibility is that there would be no significant
correlations among these tasks because SNAs are task
specific, so different tasks should elicit different patterns of
SNAs. Another possibility is that these tasks would recruit
the same WM mechanism to create SNAs on-line, such that
correlations would be due to individual difference in WM
rather than a shared MNL. To directly address this
possibility, we measured participants’ WM capacity
alongside with their SNAs (see Method below).
A strength of the current design was the inclusion of
additional control tasks that allowed us to rule out effects
due to similar task demands or general cognitive abilities.
The control tasks were divided into two groups: ‘parallel’
and ‘general cognitive’ tasks. The parallel tasks were
included based on their similarity to specific SNA tasks (see
Method below). General cognitive tasks assessed a variety
of abilities, including working memory (WM), visual
processing speed and the acuity of non-symbolic number
representations (i.e., the approximate number system
[ANS]; see below). This particular collection of tasks
afforded us the opportunity of sorting out the relations
among SNA tasks using individual differences in
performance within and across tasks.

Design
All participants completed a collection of SNA tasks and
control tasks (see Table 1 for groupings according to
parallel and general cognitive tasks) in a 90-minute session.
All tasks were adapted from existing studies. Tasks were
arranged in a pseudo-random order with the following
constraints: 1) No more than two consecutive SNA tasks; 2)
Random number generation was administered either first or
last (counterbalanced across participants) because unlike the
other tasks, this task required experimenter administration;
3) Tasks that required a chinrest (lateralized comparison,
numerical Posner, classic Posner) were blocked and
randomized within block. The chinrest block either came
before or after the remaining computerized tasks
(counterbalanced across participants). Viewing distance for
chinrest tasks was 35 cm and for the others was
approximately 60 cm. Participants filled out questionnaires
related to handedness and language experience after
completing the full battery of SNA and control tasks.
Parity and magnitude comparison tasks (adapted from
Dehaene et al., 1993). Participants judged parity (odd/even)
or compared magnitude to a standard (< or > 5) for numbers
between 1 and 9 (5 excluded in the magnitude comparison
task) on each trial. Both tasks shared the same task
structure: each trial began with a central fixation cross (500
ms, H: 0.3°, W: 0.4°), which was replaced by an Arabic
numeral (H: 0.4°, W:  0.3°) that remained on screen until
one of two response keys (P/Q) was pressed (left/ right
index fingers, respectively). In the parity task, the keys
corresponded to odd/even; in magnitude comparison task,
the keys corresponded to < or > 5. Key mapping alternated
across four blocks (parity: 9 practice trials, 36 test trials;
magnitude comparison: 8 practice trials; 32 test trials) on
each task. Block order was counterbalanced across subjects.

Method
Participants
Results of the current paper are based on 125 Emory
undergraduates (76 females) who participated for course
credit, though data collection remains ongoing. Participants
were mostly right-handed (Edinburgh Handedness
Inventory, EHI: M= 69.11, range: -100 to 100; Oldfield,
1971). The majority of participants (93.6%) reported native
languages that are left-to-right oriented (English: 68.8%;
Chinese: 11.2%; Korean; 9.6%). Only one participant
reported the reverse orientation (Arabic). Seven participants
(5.6%) did not indicate their native language. Experimental
procedures were approved by the local ethics committee.

Lateralized comparison task (adapted from Lavidor et
al., 2004). Participants judged whether stimulus numbers
(31 to 79, 55 excluded) were smaller/larger than a standard
(55). Each trial started with a blank screen (1000 ms). Then,
a central fixation cross was shown for 500 ms, which was
followed by lateralized number presentation (100 ms, H:
0.7°, W:  1.1°, 4.2°from center). Participants responded by
pressing either the left or right mouse buttons with their
dominant hand. Magnitude (< or > 55) and location
(left/right) were fully crossed across the 96 test trials.

Table 1: List of SNA and Parallel tasks.
SNA tasks

Numerical Posner and classic Posner tasks. The
numerical Posner task is a SNA task adapted from Fischer et
al. (2003). The classic Posner task (Posner, 1980) was used
as the parallel control task. Both tasks required pressing the
spacebar as quickly as possible when a target (black dot,
size 1°, 3.1°from center) appearing to the left or right of the
central fixation is detected. Preceding the target was either a
centrally presented arrow (classic Posner task; arrow
pointing left or right; H: 0.7°, W: 2.7°) or a centrally
presented Arabic numeral (numerical Posner task; 1, 2, 8, or
9; H: 2.8°, W:  2°) that lasted 300 ms. The delay between

Parallel Tasks

Parity
Simon
Magnitude Comparison
Simon
Lateralized Comparison
Numerical Posner
Classic Posner
Number bisection
Line bisection
Random number generation
Random number generation
(spatial condition)
(baseline condition)
General cognitive tasks: Corsi, Verbal WM, Retro-Cued, Visual
Search, ANS acuity

358

Corsi task and Verbal WM task. Participants’ visuospatial
and verbal WM spans were measured respectively by these
two tasks. Stimulus parameters and procedure were the
same as those of van Dijck, Gevers, and Fias (2009). The
number of trials in both tasks was contingent on
participants’ performance, with a minimum number of 3
trials and a maximum number of 18 trials.

the number/arrow and target (SOA) was either 350, 450 or
600 ms. Each task included 120 trials, among them were
20% catch trials in which the target never appeared. The
remaining trials were evenly split between congruent and
incongruent trials. In the classic Posner task, congruent
trials involved arrows pointing to the target location; in the
incongruent trials, the arrow pointed to the opposite
direction. In the numerical Posner task, congruent trials
were ones in which smaller numbers (1, 2) preceded the left
target and larger numbers (8, 9) preceded the right target;
this pattern was reversed in the incongruent trials.

Visual search task (adapted from Hermer-Vazquez,
Spelke, & Katsnelson, 1999). This task was used as an
index of processing speed. On each trial, participants judged
whether the letter “L” was present in an array of “T”s by
pressing the “Yes” button (onscreen) as quickly as possible
if they detected the target or the “No” button if they did not.
Corrective feedback was provided after a response. Each
trial consisted of 24 letters ( 0.4° 0.4°, rotated in an angle
ranging from 0° to 315°), randomly positioned within a
display of fixed size (height: 13.5°, width: 18.2°, white
background with black border) that was located at the center
of the screen. The presence of the target letter “L” was
randomized on each trial.

Number and line bisection tasks. The number bisection
task is a SNA task adapted from Calabria and Rossetti
(2005). The line bisection task was used as the parallel
control task (Longo & Lourenco, 2006). In both tasks,
participants indicated the midpoints of horizontal lines
(length: 25.4 or 12.7 cm; thickness: 0.5 cm for number, 0.3
cm for plain lines). In the number bisection task, lines were
formed by a repetition of the same number word (“one”,
“two”, “three”, “eight”, “nine” or “ten”) or Arabic numerals
(1, 2, 3, 8 or 9), whereas standard lines were used in the line
bisection task. Each trial started with a central red square;
once participants pressed a spacebar, a line appeared either
on the left or right side of the computer screen (vertical
position randomized). Participants bisected the line with a
cursor, which could be adjusted with a mouse. Line length
(short/long), location (left/right of the screen) and number
(number bisection only) were fully crossed across 44 trials
on each task.

ANS acuity task. Stimulus parameters and procedure
followed those of Lourenco, Bonny, Fernandez, and Rao
(2012). In summary, participants were asked to judge which
of the two rapidly presented arrays was larger. The rapid
presentation (200 ms) prevents participants from counting
and thus requires that they rely on their approximate number
system (ANS) to make their judgments. This task measures
the precision of this cognitive system.
Retro-cued task (adapted from Griffin & Nobre, 2003).
This task was included as a measure of individual
differences in spatial attention. In this task, spatial attention
within working memory is manipulated by presenting
participants with a location cue after they are instructed to
memorize a visual image. In this task, each trial started with
a central fixation cross (200 ms, H: 0.3°, W: 0.3°), which
was followed by a variable ISI (400-600 ms). Then, an array
made up of four crosses (H: 0.7°, W: 0.8°, each) of different
colors appeared for 100 ms, which was followed by another
variable ISI (1500-2500 ms). Then, a retro-cue, which
appeared at the center of the screen (100 ms, H: 0.8°, W:
0.8°), either pointed to one of the four cross locations, or
none (neutral cue). Finally, after a variable ISI (500-1000
ms), a probe, which was either a cross from the array, or a
novel cross, was shown at the center of the screen.
Participants had to decide whether the probe was part of the
array shown earlier in the trial and responded with the left or
right mouse button. There were 104 trials (50% chance that
the probe was presented in the array). Among the “present”
trials, 32 were valid trials such that the cue pointed to the
correct location. Sixteen trials were invalid such that the cue
pointed to a wrong location. Four trials were neutral trials.
Among the “probe absent” trials, the cue pointed to one of
the corners on 48 trials (a neutral cue was shown on 4
trials).

Random number generation task (adapted from
Loetscher et al., 2008). Participants were asked to generate
random numbers ranging from 1 to 30 on pace with a
metronome (0.5 Hz) with their eyes closed. In the baseline
condition, participants generated 40 numbers facing straight
ahead. In the spatial condition, participants rotated their
heads in alternation from left to right, generating a number
each time they faced left and right (40 numbers on each
side). Participants’ scores in the spatial condition
contributed data to the set of SNA tasks, whereas the
baseline condition was treated as the parallel task.
Simon task. The Simon task (Simon, 1969) was included as
the parallel task for parity and magnitude comparison tasks
because researchers have suggested that these tasks share
structural similarity (e.g., Gevers, Caessens, & Fias, 2005).
In the Simon task, participants indicated the color of a
square (blue/red) by pressing one of two response keys
(P/Q, left and right hand respectively). Each task began with
a central fixation cross (500 ms, H: 0.3°, W: 0.4°), which
was replaced by a square (size 1°, 500 ms) shown either on
the left/right side of the screen (10.7°from center). Color
and location of the squares were fully crossed to create 4
practice and 24 test trials in each block. Key mapping (i.e.,
the mapping between P/Q keys and blue/red colors)
alternated between 2 blocks of trials (order counterbalanced
across participants).

359

Correlation analyses. The main analyses were the
correlations across the SNA tasks. To allow for these
analyses, we computed indices of the strength and direction
of individuals’ spatial-numerical associations for each task.
For parity and magnitude comparison tasks, this is
summarized by the slopes of dRT for each participant (Fias,
Brysbaert, Geypens, & D'Ydewalle, 1996). The sign of the
slope indicates the direction of the SNA (+ slope = right-toleft; - slope = left-to-right); the absolute value of the slope
indicates the strength of the SNA. On the lateralized
comparison task, the stimulus numbers were split into 6
equal groups (31-38, 39-46, 47-54, 56-63, 64-71, 72-79),
with the mean stimulus values and dRTs calculated for each
group. Each participant’s dRT slope was then computed by
regressing dRT on the mean of stimulus values. In the
numerical Posner task, we calculated the dRT for small (1,2)
and large (8,9) numbers. A negative sign was assigned to
the index if the small number group had the higher dRT
value and vice versa. The absolute value of the index (which
indicates the strength of the SNA) equals the absolute
difference between the dRTs of the small and large number
groups. (Note that although this task did not show the
expected effect at the group level, we included it in these
analyses because it was one of the tasks of interest.) In the
number bisection task, we first calculated the bisection bias
of each line (bias divided by line length, negative value =
left bias). Then, we calculated the correlation between the
stimulus numbers and its mean bisection bias (positive
correlation indicates left-to-right SNA). To equate the sign
with those from the other tasks, the index for number
bisection was obtained by multiplying the correlation by -1.
Because the analyses above revealed a significant type 
length  magnitude interaction on this task, we subsequently
examined correlations related to this task for each
combination of type (Arabic numerals vs. number words)
and length (short vs. long). One-sample t-tests revealed that
only the short lines made up of Arabic numerals showed a
significant correlation between stimulus values and percent
bias, M= -0.1, SD= 0.5, t(120)= 2.41, p = .02, d = 0.2. We
thus only included these trials in subsequent analyses. In the
random number generation task, we first counted how many
small numbers were generated when participants faced left
and right. The index of the strength and direction of the
SNAs was obtained by subtracting the left count from the
right count.
Using the above indices, we first conducted zero-order
correlations among the SNA tasks (see Table 2) to exam the
extent to which individual differences across these different
tasks overlapped with one another. We followed up on this
by partialling out different variables to rule out associations
shared with other (parallel or general cognitive) tasks.
Zero-order correlations were significant (all ps < .05, with
outliers that were specific to each correlation removed, see
Table 2 and Figure 1) across a collection of SNA tasks.
These significant correlations are consistent with the view
that different SNA tasks tap a common representation,
namely the MNL. However, it is possible that these

Results
Preliminary analyses. Data were trimmed in each task for
outliers (> 2.5 SDs). Data were also trimmed based on
accuracy; more specifically, in each task, participants with
accuracy under 60% were dropped from subsequent
analyses for the given task. The expected pattern of results
(measured at the group level) was observed for most SNA
tasks. Significant negative slopes of dRT (dRT = right RT –
left RT) were found for both parity and magnitude
comparison tasks (i.e., regressing dRT on stimulus numbers,
see Fias, Brysbaert, Geypens, & D'Ydewalle, 1996 for
details for this measure): parity, M= -5.52, SD= 11.2,
t(111)= -5.21, p < .001, d = 0.49; magnitude comparison,
M= -5.89, SD= 11.06, t(115)= -5.73, p < .001, d = 0.53. In
the lateralized comparison task, there was the expected
significant interaction between magnitude (> or < 55) and
side (LVF/RVF), F(1,111)= 5.72, p = .018, 𝜂2𝑝 = .05. In the
random number generation task (spatial condition),
significantly more small numbers (< 16) were generated
when participants faced left than when they faced right:
t(124)= 3.36, p = .001, d = 0.3. These results showed that
we replicated the expected effects for these SNA tasks. In
contrast, significant effects were not observed in the
numerical Posner task (magnitude  side: p = .66;
magnitude  side  SOA: p = .92) or number bisection task.
In the number bisection task, the main effect of magnitude
(small, large) was not significant, F(1, 121)= 2.22, p = .14.
However, there was a significant interaction between
number type (Arabic numerals, number words), line length
(short, long) and magnitude, F(1,121)= 4.11, p = .045, 𝜂2𝑝 =
.03, which we explore further below.
Analyses of participants’ performance on the parallel
tasks revealed the expected pattern of effects on all tasks
(measured at the group level). Congruent trials were
significantly faster than incongruent trials in both the
Simon, t(112)= -2.8, p = .006, d = .26, and classic Posner,
t(114)= -3.04, p = .003, d = .28, tasks. Participants showed a
significant leftward bias on the line bisection task, t(120)= 5.84, p < .001, d = 0.53, consistent with lateralized
visuospatial attention. On the baseline condition of the
random number generation task, there was significant bias,
such that participants generated significantly more small
numbers than the chance level (half of the trials), t(124)=
9.25, p < .001, d = 0.83, as has been previously found.
Analyses of the general cognitive tasks indicate that
participants’ performance was within the normal range for
most tasks. Corsi task: M= 5.64, SD= 1.03; Verbal WM: M=
5.73, SD= 1.17; visual search, MRT= 3848.95 ms, SD=
1163.03; ANS task, Maccuracy= 68.32%, SD= 9.1%. The
retro-cued task, however, failed to show the typical
facilitation effect when the RT of valid trials was compared
to that of invalid trials, Mdifference= -9.48 ms, SD= 111.81 ms,
t(89)= -.81, p = .42. We therefore excluded the retro-cued
task from further analyses.

360

correlations were driven by task specific features that do not
pertain specifically to these SNA tasks. To test this, we next
partialled out the effects of the parallel tasks. For example,
the parallel tasks of the numerical Posner and number
bisection tasks were the classic Posner and line bisection
tasks, respectively (see Table 1). All partial correlations
remained significant (all ps < .05; see Table 2 and Figure 1),
suggesting that the overlap among the SNA tasks were not
exclusively driven by superficial task similarities.
Another possibility is that the correlations were driven by
individual differences in general cognitive abilities rather
than SNAs per se. To test this possibility, we partialled out
the effects of all general cognitive tasks (i.e., Corsi, verbal
WM, visual search and ANS acuity). We were especially
interested in effects of WM given its pivotal role in the
verbal WM explanation of SNAs. All partial correlations
remained significant (all ps < .05), except for the one
between numerical Posner and lateralized comparison tasks
(Table 2 and Figure 1). This analysis suggests that
individual differences in general cognitive abilities cannot
fully account for the SNAs observed here.

Figure 1: Graphical summary of correlations. Numerical
values indicate significant zero-order correlations. Solid
lines indicate significant effects across all partial correlation
analyses. Dotted lines indicate an insignificant effect in at
least one partial correlation.

Discussion
The MNL hypothesis has received support from a variety
of paradigms that demonstrate small-left and large-right
SNAs in Westerners. However, the extent to which these
paradigms tap a common construct remains controversial
given one especially viable alternative for SNAs (i.e., verbal
WM explanation). The current study addressed this issue by
examining individual differences across several SNA tasks.
Moreover, we included a collection of control measures that
allowed us to account for superficial task similarities, as
well as general cognitive abilities, including individual
differences in WM capacity.
As summarized in Figure 1, there was a collection of
significant correlations among SNA tasks, even when
partialling out effects of performance on the parallel tasks,
general cognitive tasks, or participants’ RTs. It is unclear
how task-specific WM effects might explain the shared
individual differences across SNA tasks. The WM
alternative to the MNL theory (van Dijck & Fias, 2011)
suggests that SNAs are constructed on-line when all the
stimuli of a task are stored in verbal WM as a task set.
According to this proposal, the rank of items in verbal WM
is represented spatially, so that earlier ranks are associated
with the left and vice versa. Given the important role of
verbal WM in this hypothesis, it is reasonable to expect
controlling for verbal WM capacity may have had
detrimental effects on the correlations among SNAs. This
was not the case, however. With only one exception, all the
SNA tasks remained significant after verbal WM capacity
was partialled out even when controlling for other cognitive
abilities.
Another important issue related to this explanation
concerns with the type of WM involved in SNAs. Though
verbal WM explanation can account for SNA in parity
judgment and numerical Posner tasks (van Dijck,
Abrahamse, Acar, Ketels, & Fias, 2014; van Dijck & Fias,
2011), it remains unclear how this proposal can account for
SNAs in other tasks. Specifically, it has been shown that
loading verbal WM can remove the spatial-numerical
association in parity judgment but not magnitude
comparison tasks (van Dijck et al., 2009), which suggests
that the verbal WM account likely does not apply to the
magnitude comparison task. Nevertheless, we found a
significant correlation between parity judgment and
magnitude comparisons, suggesting that verbal WM alone is

Table 2: Zero-order and Partial Correlations.
Controls†
Zero
Parallel Gen Cog
RT
Parity
Mag Comp‡
.25*
.26*
.24*
.25*
Num Posner
.27*
.21*
.33*
.31*
Lat Comp‡
.22*
.21*
.23*
.11
Random Num
-.07
-.15
-.04
-.05
Num bisection
-.1
-.12
-.09
-.08
Mag Comp
Num Posner
.13
.12
.11
.1
Lat Comp.
.26*
.27*
.3*
.22*
Random Num
.14
.09
.14
.16
Num bisection
.24*
.27*
.29*
.23*
Num Posner
Lat Comp
.2*
.23*
.11
.18
Random Num
.13
.12
.15
.13
Num bisection
-.04
-.03
-.05
-.04
Lat Comp
Random Num
.26*
.26*
.32*
.23*
Num bisection
.27*
.25*
.33*
.28*
Random Num Num bisection
.03
.05
.04
*p < .05; †Controls: Zero = zero order correlations; Parallel: parallel tasks
partialled out; Gen Cog: general cognitive tasks partialled out; RT: RT
partialled out. ‡Mag Comp = magnitude comparison task; Lat Comp =
lateralized comparison task.

Yet another possibility is that the correlations between
SNA tasks may be driven by individual differences in RT
shared across tasks. Though this issue may be addressed by
including a task designed to asses processing speed (visual
search), we nevertheless included an additional analysis that
partialled out RT from all the correlations (except for
number bisection and random number generation tasks, in
which RT was not a valid measure for processing speed
because participants were not required to respond as quickly
as possible). All partial correlations remained significant (all
ps < .05) except for two correlations involving the
lateralized comparison task (see Table 2 and Figure 1). This
analysis suggests that although RT can account for some
variance in the associations between particular tasks, it does
not fully account for the observed SNAs.

361

not responsible for the associations between SNAs in these
two tasks.
Other than challenging WM’s role as a common
mechanism behind SNAs, the current findings also call for a
fine-tuning of the MNL theory so as to explain the potential
differences in the correlations among SNA tasks. One
possibility is that different SNA tasks may be supported by
different spatial frames of reference (Viarouge et al., 2014).
According to this view, the meanings of ‘left’ and ‘right’ are
derived from the reference frame that is activated within a
specific context. There are at least three types of reference
frames that may contribute to SNAs: 1) a global left-right
oriented reference frame; 2) reference frames based on body
parts, e.g., hand- or head-based frames; and 3) reference
frames based on objects. Different spatial reference frames
may be activated in different contexts based on factors such
as stimulus attributes, or response requirements (e.g.,
bimanual or unimanual responses). Viarouge and colleagues
argued that the parity task is based on a global reference
frame, whereas other tasks may be more strongly associated
with other references frames. The implication of this is that
although the MNL refers to the spatial mapping of number,
the spatial reference frames implicated in these
representations may be task-specific, which could affect the
strength of the correlations across SNA tasks.
In summary, the current study demonstrated significant
correlations across SNA tasks, though differences in the
strength of these correlations may prove critical for
understanding the nature of these effects. An important area
for future research will be to tease apart the factors, such as
different spatial frames of reference, that may contribute to
the MNL.

Griffin, I. C., & Nobre, A. C. (2003). Orienting Attention to
Locations in Internal Representations. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(8), 1176-1194.
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Spelke, E. S., & Katsnelson, A. S.
(1999). Sources of Flexibility in Human Cognition: DualTask Studies of Space and Language. Cognitive
Psychology, 39(1), 3-36.
Lavidor, M., Brinksman, V., & Göbel, S. M. (2004).
Hemispheric asymmetry and the mental number line:
comparison of double-digit numbers. Neuropsychologia,
42(14), 1927-1933.
Loetscher, T., Schwarz, U., Schubiger, M., & Brugger, P.
(2008). Head turns bias the brain's internal random
generator. Curr Biol, 18(2), R60-62.
Longo, M. R., & Lourenco, S. F. (2006). On the nature of
near space: Effects of tool use and the transition to far
space. Neuropsychologia, 44(6), 977-981.
Lourenco, S. F., Bonny, J. W., Fernandez, E. P., & Rao, S.
(2012). Nonsymbolic number and cumulative area
representations contribute shared and unique variance to
symbolic math competence. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: The Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9(1), 97-113.
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32(1), 3-25.
Proctor, R. W., & Cho, Y. S. (2006). Polarity
correspondence: A general principle for performance of
speeded binary classification tasks. Psychological
Bulletin, 132(3), 416-442.
Simon, J. R. (1969). Reactions toward the source of
stimulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81(1),
174-176.
van Dijck, J. P., Abrahamse, E. L., Acar, F., Ketels, B., &
Fias, W. (2014). A working memory account of the
interaction between numbers and spatial attention. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67(8),
1500-1513.
van Dijck, J. P., & Fias, W. (2011). A working memory
account for spatial–numerical associations. Cognition,
119(1), 114-119.
van Dijck, J. P., Gevers, W., & Fias, W. (2009). Numbers
are associated with different types of spatial information
depending on the task. Cognition, 113(2), 248-253.
Viarouge, A., Hubbard, E. M., & Dehaene, S. (2014). The
organization of spatial reference frames involved in the
SNARC effect. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 67(8), 1484-1499.
Wood, G., Willmes, K., Nuerk, H.-C., & Fischer, M. H.
(2008). On the cognitive link between space and number:
A meta-analysis of the SNARC effect. Psychology
Science, 50(4), 489-525.
Zorzi, M., Priftis, K., & Umilta, C. (2002). Brain damage:
Neglect disrupts the mental number line. Nature,
417(6885), 138-139.

References
Calabria, M., & Rossetti, Y. (2005). Interference between
number processing and line bisection: a methodology.
Neuropsychologia, 43(5), 779-783.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122(3), 371-396.
Fias, W., Brysbaert, M., Geypens, F., & D'Ydewalle, G.
(1996). The Importance of Magnitude Information in
Numerical Processing: Evidence from the SNARC Effect.
Mathematical Cognition, 2(1), 95.
Fischer, M. H., Castel, A. D., Dodd, M. D., & Pratt, J.
(2003). Perceiving numbers causes spatial shifts of
attention. Nat Neurosci, 6(6), 555-556.
Fischer, M. H., & Shaki, S. (2014). Spatial associations in
numerical cognition—From single digits to arithmetic.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
67(8), 1461-1483.
Gevers, W., Caessens, B., & Fias, W. (2005). Towards a
common processing architecture underlying Simon and
SNARC effects. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 17(5), 659-673.

362

