Processing Overt and Null Subject Pronouns in Italian: a Cognitive Model
Margreet Vogelzang (margreet.vogelzang@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, University of Groningen
P.O. Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, the Netherlands

Petra Hendriks (p.hendriks@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, University of Groningen
P.O. Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, the Netherlands

Hedderik van Rijn (hedderik@van-rijn.org)
Departments of Experimental Psychology & Psychometrics and Statistics, University of Groningen
Grote Kruisstraat 2/1, 9712 TS, the Netherlands
Abstract
In this paper, we present a cognitive model that simulates the
processing of subject pronouns in Italian. The model is
implemented in the cognitive architecture ACT-R and uses
hierarchically ranked constraints to select the most likely
referent of a pronoun. When this model is combined with a
measure of accessibility in discourse and a processing time
limit imposed by the speed of natural language production, the
model accounts for novel empirical data of the interpretation
of null as well as overt subject pronouns in Italian. The model
generates concrete predictions on the basis of variations in
cognitive capacities, which can be tested in subsequent
experiments.
Keywords: pronoun interpretation; cognitive modeling; null
subjects; constraint-based modeling

Introduction
Anaphoric pronouns such as he and she are commonly used
to refer to entities that were previously mentioned in the
discourse. Such anaphoric expressions can range from
multiple-word full noun phrases (NPs) to anaphoric
pronouns without an overt form (null subjects). Anaphoric
pronouns are potentially ambiguous and have to be resolved
by the listener in order to be interpreted correctly.
Italian, like Spanish, is a null subject language. In null
subject languages, a subject pronoun can be expressed
overtly (e.g., "he runs"), or it can be omitted (e.g., "runs"),
resulting in a null subject. Compared to non-null subject
languages such as English, Italian thus has an additional
subject form. The availability of this additional subject form
may influence the processing of an overt pronoun in these
languages. When processing a sentence, the form of the
subject provides information about what the intended
referent of the subject is. For example, short forms tend to
refer to referents that are highly salient in the discourse,
whereas longer forms tend to refer to less salient referents.
Since Italian allows for two different types of pronominal
form in subject position, the use of one pronoun type over
the other may inform a listener about the intended referent.
Indeed, Carminati (2002) has found that null subjects
generally refer to the discourse topic and overt subject
pronouns generally refer to a non-topical antecedent.

However, speakers are not always consistent in their
interpretation of null and overt pronouns, and show a
substantial amount of variation.
A satisfactory explanation for this variation in the
interpretation of null and overt subject pronouns is still
lacking, but interpretations have been shown to vary on the
basis of several discourse factors, such as pragmatic
plausibility (Carminati, 2002), implicit causality of the verb
(Fedele & Kaiser, 2014), and recency of competitor
antecedents (Sorace & Filiaci, 2006). So, the interpretation
of Italian subject pronouns is influenced by discourse
factors, but how these discourse factors interact and in what
way they influence processing is not clear yet.
Most of the studies mentioned above investigated the
effects of a single discourse factor on pronoun
interpretation. In this study, we aim to provide an account of
the interaction between different factors in pronoun
processing. In addition, we wish to account for the observed
variation in the interpretation of overt and null pronouns in
Italian. We will do so through a combination of
experimental investigation and cognitive modeling. In a
cognitive model, predictions and assumptions about which
factors influence pronoun processing are implemented
computationally. This allows for the explicit testing of
hypotheses and for the development of predictions that can
be tested in future experiments.
In this paper, we present a cognitive model of the
processing and interpretation of subject pronouns in Italian.
The model builds on the earlier work by Hendriks, Van Rijn
and Valkenier (2007) and Van Rij, Van Rijn and Hendriks,
(2010), and is implemented in the cognitive architecture
ACT-R (Anderson, 2007). The model uses linguistically
motivated constraints to select the most likely referent of a
pronoun. Different sources of variation in the interpretation
of null as well as overt subject pronouns in Italian will be
investigated using the model. The model is validated based
on empirical data, which we will first discuss.

Experimental data
With a referent selection task, we examined how native
Italian adults (n=40) interpret anaphoric expressions in

2499

discourse. In a lab-based setting, participants were presented
with 48 short auditory stories of three clauses each. The
final clause of each story contained one of three anaphoric
subject forms: A full NP such as the dog as an unambiguous
baseline condition, a null subject, and the overt subject
pronouns lui (‘he’) or lei (‘she’). Consider the following
sample story:
1. Il cane va a fare un viaggio in Germania.
The dog is going on a trip to Germany.
2. Ieri sera il cane ha invitato il gatto a viaggiare insieme,
Last night the dog has invited the cat to travel together,
3. mentre Ø/lui/il cane si lavava prima della partenza.
while Ø/he/the dog washed himself before the departure.

A constraint-based approach

100
75
50
25
0

Topic continuation (in %)

Participants’ interpretations of the anaphoric subject in the
final sentence of the story were determined on the basis of
referent selection questions such as ‘Who washed himself?’.
Importantly, each story featured two characters that
participants could select as the referent of the encountered
anaphor. The first character, the dog, is the sentential subject
in the first two sentences, is the first-mentioned character,
and holds the same grammatical role as the anaphoric
subject form in the final sentence. Therefore, this character
is the most prominent character in the discourse and the
discourse topic. The second character in the story, the cat, is
introduced in the second clause of the story as a direct or
indirect object, and is therefore less prominent than the dog
(Ariel, 1990). This second character will be referred to as
the non-topical antecedent.

99

86

referent. Specifically, they were interpreted as referring to
the topical referent in 39% of the cases, and to the nontopical referent in 61% of the cases.
Since full NPs were unambiguous in the experiment and
were nearly always interpreted correctly, we will focus on
pronouns in the cognitive model. Thus, the model will
simulate the processing and interpretation of null pronouns
and overt pronouns in subject position.

39

NP null overt
Figure 1: Experimental data on the interpretations of full
NPs, null pronouns, and overt pronouns in subject position
in Italian.
The results of the experiment are plotted in Figure 1. We
coded the results as the percentage of topic continuations,
which is the percentage of answers in which the discourse
topic was selected as the referent of the subject. The
baseline condition with a full NP was answered correctly as
referring to the topic in 99% of the cases. This is not
surprising, as the NPs unambiguously referred to the topic
(e.g., the dog in the sample story). Null subjects were often,
but not always, interpreted as referring to the topic (86% of
the cases). Overt subject pronouns were not interpreted
consistently as referring to either the topic or the non-topical

A promising approach to study the interaction of various
factors in pronoun interpretation is a constraint-based
approach. The constraint-based linguistic framework
Optimality Theory (OT; Prince & Smolensky (2004), see for
earlier models based on this approach Hendriks et al. (2007)
Misker & Anderson (2003), and Van Rij et al., (2010))
accounts for the interaction between linguistic factors in
production and interpretation through its mechanism of
optimization over potential forms or meanings. In addition,
OT is able to account for speaker-listener coordination in
language use by bidirectional optimization (Blutner, 2000),
which can be seen as a formalization of the process of
perspective-taking (Van Rij, Van Rijn, & Hendriks, 2013).
In OT, the grammar consists of a set of hierarchically
ranked constraints, with each constraint being either violated
or not. In production, an input meaning is mapped onto
potential forms for expressing that meaning. On the basis of
the constraints, from the set of potential forms the optimal
output form is determined that satisfies the constraints of the
grammar best. Likewise, in interpretation the optimal output
meaning for a given input form is the meaning that satisfies
the constraints best. In the case of pronoun interpretation, a
listener encountering a pronoun will generate potential
interpretations for this pronoun. By applying constraints on
pronoun interpretation, the listener will be able to determine
the optimal interpretation of the pronoun. Crucially,
constraints in OT may conflict. In case of a conflict, the
higher-ranked constraint has priority over the lower-ranked
constraint.
Observing that English-speaking children’s production of
object pronouns seems to be ahead of their interpretation of
the same pronouns, Hendriks and Spenader (2005/2006)
argue that mapping the input form onto the optimal meaning
by uni-directional optimization does not suffice for the
correct interpretation of object pronouns. Rather, they argue
that listeners must also consider the perspective of the
speaker. In OT, this process of perspective-taking can be
modeled as bi-directional optimization. Bi-directional
optimization is thus conceptually related to Gricean
reasoning, according to which language users are
cooperative and assume the other to be cooperative as well
(Grice, 1975). In a bi-directional approach to pronoun
interpretation,
listeners
start
with
uni-directional
optimization from their own perspective, determining the
optimal interpretation for the encountered pronoun. In some
cases, however, the constraints still allow for several
meanings. In these cases a second, bi-directional

2500

optimization step is necessary. In this step, the listener
randomly selects one of the potential meanings and then
takes the perspective of the speaker in order to determine if
a speaker would indeed have used the encountered pronoun
for the selected meaning. If the optimal form from the
speaker’s perspective is identical to the encountered form,
the selected meaning is bi-directionally optimal. If, on the
other hand, the optimal form from the speaker’s perspective
is different from the encountered form, the selected meaning
is discarded and another meaning is selected.
A number of models have successfully implemented this
constraint-based bi-directional approach to simulate, for
example, the interpretation of subject pronouns in discourse
(Van Rij et al., 2013) and the acquisition of object pronouns
and reflexives (Hendriks, Van Rijn, & Valkenier, 2007; Van
Rij et al., 2010).

A cognitive model of subject pronoun
processing in Italian
We present a model of Italian subject pronoun processing1
implemented in the cognitive architecture ACT-R
(Anderson, 2007). This architecture is a useful tool to model
and explain human behavior and cognition. It increases the
psychological plausibility of models built in this framework
as it is constructed to reflect assumptions about human
cognition. Because it is a cognitive architecture, ACT-R
allows for the investigation of specific cognitive capacities.
On the basis of individual and situation-dependent variations
in cognitive capacities, the model can generate predictions
about performance in other tasks and by other populations.
The presented model is adapted from the object pronoun
resolution model of Van Rij et al. (2010). Importantly, the
underlying mechanisms of the current model are identical to
the constraint-based approach and perspective-taking
mechanism of Van Rij et al. (2010). Moreover, all
constraints used in the model are based on previous
research.
The task of the model is to determine the referent of a

pronoun presented to the model. The model uses the
following, hierarchically ordered, linguistic constraints:
[1] Null subjects refer to the topic
[2] Avoid overt pronouns
The first constraint restricts the use and interpretation of null
subjects, stating that they must refer to the current discourse
topic (adapted from Van Rij et al., 2013). No comparable
constraint is used for overt pronouns, as we will assume that
their interpretation is derived from the interpretation of null
pronouns (see below). The second constraint is adopted
from Hendriks and Spenader (2005/2006) and Van Rij et al.
(2010) and is only relevant in production, when taking the
perspective of the speaker. This constraint states that overt
pronouns should be avoided. The constraint is based on
referential economy principles (Burzio, 1998), and indicates
that a speaker, when given the choice, would rather use a
null subject than an overt subject pronoun, because a null
subject is more economical to produce.
The processing of pronouns proceeds in four steps in the
model, the last three of which are shown in Figure 2:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Determining the discourse topic
Interpretation (uni-directional optimization)
Perspective-taking (bi-directional optimization)
Evaluation

Having heard the first two clauses of a story, the listener has
already encountered the two different characters. To
simplify the model, we did not model the processing of the
first two clauses of the story. Rather, the model starts with
two referents being available in memory, each with a set
activation level. The activation of a character in memory
represents the accessibility or saliency of that character in
the discourse (Ariel, 1990; Givón, 1983). When determining
the discourse topic, the character with the highest activation
in memory is retrieved. This will generally be the topic the

Figure 2: After the discourse topic is determined (a, not shown), the processing steps are shown of (b) interpreting the pronoun
(uni-directional optimization), (c) perspective-taking (bi-directional optimization), and (d) evaluating the output by comparing
the optimal output form in (c) with the input form in (b). Null subjects are interpreted correctly as referring to the topic already
after interpretation step (b), whereas overt subject pronouns are still ambiguous at this point. To interpret overt subject
pronouns, the perspective-taking step in (c) is therefore required in order to arrive at the correct interpretation: reference to a
non-topic rather than the topic. In the diagram, the possible candidate forms or meanings are shown in boxes. A grey box
indicates that the candidate violates the current constraint, and therefore it is not considered as an optimal candidate further.
1

The model code can be found at
let.webhosting.rug.nl/~vogelzang/experiments.html

2501

dog in the sample story, since this character occurred more
often than the other character and was also the sentential
subject. However, when a character is retrieved from
memory its activation is mediated by noise (see Anderson
(2007) for more details and formulas), and so errors can
occur. Specifically, the model retrieves the correct discourse
topic about 90% of the time, and identifies the non-topical
referent as the discourse topic about 10% of the time.
Once the discourse topic has been determined, the model
will start with interpreting the pronoun from the perspective
of the listener (corresponding to step b in Figure 2). Either a
null pronoun or an overt pronoun has been encountered and
needs to be interpreted. In order to do this, both possible
interpretations of the pronoun (in the model: the topic
referent and the non-topic referent) are retrieved as possible
meanings. These meanings are evaluated on the basis of the
constraints listed above. If the input is a null subject,
constraint [1] requires a null subject to refer to the topical
antecedent, and thus the topic is selected as the optimal
meaning. When a meaning has been selected, the model
continues with the bi-directional optimization step in the
model. Alternatively, if the input is an overt pronoun, the
first constraint does not restrict its interpretation. In that
case, the second constraint is used. This constraint, ‘Avoid
overt pronouns’, does not distinguish between potential
meanings for an overt pronoun. As a consequence, the overt
pronoun remains ambiguous between reference to the topic
and reference to a non-topical referent. The model will now
randomly select one of these two meanings and continue
with the next step of the resolution process.
In the next step of the model (step c in Figure 2), the
model takes the perspective of the speaker. The optimal
meaning of the previous step is the input in this step. Now,
the model will determine the optimal form for this input
meaning. In other words, the model determines whether the
meaning selected by the listener would indeed be referred to
by a speaker with the form encountered. The same
constraints are used as in the first step and thus the first
constraint to be retrieved is again constraint [1]. If the input
is a topic, then this constraint does not restrict the use of a
null or overt subject pronoun. In that case, constraint [2] is
retrieved. This constraint states that a speaker prefers the use
of a null pronoun to an overt pronoun. Thus, the optimal
form to refer to the topic is a null pronoun. Alternatively, if
the input is a non-topic, the first constraint disallows the use
of a null pronoun. In that case, the optimal form for referring
to a non-topic is an overt pronoun.
So far, the uni-directional optimization step of pronoun
interpretation provided the model with the optimal meaning
for the input, and the bi-directional optimization step of
pronoun production provided the model with the optimal
form for the selected meaning. In the final step of the model
(step d in Figure 2), the optimal form is compared to the
original input. If the evaluation shows that the optimal form
is equal to the original input, the model assumes that the
selected optimal meaning is indeed the correct one. This is
the case for null pronouns, where the optimal meaning is the

topic and the optimal form is again a null pronoun. The
model will then yield the discourse topic as the output. Note
that which referent is the discourse topic is not determined
by the processes of uni-directional and bi-directional
optimization, but is determined in the first step. If, on the
other hand, the evaluation shows that the optimal form is not
equal to the original input, the selected meaning is revised.
In the case of an overt subject pronoun, the optimal
meaning was selected randomly after the uni-directional
optimization step. If a non-topic was selected, this would be
the correct choice, as the optimal form for expressing a nontopic is an overt subject pronoun. On the other hand, if a
topic is selected, the bi-directional optimization step will
result in a null subject as the optimal form for referring to a
topical referent. Since the original input was an overt
pronoun, the evaluation will show that the original input
differs from the optimal form. When this happens, the
optimal meaning of the pronoun must be revised from the
referent that is the discourse topic to the non-topical
referent. After this final step has been completed, the model
will yield as its output the referent that is selected as the
optimal meaning in this final step.
If the model would have unlimited time and resources, it
would interpret a null pronoun as referring to the discourse
topic, and an overt pronoun as referring to the non-topical
referent. However, due to the speed of natural language
production the model only has limited processing time, and
therefore errors can occur (processing speed limit based on
Van Rij et al., 2010). If the model does not have sufficient
time to run all four processing steps within the available
time, it will select the optimal meaning at that point in the
process. If no optimal meaning has been found so far, the
model will guess the answer. So if the model only had time
to complete the uni-directional optimization step but not the
bi-directional optimization step, the optimal meaning
selected for a null pronoun will be correct, whereas the
optimal meaning for an overt pronoun is incorrect roughly
half of the time due to the model’s random selection of a
meaning at the end of the uni-directional step.

Results of the model
The model was run for 40 simulations, simulating 40
participants. No explicit individual differences were
modeled, but small differences can occur between
simulations. In each simulation, the model was presented
with 1000 items (half presenting a null pronoun and half
presenting an overt pronoun), of which the first 968 were
used as practice items and the last 32 were used for the test
phase. The practice items were included to provide the
model with prior experience resolving pronouns.
By means of this experience, the model develops to
perform the resolution process more efficiently. The
processing speed of a simulated participant can increase
through experience because of two mechanisms: activation
and production compilation. When facts are retrieved from
memory more often, their activation increases and this
makes it easier and faster to retrieve these facts. Production

2502

100
75
50

Exp data
Model data

25
0

Topic continuation (in %)

compilation is a mechanism that allows the model to
combine multiple production rules (small decision steps in
the model) into one, so that fewer steps have to be taken
when performing a task that has been performed frequently
before. Since every production rule takes a fixed amount of
time in ACT-R, production compilation also speeds up the
model.
In all practice and test items, participants were given 0.6
seconds to process and interpret the encountered pronoun.
This time limit was given to simulate reasonably slow
speech of 100 words per minute (Wong, 2015). When the
time limit was reached, the model was not allowed to
execute any more processing steps.
The answers to the test items, and the comparison to the
experimental data, are shown in Figure 3. The figure shows
the mean percentage of responses indicating a discourse
topic interpretation for null and overt subject pronouns as
provided by the model, and as taken from the experimental
data with real participants. As Figure 3 shows (given the
limited number of data points, we have refrained from
reporting explicit model comparison measures), the model
accounts for the general trends in the data that were
described earlier: null pronouns are often (but not always)
interpreted as referring to the discourse topic, and overt
pronouns vary in their interpretation, but are most often
interpreted as referring to the non-topical referent.

86 89

39 39

null

overt

Figure 3: The experimental data and the model output of the
interpretations of null pronouns and overt pronouns in
subject position.
Sources of variation
In our explanation of the cognitive model, we mentioned
several features that influence model’s responses. Here we
will discuss these features and explain how they contribute
to the variation in interpretations shown by the model.
First of all, due to noise, the model makes mistakes when
identifying the discourse topic. These topicality mistakes are
also expected to occur in real life, where distractions or
insufficient working memory capacity influence how well
the discourse is recalled. In the model, most of the answers
indicating reference of a null pronoun to the non-topical
referent are made because of mistakes in identifying the
topic. Such mistakes also occur when interpreting overt
pronouns, but these are less visible because overt pronouns

vary more in their interpretation. However, these types of
mistakes do not account for the difference in the percentages
of topical interpretations between null and overt pronouns.
A second source of variation, one that applies differently
to null and overt pronouns, has to do with time constraints
on processing: if the model has not finished all processing
steps within the allotted time, a meaning that has been found
to be optimal in an intermediate processing step is taken as
the optimal meaning. If no such meaning is available, the
meaning is guessed by the model. This guessing behavior is
not implausible, as the human participants in the experiment
also had to choose between the two characters, even if they
did not know the answer. The time constraint accounts for
the difference in variation between null and overt subject
pronouns: null pronouns do not require the bi-directional
optimization step to arrive at the optimal meaning.

Predictions of the model
Based on the properties of the cognitive model a number of
predictions can be formulated, which can be tested in
subsequent experiments. The predictions of the model have
to do with identifying the correct discourse topic and with
speed of processing, which were argued to be sources of
variation. A very general prediction concerns children,
whose linguistic experience in pronoun interpretation
(affecting processing speed) and working memory capacity
(affecting discourse processing) are lower than that of
adults. Therefore, children are expected to show more
variation than adults when interpreting pronouns in
discourse. However, this is not a very specific prediction.
More specific and testable predictions can be made by
looking at the interaction between the sources of variation in
the model. One source of variation was the incorrect
identification of the discourse topic. If the discourse topic is
clearer (that is, much more prominent than the other
referent), fewer mistakes will be made in the interpretation
of null pronouns. However, because retrieval of the nontopical referent is necessary for the interpretation of overt
pronouns, and this retrieval becomes more difficult if the
activation of that referent is lower, it is predicted that overt
pronouns will also be interpreted more often as referring to
the discourse topic when the activation of this topic is much
higher than the activation of the non-topical referent.
Additionally, the model predicts that when working
memory is insufficient while processing speed is sufficient
(for example, when carrying out a parallel, secondary task
that places competing demands on working memory), more
mistakes will be made when identifying the discourse topic.
This would lead to a worse performance on null pronouns,
whereas overt pronouns would be less affected.
Related to processing speed, the model predicts that a
lower processing speed will influence the interpretation of
overt pronouns more than the interpretation of null
pronouns. This is because null pronouns can be resolved
already after the uni-directional processing step, whereas the
interpretation of overt pronouns requires completion of the
next step of bi-directional optimization. If this bi-directional

2503

step cannot be completed, the model will resort to guessing.
As a result, the percentage of topic continuation
interpretations of overt pronouns will rise to about 50%.

Discussion
In this paper we presented a cognitive model of subject
pronoun processing in Italian. The cognitive model uses,
based on previous models, the principles of constraint-based
optimization and perspective-taking. To account for the
observed variation in the interpretation of subject pronouns,
the notion of accessibility in discourse and a processing time
limit imposed by the speed of natural language production
were introduced to the model. The model shows a very good
fit to the data, which suggests that the model of pronoun
processing in Italian is cognitively plausible. However, as
the experimental data was modeled rather than predicted and
involved just two data points, it will have to be tested further
by examining its predictions in future experiments.
The cognitive model is an abstraction and simplification
of reality, and therefore a number of assumptions have been
made. First of all, the model does not actually process the
first two clauses of each story, and therefore can not be used
to test the influence of specific discourse factors such as
pragmatic plausibility (Carminati, 2002). Our current model
merely uses the general discourse factor of discourse
prominence (accessibility).
Moreover, the model only takes two anaphoric
expressions into account (null subjects and overt subject
pronouns). In natural speech, a speaker could also choose to
use, for example, an NP instead of a pronoun. In the
simulation however, this option was not provided and
therefore the model is a simplification of natural language
use.
Finally, it was assumed that participants get just as much
time to process a null subject as they get to process an overt
subject pronoun. However, since null subjects are not
overtly expressed in language and their occurrence has to be
deduced from the discourse, it may be the case that listeners
have less time to process a null subject than an overt subject
pronoun. On the other hand, the time limit was based on the
average time it takes to say a word, but the resolution of
pronouns may well continue after this moment. For a full,
complete model of pronoun processing in a null subject
language such as Italian or Spanish, these aspects will have
to be taken into consideration.

Conclusion
We have implemented a cognitive model that simulates the
processing of subject pronouns in Italian. The model uses a
constraint-based approach and a perspective-taking
mechanism to select the most likely interpretation of an
overt or null pronoun. Combining constraints from the
cognitive architecture ACT-R and constraints on language
processing, the model can plausibly simulate subject
pronoun interpretation in Italian, and, most importantly,
generates concrete predictions that can be tested in future
experiments.

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How Can the Human Mind Occur in
the Physical Universe? New York: Oxford University
Press, USA.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun-phrase antecedents.
London: Routledge.
Blutner, R. (2000). Some Aspects of Optimality in Natural
Language Interpretation. Journal of Semantics, 17(3),
189–216.
Burzio, L. (1998). Anaphora and soft constraints. In P.
Barbosa, D. Fox, P. Hagstrom, M. McGinnis, &
Pesetsky D. (Eds.), Is the Best Good Enough?
Optimality and Competition in Syntax (pp. 93–113).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carminati, M. N. (2002). The processing of Italian subject
pronouns (Doctoral dissertation). University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, USA.
Fedele, E., & Kaiser, E. (2014). Pronoun interpretation is
sensitive to verb semantics, except when it isn’t:
Selective verb effects on Italian null and overt
pronouns. In Proceedings of AMLaP (p. 70).
Givón, T. (1983). Topic continuity in discourse: An
introduction. In T. Givón (Ed.), Topic Continuity in
Discourse: A Quantitative Cross-language Study (pp.
3–41). John Benjamins.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and Conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics. 3: Speech acts
(pp. 41–58). New York: Academic Press.
Hendriks, P., & Spenader, J. (2005/2006). When production
precedes comprehension: An optimization approach to
the acquisition of pronouns. Language Acquisition,
13(4), 319–348.
Hendriks, P., Van Rijn, H., & Valkenier, B. (2007).
Learning to reason about speakers’ alternatives in
sentence comprehension: A computational account.
Lingua, 117(11), 1879–1896.
Misker, J. M. V., & Anderson, J. R. (2003). Combining
optimality theory and a cognitive architecture. In
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
Cognitive Modeling (pp. 165–170). Bamberg,
Germany.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (2004). Optimality Theory:
Constraint Interaction in Generative Grammar.
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Sorace, A., & Filiaci, F. (2006). Anaphora resolution in
near-native speakers of Italian. Second Language
Research, 22(3), 339–368.
Van Rij, J., Van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (2010). Cognitive
architectures and language acquisition: A case study in
pronoun comprehension. Journal of Child Language,
37(3), 731–766.
Van Rij, J., Van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (2013). How WM
load influences linguistic processing in adults: a
computational model of pronoun interpretation in
discourse. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5(3), 564–80.
Wong, L. (2015). Essential Study Skills (8th ed.). Cengage
Learning.

2504

