Production is biased to provide informative cues early: Evidence from miniature
artificial languages
Maryia Fedzechkina (mfedze@sas.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

John C. Trueswell (trueswel@psych.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Grammatical structures that permit more efficient
integration of words into the structural representation tend
to be cross-linguistically more common. For example, the
correlation between marking type (case vs. agreement) and
the position of the verb in a sentence is claimed to stem
from considerations of processing efficiency: Verb-final
languages typically have case-marking on nouns, while
verb-initial languages tend to have rich verb agreement
since it provides earlier disambiguation points in the
respective languages (Hawkins, 2004). This explanation,
however, is still under debate as a recent study found only
partial support for the claim that language structures favor
early parsing decisions (Dryer, 2002).
Cross-linguistic correlations, however, need to be
interpreted with caution. Typological analyses are known to
suffer from sparsity of independent data points. Languages
that evolved from common ancestors or remained in contact
for a long time often share lexical and structural properties.
These genetic and areal influences drastically reduce the
effective sample size of languages available for analysis.
Thus, statistical tests might not have enough power to
uncover hypothesized universals (Dryer, 1989; Jaeger,
Graff, Croft, & Pontillo, 2011).
While direct experimental tests of the MaOP hypothesis
are missing, evidence consistent with this account comes
from the developmental literature. Young learners are
highly sensitive to the order of cues to sentence meaning
and disproportionally rely on early arriving cues when
making parsing decisions. Initial parsing commitments
based on early cues, once formed, are difficult to revise for
young learners (Choi & Trueswell, 2010; Trueswell,
Sekerina, Hill, & Logrip, 1999). Cues that are available
early in parsing also appear to be acquired earlier: First and
second language learners show better command of causative
verb morphology in verb-initial languages, where it is
appears early in the sentence compared to verb-final
languages, where it is available later (Pozzan & Trueswell,
under review; Trueswell, Kaufman, Hafri, & Lidz, 2012).
Here we use a miniature artificial language learning
paradigm to experimentally test the prediction that the
language production system is organized to provide

Abstract
The role of processing constraints on sentence structure has
been a topic of central interest in cognitive science. One
proposal (Hawkins, 2004) suggests that language production
system is organized to facilitate efficient parsing. We
experimentally test this hypothesis using a miniature artificial
language learning paradigm. Our findings support this
account. Even though the input languages did not favor early
placement of cues to grammatical function assignment (case
and word order), participants used these cues in their own
productions significantly more often in such a way as to allow
early correct parsing commitments. This preference interacted
with a bias to mark the less expected: Participants tended to
use more case-marking in non-English OSV sentences. Our
results underscore the potential of miniature artificial learning
for language production research.
Keywords: language acquisition; language processing;
language production; artificial language learning

Introduction
To infer sentence meaning, listeners must integrate a
variety of probabilistic linguistic and non-linguistic cues.
This integration happens incrementally – listeners do not
wait for speakers to finish their utterances, but instead form
provisional structural hypotheses based on the cues
available at a given moment during sentence comprehension
(Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995).
Due to this incremental nature of sentence comprehension,
listeners sometimes face situations when their initial parsing
commitments turn out to be incorrect and need to be revised
as more information becomes available (Frazier & Rayner,
1987). Since revisions are associated with longer processing
times, the order in which cues are presented to the parser
has a potential impact on processing efficiency: Informative
cues that allow recognition of sentence structure early on
would on average increase parsing speed.
One proposal –the performance-grammar correspondence
hypothesis (Hawkins, 2004) -- argues that the human
production system supports efficient parsing. It does so in
part by ordering informative cues early in the sentence
(‘Maximize Online Processing’, MaOP). Primary support
for this account comes from typological correlations:

674

informative cues early. Using experimentally designed
languages allows us to separate and orthogonally control
properties that are potentially correlated in natural languages
(e.g., cue informativity and cue order). Furthermore, this
paradigm has been successfully used to study processing
influences on grammar acquisition (Pozzan & Trueswell,
under review) and online processing of newly acquired
grammatical structures (Wonnacott, Newport, & Tanenhaus,
2008), which underscores its suitability to study parsingrelated preferences in production.
In the experiment, we expose learners to miniature
artificial languages that do not have an a priori preference to
provide informative cues early (i.e., informative cues to
grammatical function assignment appear early or late with
the same frequency in the input). If the production system is
indeed organized to facilitate early parsing decisions, we
would expect learners to exhibit a (potentially small) bias to
deviate from the statistics of the input towards using
informative cues early in the sentence.

case-marking – a case-marker (suffix ‘di’) was present in
67% of the input sentences and absent in the remaining
33%. The two languages differed in the locus and function
of case-marking. In the subject-marking language, the casemarker optionally marked the subject and never the object.
In contrast, in the object-marking language, the case-marker
optionally occurred on the object and never on the subject.
Table 1: The artificial lexicon used in the experiment.
Nouns

Verbs

Case-marker

barsu
doakla
rizbi
lanfu
peza
forpih

moship
kyse
skroop
tegud

di

If the production system exhibits a bias to facilitate
correct parsing commitments early on, we expect learners to
use cues to grammatical function assignment in such a way
as to allow early disambiguation. Since word order was
uninformative about grammatical function assignment in the
experiment, case-marking (when present) provided
important disambiguating information in both languages.
We thus expect learners to produce more case-marking on
the first constituent in a sentence regardless of its locus
(subject vs. object) in the newly acquired language.

The experiment
Participants
56 monolingual native speakers of English were recruited
from the University of Pennsylvania community to
participate in the experiment. They received credit in
introductory psychology classes for their participation. 17
participants were excluded from all further analyses for the
following reasons: failure to complete all sessions of the
experiment (4 participants); previous familiarity with the
phenomenon under investigation (1 participant); failure to
achieve 70% comprehension accuracy on the final day of
testing (12 participants, see Scoring below). This left 39
participants for the final analysis (20 in the subject-marking
and 19 in the object-marking language).

The procedure
At the beginning of the experiment, participants were
informed that they would be learning a novel ‘alien’
language by watching short videos and hearing their
descriptions in this language. No further instructions about
the structure of the language were provided.
Participants were trained and tested on one of the two
miniature languages during three visits to the lab (each
lasting about 40-45 minutes) with at most one day between
the visits. During every visit, learners were exposed to a
mixture of noun and sentence exposure blocks,
comprehension tests (noun and sentence), and short
vocabulary tests. Each session concluded with a sentence
production test. The same overall procedure was followed
on all days. On the first day, however, the amount of noun
exposure and vocabulary testing was doubled compared to
subsequent days.
Every session began with noun exposure. Learners saw a
picture of each character labeled in isolation and were
encouraged to repeat the names to facilitate learning. After
the initial familiarization, learners were presented with
pictures of four characters accompanied with a label
corresponding to one of them. Learners were instructed to
click on the correct picture. In order to facilitate vocabulary
learning, which is a prerequisite for the success of the
experiment, but not itself of interest here, feedback was
provided on every trial. Noun learning concluded with a

Input languages
The two languages used in the experiment contained 10
novel words (6 animate nouns and 4 transitive verbs), all of
which conformed to English phonotactics, and a suffix ‘di’
that acted as a nominative or accusative case-marker
depending on the language (see Table 1). All sentences
described simple transitive events such as ‘hug’ or ‘poke’
performed by two male actors such as ‘chef’ or ‘referee’
(see Figure 1 for example stimuli). All verbs occurred
equally frequently within each language overall and with
each word order variant within each language. All nouns
occurred equally often in the subject and object position
with each verb
Participants were assigned to learn one of the two
miniature languages. Both languages were verb-final (i.e.,
the verb followed both the subject and the object). This
word order was chosen as it is cross-linguistically more
common in languages with a case system (Greenberg,
1963). Word order was flexible: Subject-object-verb (SOV)
and object-subject-verb (OSV) orders occurred equally
frequently in both languages. Both languages had optional

675

noun production test, during which learners were asked to
provide labels for each character presented in isolation.

was considered correctly pronounced if it fell within
Levenstein distance of 2 from the target label (i.e., we
allowed at most 2 character insertions, deletions, or
substitutions in a word). For example, ‘toagla’ was still
considered a correct label for ‘doakla’, but ‘toagli’ was not.
In the sentence production test, we scored sentence word
order, presence and position of case-marking as well as
lexical (using the wrong name for a referent or an action)
and grammatical mistakes (using word order other than
SOV or OSV or using the case-marker on the wrong
constituent). If the name of only one referent was incorrect
and it was still possible to determine sentence word order,
productions were scored as overall correct but containing a
lexical error. Such productions were included in the
analyses below. Productions containing grammatical errors
were excluded from all analyses.

Figure 1: Screenshots of sentence exposure (left panel) and
sentence comprehension (right panel) trials.
During sentence exposure that followed, learners watched
short videos (2 blocks of 24 trials) depicting simple
transitive events (e.g., the chef hugging the mountie)
accompanied by their descriptions in the novel language.
Participants were instructed to repeat the descriptions to
facilitate learning. Learners could replay the video and
sound as many times as they wished during the first training
block on day 1; no further replays were allowed throughout
the experiment. Sentence exposure was followed by a
comprehension test (24 trials total), during which learners
heard a sentence in the novel language and were shown two
videos depicting the same referents and action with the
reversed order of the actor and patient in the two videos.
Participants were asked to click on the video that matched
the description. No feedback was provided on sentence
comprehension trials. After competing the test, participants
completed two more sentence exposure and one more
sentence comprehension blocks.
Each session ended in a sentence production test (48
trials), during which participants watched previously unseen
videos depicting familiar characters and actions and
described them in the novel language. Participants were
given an auditory verb prompt that they could use in their
sentence to facilitate production. No other instructions on
form or content of the descriptions were provided.

Results
Accuracy of acquisition For participants included in the
analysis, vocabulary test performance was at ceiling on the
final day of training (99% correct in the object-marking and
100% correct in the subject-marking language). Similarly,
the number of lexical mistakes during sentence production
was below 3% across the two languages on the final day of
training (2.2% in the object-marking and 2.9% in the
subject-marking language). The number of grammatical
mistakes made by the learners was below 1% in both
languages (0.33% in the object-marking and 0.42% in the
subject-marking language) on the final day of training. This
performance suggests that the task was feasible for our
participants.
We now turn to the main question of our study – whether
language production system is biased towards providing
informative cues early.
Do learners provide case-marking early in sentences?
To address this question, we examined learners’ casemarker use in production. We used a mixed logit model
(Jaeger, 2008) to predict the presence of case-marking based
on its locus in the language (sum-coded, subject vs. object),
day of training (Helmert coded, 2 vs. 1, 3 vs. 1 and 2),
constituent position (sum-coded, first vs. second), and all
interactions between these factors. The model included
maximal converging random effects structure. Fixed effect
correlations greater than 0.4 were observed between
multiple predictors in the model. The results reported here
did not change after the stepwise model reduction was used
to reduce collinearity.
Learners’ overall proportion of case-marking did not
significantly differ across the two languages (χ2 (2)=0.11) or
days of training (χ2 (2)=0.13). Neither did language and day
of training interact (χ2 (2)>0.18). Learners did, however, use
significantly more case-marking on the first constituent as
compared to the second one (main effect of constituent
position, ß=0.86, z=2.05, p<0.05). Constituent position
interacted with language (ß=1.02, z=2.92, p<0.01). Simple
effects test revealed that the effect of constituent position on
case-marker use was significant in the object-marking

Scoring
During every session, we collected measures of accuracy
on vocabulary tests, comprehension tests, sentence
production accuracy, as well as case and word order
preferences in sentence production.
In the sentence comprehension test, we analyzed
participants’ responses on case-marked (i.e., unambiguous)
trials. Since word order was uninformative in our
experiment, this measure indicated how well learners have
acquired the meaning of case-marking. 12 participants (5 in
the subject-marking and 7 in the object-marking language)
who failed to achieve 70% accuracy were excluded from all
analyses. The results reported below hold regardless of this
exclusion.
All production trials (noun and sentence production) were
orthographically transcribed by two transcribers and then
automatically scored using a Python script. A noun or verb

676

language (ß=1.88, z=3.34, p<0.001), but not in the subjectmarking language (p>0.7). Thus, only learners of the objectmarking language preferentially case-marked the first
constituent (see Figure 2).
object-marking L.

100

2013; Piantadosi, Tily, & Gibson, 2011). Recall that the two
languages in our experiment differed in the word order that
allowed the earliest availability of case-marking during
parsing (SOV in the subject-marking and OSV in the objectmarking language). OSV word order is, however, crosslinguistically rare and, more importantly, highly uncommon
in the native language of our participants (English), while
SOV word order is more in line with participants’ native
language biases (since the subject in English typically
precedes the object). A preference to provide case-marking
early and a preference to mark the less expected nonEnglish OSV word order work in the same direction for the
object-marking language (both favor OSV) and in opposite
directions for the subject-marking language (a preference to
mark the atypical favors OSV while a preference for early
disambiguation favors SOV). Thus, if the two biases are
equally strong in production, one would expect the same
degree of case-marking on both constituents in the subjectmarking language and a relatively strong bias to mark the
first constituent in the object-marking language, as observed
in our experiment.
To further probe this question, we examined learners’
comprehension performance on ambiguous trials (i.e., trials
without case-marking): If comprehenders interpret such
sentences preferentially as SOV, this would suggest that
learners of both languages indeed treat OSV word order as
less typical. In a mixed logit model, we predicted SOV use
based on the language (sum-coded, subject vs. object), day
of training (Helmert coded, 2 vs. 1, 3 vs. 1 and 2), and their
interaction. The model included maximal converging
random effects structure. Fixed effect correlations greater
than 0.4 were observed between multiple predictors in the
model. The results reported here did not change after the
stepwise model reduction was used to reduce collinearity.

subject-marking L.

% case

75
Constituent

50

first
second

25
0
1

2

3

1

Day of Training

2

3

Figure 2: Case-marker use in production in the objectmarking (left panel) and subject-marking (right panel)
language. The dashed line indicates the input (equal for both
languages).
We further compared participants’ use of case-marking to
the input proportion in the two languages (see Figure 3). On
the final day of training, learners of both languages
produced significantly more case-marking compared to the
input (Subject-marking language, day 3: 83% case-marking
in production, significantly higher than the input [χ2
(1)=15.81, p<0.001]; Object-marking language, day 3: 83%
case-marking in production, significantly higher than the
input [χ2 (1)=15.72, p<0.0001]).

subject

75

100 Language

50

% SOV in comprehension

% case in production

100 Language
object

25
0
1

2

Day of Training

3

Figure 3: Overall case-marker use in production. The
dashed line indicates the input (equal across the two
languages).

object
subject

75
50
25
0
1

Thus, while learners of both languages used significantly
more case-marking in their own productions compared to
the input, only learners of the object-marking preferentially
case-marked the first constituent. Learners of the subjectmarking language did not use case-marking asymmetrically
and marked both constituents equally often.
What can account for this difference in the preference to
case-mark the first constituent across the two languages?
One possibility is that it is due to another production
preference – a preference to mark the less expected (Jaeger,

2

Day of Training

3

Figure 4: % SOV word order in comprehension of non-casemarked sentences. The dashed line indicates the input (same
across the two languages).
The analysis revealed a baseline SOV preference in both
languages as indicated by a significant positive intercept
(ß=0.7, z=2.5, p<0.05). There was no significant main effect
of language (p=0.18), day (χ2 (2) = 0.83), or language by
case interaction (χ2 (2) = 0.43), see Figure 4. Simple effects
test revealed no significant effect of language on any day of

677

training (p’s>0.17 for all days). Thus, comprehension
performance suggests that SOV interpretations for
ambiguous sentences were preferred across conditions.
Summary Learners of the two languages in our
experiment showed different patterns of case-marker use.
As expected under our hypothesis, learners of the objectmarking language preferentially marked the first constituent.
Learners of the subject-marking language, however, casemarked both constituents equally often. This difference in
case-marker use across the two languages is likely to reflect
two production biases – a bias to mark the atypical (i.e.,
non-English OSV order dispreferred in comprehension) and
a bias to provide informative cues early. Since the two
biases work in opposite directions in the subject-marking
language, the preference to case-mark the first constituent is
expected to be less pronounced in this language.

interacted with a bias to provide informative cues early,
resulting in a stronger preference to case-mark the first
constituent in the object-marking language.
Since the two biases are closely intertwined in natural
language, it would be difficult or perhaps even impossible to
isolate and experimentally study their respective influences
using natural language stimuli. Our findings, thus,
underscore the potential of the miniature artificial language
learning paradigm, which has previously been applied to
language acquisition and in rare cases language
comprehension, for language production research.
Finally, our findings raise a question of native language
influences in miniature artificial language learning
experiments. Learners in our experiment had a preference to
mark the less typical OSV word order, which likely reflects
a transfer from participants’ native language (English).
While our data do not speak to the exact circumstances
under which such transfer is likely to occur or directly
investigate the degree of such transfer, they point out that
the influence of native language background is a concern for
miniature artificial language experiments and that learners’
native language background needs to be taken into account
when interpreting experimental results (see Goldberg, 2013
for similar and additional arguments).

Discussion
In a miniature artificial language learning experiment, we
found that learners preferentially used cues to grammatical
function assignment in such a way as to promote correct
parsing commitments early. Learners of both languages
produced case-marking significantly more often than it was
present in the input. Learners of the object-marking
language tended to case-mark the first constituent
significantly more often than the second one, while learners
of the subject-marking language produced the same amount
of case-marking on both constituents. We argued that this
behavior was indicative of two biases influencing language
production – a preference to provide informative cues early
and a preference to case-mark the less expected.
Our findings thus add to the growing body of research
investigating the role of cue order in language acquisition
and use. To the best of our knowledge, the current
experiment constitutes the first direct experimental evidence
in support of the hypothesis that the human production
system is organized to produce informative cues earlier in
the sentence (Hawkins, 2004). A close parallel between
learners’ preferences in production and patterns observed in
typology suggests that some typological properties observed
cross-linguistically stem from biases associated with
incremental language processing. Finally, our findings
parallel a variety of developmental phenomena, such as
young learners’ disproportional reliance of early cues during
parsing (Choi & Trueswell, 2010; Trueswell et al., 1999)
and a faster time line of early cue acquisition (Pozzan &
Trueswell, under review; Trueswell et al., 2012).
By using experimentally designed miniature artificial
languages, we were able to establish that a preference to
provide informative cues early was not the only bias the
production system caters to. Replicating earlier work
(Fedzechkina, Jaeger, & Newport, 2012; Fedzechkina,
Newport, & Jaeger, under review), we also observed a
preference to mark the atypical in participants’ production.
Learners tended to use more case-marking in the less
expected (non-English) OSV sentences. This preference

Conclusions
We used a miniature artificial language learning paradigm
to experimentally investigate the hypothesis that language
production is organized to provide informative cues early.
Our findings support this hypothesis: Learners tended to use
case-marking in their productions in such a way as to allow
early commitments to the correct parse. These outcomes
parallel a variety of developmental phenomena and patterns
observed in typology.

Acknowledgments
We thank C. Schneider, K. Woodard, J. Padilla, and B.
Oshiba for their help with data collection and annotation; C.
Donatelli, I. Minkina, and A. Wood for their help creating
video stimuli. This work was supported in part by NSF
CAREER grant IIS-1150028 to TFJ, and by NIH grant 1R01-HD 37507 to JCT.

References
Choi, Y., & Trueswell, J. (2010). Children's (in)ability to
recover from garden paths in a verb-final language:
Evidence for developing control in sentence
processing. J Exp Psychol, 106(1), 41-61.
Dryer, M. (1989). Large linguistic areas and language
sampling. Studies in Language, 13, 257-292.
Dryer, M. (2002). Case Distinctions, Rich Verb Agreement,
and Word Order Type (Comment on Hawkins'
paper). Theoretical Linguistics, 28, 151-157.
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T., & Newport, E. (2012).
Language learners restructure their input to

678

facilitate efficient communication. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA, 109(44), 17897-17902.
Fedzechkina, M., Newport, E., & Jaeger, T. (under review).
Balancing effort and information transmission
during language acquisition: Evidence from word
order and case-marking.
Frazier, L., & Rayner, K. (1987). Resolution of syntactic
category ambiguities: Eye movements in parsing
lexically ambiguous sentences. Journal of Memory
and Language, 26(5), 505-526.
Goldberg, A. (2013). Substantive learning bias or an effect
of similarity? Comment on Culbertson, Smolensky,
Legendre (2012). Cognition, 127(3), 420-426.
Greenberg, J. (1963). Some universals of grammar with
particular reference to the order of meaningful
elements. In J. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals of
human language (pp. 73-113): MIT Press.
Hawkins, J. A. (2004). Efficiency and Complexity in
Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jaeger, T. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit
mixed models. J Mem Lang, 59, 434-446.
Jaeger, T. (2013). Production preferences cannot be
understood without reference to communication.
Frontiers in Psychology, 4(230).
Jaeger, T., Graff, P., Croft, W., & Pontillo, D. (2011).
Mixed effects models for genetic and areal
dependencies in linguistic typology: Commentary
on Atkinson. Linguistic Typology, 15(2), 281-319.
Piantadosi, S., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word lengths
are optimized for efficient communication. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA, 108(9), 3526.
Pozzan, L., & Trueswell, J. (under review). Revise and
resubmit: How real-time parsing limitations
influence grammar acquisition.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual
and linguistic information in spoken language
comprehension. Science, 268(5217), 1632.
Trueswell, J., Kaufman, D., Hafri, A., & Lidz, J. (2012).
Development of parsing abilities interacts with
grammar learning: Evidence from Tagalog and
Kannada. Paper presented at the Proceedings of
BUCLD 36, Sommerville, MA.
Trueswell, J., Sekerina, I., Hill, N., & Logrip, M. (1999).
The kindergarten-path effect: studying on-line
sentence processing in young children. Cognition,
73, 89-134.
Wonnacott, E., Newport, E., & Tanenhaus, M. (2008).
Acquiring and processing verb argument structure:
Distributional learning in a miniature language.
Cognitive Psychol, 56(3), 165-209.

679

