Reading Words Hurts:
The impact of pain sensitivity on people’s ratings of pain-related words
Erica Cosentino (erica.cosentino@rub.de)

Department of Philosophy, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany

Markus Werning (markus.werning@rub.de)

Department of Philosophy, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany

Kevin Reuter (kevin.reuter@rub.de)

Department of Philosophy, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany

Abstract

study of emotions, little research has been devoted to
questions regarding the relation between the semantic
processing of words on the one hand, and pain sensitivity on
the other, where pain sensitivity is generally assumed to
refer to subjects’ responsiveness to noxious stimuli. Our
study intends to fill this lacuna.
Three theoretical frameworks have often been drawn
upon to account for individual differences regarding the
language processing of pain-related or emotion-related
stimuli. (1) Cognitive bias: Subjects with different
inclinations, tendencies, etc. will show cognitive biases
towards stimuli that are in accordance with their
inclinations. E.g., studies with healthy subjects showed that
individuals, who are more pain sensitive, are also more
strongly engaged with pain-related stimuli (Baum et al.,
2011). (2) Prototype Analysis: According to prototype
theory, conceptual representations are encoded in a
prototypical fashion and consist of various features, some of
which are more central than others (Sloman et al., 1998),
e.g. having a sharp tip is more central to the concept of a
nail than having a silver colour. The degree of centrality of
the features of conceptual representations, however, varies
between different people given the different exposure to
examplars of a certain concept. Thus, differences in the
semantic processing of pain-related words need to take into
account the inter-individual differences in which concepts
are stored. (3) Embodied Cognition: the processing of
linguistic meaning essentially involves perceptual, motoric
and emotional brain regions corresponding to the contents
of the words to be comprehended. E.g. Richter et al. (2010)
have shown that when people are presented with pain
words, there is substantial activity in the pain matrix that is
also active when people feel a pain. The activation of these
brain regions during semantic processing has been taken as
evidence of the fact that reading words “hurts”. This finding
opens the way to the fascinating issue of whether people
show individual differences in the degree to which they are
hurt by words. According to the body specificity hypothesis
(Casasanto, 2011) they should: if concepts and word
meanings are at least partially constituted by implicit
simulations of bodily experiences, as stated by the
supporters of the embodied account, then individual
differences in the way in which people experience the world
should lead to corresponding differences in the way in
which they construct concepts and word meanings.The

This study explores the relation between pain sensitivity and
the cognitive processing of words. 130 participants evaluated
the pain-relatedness of a total of 600 two-syllabic nouns, and
subsequently reported on their own pain sensitivity. The
results demonstrate that pain-sensitive people (based on their
self-report) associate words more strongly with pain than less
sensitive people. In particular, concrete nouns like syringe,
wound, knife, and cactus, are considered to be more painrelated for those who are more pain-sensitive. We discuss our
results in the light of three theoretical frameworks – cognitive
bias, prototype theory, embodied account. We argue that the
latter is best suited to explain the results of this study in the
sense in which it implies the principle of body specificity,
according to which different bodily characteristics lead to
corresponding differences in the way in which people
construct concepts and word meanings.
Keywords: Pain, pain-sensitivity; semantic processing;
cognitive biases; prototype theory; embodied account; body
specificity.

Introduction
The last few decades have amassed data on the influence of
affective states like emotions and pain on semantic
processes, but also the reverse influence of semantic
processes on the perception of emotional and painful
stimuli. E.g., Dillmann et al. (2000) investigated the effects
of different semantic primes on the processing of painful
stimuli; using a sentence completion task, Rusu et al. (2012)
demonstrated that participants with pain and depression
exhibit a cognitive bias specific to negative aspects of
health; Niedenthal et al. (1997) provide evidence that being
in an emotional state facilitates responses to words
categorically associated with that emotion. More recently,
researchers have also focused on the impact of emotional
sensitivity on the cognitive processing of emotion words.
Instead of inducing certain emotions to test whether and
how strongly cognitive processes are inhibited or facilitated
while undergoing certain emotions, researchers have
investigated the importance of people’s emotional
sensitivity for specific cognitive tasks. E.g. Silva et al.
(2012) have found that sensitivity to disgust affects lexical
decision performance; Rak et al. (2013) show that people’s
ability to feel empathy with others exerts an influence on the
integration of emotion words. Despite these advances in the

453

primary aim of our study was to investigate the hitherto
unexplored question of whether individual differences in
pain sensitivity, as measured by people’s self-report, have a
substantial influence on the cognitive processing of words,
as measured by people’s ratings of the pain-relatedness of
words. We were also particularly interested in whether pain
sensitivity has a differential influence on the processing of
abstract vs. concrete nouns. After presenting the experiment
in the next section, we will discuss our results in light of the
theories that we mentioned above. Collecting people’s
evaluations of the pain-relatedness of words, our secondary
aim was to build a large database of pain-related words,
which could be later used by researchers interested in the
cognitive processing of pain-related semantic stimuli for
future research needs.

Procedure
The list of 600 words was divided into six surveys including
100 words (55 pain-related nouns, 15 positive, 15 neutral
and 15 negative nouns were randomly put together). Each
participant was randomly assigned to one of the six surveys
that they filled out using the survey platform kwiksurvey.
Before they were presented with the list of words, they were
informed that they would be asked to rate the physical pain
that they associate with that concept. After reading each
word x, the person was asked to answer the question “How
strongly do you associate a x with pain?” (Wie stark
assoziieren Sie ein(e) x mit Schmerzen?) on a 5-point Likert
scale (1 = not at all, 2 = slightly, 3 = medium, 4 = strongly, 5
= very strongly). Figure 1 depicts the mean values for each
of the 600 words that were evaluated during the study. The
average rating for all words and all subjects was 2.37 (SD =
0.99).

Methods
Participants
189 participants took part in our survey. We only collected
responses from those 141 participants who completed the
survey. 10 further subjects had to be excluded from our
analysis because they were not German native speakers, and
data of another subject had to be dismissed because the
person stopped responding differentially after 25% of the
words were presented. Of the remaining 130 people, 70
were female, 18 years or older, with a mean age of 28.04
years (SD = 8.97). All subjects who participated in our
survey were recruited through the Ruhr University Bochum
and were mostly students. They were not reimbursed for
their participation, but among all participants who submitted
their email address, four book vouchers were drawn.

Stimuli
We assembled a list of 330 German pain words. All words
were two-syllabic nouns and fell roughly into three
categories: (A) nouns that refer to objects, the use of or
contact with which, may be associated with having pain, e.g.
thorn (Dorne), hail (Hagel), hammer (Hammer), crutch
(Krücken), tank (Panzer), snake (Schlange), shard
(Scherbe). (B) nouns that refer to body parts or inflictions of
body parts that are often associated with having pain, e.g.
appendix (Blinddarm), pus (Eiter), neck (Genick), bone
(Knochen), scar (Narbe). (C) abstract nouns that refer to
states of affairs that often involve being in pain, e.g. birth
(Geburt), emergency (Notfall), epidemic (Seuche), torture
(Folter). We then supplemented this list with 270 twosyllabic nouns of which 90 words have a positive valence,
e.g. eagle (Adler), spring (Frühjahr), saphire (Saphir), 90
words with neutral valence, e.g. herring (Hering),
magnifying glass (Lupe), pendulum (Pendel), and 90 words
with a negative valence but presumably not pain-related,
e.g. wrinkle (Falte), race (Rasse), spy (Spion). Whereas the
pain-relatedness of the 330 “pain-words” was not
independently determined (as far as we know, no similar list
has so far been assembled), the 270 additional words were
randomly selected from the Berlin Affective Word List (Võ
et al., 2009).

Figure 1: Mean values for all 600 presented words.
After evaluating 100 words, participants were prompted
to provide demographical data on age, gender, and mother
tongue. Subsequently, they were asked to self-assess their
pain sensitivity: Would you consider yourself to be pain
sensitive? (Würden Sie sich als schmerzempfindlich
bezeichnen?). Possible responses were: (a) yes, (b) not so
much (c) definitely not, and (d) I don’t know. While a
person’s pain sensitivity is usually assessed in the laboratory
setting using controlled experimental stimuli in a number of
stimulus modalities, such as heat, cold and pressure, it has
been shown that the use of self-reports to assess pain
sensitivity is a viable means (Ruscheweyh et al, 2009, 2011,
but see Edwards (2007)). We furthermore asked subjects to
report on the frequency with which they feel pain. How
often do you experience pain? (Wie oft haben Sie
Schmerzen?). Possible responses were (a) very rarely (b)
now and then, (c) quite often, (d) chronic pain. The
completion of the survey took between 10 and 25 minutes.

454

as the dependent measure: Whereas Pain Sensitivity has a
significant effect on the evaluations when only pain words
are considered, (F(2,120) = 3,786 p = .025), no significant
effect was obtained for the group of random words (F
(2,120) = 1.216, p = 0.300).

Results
Main Effect
Average values for participant’s ratings of the painrelatedness of all 600 nouns are depicted in Figure 2.
Participants were divided into three groups (High (N=31),
Moderate (N=78), Low (N=12)) depending on their selfassessment of their pain sensitivity (see Procedure above). 1
In order to analyze the influence of self-assessed Pain
Sensitivity on people’s mean Rating, we applied an ANOVA
with participants’ Rating as the dependent measure.

Figure 3: Comparing pain-words with control words.

Abstract vs. Concrete Nouns
Participants were presented with both concrete pain-related
nouns, e.g. syringe, cactus, but also abstract pain-related
nouns, e.g. birth, emergency. Given the divergent
predictions different theories make regarding the processing
of abstract and concrete nouns (see Discussion), we were
particularly interested in whether there is any difference
between people’s ratings of abstract and concrete words. 2
The mean values are depicted in Figure 4. The average
value of ratings for abstract nouns is considerable higher,
3.27 (SE = .17, compared to concrete nouns, 2.64 (SE = .
14). While there is a highly significant result for concrete
nouns, F(2,120) = 5.048, p = .008, no significant result
could be obtained for people’s ratings on abstract nouns, F
(2,120) = 1.618, p = .203. We also analyzed whether
abstract words that were not strongly associated with pain
show a significant difference with regards to people’s pain
sensitivity. An ANOVA that was performed on 60 less painrelated words demonstrates that no such influence seems to
exist. F(2,120) = 1.401, p = .250).

Figure 2: Effect of pain sensitivity on average pain-ratings.
There was a significant main effect of Pain Sensitivity, F
(2,120) = 3.813, p = .025. A LSD post-hoc test revealed
significant differences between the High and Moderate
group (p=.023) as well as between High and Low (p=.018)
but no significant result between Moderate and Low (p=.
293).

Comparison ‘Pain-Words’ vs. Random Nouns
We divided the list of words into those that were preselected
as being likely to be associated with pain, so called painwords, and those that were randomly selected to
complement the list (see also Stimuli section). All average
values are displayed in Figure 3. Regardless of pain
sensitivity, pain-related words are evaluated to be more
strongly associated with pain, 2.87 (SE = .15), compared to
control words, 1.88 (SE = .14). We ran two ANOVAs for
‘pain-words’ and for controls with independent factor Pain
Sensitivity (High, Moderate, Low), and participant’s rating

Only 12 people evaluated their pain sensitivity as low. This can be explained by the actual wording of the response options.
Arguably, fewer people are willing to state that they do not consider themselves to be pain sensitive than having a low pain
sensitivity. Nine subjects, who claimed not to know whether they were pain sensitive, were excluded from statistical analysis.
1

2

To test the influence of concept type on people’s pain rating we used 108 abstract words and 190 concrete words. We
deliberately excluded all concepts that have both conrete and abstract features, e.g. tyrant, foul.

455

to form implicit or explicit pain-related memories could
play a relevant role. The underlying assumption is that
people who are highly pain-sensitive show attentional or
memory biases towards pain-related stimuli compared to
low-sensitive people, and these biases mediate their
processing of pain-related words. A classical paradigm to
test attentional biases adopts a Stroop task, in which people
are presented with colored words and instructed to name the
color while ignoring the meaning of the words. Slower
answers in naming the color of pain-related words are taken
to reveal of an attentional bias towards pain related
information (Pearce and Morley, 1989).
It has been recently shown that individuals who are
attentionally more engaged with pain-related stimuli are also
more pain-sensitive, as measured by experimental pain
sensitivity (Baum et al., 2011). Thus, it could be argued that
the results of our study are predicted by an attentional bias:
people who are highly pain-sensitive would preferentially
allocate their attention to pain-related words compared to
people who are less sensitive, and would consequently
produce higher ratings of pain-relatedness. It should be
noted though that whereas attentional bias to pain stimuli
has been extensively investigated, little is known about the
emotional and behavioral correlates of attentional responses.
It is not clear then that an attentional bias towards painrelated stimuli would predict evaluations of higher painrelatedness of the presented words. Furthermore, a recent
meta-analysis concluded that attentional bias towards painrelated information is not a robust phenomenon given that it
proved difficult to generate or replicate (Crombez et al.,
2013).
An alternative explanation of how cognitive factors
mediate between pain sensitivity and the rating of pain
related words could be that individual differences in pain
sensitivity affect the way in which people form concepts.
This view is consistent with prototype theory which, unlike
the classical account, predicts that concepts vary from one
person to the next, based on individual experiences with
exemplars of a certain category (Rosch, 1999). People who
are more sensitive to pain would, on this account, record
more often the occurrence of the attribute “painful” for
experienced exemplars of a certain concept. Thus, this
attribute is more likely to be integrated into their concepts as
compared to the concepts of people who are less sensitive to
pain. For example, for high-pain-sensitive people,
experiences with syringes will have in common the attribute
of painfulness. It follows that the central tendency and the
representation of this range of experiences will include their
painfulness, that is, the property of being painful will
become part of the prototypical representation of a syringe.
Consequently, when high-pain-sensitive people are asked to
evaluate the pain-relatedness of certain words, the average
value of their evaluations is predicted to be higher compared
to the average value produced by people who are less pain
sensitive. Interestingly, prototype theory makes also an
additional prediction concerning the ratings of concrete and
abstract words. The theory predicts an influence of painsensitivity on word ratings also for abstract words given that
also in this case the attribute “painful” is assumed to be
more strongly integrated in the concepts of highly pain-

Figure 4: Abstract vs. Concrete Nouns

Discussion
The main purpose of this study was to determine whether
pain sensitivity has an influence on the semantic processing
of pain-related words. In order to test this hypothesis, we
compared measures of subjects’ self-reported pain
sensitivity with their evaluation of the pain-relatedness of
words. Our results confirmed that pain sensitivity has a
significant impact on the rating of pain-related words.
People who reported to be more sensitive to pain produced
higher pain ratings to pain-related words compared to
people who reported to be less sensitive.
This finding stimulates a series of interesting
considerations. First of all, while the relation between the
processing of pain-related information and other cognitive
factors has been investigated, the notion of pain-related
words has been generally operationalized using stimulus
material that describes the sensory qualities of pain (e.g.,
words like ‘‘stabbing’’, ‘‘burning’’) or its affective
component (e.g., words like ‘‘annoying’’, ‘‘terrifying’’). In
our experiment we provide evidence, for the first time, of
the relation between pain sensitivity and the processing of
nouns which can be contextually related to painful situations
but do not explicitly describe pain. This suggests that the
individual variable pain-sensitivity might affect the
processing of pain-related information to a much greater
extent than previously thought. Given the widespread nature
of this phenomenon, the exploration of the possible
mechanisms by which this interaction takes place deserves
special attention.
A potential interpretation of our results assumes a
cognitive theory of pain. According to this account, the
relation between pain sensitivity and the rating of painrelated words is explained by cognitive biases in retrieval
and processing of pain-related information. For example,
biases to orient the attention towards pain-related stimuli or

456

sensitive people than in those of less sensitive people. This
prediction, however, is at odds with our data, which
confirmed a significant influence of pain sensitivity on word
ratings only for concrete words. A supporter of prototype
theory could object that in our experiment abstract words
were on average rated to be more pain-related than concrete
words. Thus, the saliency of the attribute “painful” for
abstract words would obfuscate any difference due to f painsensitivity. If this reasoning were correct, we should expect
to find a significant impact of pain-sensitivity on word
ratings when considering only the sub-set of abstract words
which were given low pain values. However, this additional
analysis did not reveal any significant result between painsensitivity and abstract words, thus rejecting the prediction
of prototype theory (see Results section). The latter then can
only partially account for our results.
A third interpretation of the reported findings claims that
pain sensitivity corresponds to higher ratings regarding the
pain-relatedness of words, because both depend on the
functioning of the same cognitive and neural mechanisms.
Such an explanation is consistent with the embodied
account of language, according to which the processing of
linguistic meaning recruits areas of the brain dedicated to
action, perception and emotion (Barsalou, 1999; Prinz,
2005; Werning, 2012; Werning et al., 2013). For example,
understanding the meaning of a word like “syringe” is
assumed to partially re-activate visual areas of the brain that
are involved in perceiving syringes, motor areas that are
relevant to the affordances of syringes, as well as emotional
and pain-related circuits that encode affective states
triggered by the interaction with syringes. More specifically,
the semantic processing of pain-related words will reactivate the areas of the brain that are active when people
actually experience pain (i.e., the pain matrix). On this
account, the relation between pain sensitivity and the
evaluation of pain-related words is explained by assuming
that individual differences in the activation of the pain
matrix determine individual differences in pain sensitivity
and thus differences in the processing of pain-related words.
The first part of this hypothesis (individual differences in
pain sensitivity are associated with stronger activation of the
pain matrix) has been indeed confirmed in an fMRI study in
which highly sensitive individuals exhibited more frequent
and more robust pain-induced activation of the primary
somatosensory cortex, anterior cingulated cortex, and
prefrontal cortex than did less sensitive individuals (Coghill
et al., 2003). The second part of the hypothesis (individual
differences in pain sensitivity determine differences in the
processing of pain-related words) is an instance of the
principle of body specificity (Casasanto, 2011), which
claims that differences in bodily experiences will also lead
to differences in the way in which concepts and word
meanings are constructed. According to the body specificity
hypothesis, if concepts and word meanings are in part

constituted by implicit simulations of actual actions,
perceptions and emotions, then systematic differences in the
way in which people act, perceive and feel will also lead to
differences in the way in which they construct concepts and
word meanings. In this perspective, if the processing of
pain-related words involves the re-activation of the brain
regions that are active when people actually experience
pain, then differences in activation as reflected by
differences in pain sensititivity should also lead to
differences in the processing of pain-related words.
The body specificity hypothesis can then directly account
for our results given that it predicts that individual
differences in the way in which people experience painful
stimuli (i.e., differences in pain sensitivity) will also lead to
differences in the processing of pain-related words.
Importantly, the difference between concrete and abstract
words in terms of their relation with pain-sensitivity can
also be readily explained assuming such a theoretical
framework. Whereas concrete concepts are processed in
brain regions devoted to action, perception and emotions,
the encoding and processing of abstract concepts may rely
more strongly on linguistic information, thus activating
brain areas that are involved in language processing, e.g.,
the left perisylvian network (see Binder et al. (2009)). If so,
we would in fact expect to find a correlation between pain
sensitivity and the processing of concrete words given that
they are assumed to depend on the activation of the same
brain regions, while we do not have an apriori reason to
expect a correlation also between pain sensitivity and the
processing of abstract words given that the latter may
depend on other brain areas. It is interesting to note that
more radical versions of the embodied theories are currently
rejecting such a picture suggesting that abstract words entail
affective processing and activate brain regions associated
with emotion (i.e., the rostral anterior cingulate cortex
which modulates activity in the amygdala; Vigliocco et al.,
2014). Our results, however, do not support this more
radical version of the embodied account and suggest that a
moderate version of it could better fit our findings. 3
After having reviewed several theories that seem possible
candidates to explain the results of this experiment, we can
draw some final considerations. Both accounts of cognitive
theories – processing biases and prototype theory - present
some limitations. As for the first, in spite of the increasing
number of studies that have been focusing on the processing
of pain-related information, the solidity of the association
between processing biases and pain sensitivity, as well as
the direction of the effect, are still highly questionable.
Prototype theory, on the other hand, has shown to be able to
account only partially for the presented evidence. Although
the embodied account cannot be unequivocally supported by
our experiment, it does seem to be the most promising
account to accommodate our results.

3 Somewhere in-between the theories that we have considered – cognitive biases, prototype theory, and the embodied account – it could be argued that the
correlation between pain sensitivity and ratings on the pain-relatedness of words, is due to the intermediate effect of imagination. Highly sensitive people
may be more prone than less sensitive individuals at imagining scenarios that are potentially associated with, or elicited by pain-related words, leading to
higher pain-association values for these words. Given the effect of pain-incompatible imagery as a distractor of pain, it seems at least plausible that paincompatible imagery would have the opposite effect, enhancing the perceived pain-relatedness of words.

457

laser-heat stimuli in humans. Neuroscience Letters, 284,
53-56.
Edwards, R., Fillingim, R. (2007). Self-reported pain
sensitivity: Lack of correlation with pain threshold and
tolerance. European Journal of Pain, 11(5), 594–598.
Neumann, W., Kugler,J., Pfand-Neumann, P., Schmitz, N.,
Seelbach, H., and Kroskemper, G.M. (1997). Effects of
pain-incompatible imagery on tolerance of pain, heart
rate, and skin resistance. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 84,
939-943.
Pearce J, Morley S. (1989). An experimental investigation
of the construct validity of the McGill pain questionnaire.
PAIN, 39, 115–21.
Prinz, J.J. (2005). Passionate Thoughts. The Emotional
Embodiment of Moral Concepts. In: R. Zwaan and D.
Pecher (Eds.), The Grounding of Cognition: The role of
perception and action in memory, language, and thinking.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (pp.93-114).
Rak, N., Kontinen, J., Kuchinke, L., & Werning, M. (2013).
Does the Semantic Integration of Emotion Words Depend
on Emotional Empathy? In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N.
Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1187-1192). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Richter, M., Eck, J., Straube, T., Miltner, W. H., & Weiss, T.
(2010). Do words hurt? Brain activation during the
processing of pain-related words. Pain, 148(2), 198-205.
Rosch, E. (1999). Principles of categorization. In E.
Margolis and S. Laurence (Eds.), Concepts: Core
Readings, Chapter 8, pp. 189–206. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Rusu, A., Pincus, T., Morley, S. (2012). Depressed pain
patients differ from other depressed groups: examination
of cognitive content in a sentence completion task. Pain.
153(9), 1898-904.
Silva, C., Montant, M., Ponz, A., Ziegler, J. C. (2012).
Emotions in reading: Disgust, empathy and the contextual
learning hypothesis. Cognition, 125(2), 333-338.
Vigliocco, G., Kousta, S. T., Della Rosa, P. A., Vinson, D. P.,
Tettamanti, M., Devlin, J. T., Cappa, S. F. (2014). The
Neural Representation of Abstract Words: The Role of
Emotion. Cereb Cortex, 24(7), 1767-1777.
Võ, M. L.-H., Conrad, M., Kuchinke, L., Hartfeld, K.,
Hofmann, M. F., & Jacobs, A. M. (2009). The Berlin
Affective Word List Reloaded (BAWL-R). Behavior
Research Methods, 41(2), 534-538.
Werning, M. (2012). Non-symbolic Compositional Representation and Its Neuronal Foundation: Towards an
Emulative Semantics. In Werning, M., Hinzen, W., &
Machery, M. (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of
Compositionality. Oxford University Press, Oxford (pp.
633-654).
Werning, M., Tacca, M., & Mroczko-Wasowicz, A. (2013).
High- vs Low-Level Cognition and the Neuro-Emulative
Theory of Mental Representation. In V. Gähde, U.,
Hartmann, S., & Wolf, J.H. (Eds.), Models, Simulations,
and the Reduction of Complexity. DeGruyter, Berlin (pp.
141-152).

Conclusion
In this study we investigated whether and how people’s pain
sensitivity influences their associations of both abstract and
concrete words with pain. Our results demonstrate that
subjects with higher pain sensitivity are likely to associate
words with greater amounts of pain than subjects with lower
pain sensitivity. In order to adjudicate between alternative
explanations, we have discussed three different accounts.
While theories of cognitive bias have severe limitations in
their application to this study, both, prototype theory and the
embodied account of cognitive processing are well
positioned to explicate the main results of our study.
However, we have argued that differences in associations
between abstract and concrete words are better accounted
for by the embodied account. Future research will need to
address a number of interesting and virtually unexplored
open questions such as the relation between pain sensitivity
and the cognitive representation of pain, and how
motivational, emotional, attentional factors contribute, if
they contribute at all, to determine people’s sensitivity to
pain. The urgency of these questions is not only determined
by their scientific value, but also by their potential practical
implications. Given preliminary evidence that heightened
pain sensitivity increases risk for future chronic pain
conditions, answering these questions could also help
identifying novel routes for preliminary diagnosis and
treatment of this complex condition.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Alexander Errenst, Marcel Gimmel,
Nina Poth, and Fahime Same for their support in
constructing the set of stimuli and preparing the data for
analysis. Thanks also to Lars Kuchinke for helpful
comments.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and brain sciences, 22, 577-660.
Baum, C., Huber, C., Schneider, R., Lautenbacher, S.
(2011). Prediction of experimental pain sensitivity by
attention to pain-related stimuli in healthy individuals.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 112(3), 926-946.
Binder J., Desai R., Graves W., Conant L. (2009). Where is
the semantic system? A critical review and meta-analysis
of 120 functional neuroimaging studies. Cereb Cortex;
19:2767-2796.
Casasanto, D. (2011). Different Bodies, Different Minds:
The body-specificity of language and thought. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 20(6), 378–
383.Coghill, R.C., McHaffie, J.G., Yen, Y.F. (2003).
Neural correlates of interindividual differences in the
subjective experience of pain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA,
100(14), 8538-42.
Crombez, G., Van Ryckeghem, D.M., Eccleston, C., Van
Damme, S. (2013). Attentional bias to pain-related
information: a meta-analysis. PAIN, 154, 497–510.
Dillmann, J., Miltner, H., Weiss, T. (2000). The influence of
semantic priming on event-related potentials to painful

458

