Reasoning about sentience and animacy:
Children’s and adults’ inferences about the properties of unseen entities
Kara Weisman
(kweisman@stanford.edu)

Ellen M. Markman
(markman@stanford.edu)

Carol S. Dweck
(dweck@stanford.edu)

Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract
One striking finding in developmental and cognitive
psychology is that people make rich inferences about the
intentions and experiences of objects that look nothing like
humans or animals. What makes these scenarios appear
social, not just mechanical? Three studies explore this
foundational level of social cognition: the detection of
sentience. We probe inferences among what we posit to be
core components of the concept of sentience—affect,
autonomy, and perception—as well as physical markers of
inanimacy. We find that children and adults share the belief
that a fact about one of these three “sentient properties”
implies the presence of others, to a moderate degree.
Meanwhile, information about sentience blocks inferences
of inanimacy. This link between sentience and animacy is
particularly strong for US adults and White children, while
people from other cultural backgrounds demonstrate a more
flexible construal of what kinds of objects might be sentient.
Keywords: inference; sentience; animacy; social cognitive
development.

Introduction
Our world is full of sentient beings. Many of these creatures
are other humans, but other entities, even unfamiliar ones,
can also evoke social responses. Certain behaviors—such as
responding contingently, or pursuing a goal—trigger quick,
perhaps irresistible, attributions of sentience, whether
performed by an animal, a piece of technology, or
something altogether unfamiliar. What are the conceptual
underpinnings of this most basic level of social cognition?
Even infants are exquisitely sensitive to the presence of
sentient creatures in their environment. In the burgeoning
field of social cognitive development, seemingly sparse
experimental displays elicit rich, spontaneous inferences
about such complex phenomena as contingent responding
and shared attention (Johnson, Slaughter, & Carey, 1998),
goal pursuit and rational action (Csibra, et al., 1999; Luo,
2011), helping/hindering (Hamlin, Wynn, & Bloom, 2007),
emotions (Skerry & Spelke, 2014), attachment (Johnson,
Dweck, & Chen, 2007), and dominance (Mascaro & Csibra,
2012; Thomsen, et al., 2011) One striking finding from this
work is that many of the protagonists that elicit social
reasoning look nothing like humans or animals. Instead,
they are polygons with minimal eyes, featureless ellipses,
wooden boxes, even “blobs” of fiberfill. What renders these
scenarios social, rather than merely mechanical? What do

such events imply about their protagonists that facilitates
reasoning about their experiences and relationships?
A close analysis of these studies suggests that the
seemingly simple behaviors used in investigations of social
reasoning can be deconstructed into multiple lower-level
capacities. An entity that responds contingently, such as a
blob that beeps in response to a baby’s vocalizations
(Johnson et al., 1998), must perceive its partner’s actions,
evaluate this partner as someone it wants to interact with,
and generate actions of its own. Likewise, in a typical goal
pursuit display (Csibra et al., 1999), an agent perceives a
goal, evaluates it as desirable, propels itself toward the goal,
adjusts its path to avoid obstacles, and stops upon arrival, at
which point it might express happiness about its success. On
this analysis, each of these ostensibly “sparse” displays
actually presents a rich set of cues to more basic properties
of sentience, offering ample evidence to the observer that
the target is some sort of creature, and not an inert object.
What are these basic properties? The present studies
investigate three low-level capacities implied by many of
the events depicted in studies of early social cognition:
affect, the experience of affective states, such as positive or
negative valence; autonomy, the generation of spontaneous
behaviors, such as movements or noises; and perception, the
detection of information about the environment, such as
sights or sounds. We posit that these capacities are core
components of the lay concept of sentience.
By using audiovisual displays of entities responding to
social partners, pursuing goals, navigating environments, or
engaging in other observable behaviors, previous studies
have presented cues to affect, autonomy, and perception in
combination. Thus, little is known about the conceptual
links between these capacities, or the individual roles they
might play in reasoning about sentient creatures. In
principle, affect, autonomy, and perception are causally
independent: In order for an entity to have one of these
abilities it need not have the others. Nonetheless, children or
adults might consider some of these capacities to “go
together”: e.g., if something is moving around on its own,
this might imply that it can also perceive the environment,
or experience emotions. The present studies probe the
conceptual connections between affect, autonomy, and
perception by examining whether learning a fact about one
of these capacities licenses inferences about the others. We
compare inferences among these three sentient capacities to
inferences involving physical cues to inanimacy. We first
examine these inferences in US adults.

2625

Study 1

capacities to be conceptually linked (in which case they
should response positively), or independent (in which case
mean responses should not differ from the midpoint).

Methods
Participants. 89 adults participated via Mechanical Turk.
Participants had gained approval for ≥95% of previous work
(≥50 assignments); had US IP addresses; and indicated that
they were ≥18 years old; and were paid $0.36 for about 6-7
minutes of their time. Three participants were excluded for
failing to complete the survey, and six participants were
randomly excluded to preserve counterbalancing, leaving a
final sample of 80 participants.
Materials and Procedure. Our method was designed with
the primary goal of presenting facts about unknown entities
in isolation, rather than in combination. We conveyed
information about sentience and animacy via verbal
descriptions of unseen targets, rather than using audiovisual
depictions of these targets (as in previous studies).
Participants were presented with an illustrated story in
which a character talked about a series of target entities. On
each trial, the character looked into an opaque box, provided
one fact about the sentience or animacy of the target inside,
and then asked a question about that target’s other
properties: e.g., Wow, this one can hear me talking! Hm,
does that mean it can be in a bad mood sometimes?
Facts and questions were drawn from the three categories
hypothesized to be core components of the concept of
sentience—affect (e.g., feels happy right now), autonomy
(e.g., is moving around on its own), and perception (e.g.,
can see what the box looks like)—as well as a fourth
category of material cues to inanimacy (e.g., is made out of
plastic), yielding 16 possible pairings of fact and question
categories. Each participant was presented with 8 of the 16
fact-question pairings; categories appeared equally often in
the fact and question positions and in the first and second
halves of the testing session, within and across participants.
Participants responded on a 4-point scale from Really no to
Really yes. Sessions began with 3 warm-up trials intended to
familiarize participants with the paradigm and to provide
practice using both ends of the response scale.

Analysis Plan and Predictions
Scoring. We scored responses of Really no as -1.5, Maybe
no as -0.5, Maybe yes as 0.5, and Really yes as 1.5; this
created a (hypothetical) neutral midpoint of 0.
Comparison to neutral. To examine responses to each of
the possible pairings of fact and question categories, we
conducted a mixed effects linear regression with a random
intercept for subject, comparing each of the 16 fact-question
pairings to the neutral midpoint of our response scale. We
predicted that participants would respond negatively on
“inanimate” trials, which probed inferences between
sentient properties and inanimate material composition.
“Sentient-only” trials, which probed inferences from one
sentient property to another (e.g., affect to perception),
served to test whether participants considered these

Planned contrasts. To compare responses to different
pairings of fact and question categories, we conducted a
separate regression analysis with 10 orthogonal contrasts.
Our strongest theoretical prediction was that participants
would respond more positively on sentient-only trials than
on inanimate trials. We also explored whether, within
sentient-only trials, participants would respond more
positively on “within-category” trials, in which both the fact
and the question were about the same core component,
compared to “between-category” trials, in which they were
about different core components. See Table 1 for the full list
of contrasts, including comparisons of responses to facts
and questions about specific sentient capacities (affect vs.
other categories, autonomy vs. perception).

Results and Discussion
Comparison to neutral. In general, adults considered
capacities for affect, autonomy, and perception to be
conceptually linked: Mean responses were moderately
positive on sentient-only trials (1.17<t<8.91), suggesting
that the fact that an unseen entity had one of these sentient
properties implied that it might also have other sentient
properties. In addition, learning about the target’s capacity
for affect, perception, or autonomy was generally sufficient
for adults to rule out the possibility that it was inanimate, as
reflected by their strong1 negative responses to inferences
from sentient properties to inanimate materials (-10.31<t<6.33). Likewise, inanimate material composition was
sufficient to rule out the possibility that the target entity had
sentient capacities (-11.49<t<-7.50). See Figure 1 (left), for
mean responses by fact and question category.
Planned contrasts. Because adults endorsed inferences
among sentient properties and rejected inferences between
sentient properties and inanimacy, responses were more
positive on sentient-only (M=0.34) vs. inanimate (M=-1.03)
trials. Responses to within-category inferences were more
positive (M=0.57) than responses to between-category
inferences (M=0.23), but this was primarily driven by
exceptionally positive responses to inferences within the
affect category (M=0.95). The strength of these responses
could be due in part to our temporal framing: This one feels
happy right now. Does that mean it can be in a bad mood
sometimes? They are also consistent with the possibility
that participants conceived of affective experience as
inherently continuous, rather than composed of discrete
emotions.2 See Table 1 for the full results of this analysis.
1
A separate analysis of absolute values confirmed that negative
responses on inanimate trials were further from the midpoint than
positive responses on sentient-only trials, b=0.03, t=16.62.
2
An additional study replicated this finding in a design that
included inferences between valence and arousal: e.g., This one
feels calm right now. Does that mean it can feel happy sometimes?

2626

Figure 1: Responses to inference questions by fact-question pairing, for US Adults (Study 1), US Children (Study 2), and
Indian adults (Study 3). Error bars are 95% confidence intervals.

Study 2
Study 2 probed the developmental progression of these
psychological connections, documenting patterns of
inferences among sentient properties and physical markers
of animacy in a sample of preschool children.

Methods
Participants. 64 US children ages 4.45–5.68 years (M=4.95
years; 33 boys) participated at a university preschool.
School records indicated that 23 (36%) were White and no
other race/ethnicity; small numbers of children were Indian
(3), Hispanic/Latino (3), African-American (2), East Asian
(2), or Middle Eastern (2) and no other race/ethnicity; and
24 (38%) were multiracial. Ethnicity/race was unknown for
5 children (8%). An additional 5 children participated but
were excluded for not finishing the study (2), being outside
of the target age range (2), or not speaking English (1).
Materials and procedure. Study 2 followed the same
procedure as Study 1, with the following exceptions. An
experimenter read the story aloud, and children gave verbal
responses; typically they spontaneously said Yes or No and
were then prompted for a more fine-grained response (e.g.,
Sort of yes, or really yes?). To accommodate limits on
children’s attention, a short break was inserted halfway
through test trials, during which the experimenter and child
completed an easy puzzle featuring an ice cream cone.

Results and Discussion
On the whole, children’s responses in Study 2 were
strikingly similar to those of adults in Study 1. By the age of
five years, children seem to have a generally adult-like way
of reasoning about capacities for affect, autonomy and
perception, considering these three capacities to imply each
other to a moderate degree.

Comparison to neutral. Like adults, children considered
capacities for affect, autonomy, and perception to be
positively related, and generally considered sentient
capacities and inanimate material composition to be
unlikely to co-occur. Accordingly, on sentient-only trials
children’s mean responses were positive (1.30<t<3.93), and
on inanimate trials mean responses were generally
somewhat negative (-2.69<t<0.30).3 See Figure 1 (center).
Planned contrasts. Like adults, children gave more positive
responses on sentient-only trials (M=0.52) than on
inanimate trials (M=-0.33). Unlike adults, children gave
equally positive responses on within- and between-category
sentient-only trials (within: M=0.59, between: M=0.49).
Inferences from one kind of affect to another were quite
positive, but not exceptional. See Table 1.
Cultural effects. Although we had no a priori hypotheses
about cultural differences, the children in our study were
quite ethnically diverse, allowing us to conduct exploratory
analyses of differences in patterns of responding by
racial/ethnic background. For these analyses, we excluded
children whose racial/ethnic backgrounds were unknown
(N=5) and considered children with at least one non-White
parent to be “children of color,” leaving us with a sample of
23 White children and 36 children of color. Among children
of color, 81% (N=29) had ≥1 parent with Indian, East Asian,
or Middle Eastern heritage. White children and children of
color did not differ in mean age (t(57)=0.45, p=0.655) or in
gender distribution (χ2(1)=0.24, p=0.625).
For both comparisons to the midpoint and planned
contrasts analyses, including interactions with race/ethnicity
improved the fit of our models (χ2(16)=28.64, p=0.026;
χ2(11)=18.35, p=0.074; respectively). Of particular interest
3
In contrast to Study 1, a separate analysis indicated that
negative responses on inanimate trials were closer to the midpoint
than positive responses on sentient-only trials, b=-0.01, t=-2.68).

2627

Table 1: Results of mixed effects linear regressions with random intercepts for subjects and planned orthogonal contrasts.
Comparison
Intercept

Study 1 (US adults)

Study 2 (US children)

b

t

p

b

t

-0.26

-7.40

<0.001

0.16

1.80

0.09

26.50

<0.001

0.05

0.11
0.06
-0.02
0.08
0.04

4.58
2.77
-0.41
3.11
1.00

<0.001
0.006
0.683
0.002
0.318

-0.06
0.21
-0.11
0.09

-1.49
2.86
-2.68
1.15

0.136
0.004
0.008
0.253

p

Study 3 (Ind. adults)
b

t

p

0.077

-0.10

-1.79

0.078

9.01

<0.001

0.05

11.95

<0.001

0.05
0.04
0.15
0.01
-0.03

1.06
1.00
1.96
0.26
-0.39

0.291
0.318
0.050
0.794
0.699

0.05
-0.02
0.01
0.01
0.05

1.39
-0.71
0.21
0.42
0.86

0.165
0.479
0.834
0.673
0.388

-0.06
0.24
0.12
0.06

-0.77
1.77
1.56
0.44

0.444
0.077
0.119
0.658

-0.19
0.11
0.01
-0.00

-3.23
1.09
0.14
-0.01

0.001
0.278
0.890
0.993

All trials
1. Sentient-only vs. inanimate

Sentient-only trials
2. Within- vs. between-categories
3. Fact: affect vs. other categories
4. Fact: autonomy vs. perception
5. Question: affect vs. other categories
6. Question: autonomy vs. perception

Inanimate trials
7. Fact: affect vs. other categories
8. Fact: autonomy vs. perception
9. Question: affect vs. other categories
10. Question: autonomy vs. perception

is that while, across the board, responses were more positive
for sentient-only trials than for inanimate trials (b=0.03,
t=4.54), this effect was exaggerated for White children,
relative to children of color (b=0.04, t=3.15).4
Comparison to adults. The general pattern of responses
was highly similar for adults and children, although
children’s responses were generally more positive than
adults’: Whereas adults gave tempered positive responses on
sentient-only trials and strong negative responses on
inanimate trials, children gave positive responses on
sentient-only trials and more tempered (though still mostly
negative) responses on inanimate trials. In the aggregate,
children were more willing to entertain the idea that an
entity that engages in autonomous behavior could be
composed of metal, plastic, glass, or clay; children’s
responses to questions about the potential sentient properties
of inanimate objects were likewise more moderate than
adults’.5 While this could reflect a positive response bias for
children, these findings are also consistent with the idea that
children are more liberal than adults in their attributions of
sentience (Piaget, 1951). We would emphasize, however,
that the differences between children and adults on our task
were quite subtle, in line with post-Piagetian examinations
of the development of the concept of animacy, which have
demonstrated reliable distinctions between animate and
inanimate objects on the part of children much younger than

4
This model also revealed that responses on inanimate trials
were less negative when the fact was about autonomy, compared to
perception (b=0.42, t=2.33); this effect was marginally smaller for
White children (b=-0.50, t=-1.74).
5
A supplemental regression analysis confirmed that children’s
responses were more positive than adults’ (b=0.42, t=4.75), and the
difference between sentient-only and inanimate trials was
attenuated for children (b=-0.03, t=-5.56). Children also gave more
positive responses than adults on sentient-only trials when the base
fact was about autonomy (b=0.16, t=1.97), and on inanimate trials
when the question was about affect (b=0.23, t=2.78).

five years (Carey, 1985; Gelman, Spelke, & Meck, 1983;
Gelman & Opfer, 2002).

Study 3
Exploratory analyses of children’s response patterns
suggested that conceptual connections between sentient
properties and physical markers of animacy might vary by
children’s cultural exposure, with children of color (most of
whom were of Indian, East Asian, or Middle Eastern
heritage) demonstrating more tolerance of the idea that an
entity might be both sentient and inanimate. Although
unpredicted, this finding is in line with known cultural
differences in both domain-general cognitive styles (Nisbett,
Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001) and domain-specific
beliefs about the ontological and moral status of inanimate
objects (see Footnote 8). If children’s construals of
sentience and animacy depend on cultural input, we would
predict that adults from different cultures—particularly
cultural contexts that are known to differ in cognitive styles
and religious/philosophical orientations—would also vary in
their profile of inferences on our task. To this end, Study 3
probed these inferences in a sample of Indian adults who
were likely embedded in a context that encourages more
continuous and dialectical reasoning (Nisbett et al., 2001).

Methods
Participants. 80 English-speaking adults with Indian IP
addresses participated via Mechanical Turk.

Results and Discussion
Comparison to neutral. Like US adults, Indian adults
considered capacities for affect, autonomy, and perception
to be positively related: Mean responses were moderately
positive on sentient-only trials (0.33<t<3.74). Indian adults
considered sentient capacities to be somewhat unlikely to
co-occur with inanimate material composition, as reflected

2628

by their negative responses on inanimate trials (-5.53<t<1.95).6 See Figure 1 (right).
Planned contrasts. Like US adults, Indian adults gave more
positive responses on sentient-only trials (M=0.26) than on
inanimate trials (M=-0.53). Unlike US adults, Indian adults
gave equally positive responses on within- (M=0.38) and
between-category (M=0.20) sentient-only trials and did not
respond particularly positively to within-category inferences
about affect (M=0.25). See Table 1.
Comparison to US adults. Overall, Indian adults’ pattern
of responses was very similar to that of US adults. However,
Indian adults were more moderate in their responses,
particularly on inanimate trials: While US adults considered
sentient properties sufficient grounds to rule out the
possibility of inanimacy (and vice versa), Indian adults
indicated that it was unlikely—but not impossible—that
inanimate objects could have sentient properties, or that
sentient beings could be composed of metal, plastic, glass,
or clay. As predicted, this difference echoes the post-hoc
finding in our child sample, with similar patterns of
responses for White children and US adults on the one hand,
and for children of color and Indian adults on the other.7

General Discussion
In these studies, we set out to explore the conceptual
underpinnings of attributions of sentience. These studies
demonstrated that adults and young children consider
capacities for affect, autonomy, and perception to mutually
imply each other to a reliable, moderate degree. By five
years of age, children and adults from multiple cultural
backgrounds converge on a similar pattern of inferences
among these capacities, suggesting that they share a similar
construal of the psychological connections among what we
consider central components of the concept of sentience.
Across our studies, inferences between affect, autonomy,
and perception were generally positive, but quite modest in
strength. At the outset of these studies, it seemed plausible
that the psychological connections between at least some
pairs of properties might be strong enough to elicit stronger
inferences in our task: It could have been the case that
learning that an unseen target is happy, or can hear someone
talking, or is moving itself around would be enough to
trigger a whole suite of sentient properties, leading
participants to strongly endorse inferences about a variety of
other capacities. Instead, both adults and children tended to
give responses that were only slightly above the neutral
6

As in Study 1, a separate analysis confirmed that negative
responses on inanimate trials were further from the midpoint than
positive responses on sentient-only trials (b=0.02, t=8.07).
7
A supplemental analysis revealed that US adults gave more
negative responses overall (b=-0.15, t=-2.30), and the difference in
responses on sentient-only vs. inanimate trials was exaggerated for
US adults (b=0.03, t=5.96). Exceptionally positive responses to
inferences within the affect category were particular to US adults
(b=0.09, t=2.22).

midpoint of our scale, both in the aggregate and at the
subject level. Although isolated information about a
capacity for affect, autonomy, or perception was sufficient
to suggest the possibility of other sentient properties, it was
not enough to fully convince participants that the unseen
target possessed the entire suite of sentient properties. The
adults and children in our studies seem to have adopted a
flexible stance regarding the specific capacities that a
sentient creature might possess: While in the absence of
other information they might expect such a creature to have
some variety of affective, autonomous, and perceptual
abilities, they would not be “thrown off” by a creature that
did not have some specific ability (e.g., to see, or to make
noises). In fact, many individual creatures in the real world,
including humans, lack one or more of the specific
capacities included in the present studies—if every such
instance constituted a major violation of people’s concept of
sentience, social reasoning would be much more difficult.
In light of our findings, we might reconsider the
traditional characterization of experimental displays in the
recent social cognitive literature as simple or sparse: The
fact that isolated verbal information about a single sentient
property does not license stronger inferences about other
sentient properties emphasizes the rich amount of
information contained in more traditional audiovisual
displays. In our studies, information about an entity’s
capacity for, e.g., autonomous movement was not redundant
with information about its perceptual abilities or its affective
experiences. Thus, behaviors such as navigating through an
environment, which requires both perceptual access and a
capacity for autonomous behavior, should be considered to
contain rich information about multiple aspects of the
identity or nature of the target—i.e., multiple, modestly
correlated cues to sentience. Although scenes portraying
social contingency, goal pursuit, helping and hindering, etc.,
are beautifully controlled with regard to the phenomena they
were created to depict, they are nonetheless incredibly rich
in content from the perspective of detecting which
components of the displays are potential social partners.
How does this understanding of sentience relate to
concepts of animacy? In contrast to the consistent pattern of
moderately positive inferences between sentient properties,
which held true across our samples, participants from
different cultural groups diverged in their responses to
questions about whether entities could be both sentient and
inanimate. US adults considered it highly unlikely that
something made of metal, plastic, glass, or clay could have
any of the sentient properties included in our studies—or
that an entity with a capacity for affect, autonomy, or
perception could be composed of these materials. In
contrast, Indian adults were more moderate in their
responses to these questions, indicating that it was not
impossible that inanimate entities could have sentient
properties. Among children attending a university preschool
in the US, White children’s responses were very similar to
those of US adults, while, in the aggregate, children of
color—most of whose ethnic backgrounds suggested

2629

exposure to East or South Asian cultures—gave responses
that were more similar to those of Indian adults.
Following work in cultural psychology (e.g., Markus &
Kitayama, 1991), we speculate that these diverging response
patterns might emerge as a result of learning both domaingeneral cognitive styles and domain-specific beliefs. From a
cognitive perspective, a liberal understanding of sentience
and animacy as non-mutually exclusive is congruent with
the “holistic” reasoning style common to many Eastern
cultural contexts, in which continuity and relationships
between entities are the focus of thought, and dialectical
oppositions are tolerated and even valued. In contrast, a
sharp distinction between sentient animate beings, on the
one hand, and non-sentient inanimate objects, on the other
hand, is more consistent with the “analytic” reasoning style
dominant in the Western world, which deals in individual
objects, belonging to discrete categories and bound by rules
of logic (Nisbett, et al., 2001). In combination with religious
and philosophical beliefs about sentience, souls, and minds8,
these cognitive styles could plausibly support cultural
differences in the degree to which information about
sentience licenses inferences about animacy, and vice versa.
Taken together, our studies provide evidence of culturally
invariant conceptual connections among affect, autonomy,
and perception, while also suggesting possible cultural
differences in how people reason about what kinds of
entities might have these sentient properties. Attributions of
sentience or mind are critical to both psychological and
philosophical accounts of sociomoral reasoning (Gray,
Young, & Waytz, 2012), and the inferences documented in
these studies may play a critical role in allowing people to
abstract away from direct observations of unfamiliar entities
(human or otherwise) toward conceptual representations of
these entities as sentient, facilitating decisions about
whether to accord them moral status. Our findings suggest
that different cultures might build on these connections in
different ways, perhaps connecting them to categorical
construals of biological animacy, or instead employing a
more fluid representation of the physical instantiation of
sentient beings. In turn, these construals might influence
how people in these communities interact with the wide
variety of creatures in their worlds.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the staff and families at Bing Nursery
School, and to Co Tran. This material is based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE114747, and by a William R. & Sara Hart Kimball Stanford
Graduate Fellowship.
8
E.g., inanimate objects are thought to be sentient in some
Buddhist traditions (Rambelli, 2007), and the Shinto term kami
refers to the spirit or essence of individual people, places, natural
objects, and some tools (Ono & Woodard, 1962)—whereas souls
in the Judeo-Christian tradition reside only in beings that have
been given “the breath of life” (Genesis 2:7, King James Bible).

References
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Csibra, G., Gergely, G., Bíró, S., Koós, O., & Brockbank,
M. (1999). Goal attribution without agency cues: The
perception of “pure reason” in infancy. Cognition, 72(3),
237-67.
Gelman, R., Spelke, E., & Meck, E. (1983). What
preschoolers know about animate and inanimate objects.
In D. Rogers & J. A. Sloboda (Eds.), The Acquisition of
Symbolic Skills. Springer US.
Gelman, S., & Opfer, J. (2002). Development of the
animate-inanimate distinction. In U. Goswami (Ed.),
Blackwell Handbook of Childhood Cognitive
Development. Blackwell Publishers Ltd.
Gray, K., Young, L., & Waytz, A. (2012). Mind perception
is the essence of morality. Psychological Inquiry, 23(2),
101-24.
Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2007). Social
evaluation in preverbal infants. Nature, 450(7169), 557–9.
Johnson, S. C. (2003). Detecting agents. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
358, 549-59.
Johnson, S. C., Dweck, C. S., & Chen, F. S. (2007).
Evidence for infants’ internal working models of
attachment. Psychological Science, 18(6), 501-2.
Johnson, S. C., Slaughter, V., & Carey, S. (1998). Whose
gaze will infants follow? The elicitation of gaze-following
in 12-month-olds. Developmental Science, 1(2), 233-8.
Luo, Y. (2011). Three-month-old infants attribute goals to a
non-human agent. Developmental Science, 14(2), 453-60.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self:
Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation.
Psychological Review, 98(2), 224-53.
Mascaro, O., & Csibra, G. (2012). Representation of stable
social dominance relations by human infants. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(18), 6862-7.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and systems of thought: Holistic vs. analytic
cognition. Psychological Review, 108(2), 291-310.
Ono, S., & Woodard, W. P. (1962). Shinto: The Kami Way.
Tuttle Publishing.
Piaget, J. (1951). Play, Dreams, and Imitation in Childhood.
New York, NY: W W Norton & Co.
Rambelli, F. (2007). Buddhist Materiality: A Cultural
History of Objects in Japanese Buddhism. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Skerry, A. E., & Spelke, E. S. (2014). Preverbal infants
identify emotional reactions that are incongruent with
goal outcomes. Cognition, 130(2), 204-16.
Thomsen, L., Frankenhuis, W. E., Ingold-Smith, M., &
Carey, S. (2011). Big and mighty: preverbal infants
mentally represent social dominance. Science, 331(6016),
477-80.

2630

