Referential cues modulate attention and memory
during cross-situational word learning
Kyle MacDonald

Daniel Yurovsky

Michael C. Frank

kyle.macdonald@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

yurovsky@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract
Tracking word-object co-occurrence statistics can reduce referential uncertainty during word learning. But human learners
are constrained by limits on attention and memory, and therefore must store a subset of the information available—how do
they select what information to store? We hypothesize that the
presence of referential cues like eye gaze guides how learners allocate their attention. In three large-scale experiments
with adults, we test how the presence of referential cues affects
cross-situational word learning. Referential cues shift learners
away from multiple hypothesis tracking towards storing only a
single hypothesis (Experiments 1 and 2). In addition, learners
are sensitive to the reliability of a referential cue and when it is
less reliable, they are less likely to use the cue and more likely
to store multiple hypotheses (Experiment 3). Together, the data
suggest a rational tradeoff: In conditions of greater uncertainty,
learners tend to store a broader range of information.
Keywords: statistical learning, word learning, referential
cues, resource rationality

Introduction
Words are powerful tools that allow speakers to rapidly convey meaning. We focus here on the task of mapping concrete
nouns to objects, as opposed to other substantive inferential
problems such as word segmentation and generalization. To
make such a mapping, learners must solve the core problem of referential uncertainty (Quine, 1960): that a speaker’s
utterance could refer to many possible objects in the visual
scene, to parts of of those objects, or even to something that
is not present. How do learners infer word meanings from
data with this kind of uncertainty?
Statistical learning theories offer a solution to this learning problem by aggregating cross-situational statistics across
labeling events to identify underlying word meanings. Recent experimental work shows that both adults and young
infants can use word-object co-occurrence statistics to learn
words from individually ambiguous naming events (L. Smith
& Yu, 2008; Vouloumanos, 2008). For example, L. Smith
and Yu (2008) taught 12-month-olds three novel words simply by repeating consistent novel word-object pairings across
10 ambiguous exposure trials. Moreover, recent computational models suggest that cross-situational learning can scale
up to learn adult-sized lexicons, even under conditions of considerable referential uncertainty (K. Smith, Smith, & Blythe,
2011).
Although all learning models agree that the input is the
co-occurrence between words and objects, they disagree
about how closely learners approximate the input distribution.
Some theories hold that we accumulate graded, statistical evidence about multiple referents for each word (McMurray,

Horst, & Samuelson, 2012), while others argue that we track
only a single candidate referent (Trueswell, Medina, Hafri,
& Gleitman, 2013). Recent experimental and modeling work
suggests an integrative explanation: that learners store both a
strong single hypothesis and a set of weaker alternative hypotheses, with the strength of the alternatives modulated by
the number of referents present during learning (Yurovsky &
Frank, under review). Under Yurovsky and Frank (under review)’s model, learners allocate a fixed amount of their attention to one hypothesis, and the rest gets distributed evenly
among the remaining alternatives. As the set of alternatives
grows, the amount allocated to each object approaches zero.
This framework raises the interesting question of whether
learners might be sensitive to the quality of the learning context and use this information to adaptively allocate their fixed
cognitive resources. This characterization fits well with recent modeling and experimental work that attempts to offer
resource-rational explanations of higher cognition (Lieder,
Goodman, & Griffiths, 2014). For example, Vul, Goodman, Griffiths, and Tenenbaum (2014) showed that as timepressure increased in a decision-making task, participants
were more likely to show behavior consistent with a less cognitively challenging strategy of matching, rather than with the
globally optimal strategy. Are there comparable aspects of
the word learning context that might shift learners’ allocation
of cognitive resources?
Here we consider the hypothesis that referential cues (e.g.,
eye gaze and pointing) modulate learners’ resource allocation
by providing evidence about the speaker’s intended meaning. Social-pragmatic theories of language learning have emphasized referential cues as critical for early word learning
(Clark, 2009). Experimental work shows that even children
as young as 16 months are sophisticated intention-readers,
preferring to map novel words to objects that are the target
of a speaker’s gaze and not their own (Baldwin, 1993). And
in naturalistic observations, learners tend to retain labels that
are accompanied with clear referential cues that are concurrent with visual access (Yu & Smith, 2012). Together, the
evidence suggests that referential cues could help learners by
allowing for efficient allocation of limited attention to the relevant statistics in the input.
In the current set of studies, we test the effect of referential
cues on the number of representations stored during crosssituational word learning. In Experiment 1, we manipulate
the presence of a valid referential cue, a speaker’s eye gaze,
at different levels of attention and memory demands. At all

1452

levels of difficulty, learners tracked a strong single hypothesis, but learners were less likely to track multiple word-object
links when referential cues were present. In Experiment 2,
we replicate the findings from Experiment 1 with a more
ecologically valid stimulus set. In Experiment 3, we show
that reducing the reliability of the referential cue increases
learners multiple hypothesis tracking. Together, the data suggest that learners adaptively allocate attention and store representations with different levels of fidelity depending on the
amount of referential uncertainty present during learning.

Figure 1: Experimental stimuli from Experiment 1
(schematic) and Experiment 2 (live action).

Experiment 1
We set out to test the effects of referential cues on crosssituational learning at different levels of attention and memory demands. Participants saw a series of ambiguous exposure trials that consisted of a set of novel objects (either 2, 4,
6, or 8) and an image of a schematic, female interlocutor. On
each trial they heard one novel word that was either paired
with an eye gaze cue or not, and were asked to make guesses
about which object went with each word. In subsequent test
trials, participants heard the novel word again after different
numbers of intervening trials (0, 1, 3, and 7), this time paired
with a new set of novel objects. Importantly, test trials were
contingent upon participants’ selection during exposure such
that one of the objects in the set was either the participant’s
initial guess (Same trials) or one of the objects that was not
the initial guess (Switch trials). While both single and multiple referent trackers could succeed on Same trials, only participants who encoded multiple word-object links during their
first encounter could succeed on Switch trials. This provides
a direct test of whether learners track multiple alternatives
and if these representations are influenced by the presence of
referential cues.

Methods
Participants This experiment was posted to Amazon Mechanical Turk as a set of Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) to
be completed only by participants with US IP addresses and
an approval rate above 95%. Each HIT paid 30 cents. Approximately 50-130 HITs were posted for each of the 32 conditions (4 referents X 4 intervals X 2 gaze conditions) for total
of approximately 2400 paid HITs. If a participant completed
the experiment more than once, he or she was paid each time
but only data from the first HITs completion was included in
the final data set. In addition, data was excluded from the
final sample if participants did not give correct answers for
familiar trials (5 HITs excluded).
Stimuli Figure 1 shows stimuli used in Experiment 1.
These stimuli consisted of black and white pictures of familiar and novel objects drawn from the set of 140 first used
in Kanwisher, Woods, Iacoboni, and Mazziotta (1997), a
schematic drawing of a human interlocutor, and audio recordings of familiar and novel words. Familiar words consisted of
the labels for the familiar objects as produced by AT&T Natural VoicesTM (voice: Crystal). Novel words were 1–3 syllable

pseudowords obeying the rules of English phonotactics produced using the same speech synthesizer. A schematic drawing of a human speaker was chosen for ease of manipulating
the direction of eye gaze, the referential cue of interest in this
study (see Figure 1).
Design and Procedure Participants were exposed to a series of 16 trials (8 exposure, and 8 test) in which they heard
a speaker say one novel word, saw a set of novel objects, and
were asked to guess which object went with the word. After a written explanation of the task, participants completed
four practice trials that consisted of familiar words and objects. These trials also served to screen for participants who
did not have their audio enabled or who were not attending to
the task.
After the practice trials, participants were informed that
they would now hear novel words, and see novel objects,
and that they should continue selecting the correct referent
for each word. Participants heard eight novel words twice,
one exposure and one test trial for each word. Four of the test
trials were Same trials in which the object that participants
selected on the exposure trial appeared again amongst a set
of new objects. The other four were Switch trials in which
one of the objects in the set was selected randomly from the
objects that the participant did not select on the previous exposure trial. All other objects were completely novel on each
trial.
Participants were randomly assigned to see either 2, 4, 6, or
8 referents on each trial and to have either 0, 1, 3, or 7 trials in
between exposure and test. Participants were also assigned to
either the Gaze or No-gaze condition. In the Gaze condition,
eye gaze was directed towards one of the objects on exposure
trials; in the No-gaze condition, eye gaze was always directed
straight ahead. On test trials, eye gaze was never informative.
To indicate that participants’ selections had been registered, a
red dashed box appeared around the object they selected for
1 second after their click was received. This box appeared
around the selected object whether or not it was the ”correct”
referent.

Results and Discussion
Exposure trials To ensure that our referential cue manipulation was effective we compared participant’s performance

1453

Figure 2: Accuracy on test trials in Experiment 1 for both trial types (Same and Switch) and experimental conditions (Gaze and
No-gaze). Each datapoint represents approximately 35-130 participants. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals computed
by non-parametric bootstrap.
on Exposure trials in the Gaze condition against the distribution expected if participants were selecting randomly (defined by a Binomial distribution with four trials and a probability of success of #Re f 1erents ). In all conditions, participants’
responses differed from those expected by chance, exact binomial p(two-tailed) < .001, suggesting that eye gaze effectively directed participants’ attention to the target referent.
We also analyzed participants’ response times on exposure
trials, which were self-paced and thus a proxy for attention
allocated to the referents on the screen. We fit a linear mixed
effects model to response times on exposure trials.1 We found
a significant main effect of referents (β = 806.88, p < .001)
with slower responses as the number of referents increased.
We also found a significant two-way interaction between condition and number of referents (β = −517.36, p < .001) such
that responses were faster in the gaze condition, especially as
the number of referents increased.
Test trials To analyze performance on Test trials, we compared the distribution of correct responses made by each participant to the distribution expected if participants were selecting randomly. Figure 2 shows participants’ accuracies in
identifying the referent of each word in all conditions for both
kinds of trials (Same and Switch) and in each referential cue
condition (Gaze and No-gaze). We replicate the finding from
Yurovsky and Frank (under review): at all Referent and Interval levels, both for Same and for Switch trials, participants’
responses differed from those expected by chance (smallest
1 All

mixed-effects models were fit using the lme4 package in R. The model was specified as follows:
RT ∼
Gaze-condition × Log(Interval) × Log(Referents) +
(Trial Type | subject).

χ2 (4) = 12.07, p < .01). Participants’ success on Switch trials provides direct evidence that learners encoded more than
a single hypothesis in ambiguous word learning situations,
even under high attentional and memory demands.
To quantify the effect of each factor on the likelihood of
a correct response, we fit a mixed-effects logistic regression
model to the full dataset.2 We found significant main effects
of number of referents (β = −0.66, p < .001) and interval
(β = −0.48, p < .001), such that as each of these factors increased, accuracy on test trials decreased. We also found significant main effects of trial type (β = −1.29, p < .001), with
worse performance on switch trials.
Next we examined the interactions between each factor.
There were significant two-way interactions between trial
type and interval (β = 0.31, p < .001) and trial type and number of referents (β = −0.69, p < .001) such that the interval between exposure and test affected same trials more than
switch trials, and the number of referents affected switch trials more than same trials. The two-way interaction between
trial type and gaze condition was not significant in this model,
but trended in the correct direction (β = −0.52, p = 0.13).
The interaction between trial type and gaze condition is
the important test of our hypothesis because it shows that the
presence of a referential cue reduced learners multiple hypothesis tracking. But we would only expect to see the effect
of referential cues on test trials if participants were actually
using the gaze cue on exposure trials. So we fit a mixedeffects logistic regression to a filtered dataset, removing those
2 The model specification was as follows: Correct ∼ Trial
Type × Gaze-condition × Log(Interval) × Log(Referents)
+ (Trial Type | subject).

1454

participants who were not reliably using the gaze cue on exposure trials. This filter removed 90 participants who selected
the target of eye gaze at below chance levels on exposure trials. The analysis of the filtered dataset showed a reliable interaction between trial type and gaze condition (β = −0.79,
p < .05), suggesting that when learners used the gaze cue,
they were less likely to track multiple word-object links.
Taken together, the response time and accuracy analyses
provide evidence that learners use of a referential cue modulated their attention during learning, thus making them less
likely to track multiple word-object links. Interestingly, we
did not see strong evidence that reduced tracking of alternatives resulted in a boost to participants’ performance on same
trials. This finding suggests that the limitations on same trials may be different than those regulating the distribution of
attention on switch trials, since the presence of a referential
cue selectively reduced learners tracking of alternatives but
did not lead learners to form a stronger memory of their single candidate hypothesis.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we attempt to replicate the findings from
Experiment 1 using a more ecologically valid stimuli set. To
move closer to a real word learning context, we replaced the
static, schematic gaze cue with a live actress and introduced a
within-subjects design where each participant saw both gaze
and no-gaze exposure trials. We selected a subset of conditions, testing only the 4-referent display with 0 and 3 intervening trials as between-subjects manipulations. Our goals
were to replicate the effect of referential cues on learners’
multiple hypothesis tracking, and to test whether increasing
the ecological validity of the cue would result in a boost to
the strength of learners’ single candidate hypothesis.

Methods
Participants Participant recruitment and inclusionary/exclusionary criteria were identical to those of Experiment 1 (excluded 36 HITs). 100 HITs were posted for each
condition (1 referent X 2 intervals X 2 gaze conditions) for
total of 400 paid HITs.
Stimuli Audio and picture stimuli were identical to Experiment 1. The referential cue in the gaze condition was a film
of a live actress (see Figure 1). On each exposure trial, the actress looked out at the participant with a neutral expression,
smiled, and then turned to look at one of the four images on
the screen. She maintained her gaze for 3 seconds before returning to the center. On test trials, she looked straight ahead
for the duration of the trial.
Design and Procedure Procedures were identical to those
of Experiment 1. The major design change was a withinsubjects manipulation of the gaze cue. That is, participants
saw exposure trials with and without eye gaze. The experiment consisted of 32 trials broken down into 2 blocks of 16
trials. Each block consisted of 8 exposure trials and 8 test trials (4 same test trials and 4 switch test trials), and contained

Figure 3: Accuracy on test trials in Experiment 2. Each datapoint represents 182 participants. Error bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals computed by non-parametric bootstrap.
only gaze or no-gaze exposure trials. The order of block was
counterbalanced across participants.

Results and Discussion
We followed the same analysis plan as in Experiment 1. First,
we analyze performance on exposure trials to ensure that participants were using the referential cue and to test if the cue
changed response times. Then we analyze performance on
test trials to measure the effect of the presence of referential
cues on the number of word-object links learners stored in
memory.
Exposure trials Similar to Experiment 1, participants’ responses on exposure trials differed from those expected by
chance, exact binomial p(two-tailed) < .001, suggesting that
eye gaze effective in directing attention to the target referent. Participants in Experiment 2 were numerically more consistent in their use of eye gaze with the live action stimuli
in Experiment 2 compared to the schematic stimuli used in
Experiment 1 (M1 = .76, M2 = .81). We also fit a linear
mixed effects model to response times with the same specification as Experiment 1, finding main effects for gaze condition (β = −1112.83, p < .001) and interval (β = −498.96,
p < .001) with faster responses in the gaze condition and in
the the longer interval condition. The two-way interaction between gaze condition and interval was not significant, showing that gaze had the same effect on participants’ response
times at both intervals.
Test trials Figure 3 shows performance on test trials in Experiment 2. We replicate the main finding from Experiment 1:
participants in the gaze condition performed worse on switch
trials. We fit a mixed-effects logistic regression model3 and
found significant main effects of interval (β = −0.55, p <
.001) and trial type (β = −2.63, p < .001). Participants were
3 We fit models to both the unfiltered and filtered datasets and
found no difference between the two analyses.

1455

less accurate as the interval increased and on switch trials. In
addition, the model showed significant two-way interactions
between gaze condition and trial type (β = −0.95, p < .001)
such that switch trials were more difficult after gaze exposure
trials. Similar to Experiment 1, we did not find evidence of a
boost to performance on same trials in the gaze condition.
Taken together, the data from Experiment 1 and 2 suggest
that the presence of a referential cue reliably focuses learners’
attention and shifts them towards single hypothesis tracking
strategy. Changing to a live action stimulus set led to slightly
higher rates of participants selecting the target of eye gaze
on exposure trials, but did not result in a boost to performance on Same trials, providing additional evidence that the
fidelity of participants’ single hypothesis was unaffected in
our paradigm by the presence of a referential cue.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, our goal was to move beyond manipulating
the mere presence of a referential cue to a parametric manipulation of the strength of that cue. To accomplish this, we varied the reliability of eye gaze as a cue to reference. This design was inspired by experimental work showing that children
are sensitive to the past reliability of those around them when
deciding whom to ask for new information (Koenig, Clément,
& Harris, 2004). By parametrically manipulating reliability,
we hoped to test a clear prediction of our account: that learners will allocate attention and memory rationally in response
to graded changes in the referential uncertainty present during
learning.

1.00

Proportion Correct

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

0.75

● Same

●

●

0.50

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

7

8

Switch

0.25

0.00
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Number Correct on Exposure

Figure 4: Accuracy on test trials in Experiment 3 for both
trial types (Same and Switch) as a function of participants’
use of eye gaze on exposure trials. Each datapoint represents
approximately 50 participants. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals computed by non-parametric bootstrap.

would be predicted by chance p(two-tailed) < .001. We fit a
mixed effects linear regression model and found a marginally
significant effect of reliability level (β = 1.03, p = .08) such
that as the reliability of the cue increased, participants were
more likely to select the target of gaze on exposure trials, providing evidence that learners were sensitive to the reliability
of the cue.
Test trials Figure 4 shows participants accuracy on test trials within the test block. To quantify the effect of reliability
on accuracy, we fit a mixed-effects logistic regression model
and found a significant main effect of trial type (β = −3.94,
p < .001), with participants responding less accurately on
switch trials. In this analysis, we did not find a significant
interaction between reliability and trial type.
Similar to Experiment 1, we would only expect to see an interaction between reliability and trial type if learners were using the gaze cue during exposure trials. Thus, we conducted a
follow-up analysis where we modeled accuracy on test trials
as a function of how often participants chose the target of eye
gaze on exposure trials. We fit a mixed effects logistic regression model with the same specifications, but substituting accuracy on exposure trials for reliability condition as a predictor, and found a robust two-way interaction between performance on exposure trials and trial type (β = −0.25, p < .001)
such that participants who were more likely to use the gaze
cue performed worse on switch trials4 . These analyses show
that as a referential cue becomes more reliable, participants
were more likely to use it, and that learners who used the
referential cue were less likely to store multiple word-object
links.

Methods
Participants Participant recruitment, and inclusionary/exclusionary criteria were identical to those of Experiment 1 and 2 (excluded 4 HITs). 50 HITs were posted for
each reliability level (0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%) for
total of 250 paid HITs.
Design and Procedure Procedures were identical to those
of Experiment 1 and 2. We modified our cross-situational
learning paradigm to include a block of 16 familiarization trials (8 exposure and 8 test), which established the reliability
of the referential cue. To establish reliability, we varied the
proportion of same/switch trials that occurred during this familiarization block. Switch trials provide evidence that eye
gaze is not a reliable predictor of the object that will appear
at test. Participants either saw 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 switch trials. After the familiarization block, participants completed a block
of 16 trials (8 exposure and 8 test). Importantly, since we
were no longer testing the effect of presence or absence of
referential cues, all exposure trials in Experiment 3 included
eye gaze, but this cue was more or less reliable depending on
which familiarization block participants saw.

Results and Discussion
Exposure trials Participants reliably chose the referent that
was the target of eye gaze at rates greater than those that

4 In an earlier version of the experiment this analysis was posthoc. So we ran a follow-up study, and all results reported here are
from a planned analysis of that follow-up.

1456

General Discussion
An ideal learner with unlimited attention and memory could
track all possible word-object co-occurrences, making crosssituational word learning a simple problem of getting enough
data points. But human learners are constrained by limited cognitive resources, making it important to decide which
statistics to store from a learning moment. Recent work suggests that learners store a strong candidate hypothesis along
with other possible word-object links with varying degrees
of fidelity depending on the attention and memory demands
present during learning (Yurovsky & Frank, under review).
In the current line of work, we extend these findings
to show that an ecologically valid referential cue to word
meaning—the speaker’s eye gaze—focuses learners’ attention and reduces the attention and memory allocated to other
possible word-object links (Experiments 1 and 2). We also
parametrically manipulated the reliability of the referential
cue, and found that learners were more likely to use the cue
as it became more reliable, and that when learners did use the
cue, multiple hypothesis tracking decreased (Experiment 3).
Interestingly, across all three experiments, reduced memory
for alternative hypotheses did not result in a boost to performance on same trials. This pattern of data suggests that the
presence of a referential cue selectively affected the number
of word-object links stored in a given learning moment, but
did not strengthen learners’ memory for their candidate hypothesis.
There are several limitations to the current study that are
worth noting. First, the social context we used was relatively
impoverished. Here we isolated just a single cue to reference, eye gaze, using both a schematic and live action stimulus set. But real-world learning contexts are much more complex, providing learners access to multiple cues to reference
such as eye gaze, pointing, and previous discourse. In fact,
we did see a more reliable effect of referential cues when we
used a live film, which included both eye gaze and head turn
as opposed to the static, schematic stimuli. Second, we do not
yet know how these results would generalize to young word
learners. It is an interesting open question as to how children,
who have even more limited cognitive resources, choose to
allocate them during learning.
Our results fit well within a resource rational framework
(Lieder et al., 2014), which attempts to push the rationality of
computational-level models down to the psychological process level. In this framework, cognitive systems are thought
to be adaptive in that they optimize the use of their limited
resources, taking the cost of computation (e.g., opportunity
cost of time or mental opportunity) into account. In the current work, learners showed evidence of adapting to the level
of referential uncertainty in the learning context, changing
how many word-object links they stored in memory.
Word learning proceeds despite the potential for high levels of referential uncertainty and learners’ limited cognitive
resources. Our work shows how referential cues can influence the allocation of cognitive resources, causing learners to

store different numbers of word-object links from a labeling
moment. Overall, these results increase our understanding of
how social contexts support language acquisition.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the members of the Language and Cognition Lab for their feedback on this project. This work was
supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship to KM and an NIH NRSA Postdoctoral
Fellowship to DY.

References
Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Infants’ ability to consult the speaker
for clues to word reference. Journal of child language,
20(02), 395–418.
Clark, E. V. (2009). First language acquisition. Cambridge
University Press.
Kanwisher, N., Woods, R. P., Iacoboni, M., & Mazziotta, J. C.
(1997). A locus in human extrastriate cortex for visual
shape analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(1),
133–142.
Koenig, M. A., Clément, F., & Harris, P. L. (2004). Trust
in testimony: Children’s use of true and false statements.
Psychological Science, 15(10), 694–698.
Lieder, F., Goodman, N. D., & Griffiths, T. (2014). Rational use of cognitive resources: Levels of analysis between
the computational and the algorithmic. Topics in Cognitive
Science. forthcoming.
McMurray, B., Horst, J. S., & Samuelson, L. K. (2012). Word
learning emerges from the interaction of online referent selection and slow associative learning. Psychological review, 119(4), 831.
Quine, W. V. (1960). 0. word and object. 111e MIT Press.
Smith, K., Smith, A. D., & Blythe, R. A. (2011). Crosssituational learning: An experimental study of wordlearning mechanisms. Cognitive Science, 35(3), 480–498.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics. Cognition, 106(3), 1558–1568.
Trueswell, J. C., Medina, T. N., Hafri, A., & Gleitman, L. R.
(2013). Propose but verify: Fast mapping meets crosssituational word learning. Cognitive psychology, 66(1),
126–156.
Vouloumanos, A. (2008). Fine-grained sensitivity to statistical information in adult word learning. Cognition, 107(2),
729–742.
Vul, E., Goodman, N., Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B.
(2014). One and done? optimal decisions from very few
samples. Cognitive science, 38(4), 599–637.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Embodied attention and word
learning by toddlers. Cognition.
Yurovsky, D., & Frank, M. (under review). An integrative
account of constraints on cross-situational learning.

1457

