Representations of Time Affect Willingness to Wait for Future Rewards
Robert Thorstad (rthorst@emory.edu)
Aiming Nie (anie@emory.edu)
Phillip Wolff (pwolff@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University
38 Eagle Row Atlanta, GA 30322

Abstract
How do representations of the future shape behavior? Prior
research has shown that people’s willingness to wait for a
future reward decreases with increases in time. At the same
time, this research has also shown that such effects can
depend on the vividness of the future reward, as well as, on
individual differences. The present research offers a potential
explanation for these additional effects in demonstrating how
representations of the future can depend not only on objective
distances in time, but also on how distances in time are
construed. In a series of three experiments using a delay
discounting paradigm, we show that participants who
represent the future as close to the present are more likely to
wait for future rewards than those who represent the future as
far, even when the objective distances are held constant.
Applications are discussed to public policy issues such as
global warming, and to episodic future thinking.
Keywords: psychological
episodic future thinking.

distance;

delay discounting;

Introduction
How do representations of the future shape behavior?
Consider a long-term public policy issue such as global
warming, whose solution requires foregoing smaller shortterm gains for a larger long-term reward. President Obama
has recently emphasized that one reason global warming
does not receive sufficient attention is psychological
distance: the American public is insufficiently motivated by
threats of global warming because the consequences are
construed as distant from the present (Warrick, 2013). This
possibility suggests that in addition to objective temporal
distance, the psychological distance with which individuals
construe the future might affect its motivating value for
behavior.
Recent work in economics offers support for the
possibility that behavior depends on how people think about
the future. According to Chen’s (2013) linguistic savings
hypothesis, many behaviors depend on whether the future is
construed as being a part of the present or as separate from
the present. If the future is viewed as part of the present,
then it may be construed as psychologically close, whereas
if the future is viewed as beyond the present, then it may be
construed as psychologically distant. Interestingly,
languages can differ in their grammar with respect to
whether the future must explicitly marked. In particular,
some languages require linguistic markers that distinguish
future from present (strong future-time reference (FTR)
languages), whereas other languages do not require
distinguishing the future from the present. For example, in

English, if it is going to rain, a future marker like will is
usually included in the sentence, “it will rain tomorrow.” In
contrast, in a language like German, present and future do
not need to be distinguished. For example, to say that it is
going to rain, it is perfectly acceptable to say “it rains
tomorrow.” Chen (2013) shows that speakers of languages
that do not require explicit future markers (and hence
conflate the future with the present) tend to engage in more
monetary and health-related future behaviors than speakers
of languages that do require that the future be distinguished
from the present.
Why do explicit linguistic markers affect behavior?
Chen’s research is conducted using survey data at the level
of large groups and, as a consequence, he is not able to test
hypotheses about psychological mechanisms. One
possibility is that Chen’s result is a linguistic manifestation
of a more general psychological phenomenon: that
representational distance affects behavior. This view – what
one might call a representational distance view – argues
that the future is more motivating when it is construed as
close to the present than when it is construed as distant from
the present. On this account, speakers of low-FTR
languages behave in future-oriented ways because the lack
of explicit future markers leads to construals of the future as
closer to the present.
Intriguingly, one might have predicted a nearly opposite
pattern of results. It seems equally intuitive that speakers of
languages that require that the future be distinguished from
the present would tend to be more aware of the future, and
possibility, then, more likely to engage in behaviors that
have positive future consequences. According to what we
might call the a future priming view, future oriented
behaviors like saving money and eating should be more
likely to occur for those who speak languages that require
that the future be distinguished from the present than not.
We therefore set out to directly test between the future
priming and psychological distance accounts using a wellunderstood laboratory task of future behavior: delay
discounting. In a delay discounting paradigm, participants
are asked to choose between large future rewards and
smaller present rewards. A standard finding is that
preference for future rewards declines hyperbolically with
increasing delay, although there are substantial individual
differences (Peters & Buchel, 2011; Bickel, Odum, &
Madden, 1999, Alessi & Petri, 2003).
Individual differences in delay discounting represent a
case where at the same interval of objective time, the
subjective value of a reward differs between participants.

2392

What might explain these individual differences? Recent
work has shown that participants asked to vividly imagine
the future show an increased willingness to wait for future
rewards (Peters & Büchel, 2010; Benoit, Gilbert, &
Burgess, 2011). We suggest that an important cause of
individual differences in delay discounting is how
individuals represent the future – specifically, the
representational distance (near or far) with which
participants view a given amount of objective time.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we examined whether individuals who
think more about the future than the past are more likely to
wait for future rewards. The future priming account predicts
that individuals who tend to think about the future will be
more likely to wait for future rewards, because a tendency to
think about the future should increase its salience. We also
examined whether specific aspects of individuals’
representations of the future, such as whether they represent
the future as distant from the present, affect their preference
for future rewards. The psychological distance hypothesis
predicts that individuals who represent the future as close to
the present will be more likely to wait for delayed rewards.
The psychological distance hypothesis also predicts that
there will be no effect of future priming: that participants
who tend to think about the future more than the past will
not differ in their preference for future rewards.
The study had two parts. In the first, participants
completed a mind wandering task where they were asked to
report the contents of their most recent mind wandering
episode. Analysis of the content of mind wanderings
provides a measure of participants’ spontaneous tendency to
think about the future versus the past (future orientation). In
order to ensure task engagement, data were excluded if
participants provided only a single-sentence mindwandering, the reasoning being that if the participants wrote
down only a single sentence, then they were probably not
especially engaged in the task. Participants also rated their
mind wanderings in terms of temporal orientation and rated
other characteristics of their representation, including how
distantly they represent the mind wandering from the
present. In the second part of the study, participants
completed a computerized delay discounting task, where
they made a series of 175 choices between hypothetical
small immediate and larger delayed rewards.

weeks, 1 month, 6 months, 2 years) with 25 present reward
amounts (rewards ranged from $9.90 to $0.10) for a total of
175 experimental trials. 5 practice trials were also created
using random delays and present reward amounts.
Procedure. The experiment consisted of two phases. In the
first phase, participants were asked to describe the last time
they were “thinking about something other than what you
were currently doing.” Participants rated whether the mind
wandering was about the past, present, and future (1-to-7
Likert scales). Finally, participants rated various
characteristics of the mind wandering, including a distance
rating (completed by the last 119 participants), or the extent
to which these thoughts were “about events that were close
in time to or far in time from the present” on a 1-to-7 Likert
scale.
In the second phase, participants completed a
computerized version of the delay discounting task.
Participants used the arrow keys to choose between $10 at
the delay interval and the present reward amount “today.”
Discounting trials were presented in random order.

Results and Discussion
Delay discounting data were analyzed by computing a
participant’s choice index, or the percentage of times a
participant chose to wait for the larger future reward
(Benoit, Gilbert, & Burgess, 2011). Participants’ future
orientation was analyzed by subtracting participants’ selfrating of the extent to which the mind wandering was about
the past from their self-rating of the extent to which the
mind wandering was about the future.

Methods
Participants. 249 participants were recruited for pay via
Amazon Mechanical Turk. Participants represented diverse
age (M=35 years, range=19-62), gender (58% female) and
educational backgrounds (61% have a bachelor’s degree).
36 participants were excluded for providing a singlesentence mind-wandering; 67 participants were excluded for
failing to provide an accurate confirmation code confirming
that they completed both experimental tasks.
Materials. Delay discounting questions were composed by
fully crossing 7 delay amounts (1 day, 2 days 1 week, 2

Figure 1. Percent future choices as a function of
objective temporal distance in Experiment 1.
Participants’ preference for future rewards declined
with increasing delay.
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the delay
discounting manipulation, we analyzed the influence of
objective temporal distance on participants’ choices. As in
previous studies and as shown in Figure 1, participants were
more likely to choose the future reward for shorter intervals

2393

(e.g., 7 days) than longer intervals (e.g., 2 years). This was
indicated by ANOVA: choice index declined with increases
in time, F(6,145) = 15.97, p < 0.001.
According to the future priming hypothesis, participants
who tend to think about the future should be more likely to
wait for future rewards. In order to analyze this hypothesis,
a Pearson correlation was conducted for future orientation
and delay discounting (choice index). There was no relation
between future orientation and delay discounting r = -0.01,
p = 0.92, suggesting that a simple tendency to think about
the future does not affect the motivating value of future
rewards. This result provides evidence against the future
priming hypothesis, because if the requirement to explicitly
mark the future motivates future-oriented behavior by
increasing the salience of the future, then individuals who
tend to think about the future should have been more likely
to wait for future rewards
By contrast, according to the psychological distance
hypothesis, what is important is not a tendency to think
about the future versus the past, but how participants

assuming a Bonferroni-corrected pairwise α = 0.025 (see
Figure 2). Thus, for participants who were future-oriented,
willingness to wait for a future reward was related to how
distantly they viewed the future. This result held even when
excluding two participants who provided especially long
distance ratings (representational distance = 7); r = -0.43, p
< 0.01, see the two points on the far right of Figure 2. This
result supports the psychological distance hypothesis
because within participants who think about the future,
those who represent the future as close to the present were
most likely to wait for future rewards.
Experiment 1 replicated the standard delay discounting
finding that reward preference decreases as a function of
objective time. In addition, Experiment 1 provided evidence
for the psychological distance hypothesis by showing that
participants who represent the future, but not the past, as
close to the present are more likely to wait for future
rewards. This suggests a possible cause for individual
differences in delay discounting is in how distance to the
future is construed: participants who construe the same

Figure 3. Percent future choices and representational
distance for past-oriented participants in Experiment
3. There was no relationship between choice and
representational
distance
for
past-oriented
participants.

Figure 2. Percent future choices and representational
distance for future-oriented participants in
Experiment 1. Participants who rated future mindwanderings as close to the present were more likely to
wait for future rewards.
construe an interval of time. We therefore examined
whether individual differences in delay discounting at the
same intervals of objective time were affected by the
distance with which participants represent the future.
Participants were divided into two groups: those who were
future-oriented (future orientation > 0), and those who were
past-oriented (future orientation < 0). Separate Pearson
correlations were conducted for each group between
representational distance and delay discounting. As
mentioned before, representational distance was based on
participants’ estimate of how distantly they represent the
mind wandering from the present. For participants who
were future-oriented, distance scores were negatively related
to choice index, r = -0.39, p < 0.01, which was significant

intervals of objective time as close to the present are more
likely to wait for future rewards.
An advantage of the mind wandering paradigm is that the
effects emerged spontaneously from people’s naturally
occurring descriptions. However, a potential limitation of
this paradigm is that mind wanderings could not be
controlled for objective temporal distance. It is therefore
possible that mind wanderings rated as distant differed both
in psychological distance and objective temporal distance:
that is, mind wanderings rated as distant might have been
about events that occurred more days in the future than
events rated as close. If this is the case, it is possible that our
effects are driven by individual’s tendency to think about
dates that are far in the future, rather than their tendency to

2394

represent the same dates in the future more or less distantly
from the present. Experiment 2 aimed to provide additional
evidence for the psychological distance hypothesis using a
trial-by-trial probe for representational distance. This
paradigm allows investigation of the effects of
representational distance, controlling for objective temporal
distance. If psychological distance reduces the motivating
value of the future, then for each discounting decision,
participants should be more likely to choose the future
reward when they rate the delay interval as close to the
present.

paired-sample t-test on the resulting group mean conditional
probabilities showed an effect of construal on reward
preference, t(4) = 4.55, p = 0.01.
Experiment 2 provided strong evidence for the
psychological distance hypothesis by demonstrating that
participants were substantially more likely to choose the
future reward at delay intervals which they represent as
close to the present. This effect was obtained while
controlling for delay, indicating that for the same amount of
objective time, participants’ decisions were influenced by
representational distance.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, participants completed a shortened
version of the delay discounting task. Before each
discounting trial, participants indicated whether they
represent the delay interval as distant from the present. The
psychological distance hypothesis predicts that, at each
delay interval, participants will be more likely to choose the
future reward if they represent the delay as close to the
present. The future priming hypothesis predicts that there
will be no effect of representational distance.

Methods
Participants. 95 participants were recruited for pay via
Amazon Mechanical Turk. While no demographic
information was collected for Experiments 2 and 3,
participants were recruited in the same manner as
Experiment 1 and probably represent diverse age, gender,
and educational backgrounds.
Materials. Delay discounting questions were composed by
fully crossing 5 delay amounts (1 day, 1 week, 1 month, 6
months, 2 years) with 12 immediate reward amounts ($9.50$4, in intervals of $0.50) for a total of 60 discounting trials.
Procedure. On a single trial, participants were shown the
delay interval and were asked to indicate whether they think
this is a “long time” from the present. Participants then
indicated on a separate screen their preference for the
immediate versus delayed reward. Participants completed
60 trials in random order.

Results and Discussion
Participants were more likely to choose future rewards at
shorter delay intervals, consistent with the expected finding
that participants’ preferences for future rewards declines
with increasing delay. This result was confirmed by a
repeated-measures ANOVA for reward choice as a function
of delay (1 day, 1 week, etc.), F(4,376) = 242.38, p < 0.001.
Importantly, there was a strong effect of construals on
reward preference. As shown in Figure 4, participants were
more likely to choose the future reward when they construed
a given interval of objective time as close to the present than
when they construed the same interval as distant from the
present. This result was confirmed by calculating the
conditional probability of participants’ choosing the future
reward at each delay interval, as a function of whether they
represented the interval as close to or far from the present. A

Figure 4. Percent future choices in Experiment 2 as a
function of representational distance and delay. Error
bars +/- 1 SEM.
A potential worry about Experiment 2 is that participants
might have suspected a relationship between the temporal
distance and delay discounting tasks. While it is unclear
how this would predict a relationship between close
representational distance and future-oriented decisions, in
Experiment 3, we sought to test for effects of expectations
using a blocked design. In Experiment 3, participants
completed the delay discounting task and representational
distance task in separate blocks, counterbalanced for order.
If the effect of representational distance on delay
discounting is due to participants’ expectations, participants
who complete the representational distance task first should
show a stronger relationship between distance and delay
discounting than participants who complete the delay
discounting task first. By contrast, the psychological
distance hypothesis predicts that participants who represent
the future as close to the present will be more likely to
choose future rewards, and that the magnitude of this
relationship will not depend on task order.

2395

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, representational distance was assessed
by asking participants to rate a list of time intervals as close
to or distant from the present. Participants also completed
the full-length delay discounting task from Experiment 1.
Task order was counterbalanced between participants. The
psychological distance hypothesis predicts that participants
who represent the future as close to the present will be more
likely to wait for future rewards, and that there will be no
effect of task order on delay discounting.

Methods
Participants. 79 participants were recruited for pay via
Amazon Mechanical Turk. 6 participants were excluded for
failing to provide an accurate confirmation code confirming
that they completed both experimental tasks; 2 additional
participants were excluded due to data recording errors.
Materials. The delay discounting task was identical to the
task in Experiment 1. The representational distance task was
composed of 7 time intervals (1 day, 2 days, 1 week, 2
weeks, 1 month, 6 months, and 2 years).
Procedure. Participants completed two blocks in
counterbalanced order. In the discounting block, participants
completed the delay discounting task in the same manner as
Experiment 1. In the representational distance block,
participants rated whether they think each time interval is a
“long time” from the present.

Figure 5. Representational distance and delay discounting
in Experiment 3. Participants who represented the future as
close to the present were more likely to wait for future
rewards. Error bars +/- 1 SEM.

General Discussion

Results and Discussion
Participants were more likely to wait for future rewards
when they indicated that they represent the future as close to
the present. Representational distance responses were scored
by computing the smallest interval that participants
represented as distant from the present. Participants were
divided into a close future group (distance > 1 month) and a
far future group (distance <= 1 month). A large distance
score indicates a close future representation because a
greater number of time intervals were represented as close
to the present. As seen in Figure 5, there was a main effect
of group, F(1,78) = 6.74, p = 0.01, indicating that
participants who represent the future as close to the present
were more likely to choose the future reward. This result
provides converging evidence for the psychological distance
hypothesis using a blocked design.
Importantly, there was no effect of participants’
expectations about the relationship between the delay
discounting and representational distance tasks. An
ANOVA found no effect of block order on delay
discounting, F(1,78) = 0.55, p = 0.46, indicating that the
effect of representational distance was not due to
participants’ expectations about a relationship between the
representational distance and delay discounting tasks.

Chen (2013) has shown that speakers of languages which
require explicit markers of the future show fewer futureoriented health and savings behaviors. Our studies suggest
this is a linguistic manifestation of a more general
psychological phenomenon: that representational distance
affects the motivating value of the future. Experiment 1
demonstrated that individuals who represent future but not
past mind wanderings as close to the present are more likely
to wait for future rewards. Experiment 2 demonstrated that
for individual discounting decisions, participants who
represent the same interval of objective time as close to the
present were more likely to wait for future rewards.
Experiment 3 confirmed that representational distance in
general affects delay discounting, even when participants
are not asked to consider representational distance before
making discounting decisions.
Recent work has shown that vividly imagining the future
increases willingness to wait for future rewards in healthy
adults (Peters & Büchel, 2010; Benoit, Gilbert, & Burgess,
2011) and obese adults (Daniel, Stanton, & Epstein, 2013).
For example, Benoit, Gilbert, & Burgess asked participants
to vividly imagine a specific episode of spending £35 in 180
days at a pub, or merely to estimate what could be bought
with it. Participants asked to vividly imagine spending the
money were more likely to choose to wait for the future
reward. Our results suggest that representational distance is
a potential mechanism for these effects. Participants asked
to vividly imagine spending £35 in 180 days at a pub might
be more likely to represent the delay between the present
and this event as part of the near future, and therefore would
be more motivated to wait for future rewards. Further
research should examine the relationship between episodic
future thinking and representational distance, as well as

2396

whether this relationship moderates the effect of episodic
future thinking on delay discounting.
Our results also have implications for framing effects on
delay discounting. In the date/delay effect (Read, Frederick,
Orsel, & Rahman, 2005), participants are more likely to
choose a future reward if the delay interval is expressed as a
numerical date (e.g. 08/01/2015) than as a delay (e.g. in 6
months). One explanation advanced for the date/delay effect
is “differential time estimation” – that participants
underestimate the objective length of a date, failing to
realize how much time is contained between the present and
that date. Our results suggest a different but related
explanation. Delay intervals may induce a distant
representation of the future by employing explicit linguistic
markers – “in 6 months” – to demarcate the future from the
present. Instead of underestimating the length of a delay, it
may be that phrasing time intervals as delays induces a more
distant representation of the future, and that as a
consequence participants are less motivated to wait for
future rewards.
Previous work has explored the effect of distance on
choices in terms of “perceived different selves” (Bartels &
Rips, 2010; Hershfield, 2011). On this account, one reason
people discount future rewards is because they view their
future selves as distant from their present selves, and are
less motivated to save for distant future selves. The present
work provides converging evidence for this view by
demonstrating that distance affects future choices. However,
an interesting question for future research is the extent to
which representational distance might be a more general
mechanism than future self-distance. Subsequent
experiments could directly test whether our effects depend
on participants representing their self as distant in the future,
or whether representational distance is a more general
construct encompassing aspects of the future other than the
self.
Finally, our results have applications to public policy
issues such as global warming, as well as to personal
finance decisions such as retirement savings. Our results
suggest that one reason important future issues such as
global warming receive insufficient attention is that
participants represent their effects as occurring in the distant
future. Relatedly, one reason individuals may fail to
adequately save for retirement is that they represent
retirement as occurring in the distant future. Our results
suggest that encouraging individuals to represent future
problems like global warming, and future life events like
retirement, as part of their near future, should increase the
motivating value of these events.

References
Alessi, S. & Petri, N. (2003). Pathological gambling
severity is associated with impulsivity in a delay
discounting procedure. Behavioural Processes 64(3), 345354.
Bartels, D. & Rips, L. (2010). Psychological
connectedness and intertemporal choice. JEP: General
139(1), 49-69.
Benoit, R., Gilbert, S., & Burgess, P. (2011). A neural
mechanism mediating the impact of episodic prospection on
farsighted decisions. The Journal of Neuroscience 31(18),
6771-6779.
Bickel, W., Odum, A., & Madden, G. (1999). Impulsivity
and cigarette smoking: delay discounting in current, never,
and ex-smokers. Psychopharmacology 146(4), 447-454.
Chen M.K. (2013). The effect of language on economic
behavior: Evidence from savings rates, health behaviors,
and retirement assets. The American Economic Review,
103(2), 690-731.
Daniel, T., Stanton, C., & Epstein, L. (2013). The future
is now: comparing the effect of episodic future thinking on
impulsivity in lean and obese individuals. Appetite 71(1),
120-125.
Hershfield, H. (2011). Future self-continuity: how
conceptions of the future self transform intertemporal
choice. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1235,
30-43.
Peters, J. & Büchel, C. (2010). Episodic future thinking
reduces delay discounting through an enhancement of
prefrontal-mediotemporal interactions. Neuron 66(1), 138148.
Peters, J. & Büchel, C. (2011). The neural mechanisms of
inter-temporal decision-making: understanding variability.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 15(5), 227-239.
Read, D., Frederick, S., Orsel, B., & Rahman, J. (2005).
Four score and seven years from now: the date/delay effect
in temporal discounting. Management Science 51(9), 13261335.
Warrick, J. (2013, Sep 23). Obama appeals for
‘ambitious’ effort to stem effects of climate change. The
Washington Post. Retrieved from www.washingtonpost.
com.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Jason Shepard for his
assistance in this research. This project was supported by a
grant on Prospective Psychology from The John Templeton
Foundation / University of Pennsylvania to the third author.

2397

