Semantic Alignment of Fractions and Decimals with Discrete
Versus Continuous Entities: A Cross-national Comparison
Hee Seung Lee (hslee00@yonsei.ac.kr)
Department of Education, Yonsei University
Seoul, South Korea

Melissa DeWolf (mdewolf@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, USA

Miriam Bassok (mbassok@u.washington.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA

Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, USA

Abstract
Previous work has shown that adults in the United States
selectively use fractions and decimals to model discrete and
continuous entities, respectively. However, it is unclear whether
this apparent semantic alignment between the format of rational
numbers and quantitative ontology is specific to the American
education system, the English language, or measuring
conventions (primarily imperial measures). Here we test
whether similar alignments hold for Korean college students
who differ from American students in educational background,
language, and measurement conventions. Across three
experiments, we found that the alignments found in the United
States were generally replicated in South Korea. Relative to
Americans, Korean students showed an overall bias towards
using continuous representations, perhaps related to their
exclusive use of the metric measurement system and to
differences in instructional practice identified in a textbook
analysis.
Keywords: Cross-national comparison, semantic alignment,
continuous and discrete quantities, fractions, decimals

Introduction
People’s interpretation and use of arithmetic operations is
guided by semantic alignment between mathematical and
real-life situations. The entities in a problem situation evoke
semantic relations (e.g., tulips and vases evoke the
functionally asymmetric “contain” relation), which people
align with analogous mathematical relations (e.g., the noncommutative division operation, tulips/vases) (Bassok,
Chase, & Martin, 1998; Guthormsen et al., in press). Rapp,
Bassok, DeWolf and Holyoak (2015) found that a form of
semantic alignment guides the use of different formats for
rational numbers—fractions and decimals. Specifically,
adults in the United States selectively use fractions and
decimals to model discrete (i.e., countable) and continuous
entities, respectively. DeWolf, Bassok and Holyoak (2015)
also demonstrated that American college students prefer to
use fractions to represent ratio relations between countable

sets, and decimals to represent ratio relations between
continuous quantities.
The apparent semantic alignment between fractions and
decimals with discrete and continuous quantities,
respectively, potentially reflects a basic ontological
distinction between quantity types (Bassok & Olseth, 1995).
However, this alignment has so far been demonstrated only
with American students. Given that the distinction between
discrete and continuous entities has linguistic and cultural
correlates (Geary, 1995), it is possible that non-Englishspeaking students from a different culture would not align
distinct mathematical symbols with distinct types of
quantity.
Here we report a cross-national investigation of whether
alignments between rational numbers and discrete and
continuous entities are found for students in South Korea.
South Korea provides a particularly interesting comparison
to the U.S. because the language is structurally different
from English, and the culture and education system differ
with respect to several factors that may impact students’
conceptions of rational numbers. First, in comparison to the
U.S., South Korea has excelled in mathematics achievement
in recent years. According to the 2012 PISA results (OECD,
2012), South Korea ranked 5th in mathematics achievement
(compared to the 36th-place standing of the U.S.). There is
evidence that much of this superior achievement in Asian
countries can be explained by educational techniques that
emphasize achieving deeper conceptual understanding and
mastery before moving on to more complex concepts (Perry,
2000; Stigler, Fernandez & Yoshia, 1996; Bailey et al.,
2015). The number-naming system is more systematic in
Korean than English. Also, base-10 units (metric units) are
used exclusively in South Korea, whereas non-base-10 (e.g.,
imperial) units are widely used in the U.S., and are known
to affect students’ interpretation and use of fractions and
decimals (Rapp et al., 2015).

1261

Experiment 1

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Percent of problems

The purpose of Experiment 1 was to test whether adults in
South Korea show the same pattern of alignment between
rational numbers and continuous and countable entities, as
found in the U.S. To this end, we asked Korean
undergraduate students to generate word problems that
contained either fractions or decimals, and examined the
entities (continuous vs. countable) they described in their
generated problems.

Participants
A total of 71 undergraduate students (male = 25; mean
age = 21.39) from Yonsei University in South Korea
participated in the study for course credit. A randomlyselected half of these participants generated decimal word
problems and the other half generated fraction word
problems.

Continuous
Countable

Decimal Fraction Decimal Fraction
Korea

U.S.

Design, Materials, and Procedures

Figure 1. Distribution of countable and continuous
problems in decimal and fraction problems for students in
South Korea (left panel) and the U.S. (right panel). The U.S.
results are from Rapp et al. (2015, Ex. 1).

The study was a between-subjects design with one factor:
number type (fraction vs. decimal). Experimental materials
were adapted from Experiment 1 of Rapp et al. (2015).
Translations of the English versions were created by two
Korean-English bilingual researchers, and then backtranslated into English to ensure accuracy (also in
Experiments 2-3). Participants were given a single sheet of
paper with three examples of simple word problems
provided at the top. Three examples involved one countable
entity (30 marbles), one continuous entity (5 kilometers),
and one discretized mass entity (four 2-kilogram bags of
sugar). The unit “kilogram” was used in place of “pound”.
All of these examples were presented with whole numbers.
Participants were then asked to generate two word problems
with their own numbers. Depending on the condition, they
were told that numbers in their problems had to be fractions
(e.g., 1/4, 11/2, 5/2), or decimals (e.g., 0.25, 1.5, 2.5).
Participants completed the study using paper and pencil.
There was no time limit.

equal slices, or a rectangle divided into equal squares).
The left panel of Figure 1 shows the distribution of
countable and continuous problems in the decimal and
fraction problems. Overall, students generated more
continuous problems with decimals than fractions. A chisquare test confirmed that number type (decimal vs. fraction)
and continuity (continuous vs. countable) were significantly
associated, 𝜒2 (1) = 15.42, p < .001. For comparison, the
right panel shows the results from U.S. undergraduates
(Experiment 1 of Rapp et al., 2015). Overall, there was a
consistent pattern of alignment across the two nations in that
students tend to use decimals to represent continuous
entities and fractions to represent discrete or countable
entities. However, Korean students showed an overall bias
towards using continuous rather than countable quantities.
In fact, unlike American students, Korean students used
continuous quantities more often than countable quantities
when creating fraction word problems.

Experiment 2

Results
There were a total of 142 problems constructed (70
decimals, 72 fractions). The constructed problems were
coded using the classification scheme developed by Rapp et
al. (2015). Problems were classified as fraction or decimal
based on the number type that appeared in the problem text.
Problems were classified as continuous or countable (i.e.,
discrete) based on the entities that appeared in the
constructed problems. Continuous problems involved
entities that are referred to linguistically as “mass nouns”
(e.g., those varying continuously in weight, volume, or
length), whereas countable problems involved either
discrete or explicitly discretized entities. Discrete entities
were sets of individual objects that cannot be broken down
into natural equal units (e.g., marbles, balloons, or grapes),
and discretized units were continuous entities that were
parsed into equal countable parts (e.g., an apple cut into

Experiment 2 tested the alignment of number type with
quantity by asking students to choose either a continuous or
a discrete depiction of fractions and decimals, which were
paired with continuous or discrete entities.

Participants
A total of 57 undergraduate students (male = 14; mean
age = 21.12) from Yonsei University participated in the
study for course credit.

Design, Materials, and Procedures
The study was a 2 (number type: fraction vs. decimal) X 2
(entity type: continuous vs. countable) within-subjects
design. There were two trials of each experimental condition,
resulting in a total of eight trials per participant.
Experimental materials were constructed by adapting the

1262

Continuous (Circle)

Discrete (Dots)

60
40
20

Results
The left panel of Figure 3 shows the percentage of total
times the continuous representation (circle) versus discrete
representation (dots) was chosen for a given combination of
entity type and number type. Collapsing across entity type,
for decimal expressions participants selected the continuous
representation (circle) 64% of the time, whereas for fraction

Fraction

Decimal

Continuous Countable Continuous Countable
Korea

materials used in Experiment 2 of Rapp et al. (2015).
Because imperial units (pound, mile) are seldom used in
Korea, these were replaced with metric units (liter, degree in
Celsius).
Each participant saw eight different expressions, each
including either a fraction or a decimal and either a
countable (pen, sandwich, book, banana) or continuous
(kilometer, liter, degree in Celsius, kilogram) entity type.
Four fractions were used (3/4, 5/8, 4/9, 2/7), and their
magnitude-equivalent decimals (.75, .63, .44, .29). For
example, a participant might see “3/4 kilometer” or “.75
sandwich.” Assignments of entity type and number type
were counterbalanced so that half of the participants
received a fraction with a particular entity (e.g., 3/4
sandwich) and half received the equivalent decimal with
that same entity (e.g., .75 sandwich). Thus, each participant
saw eight of the 16 possible pairings of number and entity
type.
The dependent variable was whether participants selected
a continuous circle representation or a discrete dots
representation for the number type-entity type expressions
(see Figure 2). Critically, the representation options were
the same for all of the statements. Both of the
representations depicted the value of 1/2 (.50), which was
not used in any of the fractions or decimals given in the
statements. The choice of representation type thus could
only be guided by its abstract form (continuous or discrete),
rather than by matches of specific values. Participants were
given eight expressions that paired number type and entity
type. For each expression participants were instructed to
choose which type of diagram (circle or dots) they would
prefer to use to represent it.

Fraction

Decimal

Fraction

Decimal

0
Fraction

Figure 2. Options provided to represent continuous (circle)
and discrete (dots) representations in Experiment 2. In the
experimental material, the representations were labeled as
Type 1 and Type 2, respectively, and presented vertically as
shown.

80

Decimal

Percent of Response Selection

100

U.S.

Figure 3. Percentage response selection by number type for
trials with continuous entities and countable entities in
Experiment 2 between South Korea (left panel) and the U.S.
(right panel). The U.S. results are from Rapp et al. (2015,
Ex. 2, metric units only).
expressions participants chose the continuous representation
(circle) 46% of the time.
A 2 x 2 within-subjects ANOVA was performed on data
coded as the proportion of trials on which the continuous
representation (circle) was selected. For simplicity, we
report the preference for continuous only. There was a
significant main effect of number type, F(1, 56) = 8.84, p
= .004, indicating that the continuous representation was
selected more frequently for decimals than for fractions.
There was no main effect of entity type (F < 1), nor any
reliable interaction effect between number and entity type,
F(1, 56) = 1.55, p = .219.
For comparison, the right panel of Figure 3 shows the
comparable data from American students (based solely on
items using metric units, to maximize compatibility with the
items used in Korea.) As in Experiment 1, Korean students
showed the same basic pattern of alignments as had been
found for American students. However, Korean students
chose continuous versus countable representations equally
often when representing fractions, whereas the U.S. students
chose countable representation more often than continuous
representation. Korean students thus showed an overall
preference for continuous representations.

Experiment 3
Experiment 2 showed that participants’ preferences for
representation types varied depending on the type of rational
number used. In Experiment 3 we tested for alignment in the
opposite direction. College students were asked to choose
either a fraction or decimal for different types of displays
that depicted ratio relations. Experimental materials were
adapted from Experiment 1 of DeWolf et al. (2015).

1263

Participants
A total of 60 undergraduate students (male = 18; mean
age = 21.08) from Yonsei University participated in the
study for course credit. Participants were randomly assigned
in equal numbers to two between-subjects conditions (partto-part vs. part-to-whole ratio; see below).

Continuous

Discretized

Design, Materials, and Procedures
The study was a 2 (relation type: part-to-part vs. part-towhole ratios) X 3 (display type: continuous, discretized,
discrete) design, where relation type was a between-subjects
factor, and display type was a within-subjects factor. A partto-part ratio (PPR) is the relation between the size of the two
subsets of a whole, whereas a part-to-whole ratio (PWR) is
the relation between the size of one subset and the whole.
Figure 4 depicts examples of the three display types. The
discrete items were displays of circles, squares, stars,
crosses, trapezoids, and cloud-like shapes. The continuous
items were displays of rectangles that could differ in width,
height and orientation (vertical or horizontal). The
discretized items were identical to the continuous displays
except that the rectangles were divided into equal-sized
units by dark lines. For the stimuli used in test trials, red and
green were used to demarcate the two different subsets. The
displays varied which color represented the larger subset
versus the smaller subset.
Participants were given instructions for either the part-topart ratio (PPR) or part-to-whole ratios (PWR) condition.
They were given a Korean translation of the following
instructions for the PPR condition: “In this experiment, you
will see displays that show various part to part relations. In
the display below [display with 1 orange circle and 2 blue
crosses] this would be the number of orange circles relative
to the number of blue crosses. Such relations can be
represented with fractions (e.g., 3/4) or with decimals
(e.g., .75). For each display your task is to choose which
notation is a better representation of the depicted relation—a
fraction or a decimal. Note that the specific values (i.e., 3/4
and .75) are just examples and do not match the values in
the displays.” For the PWR condition, the instructions were
identical except for the description of the relations. In this
condition the part-to-whole relation was defined using the
example of the number of orange circles relative to the total
number of blue crosses and orange circles. The relation type
(PPR vs. PWR) was manipulated between subjects; thus
participants in the PPR condition were only told about PPRs
and participants in the PWR condition were only told about
PWRs. Participants were shown examples of the continuous
and discretized displays, in addition to the discrete display,
and were told that displays could appear in any of those
formats.
The task was simply to decide whether the relationship
should be represented with a fraction (3/4) or a decimal
(.75). In order to assess this preference on a conceptual level,
the specific fraction and decimal shown to participants (3/4
and .75) were held constant across all trials, and never
matched the number of items in the pictures. Thus, no

Discrete

Figure 4. Examples of continuous, discretized and discrete
displays used in Experiment 3.
mathematical task needed to be performed. There was
therefore no requirement for accuracy, nor was any speed
pressure imposed. Since the quantity shown in a display
never matched the particular fraction and decimal values
provided as response options, there was no real need to even
determine the specific value represented in a display. The
paradigm of Experiment 3 was thus intended to investigate
participants’ conceptual representations for fractions and
decimals, in a situation in which mathematical procedures
were not required.
Stimuli were displayed on a computer screen and
participant responses were recorded. Participants were given
the instructions described above for either the PPR
condition or the PWR condition. Participants were told to
select the z key for decimals and the m key for fractions.
Participants completed 60 test trials (20 for each display
type). A fixation cross was displayed for 600 ms between
each trial. Display types were shown in a different random
order for every participant. All participants were tested in a
laboratory.

Results
Because participants were forced to choose either a
fraction or a decimal for each trial, the preference for each is
complementary. For simplicity, we report the preference for
fractions. The proportion of trials in which participants
selected the fraction notation was computed for each display
type for each participant. The left panel of Figure 5 shows
the proportion of trials that participants chose either
fractions or decimals for each display. A 2 (relation type:
PPR vs. PWR) X 3 (display type: discrete, discretized,
continuous) ANOVA was performed to assess differences in
notation preference. There was a significant main effect of
display type, F(2, 116) = 30.88, p < .001. Planned
comparisons showed that preference for fractions was
significantly greater for discretized displays than discrete
displays, t(59) = 2.23, p = .029, which in turn was greater
than continuous displays, t(59) = 4.94, p < .001. There was
no interaction between relation type and display type, F(2,
116) = 1.17, p = .314, and no main effect of relation type, F
< 1.

1264

Fractions

Decimals

80
60
40
20

Korea

Discrete

Discretized

Continuous

Discretized

Discrete

0
Continuous

Percent of Response Selection

100

U.S.

Figure 5. Percentage response selection for each display
type in which either a fraction or decimal were chosen in
Experiment 3 between South Korea (left panel) and the U.S.
(right panel). The U.S. results are from DeWolf et al. (2015,
Ex. 1).
These results reveal that Korean students preferred to
represent both PPR and PWR ratio relationships with
fractions when a display showed a partition of countable
entities, but with decimals when the display showed a
partition of continuous mass quantities. Participants picked
the number format that provided the best conceptual match
to either continuous or discrete displays.
No mathematical task needed to be performed, and the
specific quantities depicted in the displays did not match the
numerical values of the fractions and decimals provided as
choice options; hence our findings demonstrate that the
preferential association of display types (discrete or
continuous) and rational number formats (fractions or
decimals) has a conceptual basis for Korean as well as
American students (DeWolf et al., 2015). This result closely
aligns with the results of Experiments 1-2, in that collegeeducated adults show a preference for using continuous
displays to represent decimals and countable displays to
represent fractions. The patterns of results were consistent
between Korea and the U.S. Experiment 3 thus provides
strong support for the hypothesis that the natural alignment
of different symbolic notations with different quantity types
has a conceptual basis.

Discussion
The results across the three experiments conducted in
Korea revealed a pattern very similar to that obtained using
adults in the United States. Although direct statistical
comparisons between the two countries are not possible
because the experiments were done separately, the patterns
of results across the two parallel sets of studies are in broad
qualitative agreement. Decimals were typically used to
represent continuous entities, whereas fractions were more
likely to represent discrete than continuous entities.

Continuity versus discreteness is a basic ontological
distinction that affects children’s understanding of integers
through counting of discrete entities, and (later on) through
measurement of continuous entities that have been parsed
into discrete units (e.g., Gelman, 1993; Gelman, 2006; Mix,
Huttenlocher & Levine, 2002a, 2002b; Nunes, Light &
Mason, 1993; Rips, Bloomfield & Asmuth, 2008). The
distinction between continuity and discreteness is preserved
throughout the mathematical curriculum. As in the initial
cases of counting and measurement, discrete concepts are
always taught before their continuous counterparts (e.g.,
first arithmetic progressions, then linear functions).
The two symbolic notations of rational numbers, together
with their respective alignments to discrete and continuous
entities, are differentially suited for different reasoning tasks.
DeWolf et al. (2015) found that fractions allow people to
better represent bipartite relations between discrete sets than
do decimals. This difference arises because fractions
maintain the mapping of distinct countable sets onto the
numerator and the denominator, whereas decimals obscure
this mapping. At the same time, decimals afford direct
mapping onto a mental number line, and therefore allow for
easier magnitude assessment than do fractions (DeWolf et
al., 2014; Iuculano & Butterworth, 2011).
Although the overall patterns of results in our experiments
were consistent between the U.S. and South Korea, Korean
students showed a general bias towards using continuous
entities and representations in Experiments 1-2. One
possible explanation is use of the metric measurement
system in Korea. In a preliminary textbook analysis, we
found a pattern qualitatively similar to that observed in
Experiment 1. Unlike the U.S. (Rapp et al., 2015), Korean
textbooks used continuous entities more often than discrete
entities for both fractions and decimals (although the
preference for continuous entities is reduced for fractions
relative to decimals). The performance of college students
in Experiment 1, and the correspondence between their
performance and textbook examples, may reflect the early
exposure of Korean students to this alignment in the
textbook examples.
Despite this secondary difference between the patterns
observed in the U.S. and Korea, the present study provides
strong evidence that a natural alignment holds between
entity type and rational numbers. This alignment cannot be
attributed to the specifics of education, language, and
measurement units, which differ greatly between the United
States and South Korea. Given that we know students are
particularly prone to misconceptions with rational numbers
(Siegler et al., 2013; Ni & Zhou, 2005; Staflyidou &
Vosniadou, 2004; Stigler, Givvin & Thompson, 2010),
making use of this natural alignment may help students to
use their knowledge of entities in the real world to bootstrap
their knowledge of rational numbers. Interestingly, despite
the prevalence of this alignment in textbooks across many
grade levels, textbooks never actually address it explicitly.
The alignment seems to be implicit, and is not explicitly
taught even for adults. Teaching with this alignment in mind,

1265

and even explicitly using it, may provide a useful steppingstone for children learning rational numbers. In addition,
having students engage in tasks in which they need to
actively parse a continuous representation, or conversely,
sum over a discrete representation to align it with a decimal
value, may provide a useful tool for bolstering
understanding of the relation between the representations of
entities and the rational numbers themselves.
More generally, the present study illustrates the
importance of cross-national and cross-cultural research in
the field of higher cognition (cf. Richland, Zur & Holyoak,
2007). It is critical to distinguish between phenomena that
are specific to particular educational practices in specific
contexts from those that reflect the fundamental
representational capacities of the human mind. The
methodological approach of identifying those aspects of
cognitive performance that are the same or different across
populations varying in culture, language, and educational
practices is especially informative in answering these types
of basic questions.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by NSF Fellowship
DGE-1144087 to Melissa DeWolf.

References
Bailey, D. H., Zhou, X., Zhang, Y., Cui, J., Fuchs, L. S.,
Jordan, N. C., Gersten, R., & Siegler, R. S. (2015).
Development of fraction concepts and procedures in U.S.
and Chinese children, Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 129, 68-83.
Bassok, M., Chase, V. M., & Martin, S. A. (1998). Adding
apples and oranges: Alignment of semantic and formal
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 35, 99-134.
Bassok, M., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Object-based
representations: Transfer between continuous and discrete
models of change. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 1522-1538.
DeWolf, M., Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (2015).
Conceptual structure and the procedural affordances of
rational numbers: Relational reasoning with fractions and
decimals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
144, 127-150.
DeWolf, M., Grounds, M. A., Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2014). Magnitude comparison with different types of
rational numbers. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 40, 71-82.
Geary, D. C. (1995). Reflections of evolution and culture in
children’s cognition: Implications for mathematical
development and instruction. American Psychologist, 50,
24-37.
Gelman, R. (1993). A rational-constructivist account of
early learning about numbers and objects. In D. L. Medin
(Ed.), Advances in the psychology of learning and
motivation, Vol. 30 (pp. 61-96). New York: Academic
Press.

Gelman, R. (2006). Young natural-number arithmeticians.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15(4), 193 –
197.
Guthormsen, A. M., Fisher, K. J., Bassok, M., Osterhout, L.,
DeWolf, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (in press). Conceptual
integration of arithmetic operations with real-world
knowledge: Evidence from event-related potentials.
Cognitive Science.
Iuculano, T., & Butterworth, B. (2011). Understanding the
real value of fractions and decimals. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 64, 2088-2098.
Mix, K. S., Huttenlocher, J., & Levine, S. C. (2002a).
Multiple cues for quantification in infancy: Is number one
of them? Psychological Bulletin, 128, 278–94.
Mix, K. S., Huttenlocher, J., & Levine, S. C. (2002b).
Quantitative development in infancy and early childhood.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Ni, Y., & Zhou, Y. D. (2005). Teaching and learning
fraction and rational numbers: The origins and
implications of the whole number bias. Educational
Psychologist, 40, 27–52.
Nunes, T., Light, P., & Mason, J. (1993). Tools for thought:
The measurement of length and area. Learning and
Instruction, 3, 39-54.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) (2012). PISA 2012 Technical Report.
http://www.oecd.org/pisa/
Perry, M. (2000). Explanations of mathematical concepts in
Japanese, Chinese, and US first-and fifth-grade
classrooms. Cognition and Instruction, 18(2), 181-207.
Rapp, M., Bassok, M., DeWolf, M., & Holyoak, K. J.
(2015). Modeling discrete and continuous entities with
fractions and decimals. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 21, 47-56.
Richland, L. E., Zur, O., & Holyoak, K. (2007). Cognitive
supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom.
Science, 316, 1128-1129.
Rips, L. J., Bloomfield, A., & Asmuth, J. (2008). From
numerical concepts to concepts of number. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 31, 623 – 687.
Siegler, R. S., Fazio L. K., Bailey, D. H., & Zhou, X. (2013).
Fractions: The new frontier for theories of numerical
development. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17, 13-19.
Stafylidou, S., & Vosniadou, S. (2004). The development of
student’s understanding of the numerical value of
fractions. Learning and Instruction, 14, 508–518.
Stigler, J. W., Fernandez, C., & Yoshida, M. (1996).
Cultures of mathematics instruction in Japanese and
American elementary classrooms. In T. Rohlen & G. Le
Tendre (Eds.), Teaching and learning in Japan (pp.213247). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stigler, J. W., Givvin, K. B., & Thompson, B. (2010). What
community college developmental mathematics students
understand about mathematics. The MathAMATYC
Educator, 10, 4-16.

1266

