Similarity and Variation in the Distribution of Spatial Expressions
Across Three Languages
Kristen Johannes (johannes@cogsci.jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Krieger Hall
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Jenny Wang (jenny.wang@jhu.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Ames Hall
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Anna Papafragou (papafragou@psych.udel.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Wolf Hall
University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716 USA

Barbara Landau (landau@cogsci.jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Krieger Hall
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 USA
Abstract

"core" notions that are encoded.
A quite different
framework, which we will call "culture-dependent"
(Levinson et al., 2003; see also Levinson & Wilkins, 2006,
Bowerman & Pedersen, 1993), posits that spatial language
is built on highly culture-specific notions concerning e.g.,
culturally salient object properties or configurations, leading
to substantial variation across languages that cannot be
predicted without a full understanding of the culture. On this
view, the spatial encoding systems of typologically diverse
language groups should be, at best, weakly related – making
contact, for example, in only a handful of relational cases,
or following very broad constraints on spatial term
extension. In the current work, we examine a set of
hypothesized distinctions among spatial relational concepts
across three typologically distinct languages, with the goal
of assessing whether these languages show any clear
similarities in how they encode a broad range of spatial
relationships.

Languages of the world universally encode spatial
relationships between objects. However, speakers employ a
variety of different language-specific expressions, which may
encode culture-specific information about objects and/or
different spatial concepts. We ask whether aspects of the
encoding of spatial relations across languages nevertheless
show common underlying spatial concepts as reflected in the
distributions of spatial expressions over spatial sub-types. We
examine a set of hypothesized distinctions within the spatial
relational concepts of Containment and Support across three
typologically distinct languages: English, Hindi, and
Mandarin. We find support for two related hypotheses
concerning common patterns of variation in (a) speakers' use
of select "basic" spatial expressions, and (b) languages'
inventory and distribution of expressions across hypothesized
Containment and Support subtypes. The results underscore
the presence of strong universal similarities in both the
extension of basic spatial expressions across relations and in
the principles governing the diversity of expressions available
for encoding particular relations.

Empirical evidence has been adduced for each of the two
theoretical frameworks. Looking for variation across
languages, Levinson and colleagues (Levinson et al, 2003)
and Regier and colleagues (Regier et al., 2013) examined
spatial descriptions for a diverse set of spatial scenes
included in a battery originally developed by Bowerman and
Pederson (1993). Across a large sample of languages (9
languages with 1-36 speakers per sample), these
investigators analyzed the spatial term(s) used by the
majority of speakers in a language group to encode a given
scene. Using multidimensional scaling, Levinson et al.
proposed that spatial encoding systems across languages
reflect underlying spatial categories that are shaped by a
handful of “attractors” – salient spatial scenes that are
encoded in similar ways across languages -- and by
implicational relationships in the extension of a spatial term
to multiple scenes. Similarly, Regier et al. employed an
inferential (semantic map) analysis to come to a similar

Keywords: Spatial cognition; spatial language; semantics;
cross-linguistic analysis

Introduction
All languages have terms for encoding objects as well as a
limited set of terms for expressing the spatial relations that
hold between objects, such as the English prepositions in,
on, and above. While there is agreement about the universal
presence of spatial terms across languages, there is a great
deal of debate concerning how these terms encode
underlying conceptual-spatial distinctions.
Universalist
frameworks posit a small number of conceptual-spatial
distinctions that are encoded in most languages, with
variation primarily centered on which distinctions are
encoded in a particular language (e.g. Talmy, 1983; Landau
& Jackendoff, 1993). On this view, spatial encoding
systems of languages should show strong similarities in the

997

implicational solution, also using the majority, or modal,
spatial terms used across languages.

that might have been overlooked by analyses that rely on
modal expression use. In the current work, we pursue
questions of cross-linguistic similarity in not only the
distributional characteristics of basic spatial expressions, but
also the distributional properties of the spatial inventory, as
a whole, across and within languages.

These studies emphasized across-language variation in both
the use of basic adpositions and in the complexity of spatial
encoding systems. However, they leave open the possibility
that deep commonalities exist in spatial language systems
across languages, but are reflected in more sensitive
measures of language beyond modal expression use. In this
paper, we suggest that cross-linguistic commonalities can be
captured by measuring within-language variation in
expression use – precisely the type of information that is
ignored in the analyses above. In particular, we examine
two types of within-language variation: the systematic
variation in expression use over a range of different spatial
cases, and variation in the overall inventory of expressions
used by speakers for encoding these different cases.

The Current Study
In the current study, we propose a two-part hypothesis
concerning systematicity and variation within the broad
spatial categories of Containment and Support. We evaluate
these hypotheses by comparing the distributions of spatial
expressions produced by adult native speakers of three
typologically distinct languages – English, Hindi, and
Mandarin – in a spatial description task.
Hypothesis 1: Speakers of different languages will show
similar distributional patterns of use of their language's
basic spatial expressions across different sub-types of
Containment and Support relations. To test this, we examine
the probabilistic encoding of conceptual structure by
language: conceptual differences among spatial relations
may be realized as a series of “soft” distributional
differences in the use of a small number of expressions1. We
hypothesize that speakers of different languages will be
similar in their probabilistic patterns of use of the basic
spatial expression of their language across different spatial
relationships. On our proposal, these patterns are predicted
to reliably reflect conceptual distinctions represented by
speakers in each language. Thus, measuring the distribution
of basic expressions in the three languages will reveal
commonalities and differences in the conceptual structure
underlying spatial expression use in each language.

Strong similarities in spatial concepts across cultures may
not be captured by correspondences in the modal spatial
term used for specific spatial relation cases within a
language. That is, tracking the modal term use across
languages may be limited as a measure of cross-linguistic
similarity. Here, we examine a different kind of measure:
systematicity and variation in the distribution of spatial
terms across spatial relations. Languages may show
surprising consistency as well as systematic variation in the
distribution of expressions across many spatial scenes,
rather than in the most frequently used expression for a
particular scene. This consistency indirectly reflects
commonalities in the underlying structure and conceptual
organization of spatial relations. Landau and colleagues
(Landau et al., under review) pursue this theme in their
close examination of the encoding of Containment and
Support relations by English and Greek speakers. Despite
differences in the overall structure of the spatial language
systems in English and Greek, speakers of both languages
showed considerable consistency in the way that they
extended individual spatial expressions to what were
hypothesized to be distinct subtypes of relations. Landau et
al. examined the relative frequency with which speakers in
each language used language-specific basic locative
expressions, (a term borrowed from Levinson, see Levinson
et al., 2003; Levinson & Wilkins, 2004) to encode a diverse
set of spatial scenes. Speakers’ use of the basic expressions
is in/on in English, and ine mesa/pano se in Greek revealed
similar patterns of distinctions among subtypes of
Containment and Support relations. Furthermore, the spatial
descriptions produced by child speakers in each language
showed a high degree of similarity to adult-like distributions
of the basic expressions for Containment, and systematic
differences for Support. Overall, the two languages showed
a high degree of consistency in their distribution of a few
basic expressions across a range of scenes for the two types
of relation. These similarities in the pattern of variability in
spatial language use reveals commonalities in the
underlying organization of spatial concepts – commonalities

Hypothesis 2: Speakers of different languages will show
similar patterns of variability in the distributional
characteristics of all expressions (basic or otherwise) used
across different sub-types of spatial relationships. To test
this, we examine the variation in the size and distribution of
the complete inventory of spatial expressions that are
available and used by speakers for encoding different
relationships. We hypothesize that variation in the number
of expressions used by speakers for different types of
relations should also be similar across the three languages.

Methods

1

We chose our expressions of interest based on agreement
among native speakers for encoding the simplest instances of
physical containment and support. We consider and test the
empirical question of whether the distribution of these basic
expressions will reveal common underlying distinctions in the
three languages.

998

Participants and Languages of Interest

B: Support

A: Containment

Forty-eight adult participants contributed to the corpus of
spatial descriptions: 16 each of native English speakers,
native Mandarin speakers, and native Hindi speakers.
English and Mandarin descriptions were collected in person
and online from speakers in the Johns Hopkins University
community. Hindi descriptions were collected in person
from the Baltimore, MD and Boston, MA areas. A profile of
each of the three languages and their respective spatial
systems is presented in Table 1, below. The corpus of
English descriptions was originally collected by Landau et
al. (under review) as part of a larger cross-linguistic data set
comparing adult and child use of basic spatial expressions in
English and Greek speakers. In the current study, we use the
same proportions of and analysis of English basic spatial
expressions initially reported in Landau et al. To this we add
a new corpus of Hindi and Mandarin spatial descriptions
and analysis of basic expression use in these languages.
Finally, we also examine properties of the complete spatial
expression inventory for each language, an analysis that is
new to all three language corpora.

Full
Containment:
Loose

Gravitational
Support

Partial
Containment:
Loose

Embedded
Support

Full
Containment:
Tight

Support via
Adhesion

Partial
Containment:
Tight

Support via
Hanging

Interlocking

Support via
Point
Attachment

Materials and Procedure
Embedded
(neg. spaces)

Spatial Relations Battery The study employed a Spatial
Battery of 80 static scenes, developed by Landau and
Papafragou (Landau et al., under review). Each scene
depicted a spatial relation between two objects: a figure
object indicated by an arrow, and a ground object outlined
in white. The spatial relations of interest in the current study
were derived from two broad categories: Containment and
Support, which encompassed 44 of the 80 scenes, further
articulated into a structure of subcategories. Containment
was divided into 6 subtypes and Support was divided into 5
subtypes. Each subtype featured 4 scenes. Figures 1A and
1B present the respective Containment and Support
subtypes, with a single exemplar from each.

Figure 1: Containment (A) and Support (B) subtypes and
examples. Each sub-type included 4 examples.
Table 1: Language profiles and spatial expressions for
languages of interest.

Family
Word Order
Spatial
Expression
Form
Basic
Expression:
Containment
Basic
Expression:
Support

Spatial Description Task and Coding Participants were
asked to provide a description in their native language for
each scene, as an answer to the question “Where is the
[object indicated by the arrow]?” Each participant was
presented with the 44 scenes in a different random order,
and descriptions were transcribed and coded for spatial
content, which differed in form depending on the language.
As part of the transcription and coding process, we defined
separate basic spatial expressions (following the work of
Levinson et al., 20032), listed in Table 1, used to describe
Containment and Support relations for each language.

English

Hindi

Mandarin

Germanic
SVO
Verb +
Preposition

Indo-Iranian
SOV
Postposition +
Verb

isV in(side)P
be in

mainP haiV
in be

isV on(top)P
be on

parP (rakhaV)
haiV
on (place) be

Sino-Tibetan
SVO
(Verb+)
Prepostion +
Loc.Noun
zaiP li-LocN
locate-at
interior
zaiP shangLocN
locate-at top

Analyses and Results
Hypothesis 1: Systematicity in Basic Expression Use
Analysis We examined the distribution of basic spatial
expressions in each language (see Table 1 for the basic
expressions measured). To measure this, we calculated the
proportion of descriptions for each subtype of Containment
and Support for which speakers used the basic expression in
their language. We then used logistic regression analyses to

2

Specifically, Levinson et al. (2003; see also Levinson &
Wilkins, 2006) define the “basic locative construction/expression”
(BLC) in a language as the most natural response to the question of
“where is the (figure object) located?”, acknowledging that other
expressions might be used in certain pragmatic contexts.

999

English
p
β
Intercept
Interlock/Embed
Contain:
Full v. Partial
Contain:
Loose v. Tight
Interlocking
v. Embedded

<.01

2.86

<.01

2.07

<.01

0.41

ns

0.43

ns

2.18

<.01

-0.01

ns

-1.29

<.05

-1.31

<.05

-1.17

<.01

-0.75

<.05

0.68

<.05

>4-51;:"

?1491"

:/4-14-"

/9:6;134"

67869969"

:/4-14-"

<3142"/22/=:7642"

2=>2??2?"

789348/"34563"

4:329/0;<4:5"

-.//"34563"

789348/"/0012"

-.//"/0012"

2=>2??2?"

789348/"34563"

4:329/0;<4:5"

-.//"34563"

789348/"/0012"

!"
-.//"/0012"

3.18

-./012/2134/5"

!#$"
2=>2??2?"

ns

<3142"/22/=:7642"

!#%"

789348/"34563"

0.10

/9:6;134"

!#&"

4:329/0;<4:5"

ns

67869969"

-./012/2134/5"

!#'"

-.//"34563"

0.79

-./012/2134/5"

!#("

789348/"/0012"

<.01

<3142"/22/=:7642"

!#*"
!#)"

:/4-14-"

!#+"

-.//"/0012"

β

0.86

$"
!#,"
!#+"
!#*"
!#)"
!#("
!#'"
!#&"
!#%"
!#$"
!"

$"

A4:?4"

Mandarin
p
β

p

Likewise, for Support relations (Figure 3) speakers in each
language tended to use their basic spatial expression at
greatest rates for Gravitational Support relations and at
increasingly lower rates for Embedded Support, followed by
Support via Adhesion, Hanging, and Point Attachment.

!#,"

@:5/416"

Hindi

Full/Part Contain v

/9:6;134"

Results Speakers of all three languages showed variability
in the use of their language-specific basic spatial expression
across sub-types of Containment (Figure 2) and Support
(Figure 3). We looked for similarity in the patterns of this
variability – the way in which speakers distributed their use
of the basic spatial expression – across the three language
groups. The similarity of these patterns was statistically
confirmed through mixed model logistic regression
analyses, conducted separately for descriptions of
Containment (Table 2) and Support (Table 3) relations in
each of the three languages.

Table 2: Model coefficient estimates (β ) and statistical
reliability (p = Pr(z)) for logistic regression analysis of basic
expression use for Containment in each language.

67869969"

determine whether differences among subtypes of relations
predicted reliable differences in rates of use of the basic
expression by speakers of a given language. These models
were conducted separately within each language for
Containment and Support scenes. Subtypes were tested
against one another by coding the weights in the regression
algorithm to reflect a set of orthogonal contrasts between
subtypes of relations in the battery, allowing us to interpret
regression coefficient values as differences in language use
for dimensions that distinguished subcategories of relations
from one another.

@/49/.14"

Figure 3: Proportion of basic expression use grouped by
subtype for Support in English (is on),
Hindi (par (rakha) hai), and Mandarin (zai shang-).

B8:?894:"

Figure 2: Proportion of basic expression use grouped by
subtype for Containment in English (is in),
Hindi (main hai), and Mandarin (zai li-).
For Containment relations (Figure 2, Table 2), speakers of
all three languages showed common distributional
differences for 2/4 possible hypothesized conceptual
distinctions: speakers were more likely to use their
respective basic spatial expressions – is in, main hai, and zai
li- – to describe Full- and Partial- Containment relations
compared to Interlocking and Embedded relations, and used
the basic expression at different rates for Interlocking
compared to Embedded relations. Additionally, speakers of
two languages, Hindi and Mandarin, distinguished Loosefitting from Tight-fitting Containment relations, and
Mandarin speakers were more likely to use their basic
spatial expression zai li- for Full- compared to PartialContainment sub-types.

However, regression analyses (Table 3, below) make clear
that speakers of each language were reliably more likely to
use their basic spatial expressions – is on, par (rahka) hai
and zai shang- for English, Hindi, and Mandarin,
respectively – to express Gravitational Support relations
compared to sub-types of Support via Hanging, and Point
Attachment. And that speakers of Hindi and Mandarin, but
not English, further distinguished between Gravitational
Support relations compared to sub-types of Embedded
Support and Support via Adhesion. Our analyses show that
the variability in basic expression use within languages
reveals both similarities and differences in the patterns of
probabilistic encoding of Containment and Support relations
across languages. All three languages share a set of reliable
distinctions between sub-types, but speakers of some
languages make a greater number of distinctions (reflecting,
perhaps, more fine-grained encoding) than speakers of
others.

1000

Table 3: Model coefficient estimates (β ) and statistical
reliability for logistic regression analysis of basic
expression use for Support in each language.

Intercept
Gravitational
v. Embedded
Gravitational
v. Adhesion
Gravitational
v. Hanging
Gravitational
v. Pt attach

(separately for Containment and Support scenes) for each
pair of languages.
English
Hindi
Mandarin

English
p
β
0.72
ns

Hindi
p
β
-0.66
ns

Mandarin
p
β
-1.24
<.05

Full
Containment
Loose

0.21

ns

-1.43

<.01

-1.90

<.01

-0.45

ns

-1.57

<.01

-1.97

<.01

Partial
Containment
Loose

-2.10

<.01

-1.47

<.01

-1.60

<.01

-2.58

<.01

-0.81

<.05

-0.89

<.05

Full
Containment
Tight
Partial
Containment
Tight

Hypothesis 2: Variation in the Complete
Expression Inventory
Analysis The task of finding translational equivalents and
evaluating variation across all three languages becomes
increasingly difficult beyond the basic spatial expressions.
Thus, we sought to measure the general variation in the
inventories of expressions used to express Containment and
Support relations in each language. To do this, we
calculated the entropy, H(X), associated with the set X of
expressions produced for each scene:

H(X) = −∑ P(x i )log P(x i )
i

Higher values for H reflect increasingly uniform
distributions of expression use (many equally-probable
expressions), while low values for H reflect distributions
with
€ few high-frequency descriptions. We used these values
as indirect measures of the variability of spatial descriptions
in each language and conducted correlations to establish
whether the variability in the distribution of descriptions
across scenes was similar across the three languages.
Results The complete inventories of (both basic and other)
spatial expressions for each language also varied over
subtypes, with some subtypes eliciting only a few different
expressions and others eliciting a wide variety. The mosaic
of plots in Figures 4 (Containment sub-types) and Figure 5
(Support sub-types) give a snapshot of frequency and
distribution of different spatial expressions across different
relation sub-types in each language, and each pie piece
represents the frequency with which a single expression3
was used in the language. To determine whether different
languages were similar in the degree to which speakers’
expression choice varied across different spatial relations,
we calculated entropy values for each Containment and
Support scene in each language and computed correlations

3

We differentiated expressions on the basis of adposition, verb,
spatial noun and/or locative marker. For example, seemingly
related prespositions such as English in, inside, and within, were
treated as distinct expressions.

1001

Interlocking
Containment

Embedded
Containment

Figure 4: Distribution of spatial expressions for
Containment sub-types in each language. Expressions
within a language are consistently colored across sub-types
and the basic expression is the same color (dark purple)
within and across languages.
English

Hindi

Mandarin

Gravitational
Support
(from below)

Embedded
Support
Support
via Adhesion

Support
via Hanging

Support via
Point
Attachment

Figure 5: Distribution of spatial expressions for Support
sub-types in each language. Expressions within a language
are consistently colored across sub-types and the basic
expression is the same color (medium blue) within and
across languages.

Entropy values were computed across scene (44 scenes
total: 24 Containment, 20 Support) for the spatial
descriptions in each language. These values reflect both
information about the frequency and variability with which
expressions were used for each scene. We entered these
values into a series of Spearman rank-order correlation
analyses (Table 4, Spearman’s ρ significance established via
randomization tests with 10,000 permutations each), to
measure the strength of correlation between entropy (H)
values for pairs of languages.

across languages: languages were correlated in the extent to
which speakers preferred to use either few expressions, each
used frequently, or many low-frequency expressions to
encode a particular spatial relation scene. These results
come together to inform our view of cross-linguistic
encoding of spatial relationships in which similarities arise
as a function of systematic variability in speakers' use of (a)
basic spatial expressions over sub-types of relations; and (b)
the complete inventory of expressions available within a
language for encoding different relations.

Table 4: Spearman rank-order correlations (ρ) between
entropy (H) values across Containment and Support
relations (by item) for pairs of languages.

The current work highlights universality in both the
extension of basic spatial expressions across relations and in
the principles governing the diversity of expressions
available for encoding particular relations. Similarities
across languages arise despite clear typological differences
in the origins and structure of the sampled languages as well
as possible widespread culture-specific pressures on the
expression of information about objects and location. We
hope, in future work, to extend this analysis to language
samples with even greater typological diversity.

Containment
Correlations
Support
Correlations
All Items
Correlations

EnglishHindi
ρ = 0.62,
p<.01
ρ = 0.54,
p<.05
ρ = 0.44,
p<.01

EnglishMandarin
ρ = 0.56,
p<.05
ρ = 0.50,
p<.05
ρ = 0.53,
p<.01

HindiMandarin
ρ = 0.76,
p<.01
ρ = 0.46,
p<.05
ρ = 0.32,
p<.05

Acknowledgments

Languages showed moderate-to-high positive relationships
(ρ = 0.32-0.76) in their tendency to distribute spatial
descriptions for different spatial scenes across few (low
entropy) vs. many (high entropy) expressions. Correlations
among individual scenes were reliable across all language
pairs, both when computed separately for Containment and
Support relations and when collapsed over category4.

Conclusions
In the current study we used a novel set of distributional
analyses to uncover deep commonalities, as well as
differences5, in the structure of spatial encoding systems
across three typologically distinct languages. Our first
analysis uncovered consistency in the distribution of basic
spatial expressions across a wide range of relations in each
language: speakers of each language show similar
tendencies to use a single basic expression at different rates
to distinguish among subtypes of Containment and Support
relations. Our second analysis extended this cross-linguistic
consistency to variation in the spatial expression inventory
4
There may be other appropriate standards for comparing
similarity across languages. In their work on color naming, for
example Regier et al. (2007) propose a similarity metric and
evaluate its utility by “shifting” the space in arbitrary yet
semantically contiguous ways. Spatial categories, however, lack
the semantic contiguity present in the color space, making the
Regier et al. approach and, specifically, shifted standard of
comparison, less viable for analyses of spatial encoding.
5
An anonymous reviewer raised a concern that our hypotheses
are (un)falsifiable. However, on our account falsifiability is
possible, specifically predicting the failure to find the same sets of
relative differences in basic expression use (H 1) and failure to find
correlations between distributions of expressions (H 2).

Thanks to Sonal Chatter and Mengxi Yuan for assistance
and to Colin Wilson and three anonymous reviewers for
helpful comments. A.P. acknowledges partial support from
NSF Grant BCS-0749870.

References
Bowerman, M., & Pedersen, E. (1992). Topological relations
picture series. In Stephen C. Levinson (Ed.) Space stimuli kit
1.2, 51. Nijmegen: Max Planck Inst. for Psycholinguistics.
Bowerman, M., & Pedersen, E. (1993). Cross-linguistic studies
of spatial semantic organization. In Annual Report of the
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 1992, 53-56.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). “What” and “where” in
spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 16, 217-238.
Landau, B., Johannes, K., Skordos, D., & Papafragou, A.
(under review). Universality and variation in the
representation of Containment and Support: Evidence from
English- and Greek-speaking children and adults.
Levinson, S.C., Meira, S, et al. (2003). ‘Natural concepts’ in
the spatial topological domain – adpositional meanings in
cross-linguistic perspective: An exercise in semantic
typolgogy. Language, 79, 485-516.
Levinson, S.C., & Wilkins, D.P. (Eds.) (2006). Grammars of
space: Explorations in cognitive diversity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Regier, T., Kay, P. & Khetarpahl, N. (2007). Color naming
reflects optimal partitions of color space. PNAS, 101, 14361444.
Regier, T., Khetarpahl, N., & Majid, A. (2013). Inferring
semantic maps. Linguistic Typology, 17, 89-105.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H.L. Pick
Jr. and L.P. Acredolo (Eds.) Spatial Orientation: Theory,
Research, and Application. New York: Plenum.

1002

