So good it has to be true: Wishful thinking in theory of mind
Daniel Hawthorne-Madell (djthorne@stanford.edu), Noah D. Goodman (ngoodman@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University Stanford, CA USA 94350
Abstract
In standard decision theory, rational agents are objective,
keeping their beliefs independent from their desires (Berger,
1985). Such agents are the basis for current computational
models of Theory of Mind (ToM), but this fundamental assumption of the theory remains untested. Do people think that
others’ beliefs are objective, or do they think that others’ desires color their beliefs? We describe a Bayesian framework
for exploring this relationship and its implications. Motivated
by this analysis, we conducted two experiments testing the a
priori independence of beliefs and desires in people’s ToM
and find that, contrary to fully-normative accounts, people
think that others engage in wishful thinking. In the first experiment, we found that people think others believe both that
desirable events are more likely to happen, and that undesirable ones are less likely to happen. In the second experiment,
we found that social learning leverages this intuitive understanding of wishful thinking: participants learned more from
the beliefs of an informant whose desires were contrary to his
beliefs. People’s ToM therefore appears to be more nuanced
than the current rational accounts, but consistent with a model
in which desire directly affects the subjective probability of
an event.
Keywords: Wishful Thinking; Computational Social Cognition; Theory of Mind; Desirability Bias

Figure 1: Causal models of (a) ToM based upon classic
belief-desire psychology and (b) ToM that includes a direct
“wishful thinking” link between desires and beliefs.

The direct influence of desires on beliefs is a departure from
classic belief-desire “folk” psychology in which beliefs and
desires are independent and jointly cause action (Fig. 1a).
Previous models of ToM formalize belief-desire (B-D) psychology into generative models of action and belief formation. They show that inferring others’ beliefs (Baker, Saxe,
& Tenenbaum, 2011), preferences (Jern, Lucas, & Kemp,
2011), and desires (Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum, 2009) can
be understood as Bayesian reasoning over these generative
models. A fundamental assumption of these models, and the
B-D theory underpinning them, is that beliefs are formed on
the basis of evidence, and a priori independent of desire. We
will call models that make this assumption rational theories
of mind (rToM). We can contrast this rationally motivated
theory with one that incorporates the rose colored lenses of a
desire-belief connection, an optimistic ToM (oToM).
In this paper we attempt to experimentally distinguish
rToM from oToM. This is difficult in typical social reasoning
tasks because actions are observed, which renders desire and
belief conditionally dependent, even in rToM. To isolate the
a priori relation we therefore perform two experiments in
which participants judge the likely beliefs of an agent who
has not taken an action, in situations where the agent’s likely
desires and evidence vary. We begin by formalizing rToM
and oToM as probabilistic models in order to make their predictions more explicit.

Introduction
“I think Romney will take Ohio” Karl Rove intoned into the
camera while Fox News’ election experts were calling Ohio,
and the 2012 election, for Barack Obama. The strength of
Mr. Rove’s desire to see a Romney victory was palpable
and it seemed to overpower the evidence from the exit polls
to form his belief. However, this explanation presupposes
a direct link between his desires and beliefs, a link that is
currently absent in normative behavioral models and current
Theory of Mind (ToM) models.
Does a causal link between desires and beliefs exist?1 The
evidence is mixed. There are a number of compelling studies that find “wishful thinking,” or a “desirability bias” in
both carefully controlled laboratory studies (Mayraz, 2011)
and real world settings, such as the behavior of sport fans
(Babad, 1987; Babad & Katz, 1991), expert investors (Olsen,
1997), and voters (Redlawsk, 2002). However, other researchers have failed to observe the effect, e.g., Bar-Hillel et
al.’s The elusive wishful thinking effect (1995), have provided
alternative accounts of previous experiments (Hahn & Harris, 2014), and have argued that there is insufficient evidence
for a systematic wishful thinking bias (Krizan & Windschitl,
2007; Hahn & Harris, 2014).
Whether or not there actually is a direct effect of desires
on beliefs, people might think that there is and use this fact
when reasoning about other people. That is to say, people’s
ToM might include this causal influence (as seen in Fig. 1b).

Models of belief formation and social learning
The standard rational theory of mind pictured in Figure
1a postulates a theory of belief formation that can be understood as Bayesian updating of beliefs about unobserved
states given some observed evidence (and a causal model of
the world). For concreteness, we describe the models in this
section in terms of the scenario employed in Experiment 2.
A fan forms belief about their team’s skill, b, by updating
after seeing evidence, e, in the form of the team’s record in
their past matches, E . By Bayes rule:

1 While the causal link between desires and beliefs may, in fact,
be bi-directional, we will focus on the evidence for the a priori
effect of desires on beliefs.

p(b|e, E ) ∝ p(e|E , b)p(b),

884

(1)

send signal s given the true team skill. We take p(e|br , E ) to
be binomial as above. The remaining term can be expanded
to make the fan’s belief explicit:

where p(b) is the prior probability of the team having skill b
and p(e|b, E ) is the likelihood that the team won e of the E
matches given skill b. We assume skill is simply the probability that the team will win a match (and therefore we can
talk of a team’s skill and chance of winning the next match
interchangeably). Given this assumption, each match is independent and can be predicted by flipping a coin weighted
by the team’s skill: e ∼ Binomial(b, E ).
In the rational theory of mind described in Eq. 1, the fan’s
belief in the team’s skill (b) is a priori independent of their
desire.2 The “optimistic” theory of mind pictured in Figure 1b breaks this independence assumption, with beliefs directly depending upon desires. We formalize belief update
in this model by:
p(b|e, E , d) ∝
∝

p(e|E , b, d)p(b|d)p(d)
p(e|E , b)p(b|d),

∫

p(s|e, E , d) =

(4)

which depends on the belief formation (p(b|e, E , d)) and signaling (p(s|b)) models specified above. Finally, using Eq. 5,
we can describe the reasoner who learns about a team’s skill
from social information—a fan’s desire, amount of evidence,
and signal. Using Bayes rule:
p(br |s, E , d) ∝

∑ p(s|E , e, d)p(e|br , E ),

(5)

p(s|br , E , d)p(br )

(8)

Eq. 8 represents a social learner who assumes an oToM; for
a social learner who assumes a rToM the dependence on d
disappears.
The qualitative behavior of the rational and optimistic social learning models can be seen in Figure 4b and c. A reasoner using a rToM considers only the amount of evidence a
fan seen, E , i.e., the fan’s knowledgeability (for a given set
of direct evidence er ). For a reasoner using an oToM, the desirability of the outcome influences their estimate. Given the
a priori bias to believe in desirable events, when a person
desires an outcome and yet believes that it will not occur,
a reasoner can infer that they saw strong evidence that the
outcome will not occur. The oToM reasoner therefore learns
more from this person than they would from someone who
had identical beliefs that were consistent with their desires.
We have outlined the patterns of reasoning expected if reasoners use an oToM when thinking about others. Whether
people actually conform with these predictions, assuming
that beliefs are a priori dependent on desires, is an open empirical question. We therefore conducted two experiments
testing the qualitative predictions of oToM. In Experiment 1,
we test whether reasoner’s inferences about others’ beliefs
reflect an a priori dependence of beliefs on desires. A consequence of such a dependence would be that learners are
sensitive to others’ desires when learning from them, which
we explore in Experiment 2.
Given the strongly divergent predictions of the optimistic
and rational ToM models, only a qualitative comparison is
needed to show the presence and consequences of wishful
thinking in ToM. To generate the qualitative predictions in
Figure 3c and 4b, we used equation Eq. 3 and 8 where we
defined wishful thinking as a prior biased in the direction
of the desire; we assumed that a belief b (given a desire d)
was drawn from a Beta distribution whose mean was biased
towards the desired outcome with the magnitude of this bias
representing the degree of wishful thinking. We fit the mean
and the variance of this Beta distribution to the data in each
experiment.

e

=

(7)

b

(2)
(3)

∑ p(s|br , E , e, d)p(e|br , E , d)

p(s|b)p(b|e, E , d) db

=

where the second line follows by assuming that evidence
doesn’t change the agent’s desires, e ⊥ d|b, and assuming
a uniform p(d) for simplicity. To capture wishful thinking,
we assume that the direction of p(b|d) is for positive utility
desires to lead to higher prior probability for the corresponding events; for example, passionate fans are more likely to
think their team will win.
The difference between belief update in rToM and oToM
can therefore be understood as a dependence of prior belief
on desire. A reasoner using a rToM (Eq. 1) would infer the
same belief for a person who saw evidence e regardless of
whether the person desired or dreaded the event (see Fig. 3d).
However, a reasoner using an oToM (Eq. 3) would infer
a person believes desired events to be more probable than
dreaded ones (see Fig. 3c).
Reasoners using these different theories of mind not only
differ in the inferences they draw about others’ beliefs but
also in how they can use knowledge of others’ beliefs to
make inferences about the world, i.e., social learning. This
can be seen by considering a fan who passes a signal s to
the reasoner that indicates whether they think their team will
win: p(s|b) = δb≥0.5 . In Experiment 2, reasoners don’t know
what the fan believes about a team’s strength, and instead
have to infer it from their own prior beliefs about the team’s
skill pr (b), the matches the fan saw E , and the fan’s desire
d. To infer the true team strength (which we subscript as br
for clarity) the reasoner has to consider what evidence e the
fan actually saw:
p(s|br , E , d) =

p(s|b, d, e, E )p(b|e, E , d) db (6)
∫b

e

where the second line follows from the fact that s ⊥ br |e (the
fan’s signal depends on the true strength only via the evidence) and e ⊥ d (desire doesn’t influence the actual evidence). Eq. 5 represents the probability that the fan would

Experiment 1: Wishful thinking in ToM
To test for the presence of wishful thinking in people’s mental models of others we introduce Josh, a person playing a

2 Although beliefs and desires are conditionally dependent given

an action in rToM.

885

game with a transparent causal structure. The causal structure of the game is conveyed via the physical intuitions of
the Galton board pictured in Fig. 2c. The outcome of the
game is binary (there are two bins) with different values associated with each outcome (money won or lost). We call the
value of an outcome (i.e., the amount that Josh stands to win
or lose) the utility of that outcome, U(outcome). Participants
are asked what they think about Josh’s belief in the likelihood
of the outcome pJ (outcome). By manipulating outcome values we are able to test for wishful thinking. If people incorporate wishful thinking into their ToM, we should find
that increasing an outcome’s utility (U(outcome)) results in
higher estimates of Josh’s belief in the outcome’s occurrence
(pJ (outcome)).
We first measured pJ (outcome|evidence) without manipulating the desirability of the outcome in the “baseline” block
of trials. Then in the “utility” block of trials we assigned values to outcomes, manipulating Josh’s U(outcome).3 In the
utility block of trials we used a Price Is Right-style spinning
wheel (Fig. 2a and b) to show Josh (and the participant) what
he stood to win or lose based on the outcome of the marble
drop. By comparing these two blocks of trials we test for the
presence of wishful thinking in people’s ToM.

Figure 2: Stimuli used in Experiment 1. (a) the wheel used
to determine the payout for the next outcome in the Many
outcome condition and (b) in the Dual outcome condition.
(c) Galton board used to decide the outcome in Experiment
1. The blue arrow at the top indicates where the marble will
be dropped. The numbers indicate the four drop positions
used in the experiment.
slider with endpoints labeled “Certainly Will” and “Certainly
Won’t.” Color placement was randomized on each trial, and
the color of the box in question varied between participants.
The marble drop position was indicated with a blue arrow at
the top of the Galton board and there were four drop positions used (marblex ; top of Figure 2c) which varied in how
likely they were to deliver the marble into the bin in question.
After the baseline trials, participants were introduced to
the utility trials, which included a spinning wheel labeled
with outcome values that determined “how much Josh can
win or lose.” In the Dual outcomes condition, Josh could
win or lose $5 (as seen in 2a), and in the Many outcomes
condition, Josh could win or lose $5 or $50 (as seen in 2b).
At the beginning of each trial the wheel was spun and the
selected payout was displayed, e.g., “Josh has a chance of
winning $5,” along with the Galton board. The bins were
labeled with a $ and ∅ symbol.6 If the marble landed in the
$ bin then Josh won/lost the money. The location of the $
bin was randomized on each trial. After seeing the Galton
board with marblex indicated with a blue arrow, participants
were asked two questions sequentially. First they were asked
“What do you think Josh believes is the chance that the marble will land on the {$/-$} and he’ll {win/lose} {$5/ $50},”
with the response recorded on the same slider as the baseline
trials with endpoints labeled “Certainly Will” and “Certainly
Won’t.” They were then asked “How much does Josh care
about the outcome?” with the response on a slider with endpoints labeled from “Not at All” to “To a Great Extent.”
In the Dual outcome condition, participants saw every
combination of the two outcomes ($5, -$5) and the four drop
positions (20%, 40%, 60%, and 80%) for a total of 8 utility
trials. In the Many outcome condition participants saw 8 random samples from the 16 possible combinations of the four
payouts and the four drop points. Each participant also saw
5 catch trials asking either where the marble had landed after

Methods
Participants We recruited 110 participants via Amazon
Mechanical Turk and paid them $.75. Participants were split
into into two conditions: the Dual outcome (25 male and 20
female, µage = 28, σage = 9.1) and Many outcome (31 male
and 34 female, µage = 27, σage = 8.9).4 Ten participants were
excluded from the analyses for responding incorrectly to attention checks.

Design and Procedure
Participants first were introduced to Josh5 who was playing a
marble-drop game with a Galton board (as seen in Figure 2c).
Josh was personified as a stick figure and appeared on every
screen. To provide participants with an example of the causal
structure (i.e., physics) of the game, they were first shown a
marble dropping from the center of the board, twice. One
marble landed in the orange bin (Figure 2c left bin) and the
other landed in the right (Figure 2c right bin). After observing the physical properties of the board (i.e., the two marble drops) participants began the baseline block of trials. In
the four baseline trials, the marble’s drop position varied and
participants were asked “What do you think Josh thinks is the
chance that the marble lands in the bin with the purple/orange
box?” Participants’ responses were recorded on a continuous
3 Crucially,

Josh’s U(outcome) should not be chosen by him,
e.g., “I bet $5 that it lands in the right bin,” as such an action would
render U(outcome) and p(outcome) conditionally dependent and
both rToM and oToM would predict influence of desire on belief
judgments. To test pure wishful thinking, Josh’s U(outcome) has to
be assigned to him by a process independent of p(outcome).
4 These two conditions were presented as two separate HITs on
Amazon Mechanical Turk, two weeks apart, with no participant allowed to participate in both conditions.
5 A random male name was generated for each participant.

6$

886

when the payout was positive and -$ when it was negative.

Figure 3: For each outcome value, the mean subjective p(outcome) attributed to the agent is shown (with standard error
bars) for (a) the Dual outcome condition and (b) the Many outcome condition. These data are compared with the qualitative
predictions of the (c) optimistic and (d) rational ToM models.
the corresponding baseline trial (β = .064,t(97) = 5.5, p <
.001).8 Finally, marblex , the direct evidence, had a significant influence (β = .79,t(99) = 18, p < .05). There was
no evidence that the effect of the outcome value was affected by marblex (the interactive model provided a worse
fit (χ2 (1) = .82, p < .05).
The results from Experiment 1 are consistent with the
qualitative predictions of the oToM model (Eq. 2) indicating
that people’s ToM includes a direct “wishful thinking” link,
unlike rToM models where beliefs and desires are a priori
independent. To test the robustness of this finding, in Experiment 2 we expand our sights to social learning situations
where oToM (but, crucially, not rToM) predicts that desires
affect a social source’s influence.

a Galton board demonstration, or comprehension questions
about the game and their current task.

Results and Discussion
Comparison of Dual and Many Condition As evident in
Figure 3b, participants showed no sensitivity to the magnitude of the value of the outcome. We therefore combined $5
and $50 into one positive-value categorical variable and -$5
and -$50 into a negative-value categorical variable and tested
whether this qualitatively coded Many condition data differed from the Dual condition data. For each level of value—
negative, baseline, and positive—we compared the average
reported p(outcome) between the Dual and Many conditions
by permutation test. The tests indicated that the results are
not distinguishable (p > .05 for each level of value). In the
subsequent analyses we therefore combine the results from
the two conditions.
Wishful thinking in ToM In a rational theory of mind, beliefs and desires are a priori independent. Manipulating
Josh’s desires therefore shouldn’t have an effect on his beliefs, and we would predict that the utility trials look like
the baseline trials. However, as seen in Figure 3a and b,
the utility trials varied systematically from the baseline trials
and the predictions of a rToM. To quantify this deviation we
fit a linear mixed effects model to participants’ p(outcome)
responses. The model used marblex and the categorically
coded value of the outcome (negative, baseline, and positive)
as fixed effects and included the random effect of marblex ,
outcome value, and intercept for each participant. The resulting model indicated that if an outcome was associated with a
utility for Josh, participants thought that it would impact his
beliefs about the probability of that outcome. Participants’
thought that Josh would believe that an outcome that lost him
money was less likely than the corresponding baseline trial
(β = −.047,t(98) = −3.7, p < .05).7 They also thought that
an outcome that would net him money was more likely than

Experiment 2: Learning from others with an
oToM
Do people consider a social source’s desires when learning
from him? It would be important to do so if they think that
his desires have a direct influence on his beliefs. Consider
a learner using an oToM to reason about her uncle, a Cubs
fan, who proudly proclaims that this is the year the Cubs win
the pennant9 . Though her uncle knows a lot about baseball,
the oToM learner is largely unmoved from her (understandably) skeptical stance. However, if her aunt, a lifelong Yankees fan, agrees that the Cubs do look better than the Yankees this year, then an oToM learner considers this a much
stronger teaching signal. A learner reasoning with a rToM
wouldn’t distinguish between these two social sources10 as
seen in Figure 4c.
8 There was no evidence of loss aversion in the relative magnitude of the wishful thinking effect for positive and negative utilities.
In fact, the magnitude of the wishful thinking effect was slightly
stronger for positive utilities.
9 It never is.
10 Assuming that his aunt and uncle are equally knowledgeable
and their statements have no causal influence on the game—if the
uncle is a referee, his desires may matter through more objective
routes.

7 Denominator degrees of freedom used to calculate p-values
were approximated using the Satterthwaite method

887

Figure 4: Effect of a social sources’ desire on how others learn from them for (a) Experiment 2 data with standard error bars,
which we compare to the qualitative predictions of (b) an optimistic ToM, (c) a rational ToM. Bars represent the difference
between the baseline mean p(winx ) response and the mean p(winx ) response for the four social trials (where Teamx is observed
to win 3 of the 5 last matches). The color of the bars corresponds to which team the fan thought would win. The difference
between each pair of colored bars therefore represents the effect of the fan’s desire.
We investigated which ToM best describes learning from
social sources using a scenario where participants reasoned
about the upcoming match of a fictional soccer tournament.
Participants were introduced to a fan from one of the schools
who said which team they thought would win. Combining
the two possible desires (d f ∈ {winx , winy }) with the two
possible beliefs a fan could have (b f ∈ {winx , winy }) yields
four possible social cues. In addition to the social cues, participants were given direct evidence of p(winx ) in the form of
previous match outcomes, to make questions about the next
outcome more natural. The effect of the social information
was isolated by comparing the social trials to corresponding
baseline trials that only provided direct evidence.
40 participants (22 female, µage = 31.4, σage = 9.4) were recruited via Amazon Mechanical Turk and paid $.60. Five
participants were excluded from the analyses for failing to
respond to attention checks.

trials.
Following the baseline trials, participants were introduced
to a “student of one of the colleges who is a big fan of his
school’s team ...(who will) say who he thinks will win this
year’s game.” Each social trial consisted of a cartoon of the
student wearing his team’s (randomly assigned) color. He introduces himself, “I’ve seen the last 10 matches of this rivalry
because I’m a big fan of {Team}” and then either professed
to be bullish(“and I think they will win this year”) or bearish (“but I think {Other Team} will win this year”) on his
team. Each trial also included a results table where Teamx
won 3 out of 5 times.11 Participants were then asked the
same question as in the baseline trials “What do you think is
the chance that Teamx wins the match this year.” Participants
saw four social trials, one for each combination of who the
fan believed will win and who he wanted to win.
Each participant saw 4 catch trials asking either what the
results of the last match up where, or comprehension questions about the game and their current task.

Design Procedure

Results and Discussion

Participants were told about a (fictional) annual British collegiate soccer tournament where teams played one another
year after year in the initial round robin phase, creating rivalries. Participants were given some direct evidence of each
rivalry in the form of a summary table of the results of their
last five matches. In the initial baseline trials, participants
just received this non-social, direct evidence about each rivalry and were asked, “What do you think is the chance that
Teamx wins the match this year?” They were presented four
baseline trials such that they saw Teamx win 1/5, 2/5, 3/5,
and 4/5. The names for Teamx and Teamy were randomly
selected from a database of British counties and assigned a
random color which was shown as a border around the team’s
name in the results table.The 2/5, 3/5 trials were used as reference baselines for the impact of the corresponding social

As seen in Figure 4a, participants’ estimates of p(winx ) reflect the fan’s beliefs, bs , as predicted by both the rToM and
the oToM model. However, contrary to the predictions of
rToM, the effect of a fan’s beliefs (bs ) appears to depend
upon his desires (ds ). To quantify this effect we fit a linear mixed effects model to participants’ p(winx ) responses
using bs , ds , and their interaction as fixed effects in addition to the random effect of bs and intercept for each participant (there were insufficient within-participant data to estimate additional random effect parameters). The interactive
mixed model provides a significantly better fit compared to

Participants

11 this was counterbalanced such that half of the time the team
that was the subject of the question won 2/5, but we will talk about
the trials in the ’canonical form’ where the participant is asked
about Teamx who won 3/5.

888

a model that just includes the additive effects of bs and ds
(χ2 (1) = 4.9, p < .05). Both the main effect of bs and its
interaction with ds was significant in the interactive mixed
model (t(64) = −5.7, p < .05 and t(62) = 2.3, p < .05, respectively).
As seen in Figure 4a and b, the results are consistent with
the qualitative predictions of the model of learners that uses
an oToM, where the fan’s desires have a direct influence on
their beliefs (Eq. 8). The influence of equally knowledgeable fans who expressed the same beliefs depended on what
the fans wanted to happen. Looking at the red bars in Figure 4a, we see that fans that believed the more likely team
would win changed participants’ judgments more when this
belief ran against their desire. This is to say that people do
learn more from agents who believe things that are contrary
to their desires as predicted by the model of oToM learners.

The experiments presented here suggest that people think
that others are wishful thinkers; this has broad consequences for social reasoning ranging from our inferences
about pundit-posturing to self-regulation. Our findings highlight the importance of further research into the true structure
of ToM. Do people think that others exhibit loss aversion
or overweight low probabilities? Is the connection between
beliefs and desires bi-directional? Rigorous examination of
questions like these may buttress new, empirically motivated
computational models of ToM that capture the nuance of human social cognition—an idea so good it has to be true.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, ONR grant N000141310341, James S. McDonnell
Foundation Scholar Award to NDG. We thank Long Ouyang
and Gregory Scontras for helpful feedback.

Discussion and Conclusion

References

Current computational models of theory of mind are built
upon the assumption that beliefs are a priori independent of
desires. Whether social reasoners use such a rational ToM
(rToM) is an empirical question. In two experiments we
tested the independence of beliefs and desires in ToM and
found systematic evidence that people think that others are
wishful thinkers whose beliefs are colored by their desires.
In Experiment 1 we found that people believe that others inflate the probability of desirable outcomes and underestimate
the probability of undesirable ones, as an optimistic ToM
(oToM) with a direct link between desires and beliefs would
predict. Our model results predicted that if social learners
used an oToM to reason about others, we should expect their
learning to be affected by the desires of these social sources.
Indeed, in Experiment 2 we found that learners were more
influenced by sources whose beliefs ran against their desires.
Taken together these experiments suggest that people have a
nuanced ToM, with systematic deviations from the rational
B-D psychology underpinning rToM. However, further investigations are required to show that people spontaneously
employ an oToM when desirability is manipulated betweensubjects, and therefore less salient.
The presence of wishful thinking in ToM has no necessary relation to its existence in human “online” reasoning
under uncertainty. Indeed, the considerable heterogeneity of
the wishful thinking effect discussed in the literature leaves
open the possibility that people could think that others’ desires are coloring their beliefs when, in fact, they are not.
If this were the case, it could help explain why first-person
wishful thinking is reliably found in some paradigms and not
others. The paradigms in which wishful thinking is reliably
found involve participants reasoning about themselves and
others (for a review see Shepperd, Klein, Waters, & Weinstein, 2013), whereas asocial paradigms involving direct estimation of probabilities do not find the effect (e.g., Bar-hillel
& Budescu, 1995). Experiment 1 provides the opportunity
for an additional test of this explanation, comparing the current results to the experiment framed as a task in which there
is no other agent and participants themselves stand to win.

Babad, E. (1987). Wishful thinking and objectivity among
sports fans. Social Behaviour, 2(23).
Babad, E., & Katz, Y. (1991). Wishful Thinking-Against
All Odds. Wishful thinking-Against all odds. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 21, 1921–1938.
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Action understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113(3),
329–349.
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R. R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2011).
Bayesian theory of mind: Modeling joint belief-desire attribution. Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Bar-hillel, M., & Budescu, D. (1995, September). The elusive wishful thinking effect. Thinking and Reasoning, 1.
Berger, J. O. (1985). Statistical Decision Theory and
Bayesian Analysis (Vol. 83). Springer.
Hahn, U., & Harris, A. J. L. (2014). What Does It Mean to
be Biased: Motivated Reasoning and Rationality.
Jern, A., Lucas, C. G., & Kemp, C. (2011). Evaluating the
inverse decision-making approach to preference learning.
NIPS, 2276–2284.
Krizan, Z., & Windschitl, P. D. (2007). The influence of
outcome desirability on optimism. Psychological bulletin,
133(1), 95–121.
Mayraz, G. (2011). Wishful Thinking. CEP Discussion
Paper, 1092.
Olsen, R. A. (1997). Desirability bias among professional
investment managers: some evidence from experts. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 10(1), 65–72.
Redlawsk, D. P. (2002, November). Hot Cognition or Cool
Consideration? Testing the Effects of Motivated Reasoning on Political Decision Making. The Journal of Politics,
64(04), 1021–1044.
Shepperd, J. a., Klein, W. M. P., Waters, E. a., & Weinstein,
N. D. (2013). Taking Stock of Unrealistic Optimism. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8(4), 395–411.

889

