Social Eye Cue:
How Knowledge Of Another Person’s Attention Changes Your Own
Miles R. A. Tufft (m.tufft.12@alumni.ucl.ac.uk)
Matthias S. Gobel (matt@eyethink.org)
Daniel C. Richardson (dcr@eyethink.org)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London
London, WC1E 6BT, UK
Abstract

Inhibition Of Return (IOR)

We are highly tuned to each other’s visual attention.
Perceiving the eye or hand movements of another person can
influence the timing of a saccade or a reach of our own.
However, it is not clear whether the effect of social cues is
due to the appearance of the cue – a hand or an eye - or the
belief that the cues are connected to another person. In two
experiments we investigated this question using a spatial
cueing paradigm and measuring the inhibition of return of
visual attention. When participants believed that a cue
stimulus – a red dot – reflected the attentional focus of
another person via an eye tracker, they responded differently
to when they believed its location was determined by a
computer. Despite previous claims that they are ‘blind’ to
such factors, when a cue was imbued with a social context it
exerted a stronger influence over low-level visual attention.
Keywords: attention; vision; social context; joint action

Introduction
Our eyes are in constant demand: turn signals, pointed
glances, flashing banner ads, they all clamour for our visual
attention. Some of these cues – glances, head turns, pointing
fingers – are generated by other people; others – warning
lights, traffic signals and signposts – are put there
intentionally by other people as a signal. And others still –
bright plumage on a bird, flashes of lighting, claps of
thunder – are oblivious to our presence.
Does the visual attention system respond equally to all
these cues? Or do we give special weight to locations or
objects in the world that are cued by other people since they
might indicate their mental states or communicative
intentions? Further, if social cues do interact with basic
attention mechanisms, is this interaction a response to the
social appearance of the cues (e.g. facial features or a
finger) or a response to the belief that the cues are connected
to other intentional beings with their own states of
attention?
Here, we address these questions by spatially cueing
participants’ attention while manipulating their beliefs about
the social or non-social origins of those cues. In this way,
we are able to investigate how changes in beliefs about
social context interact with low-level mechanisms of visual
attention (Richardson & Gobel, 2015; von Zimmermann &
Richardson, 2014). We made use of a robust feature of
spatial attention, and placed it in a social context that could
be experimentally manipulated.

People are slower to return their attention back to a location
that it has previously occupied. This inhibition of return
(IOR) was first demonstrated with a spatial cueing paradigm
(Posner, Rafal, Choate, & Vaughan, 1985). Visual attention
was cued to one location on screen, and participants
responded to a second stimulus that appeared either in the
same location, or a different part of the screen. Response
times were slower when the stimulus appeared in the same
location. IOR might therefore play an adaptive role
promoting efficient visual search by biasing attention away
from previously attended objects or locations (Klein &
MacInnes, 1999).
Our central question is whether IOR can be influenced by
beliefs about social context. Staudte & Crocker (2011)
proposed that another attentional phenomenon, gaze cueing,
could be explained either by a purely reflexive visual
account, or by an intentional account, which makes
reference to beliefs about the goals and intentions of other
people. By extension, we review arguments below that IOR
coud be best explained by a visual or an intentional account.

Purely Visual Accounts Of IOR
In gaze-cuing paradigms, it has been shown that the visual
attention of others can reflexively direct our own attention.
In such experiments, participants are typically shown a
centrally presented drawing or picture of a face gazing in a
certain direction, and instructed to respond as quickly as
possible to targets appearing either congruent with the gaze
direction or incongruent (e.g. Friesen & Kingstone, 1998).
Despite gaze being non-predictive of targets it has
repeatedly been shown that reactions times to congruently
cued targets are facilitated, leading many to conclude that
gaze cues induce rapid and involuntary shifts in attention
(e.g. Friesen & Kingstone, 1998; Friesen, Ristic, &
Kingstone, 2004). If the gaze of other people can act as a
cue for an individual’s attention, then it seems plausible that
social cues would also generate the same IOR effects.
Indeed, a ‘social IOR’ effect has been demonstrated using
reaching behaviour. Welsh et al. (2005) asked pairs of
participants to sit at opposite ends of a table and respond
with a left or right button press to targets. Each participant
responded twice in a row. There were longer reaction times
to spatial locations that had previously been attended to,
independent of whether attention was cued by the
participants’ own action or their partners’.

2440

Taylor and Therrien (2005) performed an IOR experiment
in which the cue stimulus was either a high-pass filtered
image of a human face or a scrambled version of the face.
They found the standard IOR effect across both conditions,
and the magnitude of the IOR effect did not differ
significantly between them. This led the authors to describe
IOR as a “blind mechanism”. Related studies using faces
with differing emotional valance (e.g. Lange, Heuer,
Reinecke, Becker, & Rinck, 2008; Stoyanova, Pratt &
Anderson, 2007) found the same result that social and nonsocial cues were equivalent. This echoes findings from the
gaze cueing literature. Ristic, Friesen and Kingstone (2002)
showed that under certain conditions non-social cues could
indeed reflexively cue attention in a way that was
behaviourally indistinguishable from social gaze cues (see
also Hommel, Pratt, Colzato, & Godijn, 2001; Pratt &
Hommel, 2003; Tipples, 2002).

Intentional Accounts Of IOR
The conclusion from the studies described above is that IOR
effects can be triggered by social cues, but that the
magnitude of the effect is indistinguishable from non-social
cues. However, in other contexts, it has been shown that
when participants interpret a cue as connected to another
person, they respond to it quite differently. For example, if
infants (Meltzoff, Brooks, Shon, & Rao, 2010) and adults
(Staudte & Crocker, 2011) have experience with a robot
looking in time with linguistic information, they start to
follow its gaze as they would another human. Hegel, Krach,
Kircher, Wrede, and Sagerer (2008) showed that
participants in a prisoners dilemma respond differently to
computer, robot or human opponents to the degree to which
they anthropomorphize them. These results show that
beliefs about the social context of a cue can change its
effects on visual attention and cognition.
There are good reasons to think that it would be adaptive
for IOR mechanisms to be responsive to the intentions of
others. If it is true that IOR is a mechanism to make search
more efficient for an individual, then it could also make
search more efficient for people working together.
Individuals who are engaged in joint action (Sebanz,
Bekkering & Knoblich, 2006) or joint perception
(Richardson et al., 2012) are tuned to the cognitive
representations and locus of their partner’s attention.
Brennan, Chen, Dickinson, Neider, and Zelinsky (2008) for
example, found that two individuals performing a visual
search task were highly efficient when they could see each
other’s gaze location.
However, the current literature cannot say whether IOR is
best explained by a purely visual or intentional account. Past
experiments all operationalize a ‘social cue’ as something
that is social in appearance – a face onscreen or a person sat
opposite – and so conflate the two explanations. Therefore
our central question remains unanswered – is the effect of
social cues due to the appearance of the cues or the belief
that the cues are connected to other intentional beings with
their own states of attention?

Experiment 1
In our experiment, we adapted the standard IOR paradigm
(Posner et al., 1985) and manipulated whether or not
participants believed that a cue was generated by a
computer, or reflected the gaze position of another person in
the laboratory. Participants were run in pairs with a
confederate, sat back to back in the lab, each looking at a
screen and monitored by an eye tracker. In each trial, their
attention was cued by the brief appearance of a red dot in
one quadrant of a screen. Following the cue, a target
appeared in a congruent or incongruent location.
In one condition, participants were told that the position
of the red cue was generated randomly, while in the other,
they were told that it reflected the gaze position of the
confederate. In reality the position of red dot was always
random and computer generated. Our hypothesis was that
the belief that the cue was connected to a real person would
modulate the magnitude of the IOR effect.

Methods
Participants Thirty-one participants from the University
College London subject pool volunteered to participate in
exchange for a £6 payment. Five participants were
excluded, one for guessing that the other participant was a
confederate, two for falling asleep during the task and two
for adverse emotional reactions to background pictures
presented during the task. A total of twenty-six participants
were analysed (mean age 23.0 years; 10 males, 16 females).
Apparatus Participant and confederate were seated in
reclining chairs at opposite corners of a 25m2 room such
that they had their backs to each other and could not see
each other’s screens or their partner’s actions. Participants
faced an arm mounted 19” LCD screen positioned
approximately 60cm away on which stimuli were presented.
A custom-built remote eye tracker was positioned at the
base of the screen. Participants wore headsets throughout
the experiment through which they could hear a tone
signifying the beginning of each trial. They were also
provided with a wireless computer mouse that was used to
register the button press target detection response. Though
in reality it was not used, all equipment was replicated for
the confederate as well as calibration and set-up procedures
in order to maintain deception. An iMac computer presented
stimuli and recorded RTs
Design This was a 2x2 within subjects design with two
factors, congruence and cue condition. Congruence had two
levels (validly cued, invalidly cued) and cue condition had
two levels (social, non-social).
Validly cued trials were trials on which the blue box was
presented in the same location as the red dot; invalidly cued
trials were when the blue box was presented in one of three
alternate positions. As per previous studies, to ensure the
cue was not predictive of target the probability of a validly
cued trial was at chance (1 in 4). Social trials were trials on

2441

Notes

Resources

Processor Time
Elapsed Time

Pictures
1200ms

Mean Difference (Valid-Invalid) RT(ms)

1200ms!

!

!
!
!

35

Mean Difference (Valid-Invalid) RT(ms)

Notes Resources

35

Processor Time
Elapsed Time
00:00:00.31
00:00:00.00

00:00:00.31
trials were then split
between the four different cue locations
00:00:00.00
with an equal probability, such that on average 4 trials
Condition
would be validly cued and 12 invalidly cued.

Condition

Non-social
briefing
Social was

Non-social
Social

Procedure A
provided beforehand during
which the paradigm was explained to the participant (and
25
Cue
confederate) in some detail. During the briefing, participants
25
300ms
were told that they would be performing a simple reaction
20
time task. It was explained that each trial would begin with
20
15
the presentation of a set of four images and that they were
15
ISI
free to inspect these images. Following this, a series of
10
300-1200ms
shapes would appear on top of the pictures, these would be a
10
5
red dot followed by a green star and then a blue box. They
5
were instructed to fixate the red dot and green box and then
0
respond
to the blue
box with
Experimentonly
1
Experiment
2 a single button press as
0
Invalid
Valid
quickly
as possible.
IORand
Magnitude
by Condition
Experiment 1
Experiment
2accurately
It was also explained that during the task eye trackers
IOR Magnitude by Condition
Figure 1. Trial design Experiment 1.
would monitor their eye movements and that on certain
designated blocks of trials their eye tracker and that of the
which participants believed the red dot’s position
confederate would be ‘linked’ together so that they would
represented the gaze of the confederate; non-social trials
both be able to see which picture their partner had just
were trials on which participants believed the red dot’s
looked at. During these ‘social blocks’ this information
position was random.
would be conveyed by the location of the red dot that would
Trials employed a classic cue-target spatial cuing
act to highlight the picture their partner had just looked at.
paradigm with four possible cue-target locations under overt
In this way participants believed they were engaged in a
orientating conditions (eye movements allowed). Each trial
two-way exchange of information. During ‘non-social’
began with a 1200ms presentation of a set of four pictures.
blocks participants were told the eye trackers were
These images were set at 40% transparency and taken from
‘unlinked’ and the red dot’s location would be chosen at
a normed database (Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2005). Each
random by the computer and no other aspect of the design
set comprised of one negative photo (e.g. crying child), one
would change. However, at no point was any gaze direction
positive photo (e.g. puppy) and two neutral photos with no
information exchanged between confederate and participant
strong valence (e.g. spoon). The purpose of the pictures was
and at all points the cue location was randomized and nonto provide a legitimate reason for participants to scan a
Page 4
predictive of the target.
scene adding to the believability that gaze direction
Page 4 participants were taken
Following their initial briefing
information was real and being exchanged. Picture valence
through an eye tracker calibration sequence in order to
was not analysed as a factor in this study. After 1200ms, a
demonstrate that the eye tracker worked and was capable of
red dot cue appeared for 300ms (1cm in diameter; salience
determining where they were looking on their screen. On
was increased by a transient size increase from 1cm to 3cm
completing calibration they were presented with an
diameter across the 300ms presentation) in the exact centre
instruction screen that reiterated instructions given during
of one of the four pictures. This was followed immediately
the briefing and reminded them that for certain blocks their
by a centrally (centre of screen) presented green star (1cm
eye tracker would be ‘linked’ to the confederate’s. In
diameter; salience was increased by giving the star a
addition, at the beginning of each block participants viewed
rotating motion) presented for one of 300, 600, 900 or
an information screen, which informed them whether the
1200ms (randomized within block) before a blue box target
eye trackers were ‘linked’ or ‘not linked’, a point the
2
(1cm ) was presented in the exact centre of one of the four
experimenter would also verbally reiterate.
pictures. Participants were required to press the left mouse
button with the thumb of their dominant (writing) hand as
Results & Discussion
quickly and as accurately as possible on seeing the blue box
Mean RTs (ms) were calculated for all trials, excluding
(target detection task). If no response was given after
catch trials and any RTs less than 100ms or greater than 3
3000ms the trail ended and the next trial began.
SD from the participants’ mean RT by block, in line with
Participants completed a total of 288 trials during a single
other studies (Taylor & Therrien, 2005). In total 1.8% of
session comprising of four blocks (two social, two nontrials were excluded.
social) of 72 trials. Social and non-social blocks were
A two-way repeated measures ANOVA was performed
presented alternately with the first block type
on the mean RTs by participant. The analysis revealed a
counterbalanced across sessions. Of the 72 trials per block
significant main effect of congruence, F(1, 25) = 32.69, p <
on average 8 were catch trials during which no blue target
.01, with validly cued trials (M = 466.7, SD = 80.2) slower
was presented as means to maintain vigilance. The other
than invalidly cued trials (M = 446.8, SD = 77.7) consistent
300ms!

!

!
!
!

!
!

!
!

30

300/600/900/1200ms!

!

30

Until!Button!Press!
Or!
3000ms!

!

2442

Mean Difference (Valid-Invalid) RT(ms)

with an overall IOR effect. There was also a main effect of
confederate). Following initial introductions, subsequent
condition, F(1, 25) = 5.17, p < .05, with participants
interactions between participants were minimal. Four
significantly slower overall on social (M = 466.9, SD =
participants were excluded, three for falling asleep during
92.7) compared to non-social trials (M = 446.6, SD = 69.0).
the task and one for revealing prior knowledge of the task
Importantly, in combination with a main effect of
purpose. A total of twenty-eight participants were analysed
Notes
congruence there was a significant interaction effect
(mean age 22.8 years;
12 males; 16 females). Each session
Resources
Processor Time
Notes
between congruence and condition, F(1, 25) = 4.84, p < .05,
lasted no more than fifty minutes. 00:00:00.31
Elapsed Time
00:00:00.00
Resources
Time
00:00:00.31
with IOR magnitude on social trials (M
= 26.1, Processor
SD = 20.9)
Elapsed Time
00:00:00.00
significantly greater than on non-social trials (M = 13.7, SD
Condition
Pictures
35
= 24.7).
Non-social
Condition
1200ms
Social
To our knowledge, these results demonstrate
for the first
35
Non-social
30
Social
time that the manipulation of beliefs about the social context
30
of non-social cues can modulate IOR magnitude.
Since no
25
sensory characteristics of the stimuli wereCue
changed across
2
5
conditions, IOR differences cannot be attributed
to any low
1200ms
20
level sensory or perceptual effects. Instead differences must
derive from high level interpretations 2 0 made by the
15
participants.
15
ISI pictures in our
One concern is that the use of background
10
300-1200ms
design could have led to potential confounds,
with
some
10
pictures attracting more attention than others by increased
5
visual salience or emotional arousal. There5 are two main
0
reasons though why we believe this is unlikely to be the
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
case. Firstly, the picture locations were fully
randomized
0
Valid
Invalid
IOR
Magnitude
by
Condition
Experiment
Experiment 2
across conditions so all permutations of cue, target,
and 1
Figure 2. IOR magnitude in Experiments 1 and 2.
picture location will have been sampled at each SOA.
IOR Magnitude by Condition
Secondly, a post-hoc analysis of the three-way interaction
between cue picture type (positive, negative or neutral),
Apparatus, Design & Procedure Set up of the
condition (social, non-social) and congruence (valid,
experimental apparatus was identical for participant 1 as for
invalid) was non-significant, F(2, 52) = 0.40, p > .05 (i.e.
the single participant in experiment 1. Participant 2 sat in
the magnitude difference seen was the same irrespective of
the same chair originally used by the confederate however
the type of picture behind the presentation of the cue). This
data was now collected using exactly the same set up as
provides confidence that the presence of the pictures was
participant 1. A second iMac was introduced to control
not associated with the change in IOR between conditions.
stimuli and collect RT data for participant 2.
Despite these reasons, the background pictures could still
The design was identical to experiment 1, except the
represent a mediating factor. Since a small number of the
background pictures were not displayed. The cue and target
pictures contain social information such as faces, these
stimuli appeared on white backgrounds in a 2x2 grid.
could have triggered the effects we found.
Mean Difference (Valid-Invalid) RT(ms)

1200ms!

!

!
!
!

300ms!

!

!
!
!

!
!

!
!

300/600/900/1200ms!

!

Until!Button!Press!
Or!
3000ms!

!

Results & Discussion

Experiment 2
We sought to replicate our first experiment without the
presence of background pictures. In addition, we decided to
run participants in pairs rather than with a confederate. This
served the obvious benefit of improving the rate of data
collection (data from two participants collected in a single
session) but also controlled for any potential confounds
arising from the actions of one particular confederate.

Method
The experimental methods were identical to experiment 1,
except for the details listed below.
Participants Thirty-two volunteers recruited from the UCL
psychology participant pool volunteered to participate in
exchange for a £5 payment. No confederate was used
therefore they all performed the experiment in randomly
assigned pairs (acting, as it were, as each other’s

Following experiment 1, mean RTs (ms) were calculated for
non-catch trials; and any RTs that were less than 100ms or
greater than 3 standard deviations from the participants’
mean RT excluded. In total 1.6% of trials were excluded.
A two-way repeated measures ANOVA was performed
on the mean RTs by participant. The analysis Page
revealed
a
4
significant main effect of congruence, F(1, 27) = 44.28, p <
.01, with validly cued trials (M = 404.2, SD = 68.5) slower
than invalidly cued trials (M = 386.9, SD = 67.0) consistent
with an overall IOR effect. There was also a main effect of
condition, F(1, 27) = 6.89, p < .05, with participants
significantly slower overall on social (M = 403.8, SD =
72.1) compared to non-social trials (M = 387.4, SD = 66.7).
Crucially, experiment 2 replicated experiment 1 and showed
a significant interaction effect between congruence and
condition, F(1, 27) = 4.91, p < .05 with IOR magnitude on
social trials (M = 21.6, SD = 15.9) significantly greater than
on non-social trials (M = 13.0, SD = 18.3).

2443

This replication rejects the hypothesis that the original
result was due to an interaction from background pictures or
the use of a confederate. We therefore conclude that
together these results demonstrate that IOR magnitude is
influenced by the beliefs about the social context of nonsocial cue events.

General Discussion
The attentional focus of another person can act as strong cue
for our own attention, as elegantly demonstrated in the gaze
cueing literature (e.g. Friesen & Kingstone, 1998; Friesen,
et al., 2004). Someone else’s eye and hand movements can
even trigger our own inhibition of return mechanisms (e.g.
Skarratt, Cole, & Kingstone, 2010; Welsh et al., 2005). But
in all of these experimental demonstrations, the social cue is
visibly social: a face, a hand or a head turn. And in each
case, researchers have shown that the attentional effect of a
social cue is roughly equivalent to a non-social cue such as
an arrow.
Our results make two contributions to our understanding
of attention and social context. They suggest that social cues
can have a stronger effect upon IOR attention mechanisms
than non-social cues, in the right circumstances. And they
show that these differences in IOR effects do not depend on
a social appearance, but can rest purely on a belief about the
social context of a cue. In this way, a red dot that looks like
any other can have a more significant influence on low-level
visual attention when a participant believes that it is
connected to someone else – an intentional account of IOR.
Such an account goes against a purely visual account of
IOR as a socially blind, bottom-up, stimulus-driven process
(e.g. Taylor and Therrien, 2005). It highlights the
importance of beliefs on low-level attention mechanisms
and builds on similar results from the gaze cuing and joint
attention literature. For example, gaze cue effects can be
modulated by changes in beliefs about the gazer. Dalmaso,
Pavan, Castelli and Galfano (2012) showed that a subject’s
belief about the relative social status of gazers modulates
their gaze-cuing effects. Participants were presented with a
series of faces together with fictitious resumes that
described the person as being of either high or low status.
Subsequently, those faces associated with a higher social
status produced greater gaze-cuing effects in participants
than those with a lower social status. Furthermore, related
studies have shown that in-group membership (Pavan,
Dalmaso, Galfano, & Castelli, 2011) and shared political
views (Liuzza et al., 2011) can all lead to increases in cuing
effects, hinting that some top-down, social processes have
an effect on low-level attention.
Teufel, Alexis, Clayton, and Davis (2010) tested this
directly by devising an experiment that allowed
manipulation of observers’ beliefs about the gazer while
keeping all cue stimuli the same across all conditions. They
presented participants with pre-recorded video sequences of
a real-life model turning his head to the left or to the right.
Subjects were made to believe the video was live and that
they were engaging with a real person. In the video the

model wore mirrored goggles so that their eyes were
occluded. Observers were told that the model would wear
one of two types of goggles clearly indicated by their
colour. They were informed that one pair was transparent
from the perspective of the model (seeing condition) and the
other pair opaque (non-seeing condition). It was found that a
cuing effect was only present when the observer believed
that the model could see. They concluded that the attribution
of a mental state was critical for reflexive gaze following.
Building on this idea, Wiese, Wykowska, Zwickel, and
Müller (2012) measured gaze-cuing effects while
manipulating observers’ beliefs about the capacity of the
gazer to hold mental states, termed taking an “intentional
stance”. In experiment 1 participants viewed gaze cues
made by pictures of a real human face and that of a robot. In
experiment 2 they viewed cues from the same human face
or robot but were either informed that the robot was now
controlled by a human being or that the human face was that
of a realistic mannequin. They found that gaze cuing effects
were only present for gaze cues originating from stimuli
where an intentional stance was likely, human face or robot
face controlled by a human. When an intentional stance was
unlikely, mannequin face or robot face, then gaze cuing
effects were significantly reduced.
Even when people have no information about each other’s
attentional state, research suggests that they try to follow
(what they imagine to be) each other’s gaze. In a series of
studies (Richardson et al., 2012), pairs of participants were
instructed to look at sets of pictures, some with positive
valence and some with negative valence. Half of the time,
they believed that they were looking at the same images,
and half of the time that they were looking at different
images. This social context changed randomly on a trial-bytrial basis, and participants reported that they mostly ignored
the information about their partner’s condition. Despite this
reported behavior, however, simply knowing that another
person was attending to the same stimuli—even though they
could not see each other or have any verbal interaction—
shifted participants’ attention. When participants believed
that they were looking at the images together with another
person, they tended to look towards the more negative
images.
In another experiment from that series (Richardson et al.,
2012), participants were told to either (a) search a set of
pictures for an “X” or (b) memorize a set of pictures. Each
participant was given one of these tasks and was told which
of these tasks their partner would be doing as well. In this
study, we again observed the powerful effects of social
context and belief can have on lower-level behavior:
believing their partner was experiencing the same stimuli
but did not share the same task did not result in joint
perception. Joint perception only occurred when participants
believed that their partner was engaged in exactly the same
task (Richardson et al., 2012). One explanation is that when
the stimuli were believed to be shared, participants looked
towards the images that they thought their partner would
also be looking at. In other words, even with this minimal

2444

social context of no interaction or visual information about
each other, participants were seeking to coordinate their
visual attention.
Though many studies in visual perception take place in
the solitary confinement of an experimental cubicle, people
often use their perceptual faculties in a rich social
environment, where findings may not easily generalise.
Recent work on face perception, for example, has shown
that people produce very different gaze patterns when
looking at a live or pre-recorded video (Laidlaw, Foulsham,
Kuhn & Kingstone, 2011), or whether or not they believe
the person they are watching can look back at them (Gobel,
Kim & Richardson, 2015). Thus, social context may shift
and structure attentional mechanisms in ways that we do not
fully appreciate in the laboratory.

References
Brennan, S. E., Chen, X., Dickinson, C. A., Neider, M. B.,
& Zelinsky, G. J. (2008). Coordinating cognition: The
costs and benefits of shared gaze during collaborative
search. Cognition, 106(3), 1465-1477.
Dalmaso, M., Pavan, G., Castelli, L., & Galfano, G. (2012).
Social status gates social attention in humans. Biology
letters, 8(3), 450-452.
Friesen, C. K., & Kingstone, A. (1998). The eyes have it!
Reflexive orienting is triggered by nonpredictive gaze.
Psychonomic bulletin & review, 5(3), 490-495.
Friesen, C. K., Ristic, J., & Kingstone, A. (2004).
Attentional effects of counterpredictive gaze and arrow
cues. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 30(2), 319.
Gobel, M. S., Kim, H. S., & Richardson, D. C. (2015). The
dual function of social gaze. Cognition, 136, 359-364.
Hegel, F., Krach, S., Kircher, T., Wrede, B., & Sagerer, G.
(2008, August). Understanding social robots: A user study
on anthropomorphism. In Robot and Human Interactive
Communication, 2008. RO-MAN 2008. The 17th IEEE
International Symposium on (pp. 574-579). IEEE.
Hommel, B., Pratt, J., Colzato, L., & Godijn, R. (2001).
Symbolic control of visual attention. Psychological
Science, 12(5), 360-365.
Klein, R. M., & MacInnes, W. J. (1999). Inhibition of return
is a foraging facilitator in visual search. Psychological
science, 10(4), 346-352.
Laidlaw, K. E., Foulsham, T., Kuhn, G., & Kingstone, A.
(2011). Potential social interactions are important to
social attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 108(14), 5548-5553.
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (2005).
International affective picture system (IAPS). Gainesville,
FL: University of Florida.
Lange, W. G., Heuer, K., Reinecke, A., Becker, E. S., &
Rinck, M. (2008). Inhibition of return is unimpressed by
emotional cues. Cognition and Emotion, 22(8), 14331456.
Liuzza, M. T., Cazzato, V., Vecchione, M., Crostella, F.,
Caprara, G. V., & Aglioti, S. M. (2011). Follow my eyes:

the gaze of politicians reflexively captures the gaze of
ingroup voters. PloS one, 6(9), e25117.
Meltzoff, A. N., Brooks, R., Shon, A. P., & Rao, R. P.
(2010). “Social” robots are psychological agents for
infants: A test of gaze following. Neural Networks, 23(8),
966-972.
Pavan, G., Dalmaso, M., Galfano, G., & Castelli, L. (2011).
Racial group membership is associated to gaze-mediated
orienting in Italy. PLoS One, 6(10), e25608.
Posner, M. I., Rafal, R. D., Choate, L. S., & Vaughan, J.
(1985). Inhibition of return: Neural basis and function.
Cognitive neuropsychology, 2(3), 211-228.
Pratt, J., & Hommel, B. (2003). Symbolic control of visual
attention: The role of working memory and attentional
control settings. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 29(5), 835.
Richardson, D. C, & Gobel, M. S. (2015). Social Attention.
In J. Fawcett, E. Risko & A. Kingstone (Eds). Handbook
of Attention. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Richardson, D. C., Street, C. N., Tan, J. Y., Kirkham, N. Z.,
Hoover, M. A., & Cavanaugh, A. G. (2012). Joint
perception: gaze and social context. Frontiers in human
neuroscience, 6.
Ristic, J., Friesen, C. K., & Kingstone, A. (2002). Are eyes
special? It depends on how you look at it. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9(3), 507-513.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: bodies and minds moving together. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 10(2), 70-76.
Skarratt, P. A., Cole, G. G., & Kingstone, A. (2010). Social
inhibition of return. Acta psychologica, 134(1), 48-54.
Staudte, M., & Crocker, M. W. (2011). Investigating joint
attention mechanisms through spoken human–robot
interaction. Cognition, 120(2), 268-291.
Stoyanova, R. S., Pratt, J., & Anderson, A. K. (2007).
Inhibition of return to social signals of fear. Emotion,
7(1), 49.
Taylor, T. L., & Therrien, M. E. (2005). Inhibition of return
for faces. Perception & psychophysics, 67(8), 1414-1422.
Teufel, C., Alexis, D. M., Clayton, N. S., & Davis, G.
(2010). Mental-state attribution drives rapid, reflexive
gaze following. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics,
72(3), 695-705.
Tipples, J. (2002). Eye gaze is not unique: Automatic
orienting in response to uninformative arrows.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(2), 314-318.
Welsh, T. N., Elliott, D., Anson, J. G., Dhillon, V., Weeks,
D. J., Lyons, J. L., & Chua, R. (2005). Does Joe influence
Fred's action?: Inhibition of return across different
nervous systems. Neuroscience Letters, 385(2), 99-104.
Wiese, E., Wykowska, A., Zwickel, J., & Müller, H. J.
(2012). I see what you mean: how attentional selection is
shaped by ascribing intentions to others. PloS one, 7(9),
e45391
Zimmermann, von, J., & Richardson, D. C. (2014). Joint
Perception. In S. S. Obhi & E. Cross, Shared
Representations: Sensorimotor Foundations of Social Life
(pp. 1–12). Cambridge University Press.

2445

