Social Situation Awareness: Empathic Accuracy in the Aircraft Cockpit
Irene Stepniczka (irene.stepniczka@univie.ac.at)
Cognitive Science Research Platform, University of Vienna
1010 Vienna, Austria

Livia Tomova (livia.tomova@univie.ac.at)
Cognitive Science Research Platform, University of Vienna
Social, Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience Unit, Faculty of Psychology, University of Vienna
1010 Vienna, Austria

Dominik Niedermeier (dominik.niedermeier@dlr.de)
Institute of Flight Systems, Flight Dynamics and Simulation, German Aerospace Center,
38108 Braunschweig, Germany

Franz-Markus Peschl (franz-markus.peschl@univie.ac.at)
Cognitive Science Research Platform, University of Vienna
1010 Vienna, Austria

Claus Lamm (claus.lamm@univie.ac.at)
Social, Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience Unit, University of Vienna
Cognitive Science Research Platform, University of Vienna
1010 Vienna, Austria

Abstract
The present study assesses the innovative concept of empathic
accuracy within a crew-aircraft-system in a realistic approach
scenario. Empathy, one of the key skills of social situation
awareness (SSA), was found to be altered in stressful
situations. Challenging and surprising events lead to a
decrease in empathic accuracy in both pilot flying and pilot
monitoring. Stress therefore significantly impacts SSA and
modifications in training, procedures and system design could
help crews better manage their workload during surprising
and challenging situations, leading to increased empathic
accuracy and better crew interaction.
Keywords: situation awareness; social situation awareness;
empathy; stress; control; socio-technical system

Introduction
The setting of a socio-technical system, such as an aircraft
cockpit and its crew and environment, requires several
competencies from the flight crew (International Civil
Aviation Organization, 2013). Situation awareness (SA)
(Endsley, 1995, Endsley, 2012) is one of these
competencies. SA in aviation is defined as the recurrent and
continuous perceiving, comprehending and projecting of the
following components and states: (1) the aircraft and its
systems, (2) spatial location of the aircraft, (3) time and fuel
states, (4) possible threats to the safety of the aircraft, (5)
development of what-if scenarios for contingencies, and (6)
the awareness of people and their states involved in the
operation including passengers (International Civil Aviation
Organization, 2013). The last point is also called social
situation awareness (SSA) or social cognition. As a myriad
of cultural, organizational, human and technical

interrelationships are involved in a crew-aircraft system,
being aware of the colleague’s state within a cockpit is
therefore of relevance. In order to have sufficient SSA,
several social skills are required, one of which is empathy
(Singer & Lamm, 2009, Singer & Tusche, 2014). Empathy
is the ability to share the perceptual, emotional and
cognitive states of the other (Singer & Lamm, 2009).
Another crucial skill for gaining SSA next to empathy is
communication competency. Both skills, empathy and
communication, have an influence on the concept of shared
mental models (SMM) (Burtscher & Manser, 2012, Evans,
Harper, & Jentsch, 2004) which should be achieved so that a
pilot can maintain SSA and be able to quickly adapt to the
system, the task, and the colleague’s demands. In aviation,
there are examples where the combination of insufficient
communication (Howard, 2008, Glavin, 2011, Molesworth
& Estival, 2015), stress in various forms, e.g. socialevaluative threat (Andrews et al., 2007, Dickerson, Gable,
Irwin, Aziz, & Kemeny, 2009, Denson, Creswell, &
Granville-Smith, 2012, Hughes & Beer, 2013), and related
human factors were found to have a significant influence on
crew performance and were contributing factors in fatal
incidents and accidents. Some examples are the following:
mid-air collision above Zagreb (1976), Tenerife disaster
(1977), Air Florida Flight 90 (1982), Avianca Flight 52
(1990), One-Two-Go-Airlines 269 (2007), Aeroflot 211
(2008), and Asiana Airlines 214 (2013). Evidence for the
large impact of social aspects combined with stress comes
not only from Accident Investigation Authorities but also
from findings from prior research in laboratory settings that
has shown that stress can influence social cognition
(Tomova, 2014, Smeets 2009). However, there is still a gap

2284

of knowledge regarding how stress and social skills such as
empathic accuracy impact each other in highly trained
socio-technical environments such as a crew-aircraft system
and whether stress lowers empathic accuracy in well trained
crews as it has been shown to in the general population in
laboratory settings (ibid.). Thus, a flight simulator study was
carried out and the following hypothesis was tested: SSA
with a focus on empathic accuracy in highly trained aircraft
crew is decreased for both pilots during stressful events.

Definition of Terms
Stress
Stress represents the response of an organism when a
demand exceeds the regulatory capacities (Dickerson &
Kemeny, 2004). In general, stress is known to trigger
adaptive responses in two bodily systems: the fast-reacting
sympathetic adrenomedullary system (SAM-system), and
the slower hypothalamus pituitary adrenal axis (HPA-axis),
both of which originate in the hypothalamus. Stress effects
are particularly prevalent in attention (e.g., Vedhara, Hyde,
Gilchrist, Tytherleigh, & Plummer, 2000, Elling et al.,
2011), memory (e.g., Vedhara et al., 2000, Wolf, 2009), and
decision making (e.g., Starcke & Brand, 2012).
Furthermore, there is evidence that social cognition is
altered under stress (Smeets, Dziobek, & Wolf, 2009,
Tomova, von Dawans, Heinrichs, Silani, & Lamm, 2014).
Thus, stress exhibits a strong impact on individual cognitive
and affective functions which influence our team skills and
may therefore influence our social interactions and
relationships. In a meta-analysis performed by Dickerson
and Kemeny (2004), uncontrollability and social-evaluative
threat were determined as the core components of stress
(Dickerson and Kemeny 2004). Especially in critical
situations during a flight, where the system is not reacting in
a way that the crew expects it to react, the experience of
uncontrollability is very likely to occur. Thus, surprising
and unpredictable responses of the aircraft might very likely
induce feelings of uncontrollability in pilots which then
might trigger a stress response. Additionally, not being able
to control the airplane in a way the crew is expected to
might lead to feelings of insufficiency which then might
induce the fear of being judged negatively by other
members of the cockpit crew. Thus, social evaluative threat
might represent a contributing component to the stress
response in surprising situations acting as a reinforcing
factor together with feelings of uncontrollability. Therefore,
critical situations during a flight might in fact trigger both
core components of stress as defined by Dickerson and
Kemeny. The impact this has on the crew’s abilities to
control an aircraft represents an important issue in the
analysis of SA.
Empathy
Empathy – especially its cognitive processes such as
perspective taking – represents a basic requirement for SSA
and SMM. Empathy describes the isomorphic sharing and,
ultimately, understanding of the emotional state of another
person, but with full awareness that the source of the shared

feelings is the other person. Empathy can result from
directly perceiving, imagining or inferring the emotions of
others (Singer & Lamm, 2009). As such it represents a basic
cornerstone of successful human interaction. It enables us to
have a vivid and rich representation of the cognitive and
emotional states of others, helping us to understand them
and therefore enabling a smoother social interaction. In this
understanding, empathy represents a multi-faceted construct
which includes different key components, such as
perspective taking, mimicry, emotional contagion, self-other
distinction, and the flexible use of executive functions to
trigger and regulate vicarious responses (e.g., Singer &
Lamm, 2009, Lamm, Meltzoff, & Decety, 2010). Recent
evidence from social neuroscience indicates that empathic
responses are initiated by an interplay of two core
components, which are bottom-up and top-down processes
(e.g., Lamm et al., 2010, Fan, Duncan, de Greck, &
Northoff, 2011). The first component is comprised of lowlevel, sensory-driven (“bottom-up”) and mostly automatic
affective and perceptual responses. Key processes related to
this component are emotion contagion and mimicry, which
enable the individual to automatically match the affective
and motor states of others without conscious deliberation
(Singer & Lamm, 2009). While this component was the
center of attention in early neuroscientific empathy research
(for a review, see Preston & De Waal, 2002) accumulating
evidence suggests that the experience of empathy not only
relies on these affective mirroring components, but rather
seems to be a flexible phenomenon that can be modulated
and regulated by motivational, situational and dispositional
factors (e.g., Lamm, Meltzoff et al. 2010). Therefore, the
second core component which is intrinsically intertwined
with the lower-level component is comprised of high-level
(“top-down”) controlled cognitive and evaluative processes
– such as perspective taking, cognitive control, and emotion
regulation.

Methods
Experimental Settings & Procedure
Simulator Environments
The experiments were carried out in research simulators
(AVES, GRACE), which reproduced realistic Airbus 320
(A320) and Boeing 747 (B747) environments. The
advantage of such research simulators is the possibility to
adapt the cockpit according to the research requirements.
A simulator briefing was carried out to describe the safety
aspects of the simulator as well as to introduce the
functional limitations and differences that the simulator has
in comparison to a full-flight training simulator and to the
real aircraft.
Procedure
Ahead of the start of the experiment, a familiarization
scenario was flown to allow familiarization with the
operation, environment, control response and motion of the
simulator. Each crew member was asked to fly a manual
approach to landing. The manual landing included an

2285

instrument landing system (ILS) intercept. Thereafter each
pilot flew steep turns to get used to possible differences in
the stick forces of the pitch axis and control law dynamics.
Finally, each crew member received a short introduction to
the differences in flight plan handling using the Master
Control Display Unit (MCDU).
After the familiarization with the simulator, an
operational briefing was held in the briefing room which
was carried out like a real airline briefing. The briefing
materials the crew received for the operational briefing
included weather forecasts for the destination and alternate
airports in the form of Aircraft Communications Addressing
and Reporting System (ACARS) printouts. Additionally,
two iPads were handed out to the crew with Jeppesen
Mobile FliteDeck for electronic charts and the Quick
Reference Handbook (QRH) as a text document.
Furthermore, the pilots were informed regarding the starting
point of the simulation and of the flight plan, the fuel
calculations and about system limitations. Finally, the crews
were asked to behave like they do in actual flights and were
not allowed to communicate with the instructor /observer on
the jump seat.

Experimental Scenario
The experimental scenario was subdivided into five flight
phases (initial approach [INI], instrument landing approach
[ILS], go-around [GA], bird strike [BIRD], and final
approach and landing [LAND]). It was based on a regularly
scheduled flight from a European departure to destination
airport. The start of the simulation was initiated
approximately 15 to 20 minutes away from the destination
airport.
The scenario was designed to include variability in
workload, ambiguous, surprising as well as challenging
situations and also forced a manual take-over of the aircraft.
The challenging and surprising events were weather
conditions at minimum height that required a go-around, a
heading failure, wind-change and bird strike.

Participants
We conducted the experiments with full airline crews. All
crews consisted of a captain and a first officer of the same
airline, as far as possible. In total 20 crews volunteered.
However, for the analysis we had to exclude one A320 crew
because of a simulation error and one B747 crew due to a
different type rating of the FO. Thus, we evaluated 18 crews
(36 pilots), namely seven A320 crews (14 pilots [7 captains,
7 first officers]) and eleven B747 crews (22 pilots [12
captains, 10 first officers]). Of the 36 pilots participating 31
(2 female, 29 male) agreed to fill out a demographic
questionnaire. All other questionnaires were filled out by all
18 crews (36 pilots) evaluated, unless mentioned otherwise.
The pilots’ average age was 43 years (SD = 10.4) with an
average flying experience of 2,405.50 hours (SD =
1,886.61).
Both crew members held a current type rating at the time
of the experiments for the aircraft to be simulated. The roles

of pilot flying (PF) or pilot monitoring (PM) during the
experimental scenario were assigned by the crew
themselves.

Measurements
Given the hypothesis, scenario and testing environment, we
used several kinds of measures. These included methods
that are already well established in aviation research, such
as expert observations, de-brief interviews and
questionnaires like the NASA TLX and SART.
Additionally, we performed a behavioral content analysis
from video observation and applied new approaches such as
the SSA-VAS questionnaire. Due to space limitations, in
this paper we will mainly focus on our analysis of empathic
accuracy in the aircraft cockpit using the SSA-VAS.

SSA-VAS Questionnaire
After completion of the scenario, each participant filled
out the newly developed SSA-VAS questionnaire. The
SSA-VAS was used to evaluate how each crew member
perceived their own stress and control of the situation as
well as how each crew member perceived their colleague’s
stress and control of the situation. In order to avoid misunderstanding, the participants were informed that being in
control does not derive from being the PF or PM but rather
from confidently understanding the current situation,
knowing what one is doing, knowing what the team member
is doing, and knowing what upcoming actions will follow in
regard to oneself and the team member.
The SSA-VAS questionnaire has two extreme poles, like
the NASA TLX (Hart & Staveland, 2005, Hart, 2006) and
SART (Taylor, 1990), ranging from 0 (cm; low) to 10 (cm;
high) and is presented as a visual analog scale. Such a
measurement instrument is applied for values that cannot be
easily measured directly (Crichton, 2001). The
questionnaire consists of four questions which in this case
were related and referred to each flight phase separately.
The questions in their basic form are the following:
1. How much were you in control of the situation?
2. How much was your colleague in control of the
situation?
3. How stressed did you feel in the situation?
4. How stressed did your colleague feel in the
situation?
Empathic Accuracy
Empathic accuracy was measured by comparing the
control and stress ratings during each flight phase that each
pilot gave to themselves (i.e., How much were you in
control of the situation? / How stressed did you feel in the
situation?) versus the ratings their colleague gave them (i.e.,
How much was your colleague in control of the situation? /
How stressed did your colleague feel in the situation?) (see
Equation 1 and Equation 2 below– examples are given for
calculations of empathic accuracy of PF). This enabled us to
have a direct measure of empathic accuracy of both pilots,
i.e., PF and PM. This method represents an adapted version

2286

of the empathic accuracy paradigm by Ickes et al. (Ickes,
1993).
EA C = 10 - |PF R Control-Other – PM R Control-Self|
Equation 1: Calculation of empathic accuracy (EA) for
control. Example for calculation of EAc for PF.
EA S = 10 - |PF R Stress-Other – PM R Stress-Self|
Equation 2: Calculation of empathic accuracy (EA) for
stress. Example for calculation of EAs for PF.
Figure 2: Mean ratings of stress for each flight phase –
colleague ratings.

Results
A mixed model analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the
within-subject factors flight phase (INI, ILS, GA, BIRD and
LAND) and rating (self vs. other) and the between-subject
factor role (PF vs. PM) was implemented for perceived
stress and control. We implemented the same method to
evaluate empathic accuracy however using the withinsubject factors flight phase (INI, ILS, GA, BIRD and
LAND) and type of assessment (control vs. stress) and the
between-subject factor role (PF vs. PM).

Perceived Stress
We found a significant main effect of flight phase
(F(3.24,110.09) = 20.498, p < .001) and a significant
interaction of phase, rating and role (F(1.55,52.56) = 5.473,
p = .012).
For a closer investigation of the main effect of flight
phase, we computed Bonferroni corrected post-hoc
comparisons of the stress ratings (mean across both roles
and both ratings). The post-hoc comparisons showed a
significant difference between flight phase INI and GA,
BIRD and LAND (all p-values ≤ .001) as well as flight
phase ILS and GA, BIRD and LAND (all p-values < .001)
while INI and ILS were not significantly different from each
other (p > .999). Ratings for GA, BIRD and LAND were
also not significantly different from each other (all p-values
> .100). Thus, ratings show that GA, BIRD and LAND were
rated as more stressful than INI and ILS (see Figure 1,
Figure 2).

Perceived Control
There was a significant main effect of flight phase
(F(2.83,96.35) = 7.478, p < .001) and a trend significant
effect of rating (F(1,36) = 3.784, p = .061). We did not find
a significant main effect of role or any interactions of role
with other factors (all p-values > .08).
Again we computed Bonferroni corrected post-hoc
comparisons of the control ratings for each phase (mean
across both pilots and both ratings), for a closer
investigation of the main effect of flight phase. The post-hoc
comparisons showed a significant difference between flight
phase INI and BIRD (p = .029) as well as flight phase ILS
and GA (p = .002), BIRD (p < .001) and LAND (p = .010)
while INI and ILS were not significantly different from each
other (p > .999). Ratings for GA were not significantly
different from INI, BIRD and LAND (all p-values > .47) but
ratings for BIRD and LAND differed significantly (p =
.031) (see Figure 3, Figure 4).

Figure 3: Mean values for perceived control of the situation
for each flight phase – self ratings.

Figure 1: Mean ratings of stress for each flight phase – self
ratings.
Figure 4: Mean values for perceived control of the situation
for each flight phase – colleague ratings.

2287

Empathic Accuracy
Due to the missing of one rating, the N for this analysis
was 34 instead of 36.
We found significant main effects of flight phase
(F(2.91,93.07) = 4.341, p = .007) and assessment (F(1,32) =
7.724, p = .009). Role and its interactions were not
significant (all p-values > .36).
For a closer investigation of the main effects of flight
phase and assessment, we computed Bonferroni corrected
post-hoc comparisons of empathic accuracy for each flight
phase (mean across both roles) for both assessments
separately. For control assessments, the post-hoc
comparisons showed a significant difference between flight
phase INI and BIRD (p = .049) with higher empathic
accuracy during INI (mean difference ± SD = .941± .311).
For stress assessments, the post-hoc comparisons showed a
significant difference between flight phase ILS and GA (p =
.002) with higher empathic accuracy during ILS (mean
difference ± SD = 1.406 ± .329) (see Figure 5, Figure 6).

Figure 5: Empathic accuracy for the assessment of stress for
each flight phase.

determine which flight phases were stressful and thus
compare empathic accuracy between stressful and nonstressful flight phases. More specifically, empathic accuracy
was lowest during the stressful flight events BIRD (for
control ratings) and GA (for stress ratings). This effect was
present for both crew members, the PF and PM. This
implies that crews were uncertain regarding their
colleague’s stress level. Under less stressful conditions,
pilots were better able to accurately assess the state their
colleague is in. When stress levels were higher, pilots’
empathic accuracy decreased and they were less able to
judge how stressful their colleagues perceived the situation
to be. This is likely exacerbated by the fact that flight crews
do not usually work in fixed pairings, decreasing the time
individual pilots fly with one another, and the fact that
surprising and challenging situations are rare due to good
trainings and reliable systems. To increase pilots’ empathic
accuracy regarding stress, it may be useful to have crews fly
together more often.
The BIRD phase of the scenario was the most stressful
according to the self-ratings. During this flight phase pilots
had the worst empathic accuracy regarding their colleagues’
perceived level of control. When pilots cannot accurately
judge how much control their colleagues feel, competencies
such as leadership, communication, decision making,
monitoring, and SA can be negatively impacted. As a result,
pilots may be less able to sufficiently guide their colleagues
through challenging situations, carry out effective
communication, and make adequate decisions. In order to
increase pilots’ empathic accuracy regarding perceived level
of control, trainings, procedures, and system design could be
modified to support crews even better in surprising and
challenging situations.
Taken together, in the present SSA-VAS analysis, we
were able to confirm the hypothesis that stress, i.e.,
challenging and surprising situations during flight, leads to
altered social cognition. We found that empathic accuracy
between pilots was decreased during stressful situations in a
challenging approach scenario.

Acknowledgments
Figure 6: Empathic accuracy for the assessment of control
for each flight phase.

Discussion
We found an effect of flight phase on the stress and
control ratings of pilots, both on self-ratings and on the
ratings pilots assigned to their colleagues. We can conclude
from these ratings that the flight phases GA, BIRD, and
LAND were most stressful for the pilots. Thus, there is
evidence that the experimental scenario triggered the
intended effects and that crews were immersed into their
tasks. Furthermore, we found a significant effect of flight
phase, on the empathic accuracy of pilots. Based on selfratings of stressfulness of each flight phase, we were able to

This research is funded as part of the FP7 2012 Aeronautics
and Air Transport programme under EC contract ACP2GA-2012-314765-Man4Gen. The views and opinions
expressed in this abstract and poster are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the position and opinions of
the Man4Gen consortium and or any of the individual
partner organizations.

References
Andrews, J., Wadiwalla, M., Juster, R. P., Lord, C., Lupien,
S. J., & Pruessner, J. C. (2007). Effects of
manipulating the amount of social-evaluative threat
on the cortisol stress response in young healthy
men. Behavioral Neuroscience, 121(5), 871–876.

2288

Crichton, N. (2001). Visual analogue scale (VAS). J Clin
Nurs, 10(5), 706–6.
Denson, T. F., Creswell, J. D., & Granville-Smith, I. (2012).
Self-focus and social evaluative threat increase
salivary cortisol responses to acute stress in men.
Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 35(6), 624–633.
Dickerson, S. S., Gable, S. L., Irwin, M. R., Aziz, N., &
Kemeny, M. E. (2009). Social-evaluative threat
and proinflammatory cytokine regulation an
experimental
laboratory
investigation.
Psychological Science, 20(10), 1237–1244.
Dickerson, S. S., & Kemeny, M. E. (2004). Acute Stressors
and Cortisol Responses: A Theoretical Integration
and
Synthesis
of
Laboratory
Research.
Psychological Bulletin, 130(3), 355–391.
Elling, L., Steinberg, C., Bröckelmann, A.-K., Dobel, C.,
Bölte, J., & Junghofer, M. (2011). Acute Stress
Alters Auditory Selective Attention in Humans
Independent of HPA: A Study of Evoked
Potentials. PLoS ONE, 6(4), e18009.
Endsley, M. R. (1995). Toward a theory of situation
awareness in dynamic systems. Human Factors:
The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, 37(1), 32–64.
Endsley, M. R. (2012). Designing for Situation Awareness:
An Approach to User-Centered Design, Second
Edition. CRC Press.
Evans, A. W., Harper, M. E., & Jentsch, F. (2004). I know
what you’re thinking: eliciting mental models
about familiar teammates. In Concept maps:
Theory, methodology, technology. Proceedings of
the First International Conference on Concept
Mapping. Pamplona, Spain.
Fan, Y., Duncan, N. W., de Greck, M., & Northoff, G.
(2011). Is there a core neural network in empathy?
An fMRI based quantitative meta-analysis.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(3),
903–911.
Glavin, R. J. (2011). Human performance limitations
(communication, stress, prospective memory and
fatigue). Best Practice & Research Clinical
Anaesthesiology, 25(2), 193–206.
Hart, S. G. (2006). Nasa-Task Load Index (NASA-TLX); 20
Years Later. Proceedings of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 50(9),
904–908.
Hart, S. G., & Staveland, L. E. (2005). Results of empirical
and theoretical research. Ergonomics: Skill,
Displays, Controls, and Mental Workload, 2, 408.
Howard, J. W. (2008). Tower, Am I Cleared to Land?:
Problematic
Communication
in
Aviation
Discourse. Human Communication Research,
34(3), 370–391.
Hughes, B. L., & Beer, J. S. (2013). Protecting the self: the
effect of social-evaluative threat on neural
representations of self. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 25(4), 613–622.

W. (1993). Empathic accuracy. Journal of
Personality, 61(4), 587–610.
International Civil Aviation Organization. (2013). Manual
of evidence-based training.
Lamm, C., Meltzoff, A. N., & Decety, J. (2010). How do we
empathize with someone who is not like us? A
functional magnetic resonance imaging study.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(2), 362–
376.
Molesworth, B. R. C., & Estival, D. (2015).
Miscommunication in general aviation: The
influence of external factors on communication
errors. Safety Science, 73, 73–79.
Preston, S. D., & De Waal, F. (2002). Empathy: Its ultimate
and proximate bases. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 25(01), 1–20.
Rahman, M. (2011). Somatic Situation Awareness: A model
for SA acquisition under imminent threat and
severe time stress. In Cognitive Methods in
Situation Awareness and Decision Support
(CogSIMA), 2011 IEEE First International MultiDisciplinary Conference on (pp. 257–263).
Singer, T., & Lamm, C. (2009). The Social Neuroscience of
Empathy. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1156(1), 81–96.
Singer, T., & Tusche, A. (2014). Understanding Others. In
Neuroeconomics (pp. 513–532). Elsevier.
Smeets, T., Dziobek, I., & Wolf, O. T. (2009). Social
cognition under stress: Differential effects of
stress-induced cortisol elevations in healthy young
men and women. Hormones and Behavior, 55(4),
507–513.
Starcke, K., & Brand, M. (2012). Decision making under
stress: A selective review. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(4), 1228–1248.
Tomova, L., von Dawans, B., Heinrichs, M., Silani, G., &
Lamm, C. (2014). Is stress affecting our ability to
tune into others? Evidence for gender differences
in the effects of stress on self-other distinction.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 43, 95–104.
Vedhara, K., Hyde, J., Gilchrist, I. D., Tytherleigh, M., &
Plummer, S. (2000). Acute stress, memory,
attention and cortisol. Psychoneuroendocrinology,
25(6), 535–549.
Wolf, O. T. (2009). Stress and memory in humans: Twelve
years of progress? Brain Research, 1293, 142–154.

2289

Ickes,

