Spatial Perception is Continuously Constrained by Goals and Memories
David W. Vinson (dvinson@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive & Information Sciences, University of California Merced
5200 N. Lake Rd., Merced, CA 95343

J. Scott Jordan (jsjorda@ilstu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Illinois State University
Campus Box 4620, Normal, IL 61790-4620

Alycia M. Hund (amhund@ilstu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Illinois State University
Campus Box 4620, Normal, IL 61790-4620

Abstract

actions one’s current skill set will allow one to complete in
the immediate future (Witt, 2011), and what action options
the current optic array affords one in the immediate future
(Gibson, 1979). In each case, perceived future action is
guided by information present within one’s environment
(e.g., a steep hill or heavy backpack).

Perceptual variables such as perceived distance contain
information about future actions. Often our goals involve the
integration of another’s goals, such as lifting heavy objects
together. The purpose of this study was to investigate how
another’s actions might influence one’s own goal-oriented
perceptions, specifically, verbal distance estimates. Using a
within-subject paradigm, we replicated a well-known finding
that carrying a weighted backpack results in larger distance
estimates relative to not carrying a backpack. In a crucial
second condition, this effect was reversed: distance estimates
were significantly greater when not carrying a weighted
backpack than when carrying a backpack. In this condition,
participants provided distance estimates while wearing a
weighted backpack during the first phase and then gave
estimates while not wearing a backpack, but following an
experimenter wearing a weighted backpack in the second
phase. Three additional conditions systematically documented
how the observations of another’s actions influenced distance
estimates.
Keywords: perception; memory;
estimation; social interaction.

affordances;

Goal-driven Perception

distance

Introduction
Perceived distances are greater if one wears a weighted
backpack while estimating distance (Proffitt, Stefanucci,
Banton, & Epstein, 2003). In their now classic work, Proffitt
and colleagues found that while standing, participants’
estimates to a target at a variety of distances are
systematically greater when wearing a weighted backpack
(see also Proffitt & Bhalla, 1999). This difference increases
as actual distance increases. This effect also varies with a
host of factors such as knowledge about the contents of
one’s backpack (Durgin et al., 2009), blood glucose levels
(Schnall, Zedra & Proffitt, 2010), and current action
capabilities (see Witt, 2011 for review). Often, findings
such as these are accounted for via appeals to non-visual
factors such as implied effort (Proffitt, 2006), action
capabilities (Witt, 2011), and affordances (Gibson, 1979).
Common to each of the above-listed frameworks is the
notion that perception contains information about future
action: how much energy one will have to expend to
complete a future action (Proffitt, 2006), what types of

One explanation of why it is that our perceptions tend to be
contextualized by future actions is the theory of event
coding (TEC— Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, & Prinz,
2001). TEC asserts that (1) actions are planned in terms of
the distal events they are intended to produce, and (2) areas
of the brain involved in action planning also are involved in
perception. Neural support for TEC derives from a host of
data which indicate that pre-motor centers involved in motor
planning are also activated when one perceives objects that
afford motor activity (Rizolatti, Fogassi, & Gallses, 2001).
Such findings imply the following: (1) what is planned
during an action is the distal goal (e.g., reach the top of a
hill), not the movements one needs to achieve the goal (e.g.,
the leg movements required reach the top of the hill), and
(2) due to the overlap of the neural dynamics involved in
goal planning and perception, one’s perception of the event
(e.g., the hill) will be contextualized by the factors one
needs to incorporate into one’s plans (e.g., knowledge about
the content of one’s backpack, blood glucose levels and
current action capabilities). In light of these findings, it
seems clear that our perceptions are inherently biased by our
goals (Jordan, 2013).

The Social Nature of Goal Driven Perception
The overlap between action planning and perception not
only gives rise to goal-driven perception, it also entails a
social component. For example, expert dancers who observe
the dancing of other expert dancers exhibit greater
activation than novices in pre-motor areas known to be
involved in action planning (Calvo-Merino, Glaser, Greźes,
Passingham, & Haggard, 2005). Importantly, less motorcortical activation occurs when experts of different dance
types observe dances that are not within their own expertise

2493

(e.g., when an expert Capoeira dancer observes a Ballet
dancer; Calvo-Merino et al., 2005). This can be taken as
evidence that the observation of another’s actions engenders
motor-cortical activation similar to that of acting oneself.
The social aspect of goal-driven perception extends to
observation of distal events controlled by another. When
participants observe a computer stimulus whose movements
are controlled by another actor, and the stimulus
unexpectedly vanishes, the perceived vanishing point is
displaced beyond the actual vanishing point, in the direction
of motion (Jordan & Hunsinger 2008). Crucially, the size of
this displacement is larger if the observer had previous
experience controlling the stimulus. From the perspective of
TEC, observing stimulus movements controlled by another
activates the planning dynamics one would generate to
control the stimulus oneself. And if memories of controlling
the stimulus exist, these, too, are activated and alter
perception even more.
Furthermore, the notion of goal-driven perception finds
support from more recent studies on how one’s own abilities
and the abilities of others influence current perceptions.
When playing a classic Pong game on a computer,
participants perceive the speed of the virtual ball to be faster
both when they miss the ball with their paddle and when
they observe another miss the ball (Witt, Sugovic & Taylor,
2012). Additionally, participants who first played the game
and then observed another play the game experienced the
speed of the virtual ball in terms of the relationship between
their abilities and those of the person they observed.
Specifically, participants who were better than the person
they observed perceived the ball to be slower while the
other played (Witt, South, & Sugovic, 2014).
Collectively, the studies of Calvo-Merino et al. (2005),
Jordan and Hunsinger (2008), and Witt et al. (2012, 2014)
indicate that observing the goals and actions of another puts
one in the planning states for the very same goals and
actions, depending, of course on one’s abilities (i.e.,
memories of having completed the task a particular way).
In short, we perceive the goals and actions of others in terms
of our own abilities (i.e., in terms of our action memories),
as if we were doing the task ourselves.

Current Study
Given the inherently social, goal-directed, memory-rich
nature of perception, the purpose of the present experiment
was to systematically manipulate memories and goals to
uncover under what conditions the observation of another’s
actions influences current perceptions. Specifically, we
hypothesized that the observation of another’s backpackcarrying actions would influence the perception of distance
in ways that would be constrained by (1) whether or not one
has recent backpack carrying experience while observing
the other, and (2) one’s action capabilities (i.e., wearing or
not wearing a backpack) while observing the other.

Method
Sixty undergraduate students—12 participants in each of
five conditions, replicating the sample size per condition
from Proffitt et al. (2003)—were recruited through the
participant sign-up system in the Department of Psychology
at a large, Midwestern university. All participants were at
least 18 years of age with normal or corrected to normal
vision. Participants weighed between 100 and 200 pounds
and did not have current or chronic back problems.
Participants received credit for psychology courses.
Each session lasted approximately one half hour. After
providing informed consent, participants were asked to give
their weight by standing on a scale. Then, weights equal to
20% of the participant’s body weight but no more than the
maximum weight limit of 30 pounds were placed inside a
backpack to be carried by the participant, replicating the
experimental design from previous studies (Proffitt, et al.,
2003). The participant then put on the weighted backpack. If
participants were not in a condition in which carrying a
weighted backpack was necessary, this step was omitted.
They were then given a ruler (.3 m) as a guide to making
estimates of distance. Both the experimenter and participant
exited the lab and walked side by side through the basement
halls of the Psychology building along a predetermined
route, stopping at specific locations in order for the
participant to estimate their distance to a target..
We utilized a 5 (Condition) X 4 (Distance) X 2 (Phase)
mixed design with Distance and Phase as within-subject
variables, and Condition as a between-subjects variable.
Each participant underwent two phases. During each phase,
participants stopped and made distance estimates eight
times. There were four unique target locations (i.e., pieces
of paper taped to the wall with the word “Target” printed in
large, bold letters), and participants made two distance
estimates to each target during each phase, but from a
different distance each time. Target distances were 8, 10, 12
and 14 meters, replicating Proffitt et al., (2003). Thus,
across both phases, participants made four distance
estimates for each unique target location, with one of the
four being made from each of the four distances for a total
of 16 estimates. Target locations were randomized with
target distances within and across phases.
As can be seen in Figure 1, in Phase One participants
estimated their distance while carrying a backpack
(Conditions 1, 2, 3 & 5) or not (Condition 4). In Phase Two,
participants either carried a weighted backpack (Condition
5) or not (Conditions 1, 2, 3 & 4) while the experimenter
walked in front of the participant while carrying a weighted
backpack (Conditions 2, 4 & 5) or not (Condition 3) or
simply walked next to the experimenter (Condition 1). Each
condition was designed to address a specific question
regarding the circumstances under which (1) memories of
previous action, and (2) one’s current action abilities,
influence perceived distances while observing another. For
this reason, the current design did not test the relationship
between all possible combinations of participant
backpack/no backpack, ‘other’ backpack/no backpack, and

2494

Experiment Design

Figure 1: Experiment Design. Each condition (left)
contained two phases (top) where participants (white)
either carried a backpack (black) or not. In some
conditions participants followed an experimenter (gray) in
Phase two who carried a backpack or not.
phase. Rather, as will be seen, we only tested those
conditions that were essential to determining the necessary
and sufficient conditions for producing a difference between
Conditions One and Two.
Condition One was designed to replicate the results of
previous studies (Proffitt, et al., 2003). Thus, we predicted
that distances estimates in Phase One, in which participants
made distance estimates while wearing a backpack, would
be greater than distance estimates made in Phase 2, during
which the participant did not wear a backpack and the
experimenter simply walked next to the participant.
Condition Two was exactly the same as Condition One,
save for one crucial difference. Specifically, in Phase Two,
when the participant made distance estimates while not
wearing a backpack, s/he followed the experimenter who
was, in fact, wearing a weighted backpack. We created this
manipulation to see what would happen to the participants’
distance estimates in Phase Two when (1) their action
memories of having carried a backpack in Phase One were

activated by someone else carrying a weighted backpack,
and (2) the participants’ current action capabilities in Phase
Two were different from those of the other actor (i.e., the
participant did not wear a weighted backpack in Phase Two,
while the experimenter did). We liken our Phase Two
participants in this condition to the Phase Two participants
in Witt et al. (2014) who watched another play pong (during
Phase Two) after having done so themselves (during Phase
One). As was stated above, Witt et al. (2014) discovered
that participants who were better at Pong than the person
they observed perceived the ball to be slower while the
other played. That is, participants experienced the velocity
of the stimulus in terms of the relationship between their
own abilities and those of the person they were observing. If
one assumes the better participants experienced the Pong
game as being “easier” than the worse participants
experienced it to be, it might be the case that our Phase Two
participants will experience the trek from target to target as
being more difficult for the experimenter, particularly in
relation to their own experiences carrying the backpack (i.e.,
backpack-carrying memories) and their current action
abilities (i.e., not wearing a weighted backpack). As a result,
our participants might actually give larger distance estimates
in Phase Two than Phase One as their Phase Two
perceptions come to be influenced by their action memories,
the observed efforts of the experimenter, and the perceived
discrepancy in the difficulty of the task. In short, we predict
a reversal of the traditional backpack effect in Condition
Two.
Conditions Three through Five (see Figure 1) were
designed to ensure that the predicted outcome of Condition
Two, were it to occur, was clearly due to (1) the activation
of action memories, and (2) the discrepancy in action
capabilities between the participant and the experimenter in
Phase Two of Condition Two. Thus, in Condition Three we
tested the necessity of a discrepancy between the action
capabilities of the participant and the experimenter in Phase
Two by replicating Condition Two, but not allowing the
experimenter to wear a backpack in Phase Two. If we find a
reversal of the traditional backpack effect in Condition Two,
and a discrepancy between the action capabilities of the
participant and the experimenter during Phase Two is
necessary to produce the reversal, then we should find no
reversal in Condition Three. In short, we should once again
replicate the traditional backpack effect.
In Condition Four, we tested whether or not the activation
of action memories during Phase Two is necessary to
produce the reversal we anticipate in Condition Two. To test
this idea, we replicated Condition Two except for the fact
the participant did not wear a weighted backpack during
Phase One. If the social activation of action memories is
necessary to produce a reversal of the traditional backpack
effect, then there should be no difference between Phase
One and Phase Two distance estimates in Condition Four, as
the participants will have no backpack action memories to
be activated by the experimenter during Phase Two. And
given the participants’ action capabilities will be basically

2495

the same in both phases (i.e., they wear a backpack in
neither Phase One nor Phase Two), there should be no
differences in distance estimates between the two phases.
Finally, in Condition Five, we once again tested whether a
reversal requires a discrepancy in the action capabilities of
the participant and the experimenter during Phase Two.
However, this time we equated the action capabilities of the
participant and the experimenter in Phase Two by having
the participant wear a weighted backpack, (versus having
the experimenter wear no backpack during Phase Two, as
we did in Condition Three). Again, if a Phase Two
discrepancy in action capabilities is necessary for a reversal,
then there should be no reversal in Condition Five.
While a full model would have provided a more robust
series of results, these five conditions were carefully chosen
to address the subtleties of our assumptions that both (1) a
memory of carrying a weighted backpack, and (2) the
presence of an action-capability discrepancy between the
participant and the experimenter would result in perceived
distances that are greater when not carrying a weighted
backpack than when carrying one.

Results
We report the difference between phases within each
Condition (5) and Distance (4). That is, we first averaged
the distance estimates for each distance in each phase. We
then subtracted estimates in Phase One from estimates in
Phase Two (Phase Two – Phase One), separately for each
distance. A negative value for the resulting difference score
reveals that distance estimates were larger in Phase One
than in Phase Two. Underestimations are typical of verbal
distance estimates (Proffitt, et al., 2006). For this reason we
do not consider accuracy a significant predictor of the
effects of memory or social factors on perceived distances.
Average difference scores were analyzed using a 4
(Distance) X 5 (Condition) mixed ANOVA; p-values along
with estimates of effect sizes—partial eta squared (𝜂!! ) and
Cohen’s d1, respectively—are reported. As predicted, there
was a main effect of Condition, F(4,216) = 4.56, p = .001,
𝜂!! = .077, and no main effect of distance or interaction
between Distance and Condition (all Fs < 1). A pairwise
simple effects test with Bonferroni correction revealed the
main effect was driven by three significant differences
between Conditions. Specifically, a highly significant
difference occurred between Condition One and Condition
Two (p < .001, d = 1.38). As can be seen in Figure 2, the
traditional backpack effect was replicated in Condition One,
and reversed in Condition Two. That is, difference scores
were negative in Condition One (M = -2.97, SD = 4.42) and
positive in Condition Two (M = 2.59, SD = 3.57). In
addition, when treating each condition independently where
each participant’s difference scores were averaged, one
sample t-tests revealed difference scores were significantly

1

Cohen’s d for simple effects was determined by using the mean
difference score for each participant, collapsed across distances.

Figure 2: Difference scores for estimates of distance by
condition along with standard error bars of each
condition are presented. Differences in phases one (left)
and two (right) are represented by the experimenter,
participant and backpack figures below each condition.
different from zero for both Condition one (t(11) = -2.33, p
= .04, d = .67) and Two (t(11) = 2.51, p = .03, d = .72).
As can be seen in Figure 2, carrying a weighted backpack
in both phases lead to greater estimates in Phase two of
Condition Five (M = 1.38, SD = 4.0). Condition Five scores
were also significantly different from those in Condition
One (p = .006, d = 1.03), as was the case with difference
scores in Condition Two.
Difference scores in Condition Three (M = -2.67, SD =
3.84) replicated the traditional backpack effect, like
Condition One. Condition Three estimates were
significantly different from Condition Two (p < .004, d =
1.42) and marginally different from Condition Five (p =
.063, d = 1.03). However, given the estimated effect size is
large, we speculate that a true effect may exist. Furthermore
a one samples t-test revealed difference scores in Condition
Three were significantly different than zero (t(11) = -2.41, p
= .03, d = .70), as were difference scores in Condition Five
(t(11) = 1.19, p = .26, d = .34).
Condition Four was not significantly different from any
other condition (M = -.49, SD = 8.4), or from zero (t(11) = 0.20, p = .84, d = .06 ).
Discussion
Condition One replicates the well-known finding that
distance estimates are larger when one wears a weighted
backpack (Proffitt et al., 2003). Condition Two reversed
this traditional pattern; that is, distance estimates were larger

2496

in Phase Two, while participants were not wearing a
weighted backpack. The pattern of differences across
Conditions Three through Five are consistent with the
assertion that the reversal occurred in Condition Two
because (1) the participants’ memories of carrying a
backpack in Phase One were activated by the observation of
the experimenter carrying a backpack during Phase Two,
(Calvo-Merino et al., 2005), and (2) participants perceived
Phase Two distances in terms of the action-capability
discrepancy between themselves and the experimenter (i.e.,
lighter burden and heavier burden, respectively, Witt et al.,
2014) such that the heavier burden of the experimenter
amplified the participants’ perceived distances beyond what
they would be if the participant had no memory of carrying
a backpack, and there were no action capability discrepancy.
For the sake of brevity, we refer to this collection of
arguments as the Socially Relative Action Capabilities
(SRAC) account.
Condition Three supports the SRAC account because it
shows that the reversal will not occur if the experimenter
does not wear a weighted backpack during Phase Two. This
reveals that the simple observation of another during Phase
Two was not sufficient to generate the reversal. Rather, for
the reversal to occur, there must be a discrepancy in the
action capabilities of the participant and the observed other.
In short, the lack of discrepancy in action capabilities
between the participant and the experimenter led the
participant to experience Phase Two distances in terms of
his/her own action capabilities. Given participants in this
condition wore a backpack in Phase One, and did not wear
one in Phase Two, their data simply replicated the
traditional backpack/no backpack effect.
Condition Four supports the SRAC account because it
reveals that the reversal requires the creation of backpack
carrying memories in Phase One, even if there is an actioncapability discrepancy in Phase Two. This indicates that the
Phase Two action-capability discrepancy in Condition Two
produced the reversal because the backpack carrying
dynamics of the experimenter activated the backpack
carrying memories the participant had created during Phase
One. This finding is akin to the Calvo-Merino et al. (2005)
finding that the amount of pre-motor activation generated
while one observes another dancing is contingent upon the
amount and type of dance experience the observer has. In
short, without a memory of carrying a weighted backpack,
the participant was unable to experience the experimenter’s
burden as if the participant were carrying the backpack
his/herself. Given participants in this condition wore a
backpack in neither Phase One nor Phase Two, there was no
difference in distance estimates between the two phases.
Another advantage of this lack of change across phases is
that is demonstrates that all of the other phase differences in
the other conditions were not due to simple repetition
effects.
Finally, Condition Five’s relationship to the SRAC
account seems unclear. At first glance it might seem
inconsistent with the SRAC account because it looks as

though we have replicated the outcome of Condition Two
even though there was no action-capability discrepancy
between the participant and the experimenter in Phase Two
(i.e., both were wearing backpacks). In other words,
Condition Five might be taken to imply one can reverse the
traditional backpack effect without a Phase Two actioncapability discrepancy.
One way to resolve this issue might be to compare
Condition Five to Condition Three. In both conditions,
participants developed backpack-carrying memories during
Phase One, and there was no action-capability discrepancy
between the participant and the experimenter during Phase
Two. Given the results of the two conditions are so large
(i.e., Condition Three gave rise to a negative phase
difference, while Condition Five gave rise to a positive
phase difference), yet their methods were so similar, it
seems the differences in their results might be due to the
different degrees of burden in Phase Two. In other words,
given there were no action-capability discrepancies between
the participants and the experimenters during Phase Two,
participants perceived distances in terms of their own,
current action capabilities. In Condition Three, this assertion
implies that participants perceived distances in terms of not
wearing a backpack, and, as a result, we replicated the
traditional Proffitt et al. (2006) finding. In Condition Five,
however, participants perceived distances, during Phase
Two, in terms of wearing a backpack. Given this was the
second phase in a row during which they were asked to
carry the backpack, it may be the case participants were
somewhat fatigued during Phase 2 and, thus, perceived
distances in terms of the extra effort required to carry the
backpack during Phase Two. In short, they perceived
distances during Phase Two, as did those in Condition
Three, in terms of their own, current action capabilities (i.e.,
more effort required than during Phase One). This account
might also explain why the difference scores in Condition
Five were not significantly different from zero, while the
differences scores in Condition Two (i.e., the reversal
condition) were. The positive difference scores in Condition
Two actually constituted a reversal of the traditional
backpack effect, while the positive difference scores in
Condition Five were due to fatigue brought on by carrying
the backpack during two consecutive phases.
Collectively, the results of the present experiment are
consistent with the findings of Calvo-Merino et al. (2005),
Jordan and Hunsinger (2008), and Witt et al. (2014),
supporting the assertion that when we perceive another
control an event that we have previously controlled (e.g.,
complete a specific dance, control a stimulus on a computer
screen, or make estimates of the distance to a target) our
perceptions of the event are influenced by (1) our own
remembered action capabilities, and (2) our current action
capabilities in relation to those of the person we are
observing. These factors influence the degree to which we
experience the ‘other’ as if we were doing their task
ourselves.

2497

One might argue that our use of a within-subjects design
may have introduced problems regarding confounding task
demands that were less obvious in previous studies that
utilized a between-subjects design. For example, researchers
empirically (Durgin et al., 2009) and theoretically
(Firestone, 2013; but see also Proffitt, 2013 for a response)
argue that estimates of distances and hill slopes are
influenced by the obvious nature of the task. Participants in
backpack experiments may develop their own explanation
of why they were wearing a backpack while indicating
perceptual judgments, specifically, that the experimenter
expects them to give larger estimates while wearing the
backpack. To this point, at the end of the current
experiment, participants were asked if they had any idea
when the experimenter was going to ask them to stop and
make their next distance estimate. They were also asked if
they thought any of the target distances were repeated, or if
they simply felt similar. Further, participants were asked if
they knew why the experimenter conducted the experiment
or what they thought the experiment was about. In all
conditions, participants did not report being aware of design
features regarding distances and remained unaware of the
specific hypotheses of each condition, including thinking
that estimates of distance ought to be larger when observing
another carry a weighted backpack.
We utilized a within-subjects design because it is
important to demonstrate changes in perception within
individuals as opposed to between groups. By
systematically controlling factors such as Phase One
experience (i.e., backpack versus no backpack), and whether
or not the experimenter wore a weighted backpack in Phase
Two, we clearly demonstrated changes within individuals
across the phases. And given the clear pattern of changes in
difference scores across our different conditions, it seems
difficult to sustain the assertion that it was inappropriate to
utilize a within-subjects design. To be sure, we did predict
that participants’ distance perceptions would be influenced
by memory and action-capability discrepancies between the
participant and the experimenter, which one might assert
participants “picked up on” via demand characteristics.
Given that not a single participant mentioned being aware of
such issues during our post-experiment questioning, we
believe this interpretation is highly unlikely. Rather, as
stated by the SRAC account, we assert participants’ distance
perceptions were influenced by memory and actioncapability discrepancies because (1) the overlap of brain
dynamics involved in action-planning and perception
renders perception inherently goal-directed, and (2) the
goal-directed nature of perception extends to the perceptions
of others.

References
Calvo-Merino, B., Glaser, D.E., Grézes, J., Passingham,
R.E., & Haggard, P. (2005). Action
observation
and acquired motor skills: An FMRI study with expert
dancers. Cerebral Cortex, 15, 1243–1249.

Durgin, F. H., Baird, J. A., Greenburg, M., Russell, R.,
Shaughnessy, K., & Waymouth, S. (2009). Who is being
deceived? The experimental demands of wearing a
backpack. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(5), 964969.
Firestone, C. (2013). How “paternalistic” is spatial
perception? Why wearing a heavy backpack doesn’t—and
couldn’t—make hills look steeper. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 8(4), 455-473.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Hommel, B., Müsseler, J., Aschersleben, G., & Prinz, W.
(2001). The theory of event coding (TEC): A framework
for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 849-937.
Iacoboni, M. (2005). Understanding others: Imitation,
language, and empathy. In S. Hurley & N. Chater (Eds.),
Perspectives on imitation: From mirror neurons to memes
(pp. 77-99). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jordan, J. S. (2013). The wild ways of conscious will: what
we do, how we do it, and why it has meaning. Frontiers
in psychology, 4.
Jordan, J. S., & Hunsinger, M. (2008). Learned patterns of
action-effect anticipation contribute to the spatial
displacement of continuously moving stimuli. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 34(1), 113.
Proffitt, D. R. (2013). An embodied approach to perception
by what units are visual perceptions scaled?. Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 8(4), 474-483.
Proffitt, D.R. (2006). Embodied perception and the
economy of action. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 1(2), 110-122.
Proffitt, D. R., Stefanucci, J., Banton, T., & Epstein, W.
(2003). The role of effort in perceiving distance.
Psychological Science, 14, 106-112.
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2001),
Neurophysiological mechanisms underlying action
understanding
and
imitation.
Nature
Reviews
Neuroscience, 2, 661-670.
Schnall, S., Zadra, J. R., & Proffitt, D. R. (2010). Direct
evidence for the economy of action: Glucose and the
perception of geographical slant. Perception, 39(4), 464482. doi: 10.1068/p6445.
Witt, J. K. (2011). Action’s effect on perception. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 201-206.
Witt, J. K., South, S. C., & Sugovic, M. (2014). A
perceiver’s own abilities influence perception, even when
observing others. Psychonomic bulletin & review, 21(2),
384-389.
Witt, J. K., Sugovic, M., & Taylor, J. E. T. (2012). Actionspecific effects in a social context: others' abilities
influence perceived speed. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 38(3),
715.

2498

