Statements of equivalence can imply differences:
Asymmetries in directional comparisons
Eleanor K. Chestnut (ekc@stanford.edu)
Carla Remulla (remulla@stanford.edu)
Ellen M. Markman (markman@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract

similar to the gax,” adults inferred that the gax was more
important and famous than the zum. Since adults had no
prior experience with these novel words, their inference was
based purely on the direction of the comparison. Similarly,
Chestnut and Markman (2014) demonstrated that after
hearing sentences such as, “The blicket plays soccer as well
as the toma,” children ages six to eight inferred that the
toma was the older and more established player. Stating,
“Girls are as good as boys at math,” then, may subtly imply
that boys are the typical, higher-status, or even more
naturally skilled mathematicians.
To date, no research has empirically tested this inferential
process for statements expressing similarity between
familiar groups (e.g., “Women are as smart as men”), or
how such statements occur in everyday discourse. In the
following studies, we use comparisons between genders as a
case study for answering these questions.
To investigate adults’ use of directional comparisons for
expressing gender similarities, in Study 1 we analyzed
public messages (“tweets”) on the microblog website
Twitter, which has recently been recognized as a reliable
way of measuring linguistic trends (Cook, Han, & Baldwin,
2014; Doyle, 2014; Eisenstein, 2014).
Twitter is a
particularly interesting corpus to use for two reasons: 1) it is
a free website with over 280 million users who post
approximately 500 million tweets per day, making it a large
source of natural language data; and 2) it allows users to
“follow” others (i.e., view others’ tweets on their home
pages), which suggests that users typically compose tweets
with the expectation that others will read them (“About
Twitter”, 2015). Thus, Twitter provides an opportunity to
observe how adults spontaneously frame gender similarities
in naturalistic, contemporary conversation.
In Study 2, we provide experimental evidence about
whether such comparisons can shape adults’ beliefs about
the groups being compared. Specifically, we ask whether
directional comparisons intended to express equivalent
ability between genders at a novel activity (e.g., “Girls are
as good as boys at a game called gorp”) nevertheless cause
adults to associate greater natural skill with the gender
framed as the ground and greater effort with the gender
framed as the figure.

Directional comparisons are often used to express similarity
(e.g., “North Korea is like China”). These statements,
however, frame the subject as the less typical figure and the
complement as the more typical or prominent ground. Thus,
despite expressing similarity, directional comparisons may
imply that the ground is more representative. In Study 1, we
analyze Twitter to show that directional comparisons occur in
everyday conversation about gender; that men are the ground
more often than women; and that only males frequently serve
as the ground for positive traits (e.g., “Girls are as smart as
boys”), suggesting that positive traits are considered typical
of males, but not females. In Study 2, we show that
directional comparisons intended to express equivalent ability
(e.g., “Boys are as good as girls at a game called gorp”) cause
adults to infer that the ground has more natural skill and that
the figure has to work harder.
Keywords: language, comparison, pragmatics, gender

Introduction
A group of middle school girls participating in a computer
science program was recently told, “You’re as smart as any
boy in the world.” Despite the clear intention of this
statement to express gender equivalence, research dating
back to Tversky’s (1977) seminal work on the linguistic
framing of similarity suggests that comparing one group to
another may not actually convey true equality (e.g.,
Gleitman, Gleitman, Miller, & Ostrin, 1996; Bruckmüller &
Abele, 2010; Chestnut & Markman, 2014).
Rather,
directional comparisons frame the item in the subject
position as the less typical figure and the item in the
complement position as the more typical or prominent
ground. In Tversky’s (1977) original study, for example,
adults preferred to state, “North Korea is similar to China,”
rather than, “China is similar to North Korea,” because at
the time, China was a more prominent and well-known
country, and therefore served as a better ground than North
Korea. Thus, items framed as grounds in comparisons may
be inferred to be more typical than items framed as figures,
even if the sentence expresses similarity.
Since typicality is often conflated with positive traits such
as high status and prestige (Eagly & Kite, 1987; Devos &
Banaji, 2005; Hegarty & Bruckmüller, 2013), groups or
individuals framed as grounds may also be associated with
higher status. Gleitman et al. (1996) provided evidence for
this association by showing that when presented with
sentences containing novel words such as, “The zum is

Study 1
In Study 1, we used a corpus of public tweets to measure the
relative frequencies of comparisons expressing gender

351

similarities in everyday language. Specifically, we asked
whether the phrases “women are as * as men” and “girls are
as * as boys”, in which the asterisk could be replaced with
any word, occurred more or less often than “men are as * as
women” and “boys are as * as girls”, respectively, over the
past year.
We also asked whether the valence of the words that
replace the asterisks change when females rather than males
serve as the ground (e.g., “Men are as catty as women”;
“Women are as capable as men”). If men serve as the
ground for positive traits more often than women, for
example, then this would suggest that people view positive
traits as more typical of men.

shown all 243 unique target words (i.e., the words replacing
the asterisks) from the sample of 1908 tweets. Raters
viewed one word per trial, and word order was randomized
for each rater. Raters were instructed to adjust a slider on a
scale of -100 (negative) to 100 (positive) to indicate how
negative or positive they perceived the word to be when
describing a person. Cronbach’s alpha for this task was .98,
demonstrating that there was strong agreement across raters
for each word.
In some cases, the valence of the target word in isolation
differed from the valence of the word in the context of the
sentence (e.g., “Women are as responsible as men for
violence”). In other cases, the target word was not an
adjective (e.g., “Boys are as likely as girls to be unhappy
with their bodies”). To estimate the prevalence of these
cases, two coders identified target words that had a
contextual valence mismatch or were non-adjectives in a
random sample of 200 tweets. There was 100% agreement
between the coders, who identified 3 mismatches and 2 nonadjective target words (1.5% and 1% of the sample,
respectively). Since these numbers were very low, we did
not remove these tweets from our sample.

Methods
Twitter Extraction One year (11/29/2013-11/29/2014) of
public Twitter tweets were sampled. Data were extracted by
typing a string-matching pattern into the search bar of
Twitter.com, and scrolling down to retrieve all search
results from the year of interest. The search patterns used
were “girls are as * as boys”, “boys are as * as girls”,
“women are as * as men”, and “men are as * as women”.
Each search returned public tweets posted by users, where
the asterisk matched a single word. The total number of
tweets returned was 2370. All searches were conducted on
the same day, 11/30/2014.
The html from the browser in which each search was
performed was saved. A python html parser utilizing the
package BeautifulSoup was used to extract the tweet text
and the target word matching the asterisk for each tweet. A
complete list of all tweets can be found at
http://web.stanford.edu/~gordonam/Publications_files/tweet
sSample1908.csv.

Results and Discussion
Our searches on Twitter yielded a total of 1908 gendered
comparisons over the course of one year.
We first tested for differences between the number of
comparisons framing boys or men as the ground (“girls are
as * as boys”; “women are as * as men”) and the number of
comparisons framing girls or women as the ground (“boys
are as * as girls”; “men are as * as women”), respectively.
We found that the number of comparisons framing men as
the ground (711) was significantly greater than the number
of comparisons framing women as the ground (411;
binomial sign test, p < .001). Since the ground position is
associated with higher status (e.g., Bruckmüller & Abele,
2010), this result arguably reflects the perception of men as
the higher-status gender (e.g., Eagly & Wood, 1982).
We did not find a difference between the number of
comparisons framing boys (380) and girls (406) as the
ground (binomial sign test, p = .37), suggesting that boys
are not favored over girls as the ground of gendered
comparisons the way that men are favored over women.
To determine whether comparisons framing females as
the ground and comparisons framing males as the ground
differed in valence, we compared the means of the
distributions of valence for each gender, within each age
group (women/men or girls/boys). Because these
distributions were non-normal (see Figure 1), we assessed
the confidence intervals using bootstrapping, and the pvalues with permutation testing. We found differences in
valence between comparisons framing women (M = -38.27,
SD = 26.74) and men (M = -3.12, SD = 58.98) as the ground
(p < .001), such that men served as the ground for more
positively valenced traits. In terms of frequency, women
served as the ground for 378 negative comparisons (values 100 to 0) and 33 positive comparisons (values 0 to 100),

Equivalence Rating In some cases, the search patterns
returned tweets that did not actually express gender
equivalence (e.g., “I don’t think that women are as smart as
men”). To obtain a sample of tweets in which all tweets
expressed equivalence between genders, three coders
separately coded each tweet for whether it expressed
equivalence (1) or non-equivalence (0). For this coding
process, all gendered terms (e.g., women) were removed
from the tweets and replaced with “A” (for figures) and “B”
(for grounds; e.g., “A are as smart as B”). Tweets were
coded as not expressing equivalence if the phrase was
negated (e.g., “I don’t think that A are as smart as B”), if the
phrase was hypothetical (e.g., “If A were as smart as B, the
world would be a better place”), or if the phrase did not
actually have the syntax of interest (e.g., “A are as harsh as
B are vindictive”). There was strong agreement among the
three coders (Cronbach’s α = .91). For a tweet to be
included in the final sample, all three coders had to agree
that the tweet expressed equivalence between A and B. This
resulted in a final sample of 1908 tweets.
Valence Rating Valence ratings were performed by 10
raters blind to the hypothesis of the study. Each rater was

352

while men served as the ground for 350 negative
comparisons and 361 positive comparisons. A chi-squared
test comparing the number of positive and negative
comparisons when women and men served as the ground
also showed that men served as the ground for positive traits
more often than did women, χ²(1) = 206.98, p < .001.

further suggest that boys are more naturally skilled at math
while girls have to work harder to succeed.
We were interested in the concepts of natural skill and
effort for two reasons. First, natural skill and effort are
sometimes seen as diametrically opposed. If a person has to
work hard to succeed at an activity, for example, then that
person might be viewed as lacking natural talent (e.g.,
Tiedemann, 2000; Dweck, 2007).
Groups frequently
framed as figures in comparisons, then, may be associated
strongly with effort if groups framed as grounds are
associated with natural skill. Second, high status, a feature
of the ground position, can be conflated with natural skill
(e.g., Leslie, Cimpian, Meyer, & Freeland, 2015).
We presented participants with sentences containing the
structure, “A is as good as B at X,” where A and B were two
genders (girls and boys or women and men), and X was a
novel activity (e.g., a dance called quibbing). We then
asked participants one of two questions: 1) Who do you
think has to work harder to be good at X? (Effort condition,
Study 2A), or 2) Who do you think is more naturally skilled
at X? (Skill condition, Study 2B). We compared these
conditions to Baseline conditions, in which we measured
participants’ preexisting gender biases. We predicted that
the gender serving as the figure (the subject) would be
assumed to have to work harder than it would otherwise
(Study 2A), while the gender serving as the ground (the
complement) would be inferred to have greater natural skill
than it would otherwise (Study 2B).

Study 2A

Figure 1: Histograms of valence ratings when girls, boys,
women, and men served as the ground.

We first investigated whether directional statements
intended to express equality between genders in a given
activity (e.g., “Men are as good as women at a game called
gorp”) increase the assumption, relative to baseline, that the
gender framed as the figure (men, in this case) has to work
hard to have that level of ability.

We did not find differences in valence between
comparisons framing girls (M = -44.95, SD = 29.79) and
boys (M = -44.11, SD = 53.34) as the ground (p = .81), but
as Figure 1 shows, the distributions when girls and boys
served as the ground were significantly different (D = .38, p
< .001). A chi-squared test comparing the number of
positive and negative comparisons when girls and boys
served as the ground showed that, like men, boys served as
the ground for positive comparisons more often (χ²(1) =
42.22, p < .001). While girls served as the ground for 389
negative comparisons and 17 positive comparisons, boys
served as the ground for 307 negative comparisons and 73
positive comparisons.
The difference between genders, then, is that boys and
men tended to serve as the ground for both positive and
negative traits while girls and women served as the ground
primarily for negative traits.

Methods
Participants Participants were 240 English-speaking adults
in the US ages 18 to 66 (M = 32, 116 men) who participated
on Amazon Mechanical Turk for a payment of $0.15. A
total of 160 participants participated in the Effort condition
(M = 32, 18-60, 72 men), and 80 participants participated in
the Effort Baseline condition (M = 33, 19-66, 44 men).
Materials Four sentences were used in each condition. In
the Effort condition, each sentence compared either girls’
and boys’ or women’s and men’s ability to do one of four
novel activities, taken from Cimpian and Markman (2011):
a dance called quibbing, a puzzle called zool, a sport called
leeming, and a game called gorp. The structure of all four
sentences was the same: “Gender A is as good as Gender B
at X” (e.g., “Boys are as good as girls at a dance called
quibbing”). In the Effort Baseline condition, the four
sentences simply stated that the activity existed (e.g., “There
exists a dance called quibbing”).

Study 2
In our second study, we explored a possible implication of
this asymmetry for reasoning about ability. We focused on
one particular way of expressing equivalent skill, namely:
“A is as good as B”. Consider, for example, the statement:
“Girls are as good as boys at math.” Such statements, by
implying that boys are more typically good at math, may

353

Procedure Participants participated in one of two
conditions: the Effort condition or the Effort Baseline
condition. In the Effort Baseline condition, participants
were presented with four sentences (e.g., “There exists a
dance called quibbing”), one at a time. After each sentence
was presented, participants were asked, “Who do you think
has to work harder to be good at [quibbing]?” Participants
indicated their responses by selecting one of the two
genders. While half of the participants was asked to decide
between girls and boys across all four trials, the other half
was asked to decide between women and men. The order of
the four trials was counterbalanced across participants, and
the order of the two genders that participants were asked to
choose from was counterbalanced both across and within
participants. After participating, participants received a
debriefing message explaining that in real life, both genders
are good at the same activities.
The Effort condition was identical to the Effort Baseline
condition, except that the sentences used were different, as
described above, and required further counterbalancing.
Each participant in the Effort condition was presented with
two sentences that framed either girls or women as the
figure and two sentences that framed either boys or men as
the figure. For half of the participants, girls or women were
framed as the figure for the game and the puzzle, and for the
other half of the participants, girls or women were framed as
the figure for the sport and the dance. To ensure that an
equal number of participants viewed each sentence, we
therefore included twice as many participants in the Effort
condition as in the Effort Baseline condition.

The effect of participant gender was marginal, such that,
overall, female participants (M = .55, SE = .04, n = 124)
were more likely than male participants (M = .49, SE = .05,
n = 116) to state that males had to work harder to be good at
the activity (χ²(1) = 2.80, p = .09). This suggests that a
person’s gender may influence how that person perceives
gender categories, biasing them (at least in the case of
women, whose mean differed more from chance) towards
thinking more positively of their own gender.

Statistical Analysis To assess the effect of variables of
interest on responses in Studies 2A and 2B, we ran mixed
effects logistic regression models using the lme4 package of
R (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, & Walker, 2014). To test for
the significance of effects, we performed likelihood ratio
tests. Chi-squared values, degrees of freedom, and p-values,
all from the likelihood ratio test, are reported for each
statistical test.

Participants responded to the question, “Who do you
think has to work harder to be good at [quibbing]?” by more
frequently selecting the figure, or subject, of the comparison
(χ²(2) = 74.5, p < .001). In follow-up analyses to determine
whether this effect held when both females and males
served as the figure, we tested planned contrasts between
the Effort and Effort Baseline conditions. These analyses
showed that, as predicted, when the figure was female (e.g.,
“Girls are as good as boys at a dance called quibbing”),
participants were less likely to state that males had to work
harder to be good (M = .37, SE = .03) than at baseline (M =
.50, SE = .03; χ²(1) = 12.86, p < .001). Similarly, when the
figure was male (e.g., “Boys are as good as girls at a dance
called quibbing”), participants were more likely to state that
males had to work harder to be good (M = .69, SE = .03)
than at baseline (χ²(1) = 24.56, p < .001; see Figure 2).
Directional comparisons, then, shape the way that adults
interpret a gender’s ability to do an activity. On the surface,
stating that girls are as good as boys at a game seems to
convey equality between girls and boys, but it actually
implies that girls, and not boys, have to work hard to have
that level of ability.

Figure 2: The proportion of participants choosing males
when the figure was female or male (Effort condition), or
when there was no figure (Effort Baseline condition). Error
bars represent +/- 1 SEM.

Results and Discussion
The dependent measure was the proportion of times
participants stated that men or boys needed to expend more
effort. We predicted that this number would be greater
when men or boys served as the figure of the comparison
(e.g., “Men are as good as women at a game called gorp”)
than when they served as the ground (e.g., “Women are as
good as men at a game called gorp”), or when there was no
comparison (e.g., “There exists a game called gorp”).
We fit the data using a mixed effects logistic regression
model with fixed effects of participant gender (female or
male) and figure (female, male, or none) and a random
effect of item. Including age group (boys/girls or
men/women) as a fixed effect did not improve model fit
(χ²(1) = .04, p = .84), nor did including an interaction
between age group and figure (χ²(3) = 6.04, p = .11), so we
did not model the effect of age group in further analyses.

Study 2B
In this study we investigated whether adults generate
inferences based on the ground position, as well. Using the

354

same sentences used in Study 2A (e.g., “Women are as good
as men at a dance called quibbing”), we asked whether
adults associate more raw, natural skill with the gender
framed as the ground of a comparison (here, men) than they
would typically associate with that gender.

analyses to determine whether this effect held when both
females and males served as the ground, we tested planned
contrasts between the Skill condition and the Skill Baseline
condition. These analyses showed that, as predicted, when
the ground was female (e.g., “Boys are as good as girls at a
dance called quibbing”), participants were less likely to
state that males were more naturally skilled (M = .21, SE =
.02) than at baseline (M = .48, SE = .03; χ²(1) = 49.78, p <
.001). When the ground was male (e.g., “Girls are as good
as boys at a dance called quibbing”), participants were more
likely to state that males were more naturally skilled (M =
.70, SE = .03) than at baseline (χ²(1) = 32.47, p < .001; see
Figure 3).

Methods
Participants Participants were 240 English-speaking adults
in the US ages 18 to 74 (M = 30, 147 men) who participated
on Amazon Mechanical Turk for a payment of $0.15. A
total of 160 participants participated in the Skill condition
(M = 29, 18-74, 102 men), and 80 participants participated
in the Skill Baseline condition (M = 32, 19-70, 45 men).
Materials The materials were identical to those used in
Study 2A.
Procedure The procedure was identical to study 2A, except
that questions targeted natural skill rather than effort (e.g.,
“Who do you think is more naturally skilled at quibbing?”).
Thus, participants participated in either the Skill condition or
the Skill Baseline condition.

Results and Discussion
To assess whether directional comparisons intended to
express equivalent ability further imply that the group in the
ground position has more natural skill, we now asked,
“Who do you think is more naturally skilled at [gorp]?”
The dependent measure was the proportion of times
participants stated that men or boys had more natural skill.
We predicted that this number would be greater when men
or boys served as the ground of the comparison (e.g., “Girls
are as good as boys at a game called gorp”) than when they
served as the figure (e.g., “Boys are as good as girls at a
game called gorp”), or when there was no comparison (e.g.,
“There exists a game called gorp”). We fit the data using a
mixed effects logistic regression model with fixed effects of
participant gender (female or male) and ground (female,
male, or none) and a random effect of item. Including age
group (boys/girls or men/women) as a fixed effect did not
improve model fit (χ²(1) = .49, p = .48), nor did including
an interaction between age group and ground (χ²(1) = 4.66,
p = .20), so we did not model the effect of age group in
further analyses.
The effect of participant gender was significant (χ²(2) =
9.37, p = .002). Overall, female participants (M = .41, SE =
.05, n = 93) were less likely than male participants (M = .50,
SE = .04, n = 147) to state that males were more naturally
skilled at the activity. This result, together with the
marginal effect of participant gender in Study 2A, suggests
that women may be biased towards answering questions
such as these with their own gender, or towards attributing
greater natural ability to females rather than males.
Participants responded to the question, “Who do you
think is more naturally skilled at [quibbing]?” by more
frequently selecting the ground, or complement, of the
comparison (χ²(2) = 169.34, p < .001). In follow-up

Figure 3: The proportion of participants choosing males
when the ground was female or male (Skill condition), or
when there was no ground (Skill Baseline condition). Error
bars represent +/- 1 SEM.
Just as the figure position was associated with having to
put forth more effort to succeed at an activity (Study 2A), so
the ground position was associated with greater raw talent.

General Discussion
This work explored the use of directional comparisons (e.g.,
“Women are as smart as men”) in everyday communication
(Study 1) and the subtle differences in ability that such
comparisons imply (Study 2).
In Study 1, we showed, using gender as a case study, that
directional comparisons are common ways of expressing
similarity between groups, and that the way adults frame
these comparisons is non-arbitrary. While males, especially
men, frequently served as the ground for positive traits (e.g.,
“Women are as smart as men”), females overwhelmingly
served as the ground for negative traits (e.g., “Boys are as
fake as girls”). We also found that men served as the
ground significantly more often than did women.
Our Twitter results arguably reflect current stereotypic
beliefs about gender. As Miller et al. (1991) showed, adults
explain group differences by focusing on the less typical,
“deviant” group, placing them in the subject, or figure,

355

position. When explaining gender gaps in voting, for
example, adults in their study focused on how women
differed from men, rather than the reverse, because typical
voters were seen as male. Thus, Twitter users likely framed
their comparisons according to whether they viewed the trait
as typical of females or males, placing the gender most
strongly associated with the trait in the ground position.
In addition to reflecting stereotypic beliefs about gender,
we argue that these directional comparisons may also
contribute to such beliefs. With respect to frequency, by
framing men as the ground of comparisons more often than
women, we may be strengthening the idea that men are the
typical, higher-status gender, even when the comparison
does not explicitly concern status or power. Bruckmüller,
Hegarty, & Abele (2012) provide some evidence for this by
showing that adults who read paragraphs describing how
women’s leadership styles differ from men’s were more
likely than those who read paragraphs describing how men’s
leadership styles differ from women’s to endorse the idea
that men are more powerful and agentic.
Our own results in Studies 2A and 2B more clearly show
that directional comparisons can exacerbate, in addition to
reflecting, group biases. They also provide evidence for an
inferential process that has not been investigated previously.
In these studies, we found that, after reading comparisons
intended to express equivalent ability between genders at a
novel activity (e.g., “Boys are as good as girls at a game
called gorp”), adults were more likely to state that the
gender framed as the figure (here, boys) had to work hard to
be good at the activity and that the gender framed as the
ground (here, girls) was more naturally skilled. Thus,
directional comparisons may subtly suggest that the group
framed as the ground is the group with raw talent, and that
equivalent ability between the two groups has been achieved
only because the group framed as the figure has put forth
enough effort.
Stating that girls are as good as boys at math, then, may
implicitly perpetuate gender stereotypes by strengthening
both the idea that girls have to work hard to be good at math
and the idea that boys are naturally talented mathematicians.

Bruckmüller, S., Hegarty, P., & Abele, A. (2012). Framing
gender differences: Linguistic normativity affects
perceptions of power and gender stereotypes. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 42(2), 210-218.
Chestnut, E., & Markman, M. (2014). Children’s inferences
based on figure and ground thematic roles. In P. Bello, M.
Guarini, M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B. Scassellati
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 325-330). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. M. (2011). The
generic/nongeneric distinction influences how children
interpret new information about social others. Child
Development, 82(2), 471-492.
Cook, P., Han, B., & Baldwin, T. (2014). Statistical
methods for identifying local dialectal terms from GPStagged documents. Dictionary: Journal of the Dictionary
Society of North America, 1(35), 248-271.
Devos, T., & Banaji, M. R. (2005). American = White?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88(3), 447466.
Doyle, G. (2014). Mapping dialectal variation by querying
social media. Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (pp. 98-106). Gothenburg, Sweden:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dweck, C. S. (2007). The secret to raising smart kids.
Scientific American Mind, 18, 36-43.
Eagly, A. H., & Wood, W. (1982). Inferred sex differences
in status as a determinant of gender stereotypes about
social influence. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 43, 915-928.
Eagly, A. H., & Kite, M. E. (1987). Are stereotypes of
nationalities applied to both women and men? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 451-462.
Eisenstein, J. (in press). Identifying regional dialects in
online social media. In C. Boberg, J. Nerbonne, & D.
Watt (Eds.), Handbook of Dialectology. Wiley-Blackwell
Press.
Gleitman, L., Gleitman, H., Miller, C., & Ostrin, R. (1996).
Similar, and similar concepts, Cognition, 58(3), 321-376.
Hegarty, P., & Bruckmüller, S. (2013). Asymmetric
explanations of group differences: Experimental evidence
for Foucault’s disciplinary power. Social and Personality
Psychology Compass, 7(3), 176-186.
Leslie, S.-J., Cimpian, A., Meyer, M., & Freeland, E.
(2015). Expectations of brilliance underlie gender
distributions across academic disciplines. Science,
347(6219), 262-265.
Miller, D. T., Taylor, B., & Buck, M. L. (1991). Gender
gaps: Who needs to be explained? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 61(1), 5-12.
Tiedemann, J. (2000). Gender-related beliefs of teachers in
elementary school mathematics. Educational studies in
mathematics, 41, 191-207.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84(4), 327-352.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Co A. Tran, Sarina M. Soriano-Taylor,
and Alan M. Gordon for their help coding and analyzing
data from Twitter.

References
About Twitter, Inc. (2015). Retrieved February 1, 2015,
from https://about.twitter.com/company
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2014).
lme4: Linear mixed models using Eigen and S4. R
package 1.1-7, http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lme4.
Bruckmüller, S., & Abele, A. (2010). Comparison focus in
intergroup comparisons: Who we compare to whom
influences who we see as powerful and agentic.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36(10), 14241435.

356

