Stepping up to the Blackboard: Distributed Cognition in Doctor-Patient
Interactions
Katherine D. Lippa (lippa2@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy
Dayton, OH 45435 USA

Valerie L. Shalin (valerie.shalin@wright.edu)
Ohio Center of Excellence in Knowledge-enabled Computing (Kno.e.sis)
Department of Psychology, 3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy
Dayton, OH 45435 USA

identification of problems and solutions. In doing so, we
address the mischaracterization of expertise as the
composite of individual capability, the origins of problems
and the multiple perspectives that shape acceptable
interventions.

Abstract
The discourse of laymen and professionals reveals the
dependence of cognition on the interaction between
participants, and the limitations of studying expertise by
examining isolated individual behavior. This paper examines
distributed cognition in the management of Multiple Sclerosis
(MS). By varying the level of patient experience with the
management of MS, we demonstrate the dependence of
physician cognition on the patient’s contribution in four
doctor-patient interactions. Experienced patients actively
constructed clinical representations and presented initial
evaluations for the doctor to refine and validate.
Conversations between newly diagnosed patients and doctors
demonstrated the physician work to establish a common
understanding of the problem and acceptable interventions.
Our analysis focuses on the complementary participant roles,
and challenges the notion that medical cognition equals
physician cognition.

Conventional View of Medical Reasoning

Keywords: distributed cognition; medical cognition; doctorpatient interaction; expertise; problem solving

Introduction
The study of distributed cognition concerns how thought
processes are distributed across individuals and groups,
humans and technical artefacts and space and time. Most
studies of distributed cognition have been concerned either
with technical systems (Patel, Arocha, Kushniruk, 2002) or
the interactions among professionals (Hutchins, 1995). But
not all complex distributed cognition occurs solely between
trained professionals. Many domains (e.g. medicine,
financial services, real estate) involve professionals with
extensive knowledge and experience who are engaged with
laymen in a joint cognitive task.
This study examines professionals and laymen engaged in
one such task, namely doctors and patients engaged in
managing Multiple Sclerosis (MS). We conceptualize
medical cognition in terms of a doctor-patient dyad that
jointly identifies the problematic and determines the design
and acceptance of an intervention. We illustrate mutual
dependence by contrasting the coordination between the
physician and “expert” laymen with the extended effort
required of both the physician and “novice” laymen in the

Psychology has focused on physician cognition, particularly
on how doctors employ isolated psychological processes,
like reasoning and decision making (Elstein & Schwarz,
2002). This research has identified the cognitive strategies
doctors use in diagnostic reasoning including the use of
hypothesis testing, pattern matching and comparisons
(Coskerry, 2002).
Experimental studies typical present participants with a
standardized problem. This approach omits a potentially
important part of medical cognition, identifying the problem
to be solved and detecting and redirecting problems outside
one’s legitimate expertise. Shalin and Bertram (1996)
further noted the absence of attention to the cognition of
treatment selection, other than the problem of biases in the
conceptualization of risk. In our view, neither problem
identification nor treatment selection can be done without
the patient, who bears primary responsibility for presenting
a complaint and provides an idiosyncratic profile of values,
context and co-morbidities to influence treatment selection.
Observationally oriented studies of medical expertise
identify a normative ontology including culturally endorsed
values that define acceptable problems (Shalin & Bertram,
1996). Participants acquire a common technical language
that facilitates distributed cognition in a professional setting
(Sheehan, Robertson, & Ormond, 2007). Observational
study also identifies standard solution methods that render
distributed work predictable (Lippa and Feufel, 2009;
Shalin, Geddes, et al., 1997). However, patients fall outside
of this professional culture and are not accounted for as
cognitive agents in this research.

Conventional View of Patient Role
Research on patients has largely focused on socio-emotional
coping (Leventhal & Diefenbach, 1991), use of health

1380

information (Galarce, Ramanadhan, & Viswanath, 2011) or
cross-cultural definitions of illness (Good, 1990). At least in
chronic illnesses, patients also develop expertise concerning
their own illness and how it manifests in their bodies
(Lippa, Klein, and Shalin, 2008).
Research on doctor-patient interaction addresses the
structure of the clinical encounter (Roter & Hall, 2006) and
the social (and especially power) dynamics during a clinical
session (Ainsworth-Vaughn, 2003; Mishler, 1984). Many of
these studies portray doctor and patient conflict, with the
patient attempting to speak through a holistic ‘voice of the
life world’ while the doctor uses a ‘voice of medicine’ and
in so doing exerts power over the patient. However,
demonstrating a role for the patient in identifying the
problem and evaluating solutions would imply that patients
have more power than the conventional view suggests.
Because the physician requires patient compliance in the
out-patient setting, we show below that physician effort
must complement a patient’s ability to participate, thereby
supporting the claim that the patient is mutually determining
the nature of the exchange.
In this study, we directly address the interaction between
doctors and patients on a cognitive level. We suggest that
this dyad constitutes the central portion of a distributed
cognitive system. While some researchers have begun to
examine distributed cognition in medicine (Pimmer,
Pachler, & Genewein, 2013), such studies have examined
professional interactions (Cole & Engeström, 1993).
Cognition involving professionals and laymen differs from
professional team cognition in several ways. Of course,
professionals and laymen have different ontological
conceptions of the domain and the problematic within it.
They have different lexicons, with different words for the
same idea, while words in common may correspond to
different ideas, e.g., “black-out.” Professionals and laymen
typically have access to different contextual elements. For
example, only professionals can provide biomedical
knowledge and test results while only laymen can provide
personal, situated information. These differences between
physician and laymen result in a lack of common ground
(Clark, 1996). Effective distributed cognition depends on
interaction that mediates between the disparate positions of
the participant much as a blackboard system allows
otherwise incompatible computer systems to carryout
interdependent tasks.
Clinical reasoning results not solely from the mental
processes of doctor or patient but rather emerges from the
interaction between the two (Steffensen, 2013). Participants
coordinate their cognition through language, using wording
to draw on shared cultural constructs and develop a mutual
parsing of the environment (Cowley, 2011). We suggest that
how this occurs will both vary in accord with the patient’s
illness expertise. In order to explore this process, we analyze
segments of dialogue from clinical encounters concerned
with MS management (Cicourel, 2006).

Methods
Data was collected at a university-based clinic specializing in

MS attached to a larger neurology clinic. Twenty-four
patients and three medical practitioners participated in the
study. To highlight the role of patient expertise in
determining the interaction the specific examples in this
paper come from four patients interacting with a single
physician. The data included were selected to be
representative of distributed cognition during several
different types of interaction that were common in the larger
data set. While in the waiting room, patients were asked to
participate in the study. Audio recordings and field notes
documented the patient-physician. After observation each
participant was interviewed over the telephone.
All the audio recordings of both clinical sessions and
interviews were transcribed using a literary transcription
method (Kowal & O’Connell, 2004). Transcripts were first
analyzed using ‘unmotivated looking’ (Sacks, 1984) to see
what cognitive processes seemed to be functioning in the
clinical encounters. Through this process it became clear
that there was considerable variability in how diagnostic and
treatment decisions were made and especially in the
distribution of cognitive processes between doctors and
patients during these encounters. However there were
commonalities across sessions in the tasks that the
participants were working towards. Two of the most
common tasks were evaluating symptoms and assessing
disease altering medications (in terms of efficacy and side
effects). Accordingly, we used cognitive task analysis to
identify the component processes involved in carrying out
these tasks. Following Bangerter and Clark’s (2003) work
indicating that discourse between partners engaged in a
shared task is divided into tasks and subtasks that can be
managed through conversation, several segments were then
selected for more detailed analysis focusing on how the
process identified in the cognitive task analyses were carried
out in the interactions between doctors and patients. Two
segments were chosen focusing on understanding symptoms
and two were chosen looking at treatment issues. For each
pair one segment was taken from an ‘expert’ patient, who
had been actively managing MS for years, and one was
taken from a ‘novice’ patient who was newly diagnosed.

Results
Evaluating Symptoms
Analysis focused on portions of the clinical sessions dealing
with the evaluation of symptoms identified a common
process for this task. The first the symptom was identified.
Then, the doctor and patient worked together to create a
common representation of the symptom. Typically this
involved a qualitative description of the symptom,
identification of the relevant context, and definition of the
time course of the symptom (i.e. onset & duration), though
occasionally only 2 of these 3 elements were included. The

1381

doctor and patient then decided on a diagnosis and came to
a conclusion about what relationship, if any, the symptom
had to MS. While the process for evaluating symptoms was
highly consistent on the surface, closer analysis showed
variability in how it was enacted particularly in the
distribution of cognitive processes between the doctor and
patient. Table 1 illustrates the multi-step task of evaluating
symptoms for expert and novice patients.

comprehensible language to ground the exchange. With the
expert patient, the doctor uses the term ‘symptom,’
suggesting this patient can distinguish medically relevant
symptoms from other forms of discomfort. For the novice
patient, the doctor uses the broader term ‘complaints’ to
elicit the patient’s symptoms. This allows a wide variety of
issues to be raised; the physician can then distinguish which
issues constitute problems in this context.

Table 1: Evaluating Symptoms1
Process
Symptom
introduction

Expert Patient
D: Any new symptoms since I’ve seen you?
P: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Monday,

Symptom
representation

I was up here on Monday. Well when I had my
cardiac. Well, uh uh I was walking a little bit in
down town Cincinnati to a lunch meeting and uh
… my left leg started to tingle really bad and that
that usually is… is a uh they it’s been called…
they call it I want to say false flare up but that,
that’s not correct but…

Diagnosis

D: Pseudo relapse is what we call that.
P: Or it could be a relapse. This is usually a sign.
But as I relaxed you know I stopped what I was
doing I went and I lay down didn’t do anything it
has seemingly dissipated. I believe it was just the
amount of walking I was doing.
D: Ok how long did it last in total?
P: Probably about 4 hours, 5 hours
D: So we wouldn’t classify it as an attack,
because it lasted such a short time. It would
P: [right]
D:[last more than that. It’s good enough?
P: Yeah, it it feels normal for me since I’ve had
MS.

Evaluation of
significance
for MS

Symptom Introduction Both discussions begin with a
move to identify a problem and establish it as a focus of
attention. This process entails the establishment of mutually
1

Italics indicate words that are significant for the analysis.

Novice Patient
D: Any other complaints?
P: My headaches. That’s the only thing. I get
headaches all the time.
D: Are you on any medications for the headache?
P: Just ibuprofen that’s the only thing I take.
D: How often do you get them?
P: Not every day, every other day. A lot of times its
mild and it’s not too bad. Like, I have
D:[uh, huh]
P: [one right now. But it’s…
D: How does it hurt? The top of your head?
P:It hurts like right here right through my {temples},
but I get these weird, weird pains like in the back of
my head.
D:[huh]
P: [And then I have to just literally just stop for a
second because it’s a pressure like something’s
squeezing the back of my head at times and it just
makes my whole head throb. I don’t know what is.
D: Yeah it sounds like migraines. Do you feel that
you’re sensitive to light and loud noises?
P: Not too much. Maybe like…
D: [when they get worse
P: Yeah whenever I if I have the headache and I go
outside in bright light yeah it makes it a little worse
but it doesn’t cause my headaches.
D: Yeah, right, right but they do get worse.
P: Yeah.

P: Are the headaches related? To the MS?
D: I don’t think so. There are indications that there’s
migraines in patients, in people with MS. But in
general there is, migraines are so common.

Symptom Representation The expert patient’s detailed
initial representation includes both a qualitative description
and relevant context. He also suggests a partial solution to
the diagnostic problem, reaching for a medical term to use
as coordinating language. His introduction of this term with
‘they call it,’ implies that he does not think of his symptoms

1382

using these terms. In so doing, he conforms to one of the
social control components operating in the clinical setting,
that medical personnel have privileged access to technical
terms. “That’s not correct” prompts the doctor’s turn, to
validate or refute his symptom representation.
By contrast, the contribution of the novice patient is
piecemeal. At the beginning, it is still not clear if her
‘complaint’ is even a medically relevant ‘symptom.’ But she
asserts that the frequency of her headaches makes them
medically relevant. The physician follows up on this
implication by checking if they are already being treated,
i.e., the responsibility of another medical professional. The
doctor asks the patient questions, prompting her elaboration.
The patient here has the essential subjective experience
(episodic knowledge) but lacks the abstract (semantic)
knowledge to understand what aspects of her experiences
are clinically relevant, while the doctor has the necessary
semantic knowledge but is dependent on the patient to
provide specifics for her episode. The interplay between
them comprises an effort to create a shared understanding of
the symptom to support diagnosis. The patient concludes by
saying she doesn’t ‘know what it is’ with the implicit
question “do you?” prompting the doctor’s turn.
Diagnosis After the doctor provides the expert patient with
the relevant term, the patient chooses a related term to
provide an alternative hypothesis . He then revisits his initial
diagnosis, by saying it matches a pattern that is typical for
him (it’s ‘usually a sign’), and that it ended quickly. He
completes his turn asserting his belief in his last explanation
(walking a lot). This assertion provides an opportunity for
the doctor to either validate or object to the patient’s selfassessment. The doctor questions the time course of the
incident; this is critical for the definition of an MS attack,
and validates the patient’s self-assessment. The patient
presents the symptom and provides the initial analysis, but
together they decide on an account that renders the symptom
non-problematic. Had the patient not considered the
symptom potentially problematic, he would have provided a
diagnosis by omission. Once the symptom is raised,
judgment cannot have the status of a diagnosis without the
doctor’s contribution.
The diagnostic phase with the novice patient illustrates a
disparity between doctor and patient. In diagnosing the
patient as having ‘migraines,’ the doctor is introducing a
medical term. But the patient lacks the knowledge to
associate this term with her subjective symptoms. The
doctor and patient must work together to test the migraine
theory. During this testing process the patient has to infer
the clinical characteristics of a migraine from the doctor’s
questions and try to match them with her experiences. As
the doctor’s questions become more leading, the patient’s
answers flag caution, using limiting language like ‘not too
much’ and a ‘little worse,’ and making sure the doctor
doesn’t over interpret her responses by asserting that light
‘doesn’t cause’ the headaches. While the patient lacks the

semantic knowledge to provide a diagnosis, she is keenly
aware of her influence on the process.
Evaluation of Significance The evaluation of significance
is not a question of simple medical significance, but
significance as a problem for this specialist to address. The
evaluation process follows the same general pattern seen
throughout the interactions. The expert patient provides his
own assessment. But the novice lacks the knowledge to
understand the significance of her symptoms and poses the
question to the doctor. The doctor already has dismissed the
headaches as unrelated. But the patient has not agreed and
must ask a question to reach a final resolution. Far from
being inert, the novice patient raises concerns and influences
turn taking while the doctor provides a medical overlay.
In both dialogues, the doctor’s reasoning was constrained
by elements the patient chose to represent in the
conversation while the patients’ reasoning was chiefly
constrained by their understanding of MS. The variance
between expert and novice interactions was seen in the
sophistication of the language used and patterns of turn
taking. The expert dialogue used sophisticated language and
a pattern of patient presentation of symptoms and proposed
diagnosis followed by a doctor response. Whereas the
novice dialogue had basic vocabulary and required many
more question-answer sequences to insure availability of
relevant information and accuracy of the diagnosis.

Evaluating Treatments
Many clinical sessions included discussions focused on
evaluating the efficacy and/or side effects of particular
treatments, either currently being used or being considered.
These assessments involve multiple criteria including: side
effects, clinical outcomes, MRI outcomes, and pragmatic
considerations. Though all of these criteria were used
multiple times most assessments only evaluated two or three
criteria. Each party was responsible for a subset of the
evaluation criteria. The patient was the only one to have
subjective knowledge about the acceptability of symptoms
and side effects, while the physician was the only one who
could assess efficacy with respect to MRI outcomes. The
clinical outcomes can be evaluated by both participants. A
multi-attribute evaluation required input from both
perspectives and interaction concerning multiple issues.
Table 2 includes dialogue from two patients who have
recently begun new treatments. In both discussions, the
doctor initiates the evaluation by asking a question. The
expert patient, who has had MS for several years and been
treated unsuccessfully with a number of medications,
immediately responds in a medically relevant fashion. She
begins with her own assessment of the medication’s side
effects using language that is medically oriented (e.g.
‘muscle tightness,’ ‘joint pain’), but not explicitly technical.
She includes information about her subjective experiences
and the opinion of the nurse to support her conclusions. The
doctor responds directly to the patient’s contributions and

1383

Table 2: Evaluating Treatment
Expert Patient
D: So, tell me how it is.
P: It’s good, it’s very good. I had the first. Um, the first two
were no side effects. The third one I had some muscle like
tightness like sore in my wrists, kind of like joint pain. And
D: [uh, uh]
P: [then after that dose the one time and I had read that that
was a side effect and I talked
D: [um, hum]
P: [to the person that infuses it and they had said also you
know that it was. And I didn’t
D:[oh, ok]
P: [have any side effects then this last time.
D: So just one time.
P: Just the joint pain but that was it.
D: So a little bit of muscle tightness in the area but that was it.
P: Yeah, yeah but I mean physically I feel so much better.
D: Do you?…
P: Yeah, I’m like back to normal. I mean even the numbness
is not what it was. I mean I have a little in my toes but like
what you can live with you know.
D: Oh, hahaha. Me too. How was walking? I see much better.
P: Great. I mean it’s, we adopted our little girl and we were in
Guatemala.
D: No way, no way, no way.
P: I mean that’s what I mean I was down there we were in the
airports and holding the baby. It was fine, I just made it. I
wasn’t tired. …
Husband: Have you heard anything, like from other patients,
that Tysabri a good alternative.
D: The majority of patients they have very good results. They
do get better. That’s what I always heard. That’s what I
always heard. And usually good candidates are people who
don’t respond well to the other treatments. Who get enhancing
lesions on the MRI who still have active disease, who still
have inflammatory disease.
show acceptance of her evaluation. The patient then focuses
on the benefits from the treatment, providing both abstract
assessments and specific instances where the improvement
was especially evident. The doctor supports her in this
process including her own assessment of the patient’s
improved gait. Much of the active assessment is done by the
patient, although she relies on the doctor to add validity to
her judgments. The husband prompts further validation by
asking how the patient’s experiences compare to others. The
doctor provides final validation by relating her professional
experience and providing a physiological explanation.
By contrast, the dialogue with the novice patient
illustrates an initial struggle to establish common ground.
While the doctor intends to elicit an assessment of the
treatment in medical terms, the patient interprets the
question more broadly describing her emotional response.
The doctor restates her question more specifically. The
patient responds and then the doctor revisits the pragmatic
issue the patient raised. Thus we have a physician led
discussion of side effects and a patient led discussion of the
emotional impact and pragmatics of the medication.

Criteria Assessed
Side effects
Pragmatics

Side effects

Pragmatics

Novice Patient
D: How are you doing on Copaxone?
P: First I didn’t want to do the shot
cause {I} wasn’t too fond of needles. I
was afraid of them, because I had a
bad experience with needles.
Dr: Oh.
P: I got used to it.
Dr: You’re not getting any injection
site reactions?
P: It turns red and there’s a little lump
sometimes.
Dr: And they’re frequent to like every
day you have to do that {injection}.
…

Symptom
Reduction

MRI results
MRI results

Dr: There is a lesion that is here. So
we repeat the MRI if there is still
anything new after enhancement then
what we will have to do is switch the
medication.

Eventually the doctor returns to an assessment by reviewing
MR images. The patient does not participate at all in
discussion of this factor. The patient is absorbed with her
subjective experience, which is not a category of concern to
the doctor. And, the doctor shifts to MRI interpretation, for
which the patient has neither language nor knowledge.
The contrast between expert and novice discussions is
striking. The expert patient both defines the problem space
and provides the basic evaluation. But, the doctor provides
the validation and extension that transforms the patient’s
personal assessment into a verified medical outcome. By
contrast, the novice patient and physician evaluate the
medication on three dimensions. Each dimension is assessed
by one participant with minimal contributions from the
other. There are no co-constructed conclusions.

Conclusions
In this study, we have examined the interactions between
doctors and patients with Multiple Sclerosis. We revealed

1384

the role of language, available to the expert patient and
constructed for the novice patient. While expert patients had
a sense of relevance, novice patients did not, placing a
demand on the physician to elicit a relevant contribution.
With expert patients, the doctor’s role was to understand the
patients’ reasoning, check and validate the patients’
conclusions, and extend the conclusions by relating them to
broader medical constructs. With novices, the doctor’s
reasoning was constrained by what the patient contributed to
the dialogue and the patient’s acceptance of hypotheses.
This suggests that over the course of multiple clinical
interactions patients become attune to the cognitive
processes involved in MS management and oriented
associated language and values increasing the efficiency of
distributed clinical cognition.
Our point is not that all expert patients behave in one way,
while all novice patients behave in another. But that the
patient’s level of expertise shapes the physician’s behavior,
because she cannot independently identify and solve
problems. The patient’s power lies in directing a portion of
the interaction concerning experience that only she can
provide and determining the structure of the physician’s
work. Medical cognition, especially in chronic illness,
cannot be fully understood without considering the patients’
contributions and the role of patient-physician interactions.
More generally, distributed cognition among participants
with different perspectives cannot be fully understood
without an account of the processes for identifying the
problematic and creating a shared space for the mutual
design and acceptance of solutions. Future research is
needed to address the interplay of participants’ access to
knowledge and environmental elements, language,
interaction, and distributed cognition.

References
Ainsworth-Vaughn, N. (2003). The discourse of medical
encounters. The handbook of discourse analysis, 18, 453.
Cicourel, A. V. (2006). The interaction of discourse,
cognition and culture. Discourse studies, 8(1), 25-29.
Bangerter, A., & Clark, H. H. (2003). Navigating joint
projects with dialogue. Cognitive Science, 27(2), 195225.Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language (Vol. 1996, p.
92). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M., & Engeström, Y. (1993). A cultural historic
approach to distributed cognition. Distributed cognitions,
1-46.
Cowley, S.J. (2011). Taking a language stance. Ecological
Psychology, 23, 1-25
Croskerry, P. (2002). Achieving quality in clinical decision
making: cognitive strategies and detection of
bias. Academic Emergency Medicine, 9(11), 1184-1204.
Elstein, A.S. & Schwarz, A. (2002). Evidence base of
clinical diagnosis: Clinical problem solving and
diagnostic decision making: selective review of cognitive
literature. British Medical Journal, 324, 729-732.

Feufel, M. A., Lippa, K. D., & Klein, H. A. (2009). Calling
911: emergency medical services in need of human
factors. Ergonomics in Design: The Quarterly of Human
Factors Applications, 17(2), 15-19.
Galarce, E. M., Ramanadhan, S., & Viswanath, K. (2011).
Health information seeking. The Routledge handbook of
health communication, 167-180.
Good, B.J. (1994). Medicine, rationality, and experience:
An anthropological perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.
Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288
.Kowal, S. & O’Connell, D. C. (2004). The transcription of
conversations. In Flick, U., von Kardorff, E., & Steinke, I.
(Eds.) A Companion to Qualitative Research. (pp. 248252) London: Sage.
Leventhal, H., & Diefenbach, M. (1991). The active side of
illness cognition. In Mental representation in health and
illness (pp. 247-272). Springer US.
Lippa, K. D., Klein, H. A., & Shalin, V. L. (2008).
Everyday expertise: Cognitive demands in diabetes selfmanagement. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 50(1), 112-120.
Mishler, E. G. (1984). The discourse of medicine: Dialectics
of medical interviews (Vol. 3). New Jersey: Norwood.
Patel, V.L., Arocha, J.F., & Kushniruk, A.W. (2002).
Patients’ and physicians’ understanding of health and
biomedical concepts: Relationship to the design of EMR
systems. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 35, 8-15.
Pimmer, C., Pachler, N., & Genewein, U. (2013).
Reframing clinical workplace learning using the theory of
distributed cognition. Academic Medicine, 88(9), 12391245.
Roter, D.L. & Hall, J.A. (2006). Doctors talking with
patients / patients talking with doctors. Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Sacks, H. (1984). Notes on methodology. Structures of
social action: Studies in conversation analysis, 21-27.
Shalin, V. L., & Bertram, D. A. (1996). Functions of
expertise in a medical intensive care unit. Journal of
Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence,8 (3-4),
209-227.
Sha1inV. L., Geddes, N. D. Bertram, D., Szczepkowski,M.
A., & DuBois, D. (1997). Expertise in dynamic physical
task domains. In P. Feltovich, K. Ford, & R. Hoffman
(Eds.), Expertise in context: Human and machine (pp.
194-217). Cambridge, MA: MlT Press.
Sheehan, D., Robertson, L., & Ormond, T. (2007).
Comparison of language used and patterns of
communication in interprofessional and multidisciplinary
teams. Journal of Interprofessional Care, 21(1), 17-30.
Steffensen, S. V. (2013). Human interactivity: problemsolving, solution-probing and verbal patterns in the wild.
In Cognition Beyond the Brain (pp. 195-221). London:
Springer.

1385

