Structured priors in visual working memory revealed through iterated learning
Timothy F. Lew (tflew@ucsd.edu) and Edward Vul (evul@ucsd.edu)
University of California, San Diego
Department of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
What hierarchical structures do people use to encode visual
displays? We examined visual working memory’s priors for
locations by asking participants to recall the locations of
objects in an iterated learning task. We designed a nonparametric clustering algorithm that infers the clustering
structure of objects and encodes individual items within this
structure. Over many iterations, participants recalled objects
with more similar displacement errors, especially for objects
our clustering algorithm grouped together, suggesting that
subjects grouped objects in memory. Additionally,
participants increasingly remembered objects as lines with
similar orientations and lengths, consistent with the Gestalt
grouping principles of continuity and similarity. Furthermore,
the increasing tendency of participants to remember objects as
components of hierarchically organized lines rather than
individual objects or clusters suggests that these priors aid the
perception of higher-level structures from ensemble statistics.
Keywords: Visual working memory; Markov chain Monte
Carlo with people; non-parametric Dirichlet process

Introduction
Visual working memory stores object features (e.g.
locations) according to their statistical structure (Alvarez &
Oliva, 2009). If I see a crowd, for instance, I might organize
them into groups and remember the locations of both the
individuals and their higher-order groups. Although any
stimulus has its own ensemble statistics, people also have
expectations from the real world about how objects are
organized. Here, we try to characterize Gestalt priors about
the spatial arrangement of objects in an iterative visual
working memory paradigm.
Visual working memory can use statistical structure to
compensate for uncertainty about individual objects (Brady
& Alvarez, 2011; Brady & Tenenbaum, 2013). Although
relying on objects’ statistical structure biases memories of
those objects, it can improve the overall fidelity of recall.
Furthermore, encoding objects according to their statistical
structure constrains the possible properties of those objects,
allowing observers to remember the objects’ exact features
more precisely (Sims, Jacobs & Knill, 2012; Orhan, et al.,
2014). For example, inferring that a set of objects generally
fall on a horizontal line constrains their y-coordinates. This
allows the observer to focus on encoding their x-coordinates
with greater precision.
The effectiveness of an encoding scheme depends on how
well it matches the statistics of a stimulus (Orhan & Jacobs,
2014a). Consequently, when people’s priors about statistical
structures fail to match what they observe, the fidelity of
visual working memory will suffer. Orhan & Jacobs

(2014b), for example, found that in typical studies of
capacity, priors that stimuli are similar or form continuous
lines conflict with stimuli that have uniformly distributed
features. This mismatch can detrimentally bias memory and
potentially explain a significant portion of performance
limitations. In short: how people use the structure of
displays to help encode visual information depends on what
priors they have about the structure of objects in displays.
In the current study, we examined people’s visual
working memory priors using a “Markov chain Monte Carlo
with people” task (Sanborn & Griffiths, 2007). In our task,
one participant studies the positions of many dots on a
screen, then reports those positions, and then the next
participant studies the previous participant’s responses, and
so on. A long sequence of individuals encoding and
reproducing the responses of previous participants yields a
Markov chain that will emphasize the priors that people use
to encode object locations. Kempe, Gauvrit & Forsythe
(2015) previously used such an iterated learning task to
examine visual working memory for binary grids and
compared the complexity of transmitted information
between children and adults. Their study, however,
remained agnostic as to the actual structures that made up
complex displays. A simpler display, for instance, could
have reflected elements organized into less dispersed
clusters, or more linear arrangements. Consequently, this
study could not characterize the display structure priors that
participants bring to bear to encode displays.
We used a non-parametric clustering algorithm (a
Dirichlet process mixture model; Ferguson, 1983; Orhan &
Jacobs, 2013; Austerweil, 2014) to predict what kinds of
groupings subjects would infer from the displays.
Participants used the groupings predicted by the clustering
algorithm and grew more likely to group objects together
over time. Our clustering model revealed that participants
increasingly organized the objects into straight lines and in
turn remembered the orientations and lengths of those lines
using their ensemble statistics. These results suggest that
people possess priors that objects are arranged linearly and
those lines possess similar features. In this way, our study
allowed us to recover the Gestalt grouping principles of
continuity and similarity.

Experiment
Participants studied and then recalled the locations of spots
on a computer. Critically, we showed the locations one
subject reported as the stimulus to the next subject, thus
producing an “iterated learning” chain. Based on the logic
of “Markov chain Monte Carlo with people” (Sanborn &

1332

A

B

C

D

Chain

Figure 1: Example trial. (A) Participants saw 15 grey circles for 10 seconds followed by (B) a 1 second mask. (C) Participants then recalled
the locations of all the circles and were told how many circles they had to recall. Participants could move around the circles until they were
satisfied. (D) Participants then saw the correct object locations (grey) and their guesses (red) and the mapping between the targets and their
guesses (black lines). Their score out of 100 was shown on the bottom.

Seed

1

5

10

15

20

Iteration

Figure 2. Three example chains (rows) for the seed display, 1st, 5th, 10th, 15th, and 20th iterations (columns). Grey lines separate the seed
displays from the iterated trials. Circles are black in this figure for clarity (participants actually saw grey circles as in Figure 1A). Despite
objects being initially uniformly distributed in the displays, participants gradually organized them into complex structures.

Griffiths, 2007), such a process will tend to converge to the
prior, in our case yielding samples of the sorts of location
structure people expect in images.

Methods
We generated 10 initial seed displays, each containing 15
circles with uniformly distributed locations. For each seed
display, we ran 10 iterated learning chains for 20 iterations
each. We allowed participants from the Amazon Mechanical
Turk Marketplace (who performed our study for payment
and a performance-based bonus) to repeat the experiment
for different seed displays, resulting in a total of 1581
unique subjects yielding 2000 experimental runs.

In each trial, participants observed the locations of 15
circles for 10 seconds (Figure 1A), followed by a 1 second
mask (Figure 1B). Participants then recalled the locations of
the circles by clicking the mouse (Figure 1C). Participants
had unlimited time to recall the locations of the circles and
could move them (by dragging) as much as they wanted.
Once participants indicated that they were done reporting
the locations (by pressing enter), we gave them feedback by
showing the correct and recalled locations along with lines
indicating how far off they were (Figure 1D). We
determined the mapping between guesses and targets using
a greedy search that minimized root mean square error
(RMSE). Participants also received a score between 0 and
100 based on the average distance between guesses and

1333

targets normalized by the standard deviation of object
locations. Participants were instructed that their final bonus
would reflect their scores.
In each experimental run, a participant first performed a
randomly generated practice trial to familiarize themselves
with the task. The second trial was our main test in which
they saw locations from the iterated learning chain (either
the seed display for the first iteration, or the locations
reported by the previous participant in the chain). In the
third trial, participants observed the seed display, giving a
measure of baseline performance (so subjects who were
exposed to the first iteration of a chain would see the same
display twice). The fourth trial was a randomly generated
performance check: if their score was below criterion on this
test, their responses were not included in the iterated
learning chain to prevent a single inattentive subject from
ruining an entire chain. Figure 2 shows several example
chains from our study (movies of all the seeds and chains
are located on our website at www.evullab.org/dots.php).

Non-parametric Dirichlet clustering algorithm

Did participants group objects?
If participants grouped objects together per our clustering
algorithm, then objects in the same group should have
correlated errors (i.e. would tend to be misreported in the
same direction). We matched participants’ responses to
objects’ correct locations using the Hungarian algorithm
(Kuhn, 1955) to minimize total root mean square error, thus
finding the translational error xi for each object i. For each
pair of objects, we define the similarity of their
displacement errors (q) as:
𝒒!" =

𝒙! 𝒙! !   
𝒙!

𝒙𝒋

    

Where xi and xj are vectors containing the translational
errors of the reported locations. This error-similarity metric
will be q=1 if the recalled locations of two objects were
shifted in the exact same direction, and q=-1 if they were
shifted in the exact opposite direction. If participants
recalled objects independently, then the expected value of q
would be 0.
The error similarity of objects that our clustering
algorithm grouped together was significantly greater than
the similarity of objects in different groups (t(9)=13.71,
p<.001), indicating that the clustering model predicted the
structure of errors in participants’ responses, and therefore
the display structure that participants inferred.

What priors did participants converge towards?
Figure 3: Example of the Dirichlet clustering algorithm’s inferred
grouping for a single trial. The clustering algorithm estimates the
assignment of objects to groups (objects color-coded by group
membership) and the parameters of the group structure: either a
Gaussian cluster (represented by a covariance ellipse) or a line.

We designed a Dirichlet-process clustering algorithm
similar to Orhan & Jacobs (2013) to estimate the grouping
structure that subjects might infer. Critically, this grouping
model allows the number of groups to vary and each group
to be either a Gaussian cluster with a mean location and a
spatial covariance matrix or a line segment with a particular
location, length, and orientation (Figure 3). To minimize
false positive identifications of lines, we set the standard
deviation of objects around lines to be very small (ensuring
that lines were thin) and required that lines contain at least
four objects (to ignore coincidentally collinear objects). We
held the two free parameters constant throughout all
analyses (concentration=.25 – a prior on the number of
groups; and line noise=2.5 pixels – the standard deviation of
reported locations around a line. For reference, each circle
had a radius of 10 pixels). We used a Gibbs sampler
(Geman & Geman, 1984) to fit the model to each trial. In
our analyses, unless otherwise stated, we use the maximum
likelihood (MLE) groupings.

Results

In an iterated learning chain, participants’ responses should
converge towards their priors (Sanborn & Griffiths, 2007).
Therefore we can assess the structured priors that people use
by estimating the properties of the structures to which
participants’ reported locations converge over the iterated
learning chain.

Figure 4: Translational error correlation. The continuous lines
indicate error correlations over iterations. The points (Mean)
indicate the error correlations averaged over iterations. Diff-Clus
(red) represents the error correlation for objects in different groups
as estimated by the clustering algorithm, Same-Clus (blue)
represents the error correlation for objects in the same cluster
according to the clustering algorithm and Difference (grey)
represents the difference between the different and same cluster
error correlations. Errors became more correlated over iterations
and were more similar for objects grouped together by the
clustering algorithm.

1334

Translational error correlation over time. If the iterated
learning task yielded more grouping structure, and thus
more reliance on the grouping, over time, then the
translational error correlation should increase over
iterations. To test this prediction, we measured the
translational error correlation for objects the clustering
model inferred were in different groups and the same group
at each step of the iteration (Figure 4). Not only are errors of
objects that the clustering algorithm predicted would be in
the same group more similar than translational errors for
objects in different groups, but this diagnostic translational
error correlation increased over iterations for both measures.
The increasing similarity of errors for objects in the same
cluster demonstrates that participants became more likely to
remember objects in coherent groups.
Structured memory model convergence predictions.
Insofar as our clustering model captures the priors
participants used to encode objects, we should expect both
the participants and the clustering model to converge
towards the same structures. Intuitively, the model
compensates for uncertainty about individual objects by
recalling objects biased towards their structures; as such, we
expect that over multiple simulated iterations of learning
and recalling displays by this model, the reported displays
will converge towards the structured prior. To generate such
simulated “model chains” from the model, we constrained
one free parameter: the noise with which it encodes the
objects’ locations (we set this to 90 pixels). Larger encoding
noise indicates more uncertainty about the objects’ locations
and results in the objects being recalled with greater bias.
The “model chains” produced by this structured memory
model converged towards remembering objects in tighter
groups, with fewer, and more defined groups on the whole.
Additionally, in the model chains, objects were increasingly
organized into lines. In the subsequent analyses, we
compare these model chain predictions to participants’
actual performance.

Variance of groups. Objects were initially uniformly
distributed in the display; did participants expect objects to
be arranged more closely together? For each iteration, we
measured the dispersion of objects within groups by finding
the determinant of the locations’ covariance matrix, where
larger determinants indicate greater spread of objects within
clusters. The chains of responses produced by humans
showed the same decreasing within-cluster spread of objects
(Figure 5) as we saw in the model chains (r=.80, 95% CI:
.56–.91), indicating that participants recalled locations
increasingly compactly within groups.
Number of groups. Given working memory’s limited
capacity, how many groups did participants remember? We
estimated the number of groups that were evident at each
step of the chain of human responses (Figure 6A). People
reported objects in fewer groups in later iterations,
consistent with the simulated model chains, (r=.89, 95% CI:
.74–.95). Additionally, participants asymptoted around
approximately five groups, slightly higher than, but
comparable to previous studies of working memory capacity
(Cowan, 2001).
A

B

Figure 6. (A) The number of groups inferred by the clustering
algorithm. (B) The posterior standard deviation of the number of
groups. The black line indicates participants’ responses and the
blue line indicates model chains. The number of groups and the
posterior standard deviation of the number of groups both
decreased over time.
Figure 5. The determinant of the group covariance matrices. The
black line indicates participants’ responses and the blue line
indicates model chains. Larger determinants indicate larger
location dispersion. Locations were recalled increasingly close
together.

Additionally, as the within-group spread of objects, and
the number of groups decreased, uncertainty about the
number of groups in a given display decreased over
simulated iterations with the structured memory model. We
measured confidence in grouping structure as the standard
deviation of the posterior distribution of the number of

1335

groups in a display. The posterior standard deviation of the
number of groups decreased over iterations of human chains
(Figure 6B), similar to simulated iterations from our
clustered memory model (r=.81, 95% CI: .58–.92). This
suggests that, in addition to the number of groups
decreasing, the distinction between different groups of
objects became more pronounced.

lines, grouping them together, and remembering their
properties based on the ensemble statistics of groups of
lines. We tested whether participants remembered lines
according to their hierarchical structure by examining
whether they recalled lines in the same trial with similar
orientations (Figure 8A) and lengths (Figure 8B).
A

How did participants encode lines?
Participants recalled objects in increasingly coherent and
compact groups. Our Dirichlet clustering algorithm allowed
us to infer whether these groups were Gaussian clusters or
lines with orientations and lengths. Here, we use our
clustering algorithm to characterize participants’ prior
expectations of linear groupings.

B

Figure 7. The proportions of groups recalled that were straight
lines and Gaussian clusters. Clusters are divided into quartiles
based on their eccentricity. Here, low eccentricities indicate less
circular, more linear clusters. Participants organized more objects
into lines over time.

Proportion of grouping types. What kinds of structures did
participants encode over time? We used the Dirichlet
clustering algorithm to calculate the proportions of the
groups that were lines and clusters (Figure 7). We further
subdivided the clusters into quartiles based on their
eccentricity. Eccentricity measures how much the
covariance of a cluster deviates from circularity, such that
an eccentricity of 1 would indicate perfect circularity and an
eccentricity of 0 would indicate clusters with zero width
along the minor axis – in other words: lines. This allows us
to measure how linear/circular groups were.
Participants increasingly grouped objects as lines
consistent with the convergence produced in simulated
model chains. For humans, the proportion of lines went
from 13% to 34% and had a linear regression slope of .0087
(95% CI: .0076–.0098), consistent with the trend seen in the
model chains (r=.91, 95% CI: .78–.96). This change seemed
primarily to arise from regularizing greatly anisotropic
clusters toward regular lines, suggesting that visual working
memory relies on an expectation that objects are arranged
linearly, consistent with the Gestalt principle of continuity.
Properties of lines. Both participants and the model
simulations increasingly remembered objects as components
of lines. Although the structured memory model inferred
objects were organized into independent lines, it is possible
that participants imposed further hierarchical structure on

Figure 8. (A) The proportions of differences in line orientations
and (B) the proportions of differences in line lengths. Due to the
small number of lines in early blocks, in this figure we smoothed
the proportions for each iteration by aggregating over the current,
previous and next iteration. Line differences are organized into
quartiles, such that bluer colors indicate larger differences.
Participants became more likely to recall lines with similar
orientations and lengths.

For each trial containing more than one line, we
calculated the difference in feature values (orientation and
length) for each pair of lines. For each iteration, we then
aggregated all the feature differences across displays and
chains, binned the differences into quartiles calculated from
the entire study and found the proportion of differences in
each quartile. Because the number of groups arranged in
lines increased over time, later iterations reflect differences
between more lines.
Participants remembered lines with increasingly similar
orientations and lengths. Participants became more likely to
recall lines with angular differences in the 1st and 2nd
quartiles, which was confirmed by the positive slope of a
linear regression (.038, 95% CI: .029–.047). Participants
also increasingly recalled lines with length differences in the
1st and 2nd quartiles, as indicated by the positive linear
regression slope (.038, 95% CI: .033–.043).
In contrast, the simulated model chains failed to predict
participants remembering lines with similar orientations (r=.30, 95% CI: -.65-.17) and lengths (r=.29, 95% CI: -.17–
.65). This is not surprising, given that the structured
memory model incorporates no method to integrate
information across groups. Indeed, it provides evidence that,

1336

unlike the model, participants remembered lines using
ensemble statistics applied not only at the level of objects
grouped into clusters, but also at the level of the groups.
Subjects also tended to remember more vertical lines. A
v-test revealed that lines were on average 90° (vertical) and
that this average did not reflect a uniform distribution of
orientations (v(1942)=129.65, p<.001). This bias provides
further evidence that subjects imposed higher-order
structure upon groups. In this case, however, the structure
came from the prevalence of vertical lines in natural scene
statistics (Switkes, Mayer & Sloan, 1978).
These results indicate that participants encoded lines
using their ensemble statistics, consistent with the Gestalt
principle of similarity. The ensemble encoding of lines
provides evidence that linear priors helped participants
encode the basic stimuli as higher-level constructs.

Discussion
We used a Markov chain Monte Carlo with people visual
working memory task to infer people’s priors about the
spatial arrangement of objects. Participants organized the
objects into groups that were consistent with the predictions
of a non-parametric Dirichlet process. Over iterations,
objects became organized into more compact, stable groups,
these groups became increasingly structured into lines, and
these lines were grouped themselves to become more
similar in orientation and length. The convergence towards
organizing objects into lines and remembering those lines
with similar orientations and lengths suggests that visual
working memory’s priors reflect classical Gestalt grouping
principles such as continuity and similarity, respectively.
Additionally, a model that used the hierarchical structure of
objects grouped objects into lines similarly to participants,
demonstrating that these priors facilitated the organization
of objects into higher-level constructs. Notably, however,
our cognitive model was unable to predict how people used
the statistical structure of lines, raising questions about what
are the units of ensemble encoding (Im & Chong, 2014).
In contrast to the clusters and lines observers encoded in
our study, in the real-world observers frequently encode
objects in complex shapes—we need only consider
examples like stargazing for constellations or tealeaf
reading. Likewise, a quick glance at responses in later
iterations of our study (Figure 3) reveals perpendicular lines,
winding contours and even structures like letters and shapes
that suggest the use of long-term knowledge. Despite the
heterogeneity and complexity of the patterns observers
could have possibly used to remember objects, we found
that a relatively simple model that encoded objects as
components of clusters and lines was able to capture much
of how people grouped objects in visual working memory.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NSF CPS grant 1239323.

References
Alvarez, G.A., & Oliva, A. (2009). Spatial ensemble
statistics are efficient codes that can be represented with
reduced attention. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 106(18), 7345—7350.
Austerweil, J. (2014). Testing the psychological validity of
cluster construction biases. In Proceedings of the 36th
annual meeting of the cognitive science society. (pp.
122—127)
Brady, T.F., & Alvarez, G.A. (2011). Hierarchical encoding
in visual working memory ensemble statistics bias
memory for individual items. Psychological Science.
22(3), 384—392.
Brady, T.F., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2013). A probabilistic
model of visual working memory: Incorporating higher
order regularities into working memory capacity
estimates. Psychological review, 120(1), 85—109.
Cowan, N. (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term
memory: A reconsideration of mental storage capacity.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 24(1), 87—114.
Ferguson, T.S. (1983). Bayesian density estimation by
mixtures of normal distributions. Recent advances in
statistics, 24, 287—302.
Geman, S., & Geman, D. (1984). Stochastic relaxation,
Gibbs distributions and the Bayesian restoration of
images. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE
Transactions on, (6), 721—741.
Im, H.Y., & Chong, S.C. (2014). Mean size as a unit of
visual working memory. Perception, 43(7), 663-676.
Kempe, V., Gauvrit, N., & Forsyth, D. (2015). Structure
emerges faster during cultural transmission in children
than in adults. Cognition, 136, 247—254.
Orhan, A.E., & Jacobs, R.A. (2013). A probabilistic
clustering theory of the organization of visual short-term
memory. Psychological review, 120(2), 297—328.
Orhan, A.E., & Jacobs, R.A. (2014a). Toward ecologically
realistic theories in visual short-term memory
research. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 76(7),
2158—2170.
Orhan, A.E., & Jacobs, R.A. (2014b). Are performance
limitations in visual short-term memory tasks due to
capacity limitations or model mismatch. Manuscript
under review.
Orhan, A.E., Sims, C.R., Jacobs, R.A., & Knill, D.C.
(2014). The adaptive nature of visual working memory.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23(3),
164—170.
Sanborn, A., & Griffiths, T.L. (2007). Markov chain Monte
Carlo with people. Advances in neural information
processing systems, (pp. 1265—1272).
Sims, C.R., Jacobs, R.A., & Knill, D.C. (2012). An ideal
observer analysis of visual working memory,
Psychological review, 119(4), 807—830.
Switkes, E., Mayer, M.J., & Sloan, J.A. (1978). Spatial
frequency analysis of the visual environment: anisotropy
and the carpentered environment hypothesis. Vision
Research, (13), 1393—1399.

1337

