Support for a Deliberative Failure Account of Base-Rate Neglect: Prompting
Deliberation Increases Base-Rate use
Natalie A. Obrecht (obrechtn@wpunj.edu)
William Paterson University, Department of Psychology, 300 Pompton Rd.
Wayne, NJ 07470 USA

Dana L. Chesney (dlchesney@gmail.com)
The Ohio State University, Department of Psychology, 1827 Neil Ave. Mall
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

invests a lot of time in his career. Which is more likely?
A) Paul is a nurse. B) Paul is a doctor.”

Abstract
People often base judgments on stereotypes, even when
contradictory base-rate information is provided. It has been
suggested this occurs because people fail to engage or
complete deliberative reasoning needed to process numerical
base-rate information, and instead rely on intuitive reasoning.
However, recent research indicates people have some access
to this base-rate information even when they make stereotype
judgments. Here we tested several hypotheses regarding these
phenomena: A) People may believe stereotype information is
more diagnostic; B) People may find stereotype information
more salient; C) People have some intuitive access to baserate information, but must engage in deliberation to make full
use of it. Aligning with account C, and counter to account A,
we found inducing deliberation generally increased the use of
base-rate information. Counter to account B, inducing
deliberation about stereotype information decreased use of
stereotype information. Additionally, more numerate
participants were more likely to make use of base-rate
information.
Keywords: base rates; judgment; reasoning; inductive
reasoning; dual process theory; mathematical cognition;
individual differences

Introduction
It is widely accepted that humans have two systems of
reasoning, one that is intuitive, and one that is deliberative
(e.g. Evans, 2003; Kahneman, 2002; Stanovich, 1999;
Sloman, 1996, 2014). The intuitive (Type 1) system
automatically and quickly provides impressions about the
world. The deliberative (Type 2) system instead requires
one to engage in effortful, symbolic reasoning to reach
conclusions. Intuitive thinking is less effortful and time
consuming than deliberative processing, but sometimes at
the cost of accuracy. Numerous studies have demonstrated
intuitive thinking can lead to judgment biases: people
providing intuitive answers often seem to ignore relevant
information (e.g. Kahneman & Tversky, 1973; Tversky &
Kahneman, 1983). For example, consider a problem from
De Neys and Glumicic (2008):
“In a study 1000 people were tested. Among the
participants there were 997 nurses and 3 doctors. Paul is
a randomly chosen participant of this study. Paul is 34
years old. He lives in a beautiful home in a posh suburb.
He is well spoken and very interested in politics. He

Intuitively, Paul sounds like most people’s stereotype of a
doctor, while the base-rate information (997 nurses vs. 3
doctors) instead suggests Paul is a nurse. Most people make
judgments in line with the stereotype information; that is,
they judge that Paul is more likely to be a doctor.
Why do people fail to incorporate normatively relevant
base-rates into their judgments? Many theorists attribute
such reasoning errors to failures to initiate (Kahneman,
2002; Kahneman & Frederick, 2005), or carry out (Sloman,
1996, 2014) deliberative Type 2 processes. In such
accounts, base-rates are not appreciated at an intuitive level,
but rather can only impact judgments when deliberative
Type 2 reasoning is engaged.
However, recent findings seem to contradict this account.
People take longer to give their responses (De Neys &
Glumicic, 2008) and are less confident in their answers (De
Neys, Cromheeke, & Osman, 2011) when considering
scenarios for which stereotype and base-rates are
incongruent, (supporting different judgments, as in the
example above) compared to scenarios in which they are
congruent (supporting the same judgment, e.g. the above
scenario if the sample instead had 997 doctors and 3
nurses).
These findings conflict with the traditional
explanation that base-rate neglect occurs because people do
not process base-rates. Base-rate/stereotype congruency
would not affect decision speed or confidence in stereotype
responses unless participants who choose stereotype
responses had some intuition regarding the base-rate
information or did in fact engage in deliberation to make
their choice. Thus, stereotype judgments are not simply due
to a lack of Type 2 deliberation forestalling all access to
base-rate information. Rather, they may occur either
because (a) participants engage in deliberation but think
stereotype information is more diagnostic than the base-rate
information or (b) participants have intuitions regarding
base-rate information, but their intuitions regarding
stereotype information are simply more salient (Pennycook,
Trippas, Handley, & Thompson, 2013). However, it may be
that while the original deliberative failure account was
incorrect regarding the specific mechanism – apparently
people do seem to have some intuitive access to base-rate

1757

information (De Neys, 2013) ─ it is correct to the extent that
the reason people give less weight to base-rate information
is because they fail to engage in deliberative Type 2
reasoning.
To differentiate between these accounts we had
participants complete problems like the Paul example
shown above.
However, we manipulated whether
participants were asked to evaluate arguments that support
the stereotype answer and/or arguments that support the
base rate answer before rendering their judgments regarding
the group that an individual belongs to (e.g., Paul’s
profession). Evaluating these arguments should prompt
participants to engage in Type 2 reasoning about that
information and also increase its salience. As we outline
below, different hypotheses make different predictions on
how prompting such deliberation should impact
participants’ judgments.

Diagnosticity Hypothesis
If it is the case that people have intuitions about base-rate
and stereotype information, but give the stereotype
information more weight because they think it is more
diagnostic, then prompting participants to reason about
base-rates should not affect their rate of selecting the baserate answer nor their confidence in their choice. Moreover,
participants should rate arguments in favor of the stereotype
answer as stronger than arguments in favor of the base-rate
answer.

Salience Hypothesis
If it is the case that people have intuitions about base-rate
and stereotype information, but give the stereotype
information more weight because it is more salient, then
increasing information salience should increase the use of
that information. Thus, prompting participants to reason
about base-rates should increase their rate of selecting, and
their confidence in, the base-rate answer. Prompting
participants to reason about stereotypes should increase
their rate of selecting, and their confidence in, the stereotype
answer. Base-rate and stereotype argument ratings should
be similar.

Deliberative Failure Hypothesis
If it is the case that people select the stereotype rather than
the base-rate answer on incongruent problems because they
fail to carry out deliberative reasoning, then prompting
deliberative reasoning about base-rates should cause
participants to select the base-rate answer more often on
such problems. This is because evaluating arguments should
prompt deliberative thinking.
Also, prompting this
reasoning should cause participants who still give stereotype
responses to incongruent problems to be less confident in
their answers, as such reasoning would highlight the conflict
between the stereotype and base-rate information.
Participant’s base-rate argument ratings should also be
increased

Numeracy
Individuals who are higher in numerical ability are less
susceptible to some judgment biases (Peters, Vastfjall,
Slovic, Mertz, Mazzocco, & Dickert, 2006) and also are
more likely to engage in deliberative thinking (Pennycook,
Cheyne, Barr, Koehler, & Fugelsang, 2013). Therefore we
included a numeracy measure to test whether the argument
presentation manipulations would differentially affect
participants as a function of numeracy.

Method
Participants
Undergraduate students at William Paterson University and
The Ohio State University were recruited to participate in an
online study for partial course credit. Recruitment goals of
~150 students per University were chosen to yield at least
20 participants per cell in the between subjects design, after
accounting for a high anticipated incompletion rate. Of
these, 137 of 146 recruited OSU students and 126 of 152
recruited WPU students completed the surveys for a final
sample size of N=263.

Design
Participants completed inference tasks like the example
above where they decided whether individuals belong to one
group or another. Each participant read twelve scenarios in
random order. In six scenarios the stereotype and base-rate
information were congruent (e.g. Paul sounds like a doctor,
and most of those sampled were doctors). In the other six,
stereotype and base rate information were incongruent (e.g.
Paul sounds like a doctor, but most of those sampled were
nurses). Stimuli were taken from De Ney & Glumicic
(2008), with a few minor updates to reflect current culture
(e.g. Britney Spears was changed to Justin Bieber).
Critically, we manipulated whether participants were given
and asked to evaluate arguments that supported using the
base-rate information and/or the stereotype information.
Base-rate argument (evaluated vs. omitted) and stereotype
argument (evaluated vs. omitted) were crossed between
subjects yielding 4 cells in a 2x2 between-subjects design.
In order to hold the argument structure as constant as
possible, the stereotype arguments simply repeated back the
information that was given in the scenario. The base-rate
arguments followed the format shown below, with slight
variations to match the scenario. Note that for congruent
problems the two arguments supported the same conclusion,
while for incongruent problems they supported the opposite
choice.
Example stereotype argument “Sam argues that Paul is
very likely to be a doctor because Paul is 34 years old, lives
in a beautiful home in a posh suburb, is well spoken and
very interested in politics. Also, he invests a lot of time in
his career.”

1758

Example base-rate argument “Sal argues that Paul is very
likely to be a nurse because 997 out of the 1000 people in
the sample are nurses; thus, the probability of randomly
selecting a nurse is much higher than the probability of
selecting a doctor.”
For each scenario, where applicable, participants first
rated the argument(s) they saw on a 1-7 scale from
Extremely Strong to Extremely Weak (recall that which, if
any, arguments were presented varied between subjects:
neither, stereotype only, base-rate only, or both).
Participants then judged which group the described
individual belonged to using a 6 point scale; this scale
allowed us to simultaneously obtain choice and confidence
data.

conditions, and 4 separate confidence variables indicating
confidence in stereotype and non-stereotype answers in the
congruent and incongruent conditions (6 variables total).
Choice was coded as 1 or 0, with 1 indicating an answer that
was consistent with the stereotype (e.g. 0 = nurse, 1 =
doctor). On incongruent trials this indicated base-rate
neglect, while on congruent trials this was the normative
response, matching both the stereotype and base-rate
information. Confidence was coded on a 1 to 3 scale (e.g.,
1: slightly; 2: moderately; 3: very). These values were then
averaged to yield the 6 variables for each participant.
Argument ratings were coded by separately averaging the 6
base-rate and/or 6 stereotype argument evaluations in each
congruency condition.

Example group judgment “Do you think Paul is a nurse or
a doctor? Please select one of the following:”. Participants
rated their confidence that Paul was a nurse or a doctor on a
6 point scale (1-very confident Paul is a nurse to 6-very
confident that Paul is a doctor).

Preference For Stereotype Over Base-Rates

Counterbalancing For participants who were given both
base-rate and stereotype arguments, the order of these
arguments was counterbalanced between subjects, with half
always evaluating the base-rate argument first, and half
always evaluating the stereotype argument first. We also
counterbalanced scenario congruency by alternated which
six of the scenarios were congruent or incongruent between
subjects. In the example above, Group A, would read the
incongruent version of the scenario (“997 nurses and 3
doctors”) while Group B would read the congruent version
of the scenario (“997 doctors and 3 nurses”).
The
stereotypical category name was listed first in half of the
scenarios.
Numeracy Participants completed an 8-item Objective
Numeracy Scale (ONS) (Weller, Dieckmann, Tusler, Mertz,
Burns, & Peters, 2013) and other individual difference
measures not discussed here.
Procedure Participants completed the experiment online.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the 10
between subjects conditions: 2 (story/congruency pairing) x
2 (base-rate argument) x 2 (stereotype argument) + 2
(argument order among those evaluating both).
All
participants responded to 12 scenarios (6 congruent, 6
incongruent). For each scenario, they first evaluated their
assigned argument(s) (neither, stereotype, base-rate, or
both), then judged group membership. Finally, they
completed the numeracy measure.

Results
Coding
The 1-6 scale group responses were recoded to create 2
separate choice variables indicating the proportion of
stereotype responses for congruent and incongruent

Participants typically gave the stereotype answer (M = .77,
SE = .02), but chose this response more frequently in
congruent compared to incongruent scenarios (congruent:
M = .86, SE = .01; incongruent: M = .68, SE = .02, paired
samples t(262) = 7.87, p <.001, d = .49, r = -.01). This
same effect held when examining only the subset of
participants who did not evaluate any arguments (congruent:
M = .94, SE = .01; incongruent: M = .79, SE = .04, t(54) =
3.67, p < .001, d = .49, r = -.17).

Deliberation Increased Base-Rate Use
We used a mixed model ANOVA with congruency
(congruent, incongruent) as a within subjects factor, and
base-rate argument (evaluated, omitted) and stereotype
argument (evaluated, omitted) as between subjects factors
predicting the proportion of stereotype responses. As
expected, there was a main effect of congruency such that
stereotype responses were more common in the congruent
conditions, as noted above (F(1, 259) = 49.2, p <.001, η²p =
.160). As predicted by the deliberative failure account and
salience account, but inconsistent with the diagnosticity
account, participants who evaluated base-rate arguments
were less likely to select the stereotype response than those
who did not (F(1, 259) = 10.4, p = .001, η²p = .039; base-rate
argument omitted: M = .82 SE = .02; base-rate argument
evaluated: M = .74, SE = .02). Also there was a main effect
of stereotype arguments (F(1, 259) = 7.1, p = .008, η²p =
.027). Contrary to the salience account, participants who
evaluated the stereotype argument were actually less likely
to go on to select the stereotype response. This was
qualified by an interaction between base-rate argument and
congruency (F(1, 259) = 13.3, p < .001, η²p = .049) such that
the effect of evaluating base-rate arguments was only found
in the incongruent scenarios – scenarios where base-rates
suggested an answer different from the stereotype (see
Figure 1). No other effects were found (all ps > .1)

Base-Rate Arguments Rated Stronger Than
Stereotype Arguments Use
Contrary to the diagnosticity hypothesis, participants rated
the base-rate arguments to be stronger than the stereotype

1759

arguments. This effect was statistically significant among
participants who viewed both arguments (N = 104, base-rate
evaluation: M = 5.26 SE = .12; stereotype evaluation: M =
4.26, SE = .13; paired samples t(103) = -5.78, p < .001, d =
.57, r= .044) and marginally significant between groups
that evaluated only one argument type (base-rate evaluation:
M = 5.16, SE = .16, N = 52; stereotype evaluation: M = 4.79,
SE = .12, N = 52; t(102) = 1.86, p = .065, d = .37).

Figure 1: Proportion of stereotype responses as a function of
congruency and base-rate argument evaluation. Standard
errors bars are shown.

Evaluating Arguments Inconsistent With Later
Judgments Reduced Choice Confidence Use
We tested whether the arguments people evaluated affected
their confidence in their subsequent choices. We first
looked at participants’ confidence in their base-rate choices
on incongruent scenarios via a 2 (base-rate argument:
evaluated, omitted) × 2 (stereotype argument: evaluated,
omitted) between-subjects ANOVA. Participants who
evaluated the stereotype argument were less confident in
their subsequent base-rate choices compared to participants
for whom the stereotype argument was omitted (F(1, 186) =
3.93, p = .049, η²p = .021; stereotype evaluated: M = 1.48,
SE = .06, stereotype omitted: M = 1.67, SE = .07). No other
effects were uncovered (all ps > .1).
In a similar analysis we tested whether base-rate
argument and stereotype argument predicted confidence in
stereotype choices on these incongruent conditions.
Participants who evaluated base-rate arguments were less
confident in their subsequent stereotype choices than
participants for whom this argument was omitted (F(1, 242)
= 12.33, p < .001, η²p = .048; base-rate evaluated: M = 1.73
SE = .05; base-rate omitted: M = 1.99 SE = .05). There
were no other significant effects (all ps > .1). These results
show that people’s confidence is reduced when they have
evaluated arguments inconsistent with their decision.
However, their confidence is not increased by evaluating
arguments that are consistent with their choice. Two
parallel analyses for the congruent trials found only that
evaluating the stereotype argument reduced confidence in
the ‘correct’ stereotype/base-rate answer (F(1, 256) = 8.87,

p = .003, η²p = .033; stereotype evaluated: M = 1.99, SE =
.05; stereo-type omitted: M = 2.21, SE = .06; all other ps >
.1).

Numeracy Predicted Judgments Use
Participants’ numeracy scores equaled the total number of
questions they answered correctly on the 8 item numeracy
assessment. Non-responses were scored as incorrect. Scores
ranged from 0 to 8, and were normally distributed around
4.11 (SE = .11) with no significant skew.
Choice In order to examine whether the effects of
arguments differ for people at different numeracy levels we
conducted a regression analysis with stereotype argument
(evaluated = 1, omitted = 0), base-rate argument (evaluated
= 1, omitted = 0), and numeracy score and their interactions
as predictors of the proportion of stereotype responses. All
variables and their interactions were mean centered.
Analyses were run separately for congruent and incongruent
scenarios.
For the incongruent scenarios, this analysis showed baserate argument (β = -.27, p < .001) and the interaction among
numeracy, base-rate argument, and stereotype argument (β
= -.15 p = .014) significantly predicted choices. No other
effects were significant (all ps > .06). Generally, evaluating
the base-rate argument decreased the chances that
participants chose the stereotype answer in incongruent
problems. However, for more numerate participants, this
effect is only seen when the stereotype argument was also
evaluated, while for less numerate participants the effect of
the base-rate argument was more pronounced when the
stereotype argument was omitted. It could be that more
numerate participants consider base-rate arguments without
prompting, but that the importance of base-rate information
is further appreciated when contrasted with stereotype
arguments. In contrast, less numerate participants may
benefit from being directed to think about base-rate
information, but this may be overwhelmed by stereotype
information.
The regression looking at the congruent trials showed an
effect of numeracy (β = .31, p < .001) such that participants
higher in numeracy were more likely to pick the choice that
reflected both the stereotype and base-rate answer compared
to less numerate participants. Also, there was an effect of
stereotype argument (β = -.17, p = .003) and an interaction
between stereotype and base-rate argument (β = .16, p =
.006) such that participants were less likely to select the
stereotype/base-rate answer when the stereotype argument
was evaluated, especially when the base-rate argument was
omitted (no arguments: M = .94, SE = .01; stereotype
argument: M = .78, SE = .04; base-rate argument: M = .88,
SE = .03; both arguments: M = .86, SE = .02). Evaluating
the stereotype argument actually decreases people’s choice
of that intuitive response even though in congruent
problems base-rates also support the stereotype answer.
This perhaps suggests a belief that relying on stereotype
information is ‘bad’.

1760

Argument ratings A regression analysis with numeracy as
the predictor and base-rate argument rating as the outcome
showed that participants higher in numerical ability rated
the base-rate argument as stronger than did those lower in
numerical ability (β = -.312, p < .001). No such relationship
was found when the regression was run on the stereotype
ratings.

Discussion
Our results are consistent with the Deliberative Failure
hypothesis, that people give more weight to stereotype
information than base-rate information in part because they
do not spontaneously engage in deliberative Type 2
reasoning. Participants who were prompted to deliberate
about base-rate information (i.e. by evaluating arguments
about base-rate information) both chose the base-rate
answer at a greater rate than those who did not, and were
less confident in their response on the occasions they chose
the non-base-rate (stereotype) answer. This cannot be
attributed to argument evaluation simply making the baserate answers more salient, as evaluating the stereotype
argument also increased the chances of selecting the baserate answer. It appears that prompting people to engage in
deliberation, regardless of which answer is made salient,
increases their use of base-rate information. These findings
stand in contrast to the Diagnosticity hypothesis that people
spontaneously process and use base-rate information, but
believe stereotype information is more diagnostic of group
membership.
If that were the case, then inducing
deliberation should not have affected participants’ choices.
Moreover, participants explicitly rated base-rate
arguments as stronger than the stereotype arguments.
Indeed, it appears that reasoning about stereotype
information caused participants to give stereotypes less
weight. Thus we believe that while people do at some basic
level process base-rates (De Neys & Glumicic, 2008;
Pennycook et al., 2013), they do not appear to fully
appreciate their value without deliberation. These data
suggest that interventions to increase deliberation may
increase people’s use of statistical information such as baserates.
Individuals’ numeracy also seemed to influence their
choices. When base-rates and stereotypes were consistent,
participants higher in numeracy selected the base-rate
response more frequently than those lower in numeracy. On
incongruent trials, more numerate participants picked the
base-rate answer more often when both the stereotype and
base-rate arguments were given. Less numerate participants
were simply more likely to select the base-rate response
when they evaluated the base-rate argument, regardless of
whether the stereotype argument was given. More numerate
participants also rated the base-rate argument to be stronger
than less numerate participants. These results are consistent
with previous research showing that more numerate people
tend to make greater use of numbers when making decisions
(Peters et al., 2006) while less numerate people may require

an intervention that promotes numerical use (Obrecht,
2010). It is currently unclear whether this is due to more
numerate participants being more likely to deliberate
spontaneously (Pennycook et al., 2013), or due to more
numerate participants having stronger intuitions about
numbers (Schley & Peters, 2014). Further research is
needed to address this issue.
Although these results show support for the deliberative
failure account, we cannot conclude this is the only factor
that accounts for failure to consider base-rates and other
normatively relevant data. People’s choices generally still
favored the stereotype answer when it was pitted against
base-rate data, even when Type 2 thinking was prompted by
the argument evaluations.
We suspect that people
appreciate the information that base-rates provide and see it
as formally stronger evidence than the stereotype
information. However, it may be that the value people give
the stereotype information is not captured by their ratings of
argument strength. Following Thompson’s (2009) view,
people experience a System 1 based “feeling of rightness”
that is stronger when an answer more easily comes to mind,
like the answer that Paul must be a doctor, and is not
counteracted by the System 2 processes that indicate that
base-rate information may provide superior information.
We also note that one may have mathematically sound
reasons for, apparently, giving more weight to stereotype
information than base-rates in some cases. For example,
individuals may implicitly assign a very low probability to
the chances of Paul being a nurse, given his description,
compared to the probability of him being a doctor. Suppose
one feels only 1 in 1000 nurses would match Paul’s
description, while 999 of 1000 doctors would match the
description. In this case, even given the “3 doctors to 997
nurses” base-rate, the odds that Paul is a doctor rather than a
nurse are about 3 to 1. This could explain why participants
persist in choosing the stereotype responses despite rating
the base-rate argument as stronger. Indeed, past research
has shown that people do not merely rely on explicitly
provided information, such as base-rates, when making
judgments, but also consider implied probabilistic
information. For example, people give more weight to
sample size when averaging explicitly provided sample
means as the implied likelihood that those samples must
have come from the same population increases (Chesney &
Obrecht, 2011, 2012; Obrecht & Chesney, 2013). Although
not typically considered normative, this represents some
sophisticated reasoning in which information is evaluated in
light of prior beliefs.
One limitation of this work is that we did not have
measures to confirm that our argument manipulations
indeed increased deliberation and salience. A follow up
study is needed to confirm whether this was the case, or
whether the effect of our manipulation might be attributed
to some other causal pathway.
In sum, it appears that people do appreciate the
importance of base-rates and are able to make better use of

1761

them when prompted to deliberate on the value of this
information.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by a Summer
Research Stipend awarded to the first author by the
Research Center for the Humanities and Social Sciences at
William Paterson University and by NSF grant SES1155924 funding the second author. We thank Stacey Delos
Santos for her assistance with reviewing stimuli. We thank
Ellen Peters for her support.

References
Chesney, D. L. & Obrecht, N.A. (2011). Adults are sensitive
to variance when making likelihood judgments. In L.
Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 3134-3139). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Chesney, D. L., & Obrecht, N. A. (2012). Statistical
judgments are influenced by the implied likelihood that
samples represent the same population. Memory &
Cognition, 40, 420-433. doi: 10.3758/s13421-0110155-3
De Neys, W. (2013). Conflict detection, dual processes, and
logical intuitions: Some clarifications. Thinking &
Reasoning, 20, 169-187.
De Neys, W. & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring in
dual process theories of thinking. Cognition, 106, 12481299.
De Neys, W., Cromheeke, S., & Osman, M. (2011). Biased
but in doubt: Conflict and decision confidence. PLoS
ONE, 6, e15954. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0015954.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2003). In two minds: Dual process
accounts of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7,
454-459.
Gigerenzer, G., Hell, W., & Blank, H. (1988). Presentation
and content: The use of base rates as a continuous
variable. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 14, 513-525. doi:
10.1037/0096-1523.14.3.513
Kahneman, D. (2002). Maps of bounded rationality: A
perspective on intuitive judgment and choice. In T.
Frangsmyr (Ed.), Les Prix Nobel 2002 [Nobel Prizes
2002]. Stockholm, Sweden: Almquist & Wiksell
International.
Kahneman, D. & Frederick, S. (2005). A model of heuristic
judgment. In K.J. Holyoak & R.G. Morrison [Eds.] The
Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning.
Cambridge University Press. 267-293.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of
prediction. Psychological Review, 80, 237-251.
Obrecht, N. A. & Chesney, D. L. (2013). Sample
representativeness affects whether judgments are
influenced by base rate or sample size. Acta
Psychologica,
142,
370-382.
doi:
10.1016/j.actpsy.2013.01.012.

Obrecht, N. A. (2010). Sample size weighting in
probabilistic inference. (Doctoral dissertation). Rutgers
University, New Brunswick.
Peters, E., Västfjäll, D., Slovic, P., Mertz, C.K., Mazzocco,
K., & Dickert, S. (2006). Numeracy and decision
making. Psychological Science, 17, 408-414.
Pennycook, G., Cheyne, J. A., Barr, N., Koehler, D. J., &
Fugelsang, J. A. (2013). Cognitive style and religiosity:
The role of conflict detection. Memory & Cognition,
42, 1-10.
Pennycook, G., Trippas, D., Handley, S. J., & Thompson,
V. A. (2013) Base rates: Both neglected and intuitive.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 40, 544-554.Schley, D. R. &
Peters, E. (2014). Assessing "economic value":
Symbolic number mappings predict risky and riskless
valuations. Psychological Science, 25, 753-761.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for type systems
of reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 19, 3-22.
Sloman, S. A. (2014). Two systems of reasoning, an update.
In Sherman, J., Gawronski, B., & Trope, Y. (Eds.).
Dual process theories of the social mind. Guilford
Press.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of
individual differences in reasoning. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Thompson, V. A. (2009). Dual process theories: A
metacognitive perspective. In J. Evans and K. Frankish
(Eds.), Two Minds: Dual Processes and Beyond.
Oxford University Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in
probability judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293315.
Weller, J., Dieckmann, N. F., Tusler, M., Mertz, C. K.,
Burns, W., & Peters, E. (2013). Development and
testing of an abbreviated numeracy scale: A Rasch
Analysis approach. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 26,198-212. doi:10.1002/bdm.1751

1762

