Syntactic Alignment is an Index of Affective Alignment:
An Information-Theoretical Study of Natural Dialogue
Fermı́n Moscoso del Prado Martı́n (fmoscoso@linguistics.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of California – Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

John W. Du Bois (jdubois@linguistics.ucsb.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of California – Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA
Abstract

alogue participants facilitates interactions and increases
the affective bonding between participants.

We present an analysis of a treebank of spontaneous
English dyadic conversations, investigating whether the
degree of syntactic priming found across speakers is a
function of the degrees of affective alignment and overall positivity of the speakers. We use information theory
to measure the proportion of overlap between the syntactic structures of the speakers. The affective state of
the speakers is indexed by aggregated measures of the
affective valences of the words they use. We find that
there is a positive relation between syntactic priming
and affective alignment, over and above any lexical repetition effects. This constitutes evidence for the percolation of inter-speaker alignment across multiple levels of
representation. This also illustrates the indexical value
of syntactic alignment, as has been proposed in modern
functional theories of grammar such as Dialogic Syntax.
Keywords: Affective Alignment; Corpus Study; Information Theory; Natural Dialogue; Spoken Language;
Syntactic Priming; Treebank; Resonance; Valence

Introduction
Spoken dialogue is the natural home of human language.
It is the only naturally evolved form of language, and
the only one that is acquired from infancy across all human cultures. It follows that the structure of the human
mind, and that of languages themselves, should be expected to be particularly fine-tuned to spoken interactions involving more than one speaker. This privileged
status of dialogue has attracted increasing attention in
recent years. Modern theories on the nature of human
dialogue stress the importance of multi-level alignment
between speakers. From the point of view of psychology, Pickering and Garrod (2004) propose the Interactive Alignment Theory. This theory states that the
linguistic representations of speakers are automatically
aligned across many levels. Reitter and Moore (2014)
showed that increased syntactic alignment leads to increased performance in collaborative map tasks (possible through more successful communication). More recently, Abney, Paxton, Kello, and Dale (in press) found
that speakers in dyadic conversations also mirror the
complexity of each other’s language. This alignment extends beyond language: Shockley, Santana, and Fowler
(2003) report increased postural alignment between dialogue participants, and Chartrand and Bargh (1999)
report that mirroring of gestures and postures across di-

From the point of view of linguistics, Du Bois (2014)
introduces the framework of Dialogic Syntax, directly
addressing Pickering and Garrod (2004)’s desideratum of
“a grammatical framework that is designed to deal with
language in dialogue rather than monologue”. Du Bois’
theory proposes a “resonance principle” by which speakers would strive, insofar as possible, to maximize resonance in their choice of syntactic structures. In Dialogic
Syntax, even if there may be a large automatic component in the lexico-syntactic alignment between speakers, speakers do retain some degree of control over the
alignment, and they might choose to misalign themselves
lexically or syntactically to signal things such as “stance
differentials”. In other words, speakers do have some notion of the indexical value of the alignment itself. This is
in line with the broad family of functional (e.g., Chafe,
1970) and cognitive (e.g., Goldberg, 2006) theories of
grammar positing that grammatical structures are “fully
invested with meaning at all levels” (Du Bois, 2014).
The view that alignment or resonance extends from
linguistic levels of representation into other aspects of
the speakers’ minds, and that alignment at one level reinforces alignment at other levels (Pickering & Garrod,
2004) suggests that this could also extend to the affective
states of dialogue participants. There should be a relationship between the similarity of the speakers’ affective
states and the alignment between the linguistic structures they use. Moreover, from the results of Chartrand
and Bargh (1999) one could infer that the more positive
affective status would lead to higher degrees of linguistic
alignment. Here, we present a corpus study (i.e., a ‘natural experiment’; e.g., Gries, Hampe, & Schönefeld, 2005)
investigating whether one can detect such relations between linguistic and affective resonance. In particular,
we test whether the degree of overlap between the syntactic structures used by two speakers is correlated with
the degree to which they are in more or less positive
mental states, and with the extent to which their mental states differ. If this were the case, it would provide
evidence for an indexical function of syntactic structure,
supporting the notion of a meaning- and affect-invested

1655

SS0

dialogic syntax.
In what follows we present an analysis of a treebank of
spontaneous natural conversations. Moscoso del Prado
Martı́n (2015) already proved that there is a significant
amount of priming both within and across speakers in
this same corpus, contrary to what is claimed by some
authors (Healey, Purver, & Howes, 2014). Therefore
we proceed directly to investigate the relation between
syntactic priming and affective expression. In order to
measure the degrees of affective alignment and overall
positivity of the participants in dialogues, we use –as a
proxy– the affective valences of the words that they each
use. This is in line with substantial evidence (cf., Pearl
& Enverga, 2014) indicating that the affective states of
speakers are reflected in the affective characteristics of
the words they use, leaving a sort of ‘mindprint’ on language.

S

p̂(r) =

f (r)
, where n = lhs(r),
f (n)

(1)

with the functor lhs(x) denoting the left-hand side of
rule x. This corresponds to the probability of rule r in
a probabilistic context-free grammar (PCFG; Booth &
Thompson, 1973) induced from the treebank by maximum likelihood. We can use this probability to estimate
the point-wise information or surprisal (Shannon, 1948)
produced by encountering rule r:
ˆ = − log2 p̂(r).
I(r)

(2)

This measure can easily be applied to a list L of productions rules, as –for instance– the productions rules
of the tree in Figure 1, which are listed in Table 1.1 If
f (r; L) denotes the number of times that a rule r occurs in the list L, then, the informational content of L
is estimated by:
X
ˆ
ˆ
I(L)
=
f (r; L)I(r).
(3)
r∈L
1
Notice that, if the list corresponds to the productions of
a phrase-structure tree, then this is equivalent to computing
the surprisal of the tree given the induced PCFG.

VBP

NP

PP

have

NNS

I

Measures of Lexical and Syntactic
Alignment
We follow the information-theoretical approach developed by Moscoso del Prado Martı́n (2015) for estimating the degree of lexical and syntactic overlap between
the speakers in each dialogue. The frequency with which
each production rule r is used across a whole corpus is
denoted by f (r). The frequencies of occurrence of each
non-lexical (i.e., non-terminal or pre-terminal) symbol n
used in the phrase-structure trees are denoted by f (n).
Using these frequencies, we obtain a maximum likelihood estimate of the probability that symbol n will be
expanded by a rule r having n in its left-hand side:

NP

classes

PP

PP

PP

IN

NP

IN

NP

f rom

CNUM

to

CNUM

CD

CD

nine

twelve

Figure 1: Example of a phrase-structure tree extracted
from the TüBa-E/S corpus. Normal font denotes nonterminal nodes, bold font denotes pre-terminal nodes,
and italic font denotes terminal nodes.
ˆ
I(L)
measures the total information content of the productions in list L. Notice that there are three types of
nodes in the tree in Figure 1:2
• Non-terminal nodes (denoted in normal font), which
correspond to grammar-internal symbols.
• Pre-terminal nodes (denoted in bold font), which correspond to part-of-speech annotations.
• Terminal nodes (denoted in italic font), which correspond to English words.
This distinction allows us to decompose the information
content of Eq. 3 into two components, a lexical information content (Iˆlex (L)) measuring the information due
to the words used, and a syntactic information content
(Iˆsyn (L)) measuring the information due to the use of
particular syntactic constructions. The syntactic component is computed by applying Eq. 3 only to the subset
of the non-lexical productions (rules that do not include
terminals on their right-hand side) in L, whereas the
lexical component is computed by considering only the
lexical productions in L (those that have a non-terminal
symbol in their right-hand side). Table 1 show how lexical and non-lexical rules are separated for the example
2
Hence, in Figure 1, the non-terminal PP (a prepositional
phrase) and the pre-terminal PP (a pronoun) are different
symbols.

1656

in Figure 1. If computed this way, it holds that the total
information content is such the sum of the lexical and
syntactic information contents,
ˆ
I(L)
= Iˆlex (L) + Iˆsyn (L).

(4)

Table 1: Phrase-structure production rules from the tree
in Figure 1 split into lexical and non-lexical. Normal
font denotes non-terminal symbols, bold font denotes
pre-terminal symbols, and italic font denotes terminal
symbols.
Lexical Productions
PP → I
VBP → have
NNS → classes
IN → f rom
CD → nine
IN → to
CD → twelve

Non-Lexical Productions
SS0 → S
S → NP VBP NP PP
NP → PP
NP → NNS
PP → PP PP
PP → IN NP
NP → CNUM
CNUM → CD
PP → IN NP
NP → CNUM
CNUM → CD

have been used in corpus analyses (e.g., Healey et al.,
2014; Pietsch, Buch, Kopp, & de Ruiter, 2012; Reitter,
Moore, & Keller, 2006; Reitter & Moore, 2014). In addition, in order to safely compare utterances with very different lengths, it is useful take advantage of the bounds
for the shared information, and define the shared information ratio (SIR) between two lists of productions as
the percentage
SIR(L1 ; L2 ) = 100

ˆ 1 ; L2 )
I(L
.
ˆ
ˆ 2)
I(L1 ) + I(L

(6)

As above, the SIR can also be computed separately
for the lexical and syntactic components (SIRlex and
SIRsyn ).

Corpus Analysis
Materials and Methods

Consider now having two lists of productions L1 and
L2 , corresponding for instance to the productions contained in two utterances or sets thereof by different
speakers. One can now measure the amount of information that is shared between the two lists, the shared
information,
X
ˆ 1 ; L2 ) =
ˆ
I(L
[f (r; L1 ) + f (r; L2 )] I(r).
(5)
r∈L1 ∩L2

This measure is bounded
ˆ 1 ; L2 ) ≤ I(L
ˆ 1 ) + I(L
ˆ 2 ),
0 ≤ I(L
taking a value of zero iff the lists are fully disjoint, having
no common productions, and being equal to the sum of
their total informations iff every production that occurs
in one list occurs also in the other. As was the case for
the total information, the shared information can also be
decomposed into its lexical and syntactic components, by
counting only the lexical or non-lexical rules respectively.
The lexical shared information is a measure of the
amount of lexical overlap between two sets of productions (i.e., utterances, dialogue turns, . . . ), and the syntactic shared structure measures the degree to which the
two sets use the same syntactic constructions. They
can therefore be used as measures of lexical and syntactic priming within or across speakers. As discussed
in Moscoso del Prado Martı́n (2015), these are more adequate measures of priming than other measures that

Corpus We obtained the Tübingen Treebank of Spoken English (TüBa-E/S; Hinrichs, Bartels, Kawata, Kordoni, & Telljohann, 2000). This corpus contains 649
transcribed English two-participant dialogues. The dialogues are segmented into conversational turns (uninterrupted contributions by one dialog participant), which
are further broken down into approximately 30,000 syntactic units (corresponding to either full sentences or
phrases).3 An HPSG-style phrase-structure tree is provided for each syntactic unit in the corpus.
The dialogues in the corpus are short (an average of
41.23 syntactic units per dialogue, ranging between four
and 293 units) spontaneous interactions between two native speakers, concerning travel arrangements, appointment negotiations, and computer maintenance. The
phrase-structure parses were constructed using a probabilistic parser, the outputs of which were manually corrected by human annotators
Pre-processing For each dialogue in the corpus, we
grouped all phrase-structure trees by the participant who
produced them. We extracted from the phrase-structure
trees the phrase structure production rules that were
used in the tree. Figure 1 provides an example of the
phrase-structure trees contained in the corpus. The corresponding (lexical and non-lexical) production rules are
listed in Table 1. In this way, we constructed two lists
of phrase-structure productions for each dialogue, each
corresponding to the productions used by one of the two
participants. Each of these lists was further divided into
two lists: one of lexical, and another of non-lexical productions.

Estimation of Relevant Measures
Syntactic and lexical overlaps For each of the 649
dialogues in the treebank, we computed the lexical and
syntactic SIRs (i.e., SIRlex and SIRsyn ) using Eqs. 1–6.

1657

3

See Hinrichs et al. (2000) for more details.

Affective valence values For each word in a participant’s list of lexical productions, we obtained the
affective valence rating from the database described
by Warrimer, Kuperman, and Brysbaert (2013). This
database contains average human affective ratings for
about 14,000 English words. The ratings are on a
1–9 scale, where 1 denotes maximum positive valence
and 9 the maximum negative valence. This process involved looking up whether the word –as contained in
the corpus– was contained in the database, and otherwise looking up the word after lemmatization (using
the WordNet lemmatizer; Miller, Beckwith, Fellbaum,
Gross, & Miller, 1990). Words that were not present
in the database even after lemmatization were ignored.
This produced a list of affective valence values associated
to each participant in each dialogue.
For each dialogue, as a measure of affective alignment
we computed the absolute value of the difference in the
median affective values of the two participants. As a
measure of overall valence of the dialogues, we also computed the median valence of the concatenation of the
valence list of both participants in each dialogue. To
diminish the sensitivity of the measure to outliers (i.e.,
words with exceedingly positive or negative valences) we
used the median values instead of the mean. The mean
is most often used to compute the valences of texts as
a function of the words they contain (cf., Heise, 1965;
Leveau, Jhean-Larose, Denhière, & Nguyen, 2012). It
should be noted that our results do not hinge on this
choice.

Results and Discussion
The calculations described above produced a table with
649 entries, one for each dialogue in the corpus. For each
entry, the table includes its total length in number of
syntactic units (mean: 41.23 units/dialogue; range: [4 −
−296]), the lexical (mean: 41.92%, range: [3.96 − 68.17])
and syntactic (mean: 40.78%, range: [2.01 − 67.46]) SIR
values, the median affective valence across the two speakers (mean: 6.08, range: [5.51 − 6.33]), and the difference
in median affective valences between the two speakers
(mean: .14, range: [0.00 − 1.27]). We fit a linear regression model with the syntactic SIR as the dependent
variable, and the lexical SIR, (log) length in sentences,
median valence, and difference in median valences, as
independent variables, as well as all possible interactions between them. A fast backwards elimination of
factors using the AIC retained all main effects, which
were also significant according to a sequential ANOVA
(log length: F [1, 643] = 1582.36, p < .0001; SIRlex :
F [1, 643] = 321.73, p < .0001; difference in median valences: F [1, 643] = 5.96, p = .0149; median valence:
F [1, 643] = 12.74, p = .0004). The backwards elimination of factors also suggested keeping the interaction
between log length and the difference in median valences.

However, this interaction did not reach significance according to the ANOVA (F [1, 643] = 2.50, p = .1141).4
The corrected R2 value for this regression was 75%. The
residuals and predicted values of the regression did not
exhibit major non-normalities or correlations.
Figure 2 summarizes the significant main effects found
in the regression analysis. Panel (a) shows a positive correlation between the length of the dialogue and the syntactic SIR, indicating that longer dialogs exhibit more
syntactic priming across the speakers. Panel (b) shows a
very strong main effect of the lexical SIR on the syntactic
SIR. This effect lends itself to two possible explanations:
On the one hand, this strong correlation between the lexical and syntactic SIRs could be the effect of the “percolation” of alignment across levels (Pickering & Branigan,
1998; Pickering & Garrod, 2004). On the other hand,
the correlation between the two forms of inter-speaker
alignment could be a by-product of the reuse of certain
multi-word expressions. Therefore, in this respect, one
cannot argue with much certainty that these results provide evidence for percolation of inter-speaker alignment
between the syntactic and lexical levels.
Panels (c) and (d) in Figure 2 illustrate the crucial results of this study. Panel (c) shows how dialogues whose
speakers are more aligned in terms of the affective valence of the words they use (i.e., lower difference in median valence ratings), are also more aligned in terms of
syntactic priming. This effect remains over and above
the effect of dialogue length and that of the degree of
lexical priming. One could perhaps argue that this is
not so surprising because the reuse of lexical items from
one speaker to another would naturally decrease the difference in median valence scores. However, such an interpretation would also predict either
• that the effect should disappear when entering lexical
alignment directly into the regression, or at least
• that there is a significant two-way interaction between
the effect of lexical priming and that of the difference
in valences.
Since neither of the above is true, we interpret this effect as evidence for the percolation of alignment between
the affective and syntactic levels: Speakers who are more
aligned in affective terms (as evidenced by their use of
more positive words), also tend to be more aligned in
terms of the syntax they use. This interpretation is further supported by the effect of the affective valence itself,
plotted in panel (d). As we predicted, this effect indicates that the more positive terms are used overall in a
conversation, the more the speakers tend to align with
4
Besides not reaching significance, the two-way interaction had not been predicted a priori. Further considering
that it was the result of testing 24 possible (unpredicted) interactions between the main effects, motivated us to discard
further consideration of this interaction.

1658

(a)

(b)

56

45

Shared Syntactic Information (%)

Shared Syntactic Information (%)

54

52

50

48

40

35

30
46

50

100

150

200

250

10

20

Length (# of utterances)

30

40

50

60

Shared Lexical Information (%)

(c)

(d)

42
46

45

Shared Syntactic Information (%)

Shared Syntactic Information (%)

40

38

36

44

43

42

41

34
40

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

5.6

Valence difference between speakers

5.7

5.8

5.9

6.0

6.1

6.2

Valence (1=most positive ; 9=most negative)

Figure 2: (a) Effect of dialogue length on SIRsyn . (b) Effect of SIRlex on SIRsyn . (c) Effect of the difference in
valence across speakers on SIRsyn . (d) Effect of the overall affective valence of the dialogue on SIRsyn .
each other syntactically. Notice that this effect cannot
be discarded as a side-effect of lexical repetition, as this
would require saying that positive words are more likely
to be repeated (which would itself in any case support
the percolation of alignment interpretation).

syntactic priming and the degree to which the speakers
are aligned in their use of positive or negative words,
as well as with the overall level of positivity of the
words they use. In turn, recent research shows that
the affective aspects of these words are themselves indicators of the affective states of the speakers (Pearl &

Our results provide evidence of a direct link between

1659

Enverga, 2014). These results are important in two respects. First, they provide support for Pickering and
Garrod (2004)’s percolation of inter-speaker alignment
across levels, showing that the relation between alignments extends beyond purely linguistic aspects. Second,
and equally important, our results indicate –in line with
the predictions of functional/cognitive theories of grammar (e.g., Chafe, 1970; Du Bois, 2014; Goldberg, 2006)–
that apparently abstract syntactic structure is nevertheless invested with indexical function, enabling speakers
to signal and reinforce their degree of affective alignment. In other words, the choice of syntactic structure
used by a speaker in dialogue is in itself meaningful in
how it relates to the syntactic choices made by its interlocutor. This also contradicts early accounts (e.g., Bock,
1986) characterizing syntactic priming as plain subconscious priming on the choice between two structures, but
devoid in itself of any communicative function.

Acknowledgements
We are indebted to Kevin Schäfer for helpful suggestions
on this paper.

References
Abney, D., Paxton, A., Kello, C., & Dale, R. (in press).
Complexity matching in dyadic conversation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General .
Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18 , 355–387.
Booth, T. L., & Thompson, R. A. (1973). Applying probability measures to abstract languages. IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-22 , 442-450.
Chafe, W. L. (1970). Meaning and the structure of language. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The Chamaleon
Effect: The perception-behavior link in social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
76 , 893–910.
Du Bois, J. W. (2014). Towards a dialogic syntax. Cognitive Linguistics, 25 , 359–410.
Goldberg, A. (2006). Constructions at work: The nature of generalization in language. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Gries, S. T., Hampe, B., & Schönefeld, D. (2005). Converging evidence: Bringing together experimental and
corpus data on the association of verbs and constructions. Cognitive Linguistics, 16 , 635–676.
Healey, P. G. T., Purver, M., & Howes, C. (2014). Divergence in dialogue. PLoS ONE , 9 , e98598.
Heise, D. (1965). Semantic differential profiles for 1,000
most frequent English words. Psychological Monographs, 79 , 1–31.
Hinrichs, E. W., Bartels, J., Kawata, Y., Kordoni,
V., & Telljohann, H. (2000). The Tübingen Treebanks for spoken German, English, and Japanese. In

W. Wahlster (Ed.), Verbmobil: Foundations of speechto-speech translation (pp. 550–574). Berlin – Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Leveau, N., Jhean-Larose, S., Denhière, G., & Nguyen,
B. (2012). Validating an interlingual metanorm for
emotional analysis of texts. Behavior Research Methods, 44 , 1007-1014.
Miller, G. A., Beckwith, R., Fellbaum, C. D., Gross,
D., & Miller, K. (1990). WordNet: An online lexical
database. International Journal of Lexicography, 3 ,
235–244.
Moscoso del Prado Martı́n, F. (2015). Syntactic priming across speakers in natural dialogue is a lagged process: Evidence from English, German, and Japanese.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Pearl, L., & Enverga, I. (2014). Can you read my mindprint? automatically identifying mental states from
language text using deeper linguistic features. Interaction Studies, 15 , 359–387.
Pickering, M. J., & Branigan, H. P. (1998). The representation of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming
in language production. Journal of Memory and Language, 39 , 633–651.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 27 , 169–226.
Pietsch, C., Buch, A., Kopp, S., & de Ruiter, J. (2012).
Measuring syntactic priming in dialogue corpora. In
B. Stolterfoht & S. Featherston (Eds.), Empirical approaches to linguistic theory: Studies in meaning and
structure (pp. 29–42). Mouton de Gruyter.
Reitter, D., & Moore, J. (2014). Alignment and task
success in spoken dialogue. Journal of Memory and
Language, 76 , 29–49.
Reitter, D., Moore, J., & Keller, F. (2006). Priming of
syntactic rules in task-oriented dialogue and spontaneous conversation. In Proceedings of the 28th annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 685–
690). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical Journal , 27 ,
379—423, 623–656.
Shockley, K., Santana, M., & Fowler, C. (2003). Mutual
interpersonal postural constraints are involved in cooperative conversation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29 , 326–
332.
Warrimer, A. B., Kuperman, V., & Brysbaert, M.
(2013). Norms of valence, arousal, and dominance for
13,915 English lemmas. Behavior Research Methods,
45 , 1191–1207.

1660

