Task-General Object Similarity Processes
Gavin W. Jenkins (gavin-jenkins@uiowa.edu)
Larissa K. Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)
John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA 52245 USA

invaluable general target data for developing computational
theories of those core processes.
Where do we begin, however, to search for evidence of
general processes of similarity judgments? Many distinctive
behaviors have been found in different similarity judgment
contexts. Certainly, similarity judgments correlate with
measurable differences in features between objects like
color hue or size. This is qualitatively evident at face value,
and feature comparisons have also been incorporated into
formal, quantitative models since at least the early 20 th
century (Richardson, 1938). Details of these metrics have
taken longer to establish, however. For example, there is
evidence for both the use of Euclidean (Hout, Goldinger, &
Ferguson, 2013) and of taxicab/city-block (Shepard, 1964)
algorithms for determining the quantitative difference
between two objects' feature values. Circular, wrap-around
dimensions like angle or color hue present additional
considerations. Analogous to city-block and Euclidean
metrics, but within a single circular dimension, differences
between objects could potentially follow a linear-type
metric (Fig. 1) or a “chord length” metric (Shepard, 1962).

Abstract
The similarity between objects is judged in a wide variety of
contexts from visual search to categorization to face
recognition. There is a correspondingly rich history of
similarity research and many known behavioral trends and
models of similarity. Nevertheless, most similarity behaviors
have been identified and tested only in a comparatively
narrow set of unique contexts. This leaves open the question
of the extent to which similarity judgments rely on common
processes or resources and the specific nature of those
processes if so. We tested three diverse yet well-established
measures
of
object
similarity
using
identical,
psychometrically controlled stimuli and identical analyses
across tasks. We found several consistent behavioral effects
across tasks that provide clues as to the nature of task-general
similarity processes and serve as diagnostic targets for
computational models of similarity.
Keywords: similarity; psychology; concepts and categories;
decision making; vision

Overview
Similarity judgments between objects occur across diverse
contexts and tasks. Judging the similarity between perceived
objects is necessary for following a map, identifying growth
of a tumor between scans, noticing a defective product on an
assembly line, or inventing new categories for novel objects.
The ubiquity of similarity judgments raises the question
of whether they may derive from general, task-independent
cognitive processes. If so, the specific nature of those
processes and which similarity judgment behaviors they
map to will be critical in better understanding the many
tasks involving similarity judgments. One way to determine
the nature of any core similarity processes is to test for task
general behaviors. If tasks are diverse from one another, yet
a set of behaviors is found to be common across them, this
would suggest not only the existence of core processes, but
that the behaviors in question derive from those core
processes and offer clues about their nature.
Formal models in particular are well suited to
investigating the nature of similarity judgment processes.
Several formal models of similarity or that involve
similarity exist (SIAM—Goldstone, 1994a; SUSTAIN—
Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004; COVIS—Ashby, Paul, &
Maddox, 2011; ALCOVE—Kruschke, 1992; the SME—
Gentner & Markman, 1997), and although there are
overlaps, few specific behaviors are captured by a wide
variety of models. If any general processes of similarity
judgments exist, however, then task-general behaviors likely
associated with those general processes would serve as

Figure 1: Left: differences along a circular dimensions can
be measured or perceived in two ways: as if the dimension
were linear around the circle, or as if along chords through
the circle, yielding different ratios between pairs. Right: a
two-dimensional feature space where one dimension is
circular may be perceived as a curved (A) or flat (B)
manifold when a subset of items are sampled, with red
(chord) and blue (linear type) lines showing metric options.
Further complicating the study of similarity judgments,
Tversky (1977) classically demonstrated that similarity
judgments do not always follow pure metric assumptions at
all. For example, China may be judged less similar to North

980

Korea then North Korea is to China. This “asymmetry”
effect cannot be explained by static feature value
differences, since the difference between two real numbers
does not metrically change with order of presentation.
Since Tversky, a variety of other non-metric patterns have
been observed in similarity judgments (in addition to metric
patterns). A given magnitude of difference between two
objects may become exaggerated in similarity judgments as
the objects may become more similar along other
dimensions or more “alignable” (Gentner & Markman,
1997). For example, differences between an atom and the
solar system are easier to point out than differences between
an atom and a toaster. A given difference between two
objects can also be magnified in judgments if a person
knows of many other objects near one or both in features (a
high “neighborhood density,” Krumhansl, 1978), such as
differences between minor breeds of dogs. Similarities or
differences between objects can also be perceived
differently if attending to a certain feature dimension over
others, like color over shape (Nosofsky, 1991).
A variety of tasks have been used to find and test
similarity judgment behaviors. Pairwise tasks are
particularly common, where pairs of two items from a larger
set are judged at a time. Often, a ratings scale is used, or a
two-alternative “same/different” choice. Alternatively,
grouping, piling, and other arrangement methods allow
participants to see a larger number of objects at once, then
sort them into patterns to indicate similarity.

faster and less deliberative. It also included a time pressure
element and had right and wrong answers.
The third task was the Spatial Arrangement Method
(SpAM, Goldstone, 1994b; Hout, et al., 2013). SpAM
involves arranging many objects at once into a pattern such
that distances correspond to dissimilarities between any two
objects. The task was the least time-pressured, allowed the
highest response precision, and afforded the greatest ability
to form intentional patterns of judgments, since the full
context of all items was visible throughout the task.
The final step in testing for the existence of task-general
similarity processes is to isolate the variable of task by
utilizing a consistent environment of stimuli and analyses.
After describing the general task environment, we will
describe the methodologies and findings of each task in
detail, as well as the theoretical and modeling implications
of task-general similarity.

Common Stimuli
In order to rule out stimulus-based confounds and to align
tasks to allow for identical analysis, we used a single set of
stimuli across tasks. The stimuli were shapes with two
metric feature dimensions—color and shape. Fig. 2 depicts
the full set. Both feature dimensions were psychometrically
controlled in previous experiments and developed explicitly
such that mathematical steps equal perceptual steps in these
dimensions for average participants. The color dimension
varied in hue according to the CIE l*a*b color space
designed for a perceptually equal gradient, and the shape
dimension consisted of circles modified by sine waves in a
way that has been previously established to be perceived by
participants as an equally spaced single, circular feature
dimension of shape (Drucker & Aguirre, 2009).
Dimensions where mathematical steps equal perceptual
steps means that the effect of any metric component of
similarity can be quantitatively predicted, such as the
influence of distances between objects along individual
feature dimensions.
The full set of stimuli formed a 25 object grid across the
two feature dimensions, as seen in Fig. 2. This is a
commonly used pattern of stimuli for studies of object
similarity due to its symmetry, uniformity, and
predictability (Hout, Goldinger, & Ferguson, 2013;
Kriegeskorte & Mur, 2012). However, one consistently
observed factor in object similarity judgments is
neighborhood density. Difference judgments of objects with
many other objects near them in feature space are magnified
compared to objects in sparse areas (Krumhansl, 1978;
Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2003).
To allow us to better test neighborhood density effects
across tasks, we manipulated the subset of objects that
participants worked with across two conditions. Half of all
participants judged the similarities of objects in a basic grid
pattern in feature space (a smaller 4x4 grid within the full
5x5 set). The other half of participants judged objects from
a less symmetric, two-wide “L” shaped pattern consisting of
the same number of objects as the grid pattern but with

Establishing Task-General Similarity Processes
In order to test for the existence of task-general similarity
processes among this wide array of tasks and behaviors,
three steps must be taken. First, a set of candidate behaviors
must be chosen that hold the potential to be consistently
observed across tasks. We ruled out any behaviors already
known to differ between tasks or ones that cannot be
demonstrated in certain tasks. For example, Tversky's
asymmetry effect, although seminal in the field, is difficult
to observe in a multi-object arrangement task (Goldstone,
1994b), due to the geometric constraints of a workspace. We
investigated the influence of basic feature value differences
on similarity judgments, degree of feature dimensional bias,
participants' sensitivity to circular dimensions, and the
influence of neighborhood densities in feature space.
The second step in investigating possible core processes is
to test all candidate behavioral effects redundantly across a
diverse variety of available judgment tasks. Common
behaviors despite diverse tasks suggests that those behaviors
may hold clues to core processes shared across context. We
chose three similarity tasks that are all widely used but
differ from one another along key characteristics to cover a
meaningful range of cognitive environments. Our first task
used pairwise ratings, a task where participants judge object
pairs by clicking on a 1-9 similarity scale. This task allowed
for quick trials but was not time pressured.
The second task used binary “same/different” judgments.
Compared to the ratings task, the same/different task was

981

overall less neighborhood density. Fig. 2 shows both
patterns with colored overlays on the full stimulus set.
Stimuli were sampled from 180 degrees of each of their
full circular dimensions, to make distances unambiguously
unidirectional between pairs of objects. Both dimensions are
still circular, however, and could be perceived as such.

Circular Dimension Sensitivity
We hypothesized that participants’ similarity judgments
might be consistently sensitive to the fact that our stimuli
were sampled from circular dimensions.
If participants fail to notice a dimension's circularity, then
they should judge each perceptually equal step linearly. If
participants recognize curvature in the dimension, however,
then they may judge pairs of objects according to chord
distances “through the circle of the dimension.” The right
side of Figure 1 shows this distinction as applied to a grid of
stimuli with one circular dimension. To test this, we
analyzed raw similarity judgments by object pair,
calculating root mean square errors to both linear and chordbased predictions to find the closer fit for each task.

Neighborhood Density Sensitivity
Previous studies (e.g., Krumhansl, 1978) suggest that in
some cases, denser neighborhoods of objects in feature
space can bias similarity judgments toward more “different”
responses in that neighborhood than for the same number of
feature steps of difference in a sparser neighborhood. We
measured neighborhood density of each object pair as a
count of both objects’ immediately adjacent neighbors in
feature space (up to 8 neighbors each in our stimulus set
shown in Fig. 2).
We then correlated the neighborhood densities of each
pair with the degree to which dissimilarity judgments
differed from metric predictions. A positive correlation,
therefore, would indicate inflated dissimilarities between
objects in denser local neighborhoods in feature space.

Figure 2: The full 5x5 set of stimuli, varying by sine
wave-based shape and by l * a * b color space hue. The blue
box indicates stimuli included in the grid subset, and the red
box indicates stimuli in the “L” subset.

Common Analyses
Since our goal was to determine task-general similarity
processes, we performed the same set of analyses on the
data from each task.

Experiment 1 – Pairwise Ratings Task

Multidimensional Scaling

The pairwise ratings task is the most common and
straightforward of our three similarity judgment tasks. Most
of the behaviors we tested originated from data using this
task. The task is open-ended, unconstrained, without time
pressure, and focused on pairs of objects at a time.

Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is an algorithm that takes
as input a matrix of pairwise differences between all the
pairs of items in a set.1 It outputs positions for each item so
that the distance between pairs of items are as proportional
as possible to the input differences. Most notably, MDS
provides visualization of the “shape” of a set of similarity
judgments, such as the overall degree of metric uniformity
and the compression, expansion, or warping of feature
dimensions.
We performed MDS analyses of both group averages
within experimental conditions and of individuals' data.
Group analysis allowed us to visualize the strongest, most
influential trends of judgments across tasks and between
stimulus conditions (grid versus “L” subsets of items), while
individual analysis indicated the range and variety of task
“strategies.” In particular, we were interested in how
metrically organized group judgments were and whether
participants showed dimensional modulation.

Methods
Twenty adult participants performed the pairwise ratings
task. One participant was dropped due to MDS being unable
to converge on a solution for his ratings.
Participants provided informed consent and were then
seated in front of a computer terminal in an unadorned
room. All instructions were on-screen. Participants were
first exposed to the full set of 25 stimuli for context, one per
second, and told to watch passively. Afterward, a ratings
scale appeared and remained at the bottom of the screen
throughout the rest of the experiment. The scale was labeled
from 1-9, with 1 being labeled as least similar and 9 labeled
most similar. Each trial consisted of a 500ms initial fixation
cross, which was then replaced by two horizontally
separated objects.2 Participants were instructed to click the

1 Unlike our stimulus dimensions, the response scales in our
tasks were not carefully psychometrically equalized. Therefore,
non-metric, rank order MDS was appropriate for all tasks. The best
fit from 50 random starts was used for MDS analyses.

2 Separation was eight degrees of visual angle and stimuli
subtended approximately five degrees of visual angle.

982

participants rated objects in the arms of the “L” differently
than the feature values alone suggest. Both arms of the “L”
also show exaggerated differences across shape (green lines
are longer than red lines), suggesting dimensional
modulation.

number on the ratings scale corresponding to how similar
they thought each pair of objects was.
Each participant was grouped into one of the two stimulus
conditions—the 4x4 grid subset of stimuli or the 2-wide “L”
shaped subset of stimuli. Each participant received two
trials each of every pair of objects within the subset of their
condition, for a total of 272 trials per participant, randomly
ordered per participant in one block.
After the experiment, all similarity ratings were inverted
(10 – rating) to yield dissimilarity ratings, and the set of
common analyses described above was applied to the
dissimilarity data from all participants.

Results
Before analyzing MDS results, we needed to determine
the appropriate number of dimensions to use for fitting data
in the MDS algorithm. We accomplished this by fitting
multiple solutions at different numbers of dimensions and
using “scree plots” shown in Fig. 3. Two-dimensional
solutions were determined most valid across all conditions
and experiments. An “elbow” is visible across conditions in
the scree plots at two dimensions, indicating the point at
which more dimensions begin to yield diminishing returns
in fits that no longer justify the greater complexity of a
higher dimensional model. Additionally, two dimensions is
the simplest fit for all conditions that outperforms
comparison results using random input data (black dots,
Spence & Ogilvie, 1973).

Figure 4: Group MDS solutions for Experiment 1.
Individual MDS solutions confirmed that the group
patterns were not artifacts of averaging. Several individual
participants showed grid like results in the grid condition,
and several showed less organized but distinct “L” patterns.
Additionally, a number of individual results demonstrated
dimensional modulation more dramatically than group
results, yielding tightly clustered groups of objects along
one dimension in MDS solutions. Fig. 5 contrasts a
dimensionally even solution with a clustered solution.
Overall, nine participants showed evenly spaced
dimensional patterns, and eleven showed clustering patterns.

Figure 5: Individual MDS solutions of two individuals from
the grid condition of Experiment 1, showing mostly evenly
weighted dimensions (left) and clustering (right).
Figure 3: Scree plots of data from all conditions. All
conditions outperform random data at two dimensions, and
“elbows” are visible across conditions at two dimensions.

Circular dimension analysis showed that participants'
similarity judgments matched chord-based predictions more
closely than linear-type predictions (RMSE of 1.24 [chord]
vs. 1.65 [linear] for the grid condition and 0.87 vs. 1.70 for
the “L” condition). This suggests that participants likely
perceived dimensions as more circular than linear.
Neighborhood density analysis showed moderate
correlations between (observed – expected) dissimilarity
ratings and the neighborhood densities of objects in a pair, r
= 0.30 across conditions. This is consistent with predictions
that high neighborhood density should magnify differences.

Group MDS solutions for the pairwise ratings task are
shown in Fig. 4. Intersection points between lines represent
object positions as placed by MDS. To aid visualization,
green lines connect objects one step apart in color, and red
lines connect objects one step apart in shape.
Both conditions show clear metric feature comparison
influence: aside from a few items with swapped positions in
the upper right, the grid conditions shows participants
judging similarity roughly by a grid, and the “L” condition
shows two unambiguous “arms” of objects, as expected for
the “L” shaped subset of stimuli.
The “L” condition also shows non-linear warping of the
predicted shape. The overall solution is “bent,” meaning

Experiment 2 – Pairwise Same/Different Task
Our second task was a binary judgment “same”/“different”
ratings task. The task was speeded and designed to be

983

overall faster and with less opportunity for deliberative
thought than the pairwise ratings task.

Methods
Twenty-two adult participants performed the pairwise
same/different task. Two participants were dropped for not
meeting a predetermined 70% accuracy cutoff (see below).
The procedure for the same/different task was identical to
that of the ratings task, up until the point of test trials.
Participants were still given a 500ms fixation cross followed
by pairs of objects at a time, but instead of a ratings scale,
participants were instructed to use keyboard keys “A” and
“L” to indicate “same” or “different” (counterbalanced) for
object pairs. Unlike in the ratings task, each trial had a
correct answer. Participants were instructed that “’Different’
pairs are different in EVERY way. ‘Same’ pairs are the
same in ANY way.” This particular rule was used, because
it allowed a much more even distribution of “same” and
“different” trials than if “same” were defined as identical,
thus avoiding excessive repetition of identical pairs.
Feedback was given at the end of each trial as a green check
mark or a red “X” in the center of the screen for 500ms.
The task was “speeded” by the addition of a loud,
annoying buzz that sounded whenever participants took
longer than 1500ms from the onset of stimuli to respond.
Despite the buzz, all trials continued until an answer was
recorded, to avoid missing data.
Participants were again grouped into grid and “L”
conditions. Each participant saw each pair of objects in their
condition at least five times. Some randomly chosen “same”
pairs appeared a sixth time, to equalize the number of
“same” and “different” trials for each participant. Overall,
participants in the grid condition completed 728 trials, and
participants in the “L” condition completed 740 trials.
Dissimilarity ratings used in analyses were derived from
the ratio of same:different responses across duplicate trials
of each pair for a participant. If a given pair of objects was
shown five times, for example, and a participant answered
“different” to three of them, then the dissimilarity judgment
for that object pair was interpreted as 3/5 = 0.6 out of 1.0.

Figure 6: Group MDS solutions for Experiment 2.
Individual MDS analyses again confirmed that some
individual results matched those of the group. Ten
participants showed clustering patterns, and eleven showed
even dimension ratios.
Circular analysis showed that participant behavior again
fit more closely to chord-based predictions than linear-type
predictions, indicating that judgments were sensitive to the
circular feature dimensions used (RMSE of 0.2 vs. 0.23 for
the grid condition and 0.16 vs. 0.23 for the “L” condition).
After subtracting out the contribution of feature values
alone, neighborhood density analysis again showed
moderate correlations between behavioral difference ratings
and the neighborhood densities of objects in a pair, r = 0.21
across conditions, suggesting that judgments of differences
were magnified in high density feature neighborhoods.

Experiment 3 – Spatial Arrangement Task
Our third task, SpAM, used distance relationships between
many arranged objects to indicate similarity judgments. The
task was slower, more contextual, and more allowing of
thoughtful patterns of judgments than the previous tasks.

Methods
Twenty-three adult participants performed the SpAM task.
One participant was dropped for not arranging any stimuli.
Participants used the same apparatus and were shown the
same 25 item exposure phase as in the previous tasks. They
were then presented with a single test trial. All 16 items in
their condition (grid or “L”) were displayed in columns
along the sides of the screen, and a square workspace took
up the center space. Participants were instructed to click and
drag all items into the workspace, such that once all were
placed, the distance between any pair of items would
represent the dissimilarity between those items. Participants
were allowed to move items after initial placement.
Dissimilarity ratings in the SpAM task were recorded as
simply the pixel distances between each pair of item
placements. These were then used to perform the common
set of analyses.

Results
MDS group analysis is shown in Fig. 6. The results reflect
those of Experiment 1, although with greater noise. In the
grid condition, more green rows (objects sharing color) have
swapped positions than in Experiment 1, but judgments are
overall still dimensionally organized, with objects of shared
feature following consistent orders and patterns across the
stimulus set and dimensions being relatively perpendicular
to one another. In the “L” condition, differences along shape
are again exaggerated relative to differences along color,
providing evidence of dimensional modulation.

Results
As seen in Fig. 7, group MDS results for the grid condition
matched those of the pairwise experiments, taking the form
of a noisy grid pattern with some swapped rows or columns.
The “L” results showed a unique pattern. Feature

984

comparison is still apparent as a basis for judgments, but the
two arms of the “L” were in this case laid out perpendicular
to one another and with heavily swapped orders of feature
values. Dimensional modulation is still suggested, but here,
shape differences are exaggerated in only one arm, while
color differences were exaggerated in the other.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by award number
R01HD045713 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD
but does not necessarily represent the views of the NIH.

References
Ashby, F. G., Paul, E. J., & Maddox, W. T. (2011). COVIS.
Pothos, E. M. & Wills, A. J., eds. Formal approaches in
categorization. Cambridge University Press.
Drucker, D. M. & Aguirre, G. K. (2009). Different spatial
scales of shape similarity representation in lateral and
ventral LOC. Cereb. Cortex,19, 2269–2280.
Gentner, D. & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. Am. Psychol., 52(1), 45-56.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994a). Similarity, interactive activation,
and mapping. J. Exp. Psychol.-Learn. Mem. Cogn., 20(1),
3-28.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994b). An efficient method for obtaining
similarity data. Behav. Res. Meth. Ins. C., 26(4), 381-386.
Hout, M. C., Goldinger, S. D., & Ferguson, R. W. (2013).
The versatility of SpAM: A fast, efficient, spatial method
of data collection for multidimensional scaling. J. Exp.
Psychol.-Gen., 142(1), 256-281.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2003).
SUSTAIN: A network model of category learning.
Psychol. Rev., 111, 309-332.
Kriegeskorte, N. & Mur, M. (2012). Inverse MDS: Inferring
dissimilarity structure from multiple item arrangements.
Front. Psychol.: Perception Science, 3, 1-13.
Krumhansl, C. L. (1978). Concerning the applicability of
geometric models to similarity data: The interrelationship
between similarity and spatial data. Psychol. Rev., 85(5),
445-463.
Kruschke, J. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychol. Rev.,
1, 22-44.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1991). Stimulus bias, asymmetric
similarity, and classification. Cogn. Psych., 23, 94-140.
Richardson,
M.
W.
(1938).
Multidimensional
psychophysics. Psychol. Bull., 35, 659-660.
Shepard, R. N. (1962). The analysis of proximities:
Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance
function, part II. Psychometrika, 27(3), 219-246.
Shepard, R. N. (1964). Attention and the metric structure of
the stimulus space. J. Math. Psychol., 1, 54-87.
Spence, I. & Ogilvie, J. C. (1973). A table of expected stress
values
for
random
rankings
in
nonmetric
multidimensional scaling. Multivar. Behav. Res., 8(4),
511-517.
Tversky, A. 91977). Features of similarity. Psychol. Rev.,
84(4), 327-352.

Figure 7: Group MDS solutions for Experiment 3.
Individual MDS analyses again confirmed the validity of
group patterns in some participants, and revealed another
strong split between even dimension patterns (fifteen) and
clustering patterns (six).
Participants showed mixed sensitivity to circular
dimensions, with better fitting RMSEs to linear distances in
the square condition (520 vs. 624) and better fits to chordbased distances in the “L” condition (100 vs. 107).
Participants also again demonstrated a weak to moderate
sensitivity to neighborhood densities, with neighborhood
density measures correlating with feature-controlled
dissimilarity ratings at r = 0.17 across conditions.

General Discussion
All three of our tasks showed evidence of a feature
comparison influencing similarity judgments, roughly
accurate representation of grid versus “L” stimulus patterns,
uneven dimensional modulation to the extreme of clustered
judgments in some participants, sensitivity to circular
dimensions, and sensitivity to neighborhood density.
This large number of behaviors consistent across diverse
tasks presents a strong case for the existence of core
similarity processes. Furthermore, the identity of these
particular behaviors may offer important clues as to the
nature of those processes, particularly when targeted by
formal, computational models of similarity judgments. Any
general theory of similarity will likely require a flexible
memory space that allows for both linear and circular
feature space metrics (unlike traditional, Cartesian
frameworks), and should describe processes allowing for
modulating feature dimensions in linear (e.g., clustering)
and non-linear (e.g., neighborhood density) ways.
Our findings also serve as a convenient quantitative
modeling target due to the quantitative nature of our
analyses, the psychometrically controlled and evenly
perceptually spaced stimuli, and our consistent testing
environment.

985

