The role of conflict in the n-2 repetition cost in task switching:
a computational model
Nicholas J. Sexton

Richard P. Cooper

n.sexton@mail.bbk.ac.uk
Centre for Cognition, Computation and Modelling
Department of Psychological Sciences
Birkbeck, University of London,
Malet Street, London, UK, WC1E 7HX

r.cooper@bbk.ac.uk
Centre for Cognition, Computation and Modelling
Department of Psychological Sciences
Birkbeck, University of London,
Malet Street, London, UK, WC1E 7HX

Abstract

As yet, however, there is no agreed-upon mechanistic explanation of task inhibition. In one proposal, Grange, Juvina,
and Houghton (2013) presented a computational model based
in the ACT-R architecture. Task activation and inhibition
were simulated using a modified form of the equation used to
model the activation of items in declarative memory, in which
the activation initially increases (simulating the decay of inhibition), peaks, and decays. This form of task inhibition is
sufficient to produce n-2 repetition costs, with its absence predicting n-2 facilitation. The authors argue that lateral inhibition between task-sets, alone, is not a sufficient mechanism to
produce persistent effects lasting more than one trial. Instead,
task sets self-inhibit following their execution. A limitation of
this model in its current form, therefore, is that it predicts n1 switch facilitation rather than costs. Overall, whether selfinhibition represents a viable theoretical proposal remains under debate (Koch, Gade, Schuch, & Philipp, 2010, offer a
critical review).

In task switching, the n-2 repetition cost (informally, the elevation in RT associated with performing a recently abandoned
task) is an indicator of residual task-set inhibition. One suggestion is that such inhibition is triggered by conflict between
task-set elements. We present a novel computational model
instantiating this proposal, by adding task-conflict monitoring
units to an existing, interactive activation model of task switching. The model produces the empirical pattern, n-1 switch
costs and n-2 repetition costs, as an intrinsic property of its
architecture, but dependent on the inhibition of task demand
units by the conflict detection mechanism. In a further simulation, we make predictions about n-2 repetition costs for asymmetric tasks, and show that one functional benefit of such a
conflict-based, task inhibition mechanism is to facilitate topdown control of tasks by automatically reducing cross-task interference.
Keywords: backward inhibition; conflict monitoring; interactive activation model; task inhibition; task switching

Introduction
When switching task, switch costs, in terms of increased reaction time (RT) and errors, are robustly observed when compared with successive performance of the same tasks (Kiesel
et al., 2010). Much debate has focused on whether switch
costs reflect the operation of executive processes specific to
switch trials, such as reconfiguring the cognitive system appropriate to the new task, or facilitation and interference due
to residual activation and/or inhibition from the preceding
trial. Recent consensus is that switch costs reflect an interplay
of both control and interference (Vandierendonck, Liefooghe,
& Verbruggen, 2010).
In order to more conclusively ascertain whether task inhibition occurs, one approach is to see if a cost is associated
with re-activating a recently abandoned task. Mayr and Keele
(2000) devised an experiment involving three tasks (A,B,C)
in which repeating a recently switched-away-from task (e.g.,
the final trial in the sequence ABA, henceforth n-2 repeats)
are contrasted against tasks abandoned less recently (e.g.,
CBA n-2 switches). They hypothesized that if task-set inhibition occurs when abandoning a task, assuming that inhibition
dissipates slowly, there should be a cost associated with n-2
repeats compared to n-2 switches. In fact, this is typically
observed in human participants, and is taken as evidence for
a cognitive task inhibition mechanism. In contrast to the (n1) switch cost, these n-2 repetition costs have, to date, been
resistent to non-inhibitory explanations.

Moreover, a second line of behavioural research suggests
that task inhibition is variably recruited by conflict generated during task processing. For example, increasing conflict during various stages of task processing, including response generation (e.g., by manipulating overlap of response
sets) has been found to affect n-2 repetition costs, suggesting
that task inhibition may occur in response to conflicting elements of multiple task-sets (Koch et al., 2010). Any complete
model of task switching should parsimoniously explain both
behavioural effects (i.e, n-1 switch costs and n-2 repetition
costs) and their modulation by conflict between task-sets.
This paper presents a cognitive computational model of
switching between three tasks, by adding a novel task inhibition mechanism, triggered by task conflict, to an earlier model
of two-task switching (Gilbert & Shallice, 2002). We present
two simulations in which the model reproduces the main empirical effects, namely costs for both n-1 switches and n-2 repeats. Importantly, the model demonstrates that lateral inhibition alone is not sufficient to produce these effects. Moreover,
the model makes specific predictions regarding the asymmetry of n-2 repetition costs given tasks of different difficulty.
In addition, the simulations suggest that a conflict/task-set inhibition mechanism provides benefits in a multitask environment, by smoothing performance during task switches, and
by shielding task processing from residual activation that can
occur following highly controlled tasks.

2134

Behavioural and computational studies of
mechanisms in task switching

Conﬂict
Conﬂict Monitoring
Monitoring

The basis for our model is the phenomenon of asymmetric
switch costs, which has been studied and modelled in the twotask switching literature. When two tasks are of different difficulties, such as word reading and colour naming of Strooptype stimuli, asymmetric switch costs are frequently reported.
Although the colour naming task is slower than word reading,
counterintuitively the switch cost is smaller when switching
to it than to word reading (e.g., Allport, Styles, & Hsieh,
1994; Yeung & Monsell, 2003). This asymemtry has been
attributed to between-task interference. For example, Allport
et al. (1994) proposed that performance of the weaker task
requires inhibiting the stronger task to prevent it being performed inadvertently. If residual inhibition affected processing on the next trial, on switch trials it would interfere
more with switching to the stronger task than the weaker
task. While an inhibition-based account is appealing, similar
activation-only accounts are possible, such as the mathematical model of Yeung and Monsell (2003), in which separate
task processing pathways compete in terms of activation, and
are influenced by residual activation from previous trials, topdown control, and intrinsic task strength. Similar levels of
task activation create interference, and thus longer response
times.
Gilbert and Shallice (2002) present an interactive activation model of task switching in which switch costs have a similar explanation. Processing in two task pathways is affected
by the current activation state of task demand (TD) units, or
task representations. These units receive top-down (control)
input, and unlike other units in the model, a proportion of
their activation is carried over from trial to trial. Common
to this class of model, units have lateral inhibitory connections to other units at the same level. Switch costs occur due
to residual TD unit activation favouring the repeat task. The
switch cost asymmetry occurs because activating the weaker
pathway (i.e., colour naming) in the face of strong irrelevanttask (word reading) interference, takes longer to produce a response, by which time the relevant TD unit tends to be more
highly active at the end of the trial, than vice versa. A portion of this activation is carried forward to the next, switch
trial, where TD unit activation of the previous (now irrelevant) task causes interference in the early stages of task processing, which is therefore greater for word reading trials than
colour naming trials.
From the models of Yeung and Monsell (2003) and Gilbert
and Shallice (2002), we note: a) switch cost asymmetries are
an intrinsic result of an interplay between task strength and
cross-task interference from a residually active, alternative
task. b) a dedicated, explicit task inhibition mechanism is not
required. In extending these findings into the current line of
research, we assume that cross-task interference is a form of
task conflict. Similar to these previous explanations of switch
costs, our model aims to explain a complex pattern of behavioural effects in terms of a relatively simple task inhibition

A

B

C

Task Demand
Demand
Task

Outputs
Outputs

A

Top Down
Down
Top
Control
Control

Inputs
Inputs

B

C

Figure 1: Architecture of the model. Excitatory connections
in black (sharp arrows), inhibitory in red (circular arrows).
Arrowheads show the direction of the connection. Not shown
are within-module connections (e.g., lateral inhibition).

mechanism, triggered by between-task conflict/interference.
Little systematic attention has been paid to n-2 repetition
costs for asymmetric tasks. One exception is the study of
Arbuthnott (2008), which examined switching between three
digit judgement tasks: participants judged whether a given
digit was odd or even (easy), greater or less than 5 (easy), or
prime or non-prime (hard). In two experiments, involving either separate or overlapping response sets respectively, asymmetric n-2 repetition costs were observed, with greater costs
for easy-hard-easy triplets than hard-easy-hard triplets. That
is, the n-2 task received greater backward inhibition when it
was easy than when it was hard. However, the effect on RTs
was not robust, and only reached statistical significance for
one pairing of tasks, and then for non-overlapping response
sets only. Additionally, unexpected effects occurred, such as
the reversal of direction of the switch cost asymmetry for one
pairing of tasks, in both experiments (i.e., greater cost when
switching to the more difficult task) — a result which it is difficult to fully predict using only a verbal model. Therefore,
one useful role of modelling is the integration and explanation
of these disparate effects.

A conflict-based model of task-set inhibition
Our model architecture is illustrated in figure 1. The lower
portion of the figure is equivalent to the model of Gilbert
and Shallice (2002) applied to three tasks. The upper level
corresponds to conflict monitoring units, similar to that of
Botvinick, Braver, Barch, Carter, and Cohen (2001). The input to these units is somewhat different to elsewhere in the
model. Each monitors the conflict (i.e., simultaneous activation) between two Task Demand (TD) units, by taking the
product of the TD activations as an input1 , multiplied by a
gain parameter. Thus, if two TD units have activation greater
1 The range of TD activations are linearly rescaled from (-1,1) to
(0,1) for this calculation only.

2135

than zero, one conflict unit will receive a positive input. Conflict units also receive a constant, negative bias input, hence
activation decreases in the absence of positive input. Unlike the model of Botvinick et al. (2001), conflict units bias
model processing interactively, via inhibitory connections to
both respective task demand units, multiplied by a weight parameter.2 Unless otherwise specified, connection weights are
fixed and take the default values used by Gilbert and Shallice
(2002).
Simulations were run on blocks of three trials. On the first
trial of each block, all units are initialised with zero activation. On subsequent trials, TD units, which carry over 20% of
their final, previous-trial activation (as in the original model)
and conflict units, which carry over 50% of their activation,
modelling the effects of residual task inhibition. All other
units are initialised as for the first trial. In a simulated trial,
one input unit in each task pathway (representing a trivalent
stimulus), and a top-down control unit (representing the currently cued task) are set to 1. Activation then iteratively propogates throughout the model. A response is made when the
most active output unit exceeds that of the next most active,
non-congruent output unit by a response threshold of 0.15,
and the number of cycles taken for this to occur is the simulated response time (RT). In sum, the model instantiates a theoretical position similar to the proposal by Koch et al. (2010),
i.e., that task inhibition is recruited by conflict generated during task processing.

General simulation methods
The model was tested using an analog of the paradigm of
Arbuthnott (2008). Blocks of three tasks are classified according to the number and type of task switches, with the
dependent variable being the RT of the final trial. The n1 switch cost is the difference between 1-switch (1SW) and
0-switch blocks (0SW), in which the final trial is a task
switch (e.g., AAB) or a repeat (ABB), respectively. The n2 repetition cost is the difference between final trial RT on
alternating-switch (ALT) blocks (ABA), and 2-switch (2SW)
blocks (CBA), If no response is made within 500 cycles, the
trial is classified as an error. RTs are only analysed from
blocks with no errors.
Running the model requires a number of parameter values
to be specified. In addition to those shared with the model
of Gilbert and Shallice (2002), which took default values,
an additional parameter controls the amount of residual conflict activation (50% for all simulations). As described above,
three further parameters are required for the conflict monitoring layer: gain, bias, and weight. One approach to parameter setting would simply be to fit the model to the empirical
data pattern. However, it might be that with an alternative
set of parameters, the model could fit any arbitrary pattern of
2 Given

that unit activation varies between -1 and 1, only abovezero conflict unit activations are allowed to inhibit task demand units
to prevent negative activation from exciting task demand units (due
to the negatively weighted connection).

behaviour (Roberts & Pashler, 2000). It is important, therefore, to show what behaviour is predicted across a wide range
of possible parameter values, and examine whether a specific behaviour is intrinsic to the model’s theoretical content,
or dependent on specific parameter values. Accordingly, we
pursue a methodology similar to parameter space partitioning
(Pitt, Kim, Navarro, & Myung, 2006). By varying three parameters across a wide range, dependent variables were generated and compared for each region (voxel) of a 3D grid.

Simulation 1
Simulation 1 tests the hypothesis that n-2 repetition costs are
dependent on a conflict-driven task-inhibition mechanism.

Method
This simulation varied three parameters of the conflict system: gain, (0 to 100); bias (-40 to 0); and weight (-30 to 0).
Gain and bias both affect the rate at which conflict unit activation builds up, and decays, respectively. Weight affects
the amount of biasing that conflict units exert on TD units. A
weight of zero is functionally equivalent to a model with no
conflict mechanism (thus, only lateral inhibition of TD units).
The effects that the task inhibition/conflict mechanism has on
behaviour is assessed by comparing stronger levels of weight
with this baseline.
Mean switch costs and n-2 repetition costs, in model cycles, were calculated for 3000 blocks for each voxel of parameter space, for each condition (0SW, 1SW, 2SW, ALT). DV’s
were compared for each voxel using a Welch two-samples
t-test, and the resulting effect sizes (r) for were plotted in
figure 2. The intersection of both empirical effects (figure 2
lower panel) was taking the geometric mean of both effect
sizes, for voxels with both effects in the correct direction.

Results and discussion
Figure 2 (upper panel) shows RT switch costs are robustly
predicted over a wide region of the model’s parameter space,
except for a small region in the upper right of the plot for
stronger weight values. Here, a high gain and weak bias
means that activation of conflict units increases irrespective
of the degree of actual conflict. Conversely, behaviour in
the bottom left of each plot (i.e., strong bias and low gain) is
relatively uniform, because these settings mean conflict unit
activation decreases irrespective of input, thus no biasing of
model processing occurs.
N-2 repetition costs (figure 2, centre panel), in contrast, are
less robust than switch costs, partly because the difference in
sequences (occurring on the n-2 trial) must affect processing
even after one intervening trial. Nevertheless, systematic effects did occur. The model did not produce N-2 repetition
costs for near zero weight values, demonstrating that lateral
inhibition between TD units, alone, is insufficient to produce
n- 2 repetition costs. However, for stronger weight values,
inhibition of TD units by the conflict units was sufficient to
produce the effect for a contiguous region of parameter space.

2136

while conflict detection might beneficially be used to regulate
performance by trading off speed and accuraccy (Botvinick
et al., 2001), what functional advantages are provided by
task inhibition triggered on this basis? Simulation 2 manipulates the between-trial conflict by using two tasks of identical,
fixed, intermediate difficulty, while varying the difficulty of
the third task.

Method

Figure 2: Simulation 1, visualisation of parameter space.
Horizontal panels show levels of the weight parameter, with
zero (baseline) at far right. Upper: switch cost effect size
(r) of switch cost. Central: n2-repetition cost effect size (r).
Lower: geometric mean of switch cost and n-2 repetition cost
effect sizes for voxels with positive costs only.

The main region of parameter space (below a top left - bottom right diagonal) predicts n-2 facilitation, rather than costs.
Here, the combination of strong bias and low gain means that
conflict decays too quickly, with the units insufficiently sensitive to their inputs to produce residual conflict effects. In
the region above this diagonal, where bias is weaker and/or
gain stronger, n-2 repetition costs are consistently predicted
for non-zero weight values.
The two empirical phenomena, costs for n-1 switches and
n-2 repetitions (figure 2 lower panel) co-occur in a welldefined region for non-zero weight values. Informally, this
behavioural pattern is obtained with the constraints that the
activation of conflict units must increase or decrease, given
conflict or lack of conflict, respectively. Outside these regions, other behaviour (e.g., switch costs but n-2 repetition
facilitation) may be understood either in terms of implementational failure of the model (the parameters are inappropriate for the functioning of conflict units) or in terms consistent
with theory (TD unit processing must be biased by inhibitory
connnections from conflict units). In conclusion, the empirical pattern is a feature of the model architecture, and not of a
specific set of parameter values.

Simulation 2
While simulation 1 tests whether or not the model can reproduce empirically observed phenomena, simulation 2 examines two questions. Firstly, why does a conflict/taskinhibition mechanism affects performance in this way? More
specifically, do n-2 repetition costs reflect a performance improvement for n-2 switches, or an impairment of n-2 repeats,
compared to a system lacking such a mechanism? Secondly,

In the model of Gilbert and Shallice (2002), task difficulty
is specified by two parameters — stimulus input strength
(SIS), representing the automatic, bottom-up activation of a
response by a stimulus (greater for stronger tasks), and topdown control strength (TDCS), specifying the control needed
to ensure the task is performed (greater for weaker tasks).
As top-down control provides a constant positive input to the
cued task demand unit, a variable TDCS is a confounding factor, in that the same degree of task inhibition has a stronger
influence on the processing of units with a low TDCS (i.e.,
easier tasks). Thus, rather than using a single weight value
for all inhibitory conflict-TD connections (as in simulation
1), the weight parameter in simulation 2 was multiplied by
TDCS for each task demand unit. The bias and gain parameters were fixed, at -10.0 and 75.0 respectively.
This simulation varies the weight, SIS and TDCS parameters to create a three-dimensional space. The task parameters (TDCS, SIS) of task A were manipulated, while B and
C were left at default. For asymmetric tasks, each task sequence (e.g., 0SW) has various permutations — (e.g., ABB,
BAA and BCC). Here, we considered only switches from task
A (variable SIS and TDCS) to task B (fixed). Hence, 0SW sequences are all ABB, 1SW are AAB, 2SW are CAB and ALT
are BAB, with only the n-1 task being of variable difficulty
(except for the 0SW condition). By varying the parameters
of task A, we test the effect on behaviour for both hard-easyhard (HEH) and easy-hard-easy (EHE) switches.
By varying SIS and TDCS of task A factorially, such that
either may be greater or less than that for task B, the resulting
two-dimensional parameter space is divided into four quadrants. The upper-left represents the region in which task A
is stronger, but less controlled, than task B, as in a stronger
task (e.g., word reading). In the lower-right, A is weaker, but
more controlled than task B, indicating a weaker task (e.g.,
colour naming). In the upper-right both the input and control strength are greater for task A, hence the task has more
control than is needed to perform the task. Finally, in the
lower-left a weak task is coupled with insufficient control.

Results and discussion
To determine the effect of the conflict/task-inhibition mechanism on performance, figure 3 plots switch costs (panel 1) and
n-2 repetition costs (panel 2) and RTs (panels 3 to 6) relative
to a baseline of weight = zero.
The plot of relative switch costs (figure 3, panel 1) suggests
that stronger weight values produce smaller switch costs, especially for HEH switches (upper quadrants). The effect is

2137

Figure 3: Simulation 2. Horizontal panels show parameter
space for successive values of weight, from strong (left) to
weak (right) biasing. All values are relative to a baseline
where weight equals zero. (1) switch costs (i.e., 1SW - 0SW),
(2) n-2 repetition costs (i.e., ALT - 2SW), (3 - 6) RTs for individual 0SW, 1SW, 2SW and ALT condititons respectively.

qualitatively modulated by the strength of inhibitory biasing:
for the weakest weight, the effect is minimal. The reduction
in switch costs is most pronounced when the A task is overcontrolled (top right quadrant). In this case, higher levels of
control on the trial preceding the switch produce greater task
demand activation, leading to more residual conflict on the
subsequent (switch) trial. Interestingly, this selective reduction in switch costs exaggerates the switch cost asymmetry
(i.e., it reduces costs more for EH than HE switches) suggesting that in a task-switching system with such a mechanism, a
component of the switch cost asymmetry may be attributable
to task inhibition. In contrast, for n-2 repetition costs (figure 3, panel 2), stronger weight values produce larger costs.
However, increased costs are also modulated by input con-

trol strength, with a greater increase in n-2 repetition cost for
HEH switches (i.e., upper quadrants). To understand why, we
next consider each sequence individually.
In the 0SW condition (figure 3, panel 3), intermediate or
stronger values of weight predominantly produce longer RTs.
The figure suggests topdown control strength modulates this
increase — the greatest increase occurs during switches from
a less controlled task of a similar difficulty (centre left). In
the 1SW condition (panel 4), lower weight levels produce
RT facilitation, particularly for HE switches (lower right).
This is due to residual task inhibition helping to overcome
the residual task activation which contributes to the asymmetric switch cost. At higher weight values, slowing occurs for
switches from undercontrolled tasks (left centre), with some
effect on easy-hard switches (upper left). This occurs due to
conflict on the undercontrolled (n-1) trial, and thus inhibition
of the non-relevant task demand unit, which becomes the relevant task demand unit on the switch trial. Taken together,
the reduction in switch cost, greater for EH switches, occurs
for two reasons: firstly, 1SW trial facilitation, particularly for
switches from more controlled tasks (including HE switches);
secondly, 0SW trial interference, particularly for switches
from less controlled tasks (including EH switches). Overall, the switch cost is reduced for both HE and EH switches,
but the effect is greater for EH switches, exaggerating the
switch cost asymmetry. In general, weak weight values produce more generalised effects, with effects becoming more
specific to task asymmetries for higher weight values.
In the 2SW condition (figure 3 panel 5), mild weight values produce generalised facilitation. Interestingly, this extends to switches from under-controlled tasks (bottom left).
For strongest weights, the effect on RTs is highly modulated
by top-down control, with interference and facilitation caused
by low-control and high-control n-1 trials, respectively, with
the effects most exaggerated for under- and over-controlled
trials. That facilitation dominates irrespective of SIS or TDCS
for all but the highest weight values, suggests one benefit of
this mechanism is to reduce the amount of control required
to achieve good performance when switching. In the ALT
condition (panel 6), the effect is modulated by n-1 task difficulty. For low weight values, conflict units facilitate performance. For intermediate and stronger values, they cause
interference — greatest for EH switches, but also for HE
switches. In general, the interference effect is modulated by
both SIS and TDCS of the n-1 task. Together, these results explain the larger n-2 repetition costs observed in HEH alternations — it is a composite of stronger facilitation for switches
from easier/more controlled tasks in the 2SW condition, and
greater interference when switching from those same tasks in
the ALT condition.

General discussion
N-2 repetition costs are typically attributed to residual task inhibition. Here, task demand units receive both inhibitory and
excitatory inputs, hence ‘task inhibition’ may be too simplis-

2138

tic. However, consistent with the original hypothesis, conflict units effectively smooth performance in switch trials, at
the cost of interference when resuming a recently abandoned
task. The reduction in switch cost had a side-effect of contributing to the switch cost asymmetry, suggesting that one
component of the switch cost may be due to task inhibition,
modulated by inter-task conflict.
A beneficial effect of the proposed mechanism is facilitation of performance following under-controlled tasks, seen
in the 2SW condition of simulation 2. This suggests that
conflict units insulate switching performance against deterioration when top-down control is lower than ideal, such
as in the case of distraction or divided attention. However,
the trade-off is weaker performance when repeating the same
task. Thus, conflict units might serve the function of an intermediate control layer — ‘dumb’ units that are unselective/uncontrolled as to the target of inhibition, but effectively
facilitating performance in contexts requiring control, such
as task switching. Such units might provide an automatic,
low-level control layer, reserving top-down attentional biasing for the ‘heavy lifting’. Additionally, the effect of conflict units is heavily modulated by top-down control. Specifically, in switching conditions (1SW, 2SW) it protects performance following a highly controlled task (such as a simple task with a high cost of failure — imagine carrying an
antique vase across a polished floor), effectively protecting
subsequent tasks against distracted attention.
Three issues remain. Firstly, while the simulations explore
the effect of various weight values, it remains an empirical
question whether this parameter models something fixed or
variable in a human cognitive system. Does the conflict system exert more or less biasing on task representations in different contexts? The sensitivity of the n-2 repetition cost to
task parameters suggests that it may.
A second issue concerns that fact that the model predicts
that in response to asymmetric task difficulties, n-2 repetition
costs should be greater for hard-easy-hard switches than easyhard-easy switches. This is the opposite direction to that observed in the only empirical data available, that of Arbuthnott
(2008), although as previously noted, the switch cost asymmetry found in that study was not robustly observed. One
difference between the model and that study concerns the
overlap of response sets: in the model, response sets are
mutually connected, that is, compatible responses are mutually excitatory while incompatible responses are inhibitory.
Arbuthnott (2008) found a statistically significant n-2 repetition cost asymmetry only when response sets did not overlap,
perhaps suggesting that any effect is modulated by response
conflict. The status of the present model and simulations is
considered a tentative hypothesis, therefore, to be empirically
tested as a priority.
Finally, in theoretical terms, the model only considers conflict between task representations, as a trigger for task inhibition. However, some evidence suggests response processes
have a critical role. Accomodation of these findings within

the current model would seem to require an elaboration of
the model’s response processes, at least. Alternatively, these
phenomena may be better explained by a model in which task
inhibition is triggered by response, not task, conflict. Development of such a model, and detailed behavioural comparisons on a range of simulated experimental paradigms, elucidating the role of response or task conflict in task inhibition,
is a goal for future research.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council [grant number ES/J500021/1].

References
Allport, A., Styles, E., & Hsieh, S. (1994). Shifting intentional set - exploring the dynamic control of tasks. In
C. Umilta & M. Moscovitch (Eds.), Attention and performance xv: Conscious and nonconscious information processing (Vol. 15, pp. 421–452). Cambridge: M I T Press.
Arbuthnott, K. D. (2008). Asymmetric switch cost and
backward inhibition: Carryover activation and inhibition
in switching between tasks of unequal difficulty. Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology/Revue canadienne de
psychologie exprimentale, 62(2), 91–100.
Botvinick, M., Braver, T., Barch, D., Carter, C., & Cohen, J.
(2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive control. Psychological Review, 108(3), 624–652.
Gilbert, S. J., & Shallice, T. (2002). Task switching: A PDP
model. Cognitive Psychology, 44(3), 297–337.
Grange, J. A., Juvina, I., & Houghton, G. (2013). On costs
and benefits of n-2 repetitions in task switching: towards a
behavioural marker of cognitive inhibition. Psychological
Research-Psychologische Forschung, 77(2), 211–222.
Kiesel, A., Steinhauser, M., Wendt, M., Falkenstein, M., Jost,
K., Philipp, A. M., & Koch, I. (2010). Control and interference in task switchingA review. Psychological Bulletin,
136(5), 849–874.
Koch, I., Gade, M., Schuch, S., & Philipp, A. M. (2010). The
role of inhibition in task switching: A review. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 17(1), 1–14.
Mayr, U., & Keele, S. W. (2000). Changing internal constraints on action: The role of backward inhibition. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 129(1), 4–26.
Pitt, M. A., Kim, W., Navarro, D. J., & Myung, J. I. (2006).
Global model analysis by parameter space partitioning.
Psychological Review, 113(1), 57. (00064)
Roberts, S., & Pashler, H. (2000). How persuasive is a good
fit? a comment on theory testing. Psychological Review,
107(2), 358–367.
Vandierendonck, A., Liefooghe, B., & Verbruggen, F. (2010).
Task switching: Interplay of reconfiguration and interference control. Psychological Bulletin, 136(4), 601–626.
Yeung, N., & Monsell, S. (2003). Switching between tasks
of unequal familiarity: The role of stimulus-attribute and
response-set selection. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29(2), 455–469.

2139

