Teaching Children to Attribute Second-order False Beliefs:
A Training Study with Feedback
Burcu Arslan1 (barslan.cogs@gmail.com), Rineke Verbrugge1 (l.c.verbrugge@rug.nl),
Niels Taatgen1 (n.a.taatgen@rug.nl), Bart Hollebrandse2 (b.hollebrandse@rug.nl)
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 407,
9700 AK Groningen, The Netherlands
2
Faculty of Arts, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 716,
9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands

Abstract

The most studied task for assessing the development of
ToM is called the false belief task (Wimmer & Perner,
1983). In the verbal first-order false belief task, a child is
expected to answer a question about a protagonist who has a
false belief about a situation, while the child itself has a true
belief about the same situation. For the second-order false
belief task, children are expected to answer a question about
what a protagonist thinks about another protagonist’s beliefs
or knowledge, such as “Where does Ayla think that Murat
will look for the chocolate?” (see Materials section for more
details about second-order false belief stories and
questions). After children can pass first-order false belief
tasks around the age of 4 (Wellman, Cross & Watson,
2001), it takes them one or two further years to pass the
second-order false belief task (Perner & Wimmer, 1985;
Sullivan et al., 1994).
Is it possible to accelerate the development of ToM? There
are several training studies showing that it is possible to
teach pre-school children to pass first-order false belief
tasks (see Kloo & Perner, 2008 for a review). The general
procedure in those successful first-order ToM training
studies starts by pre-testing children who are on the verge of
developing first-order ToM to make sure that they have not
developed it yet. Subsequently, the children are trained with
false belief tasks, either with or without feedback
(Clements, Rustin, & McCallum, 2000; Melot & Angeard,
2003) to investigate the role of feedback. Alternatively, in
order to examine the contributing factors in ToM
development, children are exposed to tasks testing different
cognitive abilities, such as language (Hale & TagerFlusberg, 2003) and executive functions, such as inhibition
and working memory (Kloo & Perner, 2003). The studies
that tested the role of feedback showed that children’s
performance increased when they had been trained with
detailed explanations, but not when they had only received
the feedback “Correct/Wrong” without any explanation.
These results are in line with theories proposing that
children’s development of first-order theory of mind
depends on conceptual change (Gopnik & Wellman, 2012).
On the other hand, the literature is still missing analogous
training studies that examine the effect of feedback,
language, and executive functions on the development of
second-order theory of mind during the primary school
years, except for a recent training study with 9- and 10-yearolds that highlighted the important role of conversation

The ability to reason about another person’s mental states,
such as belief, desires and knowledge – first-order theory of
mind – develops between the ages three and four. On the
other hand, children need one or two more years to reason
about a person who reasons about another person – secondorder theory of mind. Is it possible to accelerate the
development of theory of mind? There are several training
studies that showed that it is possible to teach preschool
children to pass first-order false belief tasks. However, the
literature is missing analogous training effects for school-age
children with respect to second-order false belief tasks. In this
study, we focus on the role of feedback in the development of
second-order false belief reasoning in two different conditions
in children between the ages five and six: (i) feedback with
explanation, (ii) feedback without explanation. Children’s
performance improved in both conditions. Previous theories
suggest either that children’s development of second-order
theory of mind requires conceptual changes or that 4-5 year
old children have cognitive constraints that need to be
overcome in order for them to be able to apply second-order
theory of mind. In line with our findings, however, we argue
that five-year-old children who cannot yet pass the secondorder false belief task reason about the false belief questions
based on the reasoning strategy that they most frequently use
in daily life (i.e. first-order or zero-order theory of mind).
Moreover, we argue that most of the time children can revise
their wrong reasoning strategy and change to the correct
second-order reasoning strategy based on repeated exposure
to the feedback “Correct/Wrong” together with the correct
answer.
Keywords: Second-order theory of mind, false belief
reasoning, feedback, training.

Introduction
To understand and predict the behavior of others, people
regularly reason about other people’s mental states, such as
beliefs, desires, knowledge and intentions. This ability is
called theory of mind (ToM) (Premack & Woodruff, 1978).
If we reason about world facts such as the location of an
object, we do not attribute any mental states to another
person (zero-order reasoning). However, if we reason about
what a colleague believes about the location of the object,
we are attributing a belief to that colleague (first-order
ToM). In more complex social situations, we do not only
reason about what a colleague believes but also we reason
about what a colleague believes that we think (second-order
ToM) and so forth. Those different orders of reasoning
develop with age.

108

Figure 1: The Chocolate Bar story (see Materials section; Illustrator ©Avik Kumar Maitra)
about mental states in a nonliteral interpretation ToM task
(Lecce et al., 2014). Before the empirical training study that
we report here, we performed a computational cognitive
modeling study, which predicted that children who are
between the ages of 5 and 6 can learn to pass second-order
false belief stories with the help of only the feedback
“Correct/Wrong”, without explanation (Arslan, Taatgen, &
Verbrugge, 2013). The cognitive model starts to reason
about a second-order false belief question (e.g. “Where does
Ayla think that Murat will look for the chocolate?”) from its
own perspective (zero-order reasoning) and gives an answer
accordingly (i.e. the real location of the chocolate).
The theoretical explanation behind our modeling choice is
that young children experience reasoning about world facts
predominantly from their own perspective. However, after
the model repeatedly receives the feedback “Wrong”, the
model increments its strategy one level up (first-order
reasoning), and gives an answer accordingly (i.e. what
Murat thinks about the location of the chocolate). Because
this is still not the correct answer, the model still gets the
feedback “Wrong”. It then again increments its strategy by
one level (second-order reasoning), and, finally, it gives the
correct answer (i.e. where Ayla thinks that Murat will look
for the chocolate). This time, because the answer is correct,
the model gets the feedback “Correct”, and it stabilizes its
second-order strategy.
Thus, our model suggests that in principle, children
around the age of 5 can pass second-order false belief tasks.
However, the problem that they still encounter is that, while
their conceptual development has advanced far enough to
understand that people can have different second-level
perspectives, they are not used to reasoning about secondorder mental states in their daily lives yet. Thus, we propose
that by getting sufficient experience and by getting the
feedback “Correct/Wrong”, children can revise their
reasoning strategy and can pass second-order false belief
tasks.
Therefore, the goal of the current study is to test our
model’s prediction (Arslan, Taatgen, and Verbrugge, 2013)
that children between the ages 5 and 6 can learn to pass
second-order false belief tasks with the help of feedback.

Method
Participants
A sample of 51 Dutch 5 to 6 year-old children from
predominantly upper-middle-class families was recruited
from a primary school in Groningen, the Netherlands, and
tested individually in their school in a separate room. The
children were pre-tested to ensure that they had not yet fully
developed second-order reasoning about false beliefs.
Accordingly, four children who gave correct answers for all
of the three second-order false belief questions contained in
pre-test were excluded from our analysis, as well as one
child who experienced technical problems in one run of the
experiment. Therefore, the analysis included the results of
23 children in the ‘feedback with explanation’ group (15
female, Mage=5.8 years, SE=0.06, range: 5.1 – 6.2), and 23
children in the ‘feedback without explanation’ group (10
female, Mage=5.8 years, SE=0.09, range: 5.2 – 6.8).

Materials
Second-order false belief stories. We constructed 31
different second-order false belief stories of three different
types: (i) 3 ‘Three locations’ stories, (ii) 14 ‘Three goals’
stories, (iii) 14 ‘Decoy-gift’ stories. For all stories, children
were asked a question that required second-order false belief
attribution, as well as some control questions. In the
literature, second-order false belief questions often have two
possible answers, for example, two locations. We
constructed ‘three locations’ and ‘three goals’ stories in
such a way that our second-order false belief questions have
three different possible answers, according to which we can
distinguish children’s level of reasoning (i.e. zero-order,
first-order, second-order). Figure 1 shows the prototype
example of a ‘three-locations’ story, namely the Chocolate
Bar story. In each story type, we fixed the general story
structure, but we changed the protagonists’ gender,
appearance and name, as well as objects, locations and
further context of the stories.
‘Three locations’ stories were constructed based on
Flobbe and colleagues’ (2008) Chocolate Bar story (see
Figure 1), as follows. Two siblings play in a room. The
mother gives a chocolate bar to her son Murat but not to her

109

daughter Ayla and then leaves the room. Murat eats some of
the chocolate, puts the remainder into the drawer, and leaves
the room as well. Because he did not give any chocolate to
his sister, Ayla wants to play a trick on him. She takes the
chocolate from the drawer and puts it into the toy box.
While she is hiding the chocolate in the toy box, Murat is
passing by the window and sees Ayla put the chocolate into
the toy box; however, Ayla does not see Murat. After that,
Ayla leaves the room, too. Then the mother enters to tidy up
the room; she finds the chocolate in the toy box, and she
places it on the TV stand. The experimenter asks the
participant the second-order false belief question: “Where
does Ayla think that her brother Murat will look for the
chocolate?”. There are three possible locations to be
reported to this question: the drawer (second-order answer),
the toy box (first-order answer), and the TV stand (zeroorder answer).
‘Three goals’ stories included and extended the stories
used in Hollebrandse, van Hout, and Hendriks’ (2014)
study. One of the examples of this story type is as follows:
Ruben and Myrthe play in their room. Myrthe tells Ruben
that she will go to buy chocolate-chip cookies from the bake
sale at the church and she leaves the house. After that, their
mother comes home and tells Ruben that she just visited the
bake sale. Ruben asks his mother whether they have
chocolate-chip cookies at the bake sale. The mother says,
“No, they have only apple pies”. Then Ruben says, “Oh,
then Myrthe will buy an apple pie”, Meanwhile, Myrthe is
at the bake sale and asks for the chocolate-chip cookies. The
saleswoman says, “Sorry, we only have muffins”. Myrthe
buys some muffins and goes back home. While she is on her
way home, she meets the mailman and tells him that she
bought some muffins for her brother Ruben. The mailman
asks her what Ruben thinks that she bought. At this point,
the experimenter asks the participant “What was Myrthe’s
answer to the mailman?” There are three possible answers
that children might report: chocolate-chip cookies, which
Myrthe told Ruben initially (second-order answer); an apple
pie, which the mother told Ruben (first-order answer); and
muffins, which Myrthe really bought (zero-order answer).
‘Decoy gift’ stories were constructed based on Sullivan
and colleagues’ (1994) Birthday Puppy story, on the
following lines: A father deliberately lies to his daughter
about the present he will give her for her birthday, in order
to surprise her later. However, when the father is not in the
room, the daughter finds her real birthday present. In the
meantime, the daughter’s grandmother calls the father and
asks him what the daughter thinks that she is getting for her
birthday. In this story, there are two possible objects that the
participants might report: the decoy gift about which the
parent deliberately lied to his child (second-order answer),
and the real present that the child found (zero-order and
first-order answer).
Second-order true belief stories. In the true belief stories,
children were asked to answer a question that required
attribution of a second-order true belief. We constructed two
‘decoy gift’ stories and two ‘three goals’ stories. The true

belief stories have the same structure as the false belief
stories. However, the protagonist whose belief the child has
to report entertains a true belief instead of a false belief. For
instance, in the true belief story corresponding to the ‘decoy
gift’ story given above, the daughter finds her real birthday
present, but the father is also in the room and they jointly
attend the present. Therefore, this time the correct answer to
the second-order true belief question is not the same as the
second-order false belief answer.
Counting span task. This task is a simple working
memory task. We adapted it from Towse and colleagues’
(1998) study. In the task, there are red triangles and blue
squares on each card. Children were instructed to count
aloud the blue squares by pointing at them and to remember
their total number on each card. The experimenter told them
that after they counted the targets on the first card, the next
card would be shown on the screen and they should repeat
the same procedure. After being sure that children
understood the instructions, the real experiment started.
In the first level, after two cards, the children were asked
to report the total number of blue shapes per card, in the
same order that the cards had been presented. Each level had
three trials. If a child reported all numbers back correctly for
a trial, positive feedback was provided in the form of an
audio file saying “Well done!” together with a green happy
smiley on the screen. If a child was not able to report all the
target numbers correctly, a neutral face together with an
audio “Let’s try another one!” was presented. If a child
correctly reported two out of three trials at a given level,
then the difficulty was increased to a higher level, meaning
that the number of cards was increased by one. For the
scoring, we adapted the same criteria of Towse and
colleagues’ (1998) study. In this scoring procedure, the
highest level (number of cards) for which two of the three
trials were correct was noted as the main part of the score.
Moreover, the number of a child’s correct answers in the
next level was included as the secondary part of its score.

Procedure
All the stimuli were presented to the children in a 15-inch
MacBook Pro and were implemented with Psychopy2
v.1.78.01. Each child was tested on four different days,
which are referred to as sessions for the rest of this paper.
There was at least one day and at most three days of
intermission between the sessions, and there was at least one
week of intermission between the first and the fourth
sessions. Each session took approximately 30 minutes.
In the first session (pre-test), children were pre-tested in
order to test that they did not pass all of the three secondorder false belief stories (1 ‘three goals’ 1 ‘decoy gift’, and
1 ‘three locations’). If a child gave correct answers for all of
them, their score was coded as 3, and they were excluded
from the data analysis. In addition to the stories, children
were tested with the counting span task. The presentation of
the order of the tasks was randomized.
In the second and the third sessions (training sessions),
children were trained using six different second-order

110

Figure 3: Children’s improvement in second-order false belief scores from pre- to post-tests (error bars represent SEs).
false belief stories (3 ‘three goals’, and 3 ‘decoy gift’) in
each training session. Therefore, the maximum score for
each training session was 6. In addition to the second-order
false belief stories, the children were tested with two
second-order true belief stories in order to capture whether a
child could have applied a simple strategy instead of
reasoning about the questions. The true belief stories were
always asked after the 3 false belief stories. Because
children were not trained with ‘three locations’ stories
during the two training sessions, this type of story was used
to test the transfer effect of the training, from pre-test to
post-test. Finally, in the fourth session (post-test), children
were post-tested using exactly the same procedure as used in
the pre-test1.
Stories were pseudo-randomly drawn from a pool that
contained 31 different false belief stories and a pool of 4
different true belief stories. Drawings illustrating the story
episodes were presented one by one, together with the
corresponding audio recordings. The drawings remained
visible throughout the story. Control questions were asked
before the second-order belief questions, to test that children
did not have major memory and linguistic problems about
the stories and the structure of the questions. A child was
never tested on the same story twice.
Children were tested in two different experimental
conditions: (i) feedback with explanation; (ii) feedback
without explanation. For the feedback with explanation
group, the feedback “Correct/Wrong” together with an
explanation was provided in an interactive fashion (e.g.
“Correct/Wrong, Did Murat see that Ayla put the chocolate
into the toy box? Yes, right? Did Ayla see Murat? No, right?
That is why Ayla thinks that Murat will look for the

chocolate in the place where he put it, and that is the drawer,
isn’t it?”). For the feedback without explanation group, only
the feedback “Correct/Wrong” was provided, together with
the correct answer without any further explanation. No
feedback was provided to any child during pre- and posttests.

Results
We used binomial linear mixed effect models by using the
glmer function in the lme4 package (Bates, Maechler,
Bolker & Walker, 2014) for the statistical software R. The
estimates of the coefficients are reported in log odds.

Second-order false belief stories
As can be seen from Figure 3, there is a considerable
improvement of children’s scores from pre-test to post-test
(from 31% to 69% correct in the feedback with explanation
condition, and from 23% to 51% correct in the feedback
without explanation condition). Figure 4 shows children’s
improvements in second-order false belief scores from preto post-tests for different types of stories in both
experimental conditions.
A binominal mixed effects model was fitted on the scores
with an interaction between test condition (pre-test/posttest), experimental condition (feedback with and without
explanation), and story type (‘decoy gift’, ‘three goals’, and
‘three locations’). As random effects, we had intercepts for
subjects, and random slopes for time per subject correlated
with the random intercepts. Table 1 lists the estimates and zstatistics of the mixed-effects model.
There are significant main effects for post-test and ‘decoy
gift’ stories. In the feedback with explanation condition,
children’s performance increased equally for all three story
types. In contrast, as can be seen from Figure 4, in the
feedback without explanation condition children’s scores of
‘three locations’ stories did not improve as much as for the
other two story types, which were used during training
sessions. However, we couldn’t find any statistically
significant evidence to show this effect.

1

Children were also tested with a theory of mind game during
pre- and post-test in order to investigate the far transfer effect. In
this game, children were expected to reason about the computer’s
decision (first-order ToM) and about the computer’s belief about
their own decision (second-order ToM). However, the task was too
hard for the 5-6 years olds. For this reason, we do not present the
game and its results here.

111

(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Children’s improvements in second-order false belief scores from pre- to post-tests for different types of stories in
(a) the feedback with explanation group and (b) the feedback without explanation group.
Table 1: The estimates and z-values of the mixed-effects
model for pre- and post-tests
β

SE

z

Counting span task
To see whether counting span task scores predict the false
belief scores and the learning effect, we added the counting
span score with its interaction with time to the binomial
linear mixed effect model. We couldn’t find any significant
effect of counting span task scores on the second-order false
belief scores.

p

Intercept

-1.56

0.55

-2.83

.005**

Post-test

2.32

0.90

2.57

.010*

Without explanation

0.28

0.75

0.37

.71

‘Decoy gift’

1.65

0.69

2.39

.017*

‘Three goals’

0.05

0.78

0.06

.949

Posttest: without explanation

-2.41

1.29

-1.87

.062.

Posttest: ‘decoy gift’

-0.24

1.13

-0.21

.832

Posttest: ‘three goals’

0.27

1.12

0.24

.810

Without explanation: ‘decoy
gift’

-0.81

0.96

-0.84

.398

Without explanation: ‘three
goals’

-0.33

1.08

-0.30

.762

Posttest: without
explanation: ‘decoy gift’

2.50

1.58

1.59

.112

Posttest: without
explanation: ‘three goals’

1.24

1.57

0.79

.430

General Discussion, Conclusions and Future
Directions
To the best our knowledge, we have shown for the first time
in the literature that children’s performance on the secondorder false belief task can be improved with the help of both
feedback with explanation and feedback without
explanation. Moreover, our finding that children performed
around 85% correct on the true belief stories suggests that
the training effect cannot be interpreted simply by assuming
that children were applying a simple strategy instead of
learning to attribute second-order false beliefs.
Because we provided detailed explanations with
interactive feedback in the feedback with explanation group,
the children’s improvement in that group was expected, also
considering Clements, Rustin, and McCallum’s (2000) and
Melot and Angeard’s (2003) studies that found a positive
effect of training with feedback with explanations in firstorder theory of mind tasks.
Moreover, our results about the improvement in the
feedback without explanation group are in line with our
previous computational cognitive model’s predictions that
children’s performance will improve with the help of
feedback without explanation, simply on the basis of
“Correct”/”Wrong” feedback (Arslan, Taatgen &
Verbrugge, 2013). On the other hand, this result differs from
Clements, Rustin, and McCallum’s (2000) finding in the

Second-order true belief stories
In order to make sure that children did not use a simple
strategy instead of reasoning about the questions, we
investigated children’s performance on second-order true
belief questions. Overall, the true belief questions were
answered correctly in 85% of cases in both conditions. The
high proportions of correct answers suggest that children did
not use a simple strategy (such as “take the object in the topleft picture”) in the false belief tasks, otherwise they would
probably have used the same (then incorrect) answers for
the true-belief questions.

112

first-order false belief reasoning domain, namely that
explanation is necessary for training effects. Note that
Clements and colleagues (2000) did not provide the correct
answer to the children after giving the feedback
(“Correct/Wrong”), in contrast to our study.
What does it mean to have a training effect in both the
feedback with and without explanation conditions? The
improvements in the feedback with explanation condition
suggest that 5- to 6-year olds who cannot yet pass the
second-order false belief tasks before the experiment are
actually able to pass those tasks with the help of related
explanations, and there is no cognitive constraint to prevent
them passing the second-order false belief tasks. In addition,
the improvements in the feedback without explanation
condition suggest that even if children do not receive any
explanation, they can still revise their strategy and can pass
the second-order false belief tasks with the help of feedback
“Correct/Wrong” together with the correct answer. This
result, together with our previous computational cognitive
model, can be interpreted as follows: children might be able
to make the necessary reasoning steps, however, they might
not be used to applying those strategies in practice.
We are currently running the third control condition of the
experiment, in which we are training children with secondorder false belief tasks without any feedback. Because we
do not have the data for this condition in this paper, we
cannot rule out another possible interpretation of the
training effect. That is, just hearing second-order false belief
stories and answering the related questions might help
children. Moreover, in order to be able to conclude that the
training effect is not just for a short time period, we are also
conducting a follow-up test in which children are tested
again a couple of months later than the actual training
sessions.

Bates D., Maechler M., Bolker B.M. & Walker S. (2014).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and S4.
ArXiv e-print; submitted to Journal of Statistical
Software, http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.5823.
Clements, W., Rustin, C. L., & McCallum, S. (2000).
Promoting the transition from implicit to explicit
understanding: A training study of false belief.
Developmental Science, 3, 81–92.
Flobbe, L., Verbrugge, R., Hendriks, P., & Krämer, I.
(2008). Children’s application of theory of mind in
reasoning and language. Journal of Logic, Language and
Information, 17 (4), 417-442.
Gopnik, A., Wellman, H.M., 2012. Reconstructing
constructivism: Causal models, Bayesian learning
mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological
Bulletin 138, 1085–1108.
Hale, C. M., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (2003). The influence of
language on theory of mind: A training study.
Developmental Science, 6, 346–359.
Hollebrandse, B., van Hout, A., & Hendriks, P. (2014).
Children’s first and second-order false-belief reasoning in
a verbal and a low-verbal task. Synthese, 191 (3), 321333.
Kloo, D., & Perner, J. (2003). Training transfer between
card sorting and false belief understanding: Helping
children
apply
conflicting
descriptions.
Child
Development, 74 (6), 1823-1839.
Kloo, D., & Perner, J. (2008). Training theory of mind and
executive control: A tool for improving school
achievement? Mind, Brain, and Education, 2, 122–127.
Lecce, S., Bianco, F., Devine, R. T. & Hughes, C. (2014).
Promoting theory of mind during childhood: A training
program. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 126, 52 67.
Melot, A. N., & Angeard, N. (2003). Theory of mind: Is
training contagious? Developmental Science, 6, 178–184.
Perner, J. & Wimmer, H. (1985). “John thinks that Mary
thinks that...”: Attribution of second-order beliefs by 5- to
10-year old children. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 5, 125-137.
Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee
have a theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 4.
515-526.
Sullivan, K., Zaitchik, D. & Tager-Flusberg. H. (1994).
Preschoolers can attribute second-order beliefs.
Developmental Psychology, 30 (3). 395-402.
Towse, J. N., Hitch, G. J., & Hutton, U. (1998). A
reevaluation of working memory capacity in children.
Journal of Memory and Language, 39 (2), 195-217.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory-of-mind development: The truth about
false belief. Child Development, 72, 655–684.
Wimmer, H. & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children’s understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13. 103–128.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research for Vici grant NWO-277-80-01,
awarded to Rineke Verbrugge. We are also thankful to the
managers and teachers of Joseph Haydn School in
Groningen and to the children’s families who allowed us to
carry on this study. Finally, we would like to thank Avik
Kumar Maitra for the illustrations of the stories, Bea
Valkenier for being the voice of the stories, Maximilian
Seidler for running the pilot study and for the code of the
experiment, and Harmen de Weerd for his continuous
support.

References
Arslan, B., Taatgen, N. A. & Verbrugge, R. (2013).
Modeling developmental transitions in reasoning about
false beliefs of others. In R. West & T. Stewart (eds.),
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Cognitive Modeling, Ottawa: Carleton University. 77-82.
Arslan, B., Hohenberger, A., & Verbrugge, R. (Submitted).
The role of language and memory in the development of
second-order theory of mind.

113

