The perception and memory of object properties: The role of attention, intention,
and information detection
Brandon J. Thomas (thomab9@mail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 47 Corry Blvd
Cincinnati, OH 45219-0376 USA

Michael A. Riley (rileym@ucmail.uc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 47 Corry Blvd
Cincinnati, OH 45219-0376 USA

Abstract
The current study sought to investigate the relationship
between attention, perception and memory in the perception
and recall of attended and unattended properties of objects.
Two experiments tested whether the intention to perceive
maximum overhead reaching height with the use of handheld
rods with different mass and rotational inertia yielded
information for participants to remember the rods’ heaviness
after they were removed from view. Participants remembered
the difference in heaviness of rods but only when haptic
information was solely available during the earlier perception
of overhead reaching height and vision was occluded. The
results support an ecological approach to perception, attention
and memory, and suggest that information detected for
perception can be later used to remember other object
properties that have a correlated informational basis.
Keywords: remembered affordances, direct perception,
ecological psychology, information, attention

The ecological approach defines attention as an active
process of detecting goal-relevant information about the
environment (E. J. Gibson, 1969; E. J. Gibson & Pick, 2000;
J. J. Gibson, 1966, 1979). Michaels and Carello (1981)
consider attention as the control of information detection,
which proposes that an organism’s intention is a driving
force of attention and subsequent information detection
(e.g., Arzamarski, Isenhower, Kay, Turvey, and Michaels,
2010; Carello & Turvey, 2004; Michaels & Isenhower,
2011; Riley, Wagman, Santana, Carello, & Turvey, 2002;
Stephen, Arzamarski, & Michaels, 2010).
Consonant with this explication, Michaels, Weier, and
Harrison (2007) found that when participants perceived the
affordances (action capabilities) of multiple tools in a
number of different behavioral tasks, perception of tool
suitability was accomplished by attending to task-specific
properties of the tools and information about each tool was
generated by differential exploratory movement patterns for
different tools and tasks. Participants tended to rely on
visual information when it was available, even when
concurrently available dynamic touch information could
have supported the perception of affordances. Information
that specified the environmental property necessary to fulfill
the task was attended, detected, and constrained the
perception of tool suitability.

The ecological approach also suggests that information
within ambient energy arrays lawfully specifies (i.e., relates
in a 1:1 fashion to) intentionally perceived properties of the
environment (J. J. Gibson, 1966, 1979). However, a number
of studies suggest that individuals can use variables that
correlate
with
specifying
variables—nonspecifying
variables (Gilden & Proffitt, 1994; Jacobs & Michaels,
2001; Jacobs, Runeson, & Michaels, 2001; Runeson &
Vedelar, 1993) to perceive properties of the environment.
The degree of perceptual accuracy with the use of
nonspecifying variables depends on the magnitude of the
correlation between the nonspecifying variable and the
property in question. If a perceiver intends to perceive a
certain property, such as the length of a handheld rod, then
the perceiver might have incidentally obtained
nonspecifying information of properties that merely
correlate with the information detected about length.
Research on dynamic touch has provided an
understanding of the different informational variables used
to perceive both the length and heaviness of handheld rods.
Perceived length is a power function of the rods’ first
moment of inertia (I1) raised to a positive value and the third
moment of inertia (I3) raised to a negative value (Fitzpatrick,
Carello, & Turvey, 1994). Perceived heaviness is a function
of the object’s mass, inertia ellipsoid volume, and inertia
ellipsoid symmetry (Shockley, Grocki, Carello, & Turvey,
2001). For a review on dynamic touch see Carello &
Turvey, 2000) The variables I1 and I3 influence both the
perceived length and heaviness of a wielded object. If
perceivers detect information that expresses the influence of
those mechanical quantities, then the intention to perceive
the length of an unseen rod by dynamic touch might
incidentally enable rod heaviness perception. In other
words, the correlated informational bases of perceived
length and heaviness by dynamic touch might permit people
to incidentally perceive one by detecting the other.
We hypothesized that the intention to perceive a property
will partially support the memory of properties that share an
informational basis with the intended property. Other
informational variables that do not correlate with that of the
intended property should not be remembered. We tested this
hypothesis using the remembered affordance paradigm
(Wagman, Thomas, Day, & McBride, 2013), which has
previously been used to uncover specific aspects of the

2380

environment that people detect (Thomas & Riley, 2014). It
is possible that individuals can incidentally remember object
properties that differ from the properties they initially
intended to perceive if the informational variable detected
correlates with the “unintended” object property (i.e., if the
detected information acts as a nonspecifying variable). This
should, however, depend on the salience and availability of
the type of information available to the perceiver. We
therefore manipulated the availability of different perceptual
modalities during the task.

the length of the handle, the rod could have extended reach
by a maximum of 32.1 cm). Brown construction paper was
wrapped around the distal portion of rod, covering it from
the top of the handle to the end of the rod, and red duct tape
covered the distal end of the rod. In addition to the 50 g
weight at the top of the handle, which was attached to rods,
the heavy rod had an additional 50 g weight attached to the
distal end. The properties of the rod set are listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Metric rod properties for Experiments 1 and 2.

Experiment 1

Property

In Experiment 1, visual and dynamic touch information
were available concurrently to participants while they
reported their maximum ability to reach overhead with a
rod. We predicted that perceived reach-ability would not
differ between the two wielded rods, since they differed in
weight but not length. Participants should use geometric
visual information in this context, consistent with Michaels
et al. (2007). We also expected that participants would not
report differences in heaviness between the two rods once
the rods had been removed from view, even though one of
the rods had more mass than the other. We expected this
because the visual information detected to perceive reachability does not correlate with rod heaviness information.

Method
Participants
Thirty-seven undergraduates from the University of
Cincinnati participated in this experiment for course credit.
Written informed consent was obtained prior to data
collection. Given the height constraints of the laboratory
and apparatus, participants were required to be no taller than
173 cm. The average height of participants was 164.4 cm
(SD = 5.1 cm). The sample consisted of 32 females and 5
males, and their average age was 20.0 yrs (SD = 3.9 yrs).
Materials & Apparatus
When providing reaching height reports, participants
instructed an experimenter to use a pulley and string to raise
or lower a marker consisting of 11 stacked washers (11 g
mass, 3 cm diameter, 2 cm tall) until they felt it was at their
maximum reaching height. The marker was suspended via
the pulley system attached to the top of a planar surface
(264 cm tall × 165 cm wide). To create a uniform
background behind the marker, grey sheets were draped
over the surface. A tape measure affixed to the back of the
vertical surface was used to measure the height of the
suspended marker once participants finalized their
perceptual reports. The tape measure was not visible to
participants.
Two 46 cm long aluminum rods were used. Both rods had
a 50 g circular weight (5.2 cm diameter and 1.9 cm tall)
attached 13.9 cm from the bottom. The rod’s “handle” was
the length of the rod that extended below this weight
resulting in an effective rod length of 32.1 cm (i.e., given

Length
Mass
I1 (g × cm2)
I2 (g × cm2)
I3 (g × cm2)

Light
Rod
46 cm
111.4 g
36,766
35,739
1,780

Heavy
rod
46 cm
163.1 g
126,657
125,183
2,945

Standard
rod
46 cm
50.5 g
28,971
28,401
604

Procedure
Each participant stood 285 cm from the vertical surface in
a viewing area (50  50 cm) that was centered relative to the
vertical surface. In each perceptual report condition,
participants completed three ascending trials (in which the
marker was initially set at its lowest position and then raised
during reporting) and three descending trials (in which the
marker was initially set at its highest position and then
lowered during reporting). Ascending and descending trials
alternated.
All participants completed the conditions in blocked
fashion in the same order (rod present trials must
necessarily precede rod absent trials). There were two sets
of trial blocks. Each set began with a block of reach-withrod-present trials. Half of the participants wielded the light
rod in this block, and half wielded the heavy rod.
Participants held out their right arm so that it was parallel to
their body and the rod was placed in their hand, aligned with
the distal end of the handle. Participants were instructed to
wield the rod comfortably in their hand about their wrist,
elbow, or shoulder as long as they did not explicitly practice
reaching upward with the rod or raise their elbow above
shoulder height. Participants reported the maximum height
they would be able reach if they were to walk over to the
front of the vertical surface and use the rod to reach for the
marker. The reports were provided by instructing the
experimenter to raise or lower the marker until it was at the
maximum height that the participant believed he or she
could reach. The experimenter adjusted the height of the
marker from behind the vertical surface and was not visible
to the participant. Participants were able to fine-tune the
height of the marker on a given trial until they were satisfied
with the report. After each trial, participants were asked to
close their eyes while the marker was set for the next trial.
At the conclusion of this condition, participants closed
their eyes and the rod was placed behind the vertical surface
and out of view. They then performed the reach-with-hand

2381

condition, in which participants reported the maximum
height they could reach if they were to walk over to the
front of the vertical surface and reach up with the fingertips
of their right hand1.
Next, in the reach-with-rod-absent conditions,
participants performed the same perceptual task as in the
reach-with-rod-present conditions except the rod remained
out of view. Participants were instructed to imagine that
they were still holding the rod and report the maximum
height they would be able to reach if they were to walk over
to the vertical surface, and use it to reach for the marker.
The order of conditions resulted in a delay of a few minutes
(i.e., the duration of the trial block for the reach-with-hand
condition) between the reach-with-rod-present and the
reach-with-rod-absent conditions.
In the heaviness conditions, a magnitude estimation
strategy was used to obtain reports in which the participant
was handed the standard rod in their right hand and told that
they would refer to it to report the heaviness of the rod that
they wielded in the first block of trials. The participant was
told that the standard rod was assigned a value of 100 that
did not correspond to any actual units of heaviness, and that
if they thought the rod held earlier was twice as heavy as the
standard, to give it a value of 200 or a value of 50 if they
thought it was half as heavy. However, they were told that
they could give the rod any value. Prior to this point in the
experiment, participants had no knowledge that they were to
report the heaviness of the rod.
Participants then repeated those four conditions in the
second set of trial blocks. Participants made reach-ability
and heaviness reports with the other rod in the second set of
trial blocks2. The second set continued with reach-with-rodabsent, reach-with-hand, reach-with-rod-absent, and
heaviness blocks. The experimental design is schematized in
Figure 1. After completing the first set of trial blocks, it is
likely that participants expected to be instructed to report
heaviness in the second set of trial blocks, and thus may
have attended explicitly to rod heaviness. Our primary
hypothesis about whether attending to rod length would
support perception of rod heaviness was most appropriately
evaluated using the data from the first set of trial blocks. For
these reasons we included the set as a factor in analyses of
heaviness reports. There were six trials per condition,
yielding a total of 48 trials in the experiment (not including
the two heaviness reports in sets 1 and 2).
After the completion of all trials, the experimenter
measured participants’ standing height and maximum
reaching heights when reaching with their right hand and
when reaching with the heavy and light rods held in their
right hand. At no prior point in the experiment did any
participant approach the surface or attempt to reach for the
marker.

Figure 1: A schematic of the experimental design and
procedure for Experiments 1 and 2.
Results & Discussion
Each participant’s perceptual reports were averaged
across the six trials per condition. Those data were screened
for outliers that were 2.5 SD less or greater than the median.
One outlier was found and that participant’s data were
excluded from any further analyses. The significance of the
main effects and interaction did not change by removing
this participant.
Mean perceived maximum reaching height reports were
compared in a two-way, repeated-measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) with the factors of rod (light and heavy)
and condition (reach-with-rod-present, reach-with-hand, and
reach-with-rod-absent). There was a significant effect of
condition, F(1, 66) = 243.8, p < .001,

 p2

= .88. According

to Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc t-tests, the reach-with-rodpresent (M = 219.0 cm) and reach-with-rod-absent (M =
219.8 cm) conditions did not significantly differ (p = .972),
but both were significantly greater than the reach-with-hand
condition (M = 201.9 cm), both p < .001. The main effect of
rod (F(1, 66) = 0.014, p = .906,

 p2

= .01) and rod ×

condition interaction (F(2, 66) = 2.14, p = .216,

 p2

= .06)

were not significant. There was no difference between the
mean reach-with-hand reports when participants reported
the reach-ability of the light rod (M = 201.5) compared to
the heavy rod (M = 202.2), t(33) = 0.62, p = .542 (see Figure
2).

1

The reach-with-hand condition was included to introduce a
delay between rod present and absent conditions and to replicate
the method of Thomas and Riley (2014).
2 Participants made reports for the heavy rod in set 2 if they
reported on the light rod in set 1 and vice versa.

2382

present and -absent conditions were different from the
reach-with-hand condition. Participants did not detect the
available dynamic touch information about the rods’ length,
even though participants actively wielded the rods. There
was no difference in remembered heaviness between the
light and heavy rods when participants reported the rods’
heaviness in set 1. Though, participants were sensitive to the
rods’ difference in mass and rotational inertia in set 2 once
they became aware that they would be asked to report
heaviness.
Figure 2: Mean perceptual reports (cm) for the reachwith-rod-present, reach-with-hand, and reach-with-rodabsent conditions × heavy and light rods in Experiment 1.
Error bars represent within-subjects standard errors.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, the rods were occluded from view in the
reach-with-rod-present conditions. We expected participants
to perceive that they could reach higher with the heavy rod
because of its difference in mass and mass distribution. We
also expected that attention to dynamic touch information
about length would support accurate discrimination of the
two rods’ heaviness in set 1.

Because of the carryover effects that were anticipated
when participants reported the heaviness of the rod in the set
2, we compared mean heaviness reports in a two-way
ANOVA with a between-subjects factor of rod (light and
heavy) and a within-subjects factor of set (set 1 and set 2).
There was a significant main effect of rod F(1, 32) = 10.08,

Method

p = .003,  p = .24, with the heavy rod (M = 201.3) eliciting
2

greater reports than the light rod (M = 142.5). There was a
significant main effect of set, F(1, 32) = 6.39, p = .017,

 p2

= .17, with greater reports in set 2 (M = 187.6) than set 1 (M
= 156.2). There was also a significant interaction, F(1, 32) =
7.23, p = .017,

 p2

= .18. A simple-effects test revealed that

the set 1 heavy condition (M = 168.8) did not differ from the
set 1 light condition (M = 143.5), p = .263. However, the set
2 heavy condition (M = 233.8) significantly differed from
the set 2 light condition (M = 141.5), p < .001. A second set
of simple effects tests revealed that the set 1 heavy rod
condition differed from the set 2 heavy rod condition, p =
.001. The set 1 light rod condition did not differ from the set
2 light rod condition, p = .910 (see Figure 3).

Participants
Thirty-nine undergraduates from the University of
Cincinnati participated in this experiment for course credit.
Written informed consent was obtained prior to data
collection. Participants were required to be no taller than
173 cm for the same reasons as Experiment 1. The average
height of participants was 166.4 cm (SD = 6.4 cm). The
sample consisted of 38 females and 1 male, and their
average age was 19.9 yrs (SD = 4.3 yrs).
Materials, Apparatus, & Procedure
The materials and apparatus from Experiment 1 were
reused in Experiment 2. A grey curtain that fully occluded
the wielded rods was also utilized. The curtain was hung
from the ceiling and had a slit that participants put their
hand through.
The procedure was the same as Experiment 1, except for
in the reach-with-rod-present conditions, in which
participants put their hand through the slit in the curtain.
The rod was placed in the participant’s hand so that the
distal end of the handle was even with the bottom of the
hand.
Results & Discussion
Mean perceived maximum reaching height reports were
compared in a two-way, repeated-measures ANOVA with
the factors of rod (light and heavy) and condition (reachwith-rod-present, reach-with-hand, and reach-with-rodabsent). There was a main effect of rod, F(1, 41) = 18.36, p

Figure 3: Mean magnitude estimated heaviness reports for
set 1 and set 2 × heavy and light rods in Experiment 1. Error
bars represent within-subjects (set) and between-subjects
(rod) standard errors.

< .001,

 p2

= .31; heavy rod reports (M = 209.5 cm) were

greater than the light rod reports (M = 205.1 cm). There was
a significant effect of condition, F(2, 82) = 108.98, p < .001,

There was no difference in perceived reach-ability
between the light and heavy rods, and the reach-with-rod-

 p2

= .73. According to Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc t-

tests, all conditions significantly differed. The reach-with-

2383

rod-absent condition (M = 214.2 cm) was greater than the
reach-with-rod-present condition (M = 210.2 cm), and both
of those were greater than the reach-with-hand condition (M
= 197.5 cm), all p < .001. There was a significant rod ×
condition interaction, F(2, 82) = 5.24, p = .007,

 p2

= .11

(see Figure 4). Post-hoc simple-effects tests revealed that
the light and heavy rod conditions differed in the reachwith-present and -absent conditions (all p < .003), but the
rod conditions did not differ in the reach-with-hand
conditions (p = .276); this was expected because the rod
variable was essentially undefined during reach-with-hand
reports).

Reach-ability reports with the heavy rod were greater than
reports with the light rod in both the present and absent
conditions. Both present and absent reach-ability reports
with the rod were greater than reports in the reach-withhand condition. Also, reports of remembered heaviness were
significantly greater for the heavy than the light rod in both
set 1 and set 2. The set 1 heaviness results indicate that
perceived reach-ability with the rods by dynamic touch
supported the memory of the rods’ heaviness by dynamic
touch, because of the correlation in the variables that
determine both perceived heaviness and perceived reachability.

General Discussion

Figure 4: Mean perceptual reports (cm) for the reachwith-rod-present, reach-with-hand, and reach-with-rodabsent conditions × heavy and light rods in Experiment 2.
Error bars represent within-subjects standard errors.
Mean heaviness reports were compared in a two-way
ANOVA, with the between-subjects factor of rod (heavy
and light) and the within-subjects factor of set (set 1 and set
2). There was a significant main effect of rod F(1, 40) =
25.67, p < .001,

 p2

= .39, with greater heavy rod reports

(M = 239.9) than light rod reports (M = 158.9). Neither the
main effect of set, F(1, 40) = .69, p = .412,

 p2

= .02 or the

set × rod interaction were significant, F(1, 40) = 2.22, p =
.144,  p = .05 (see Figure 5).
2

Figure 5: Mean magnitude estimated heaviness reports for
set 1 and set 2 × heavy and light rods in Experiment 2. Error
bars represent within-subjects (set) and between-subjects
(rod) standard errors.

In Experiment 1, we predicted that participants would
detect visual, geometric information when perceiving reachability and that reports would not be affected by the
difference in mass and mass distribution of the two rods,
consistent with Michaels et al. (2007). In Experiment 2,
when vision was occluded, we predicted that participants
would detect dynamic touch information when perceiving
reach-ability and that reports would be constrained by the
specification of length based on the rods’ rotational inertia,
with greater reports for the heavy rod than the light rod.
Both of these hypotheses were confirmed.
We also predicted that the detection of information to
perceive reach-ability would support the memory of
heaviness when the information detected about rod length
correlates with that of heaviness. We expected this would be
the case in Experiment 2, since the informational bases of
perceived length and heaviness by dynamic touch correlate,
which was the only information about the rods available to
participants. However, we expected that the intention to
perceive reach-ability would not support the memory of
heaviness when the informational bases were uncorrelated
as they were in Experiment 1 (where participants attended to
visual, geometric information about rod length). Both of
these hypotheses were also confirmed. The results suggest
that nonspecifying informational variables can be used to
remember properties of objects that are not intentionally
perceived while the object is present.
The results are consistent with Craik’s (2002) claim that
retrieval is largely determined by the nature of processing
during encoding and the relationship between the retrieval
cue and the encoded stimulus. While we do not invoke
processing depth or elaboration during encoding in our
explanation, our results also suggest that the informational
variables detected during perception are a constraint on
remembering. The results of the current study also
contribute to the concept of implicit learning or implicit
knowledge. A. Reber (2003) defines implicit learning as
situation-neutral processing of stimuli beyond a person’s
awareness of the process or acquisition of the knowledge
obtained (for a review of implicit learning see Kihlstrom,
Dorfman, & Park, 2007; P. Reber, 2013). The results of the
current study add to this literature and suggest that implicit
perception and memory of object properties are constrained

2384

by the information detected to fulfill perception-action goals
while the object is present.
The current study highlights the constraints imposed on
experience by a perceiver-actors intention and the
information detected for fulfilling that intention. The current
study also demonstrates the potential utility of
nonspecifying variables for understanding the attention to,
and perception and memory of object properties. Future
investigations into the relationship between information
detected for perceiving and remembering might prove
insightful in understanding attention, perception, and
memory.

References
Arzamarski, R., Isenhower, R. W., Kay, B. A., Turvey, M.
T., & Michaels, C. F. (2010). Effects of intention
switching and feedback on attunement in dynamic touch.
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 72, 721–735.
Carello, C., & Turvey, M. T. (2000). Rotational invariants
and dynamic touch. In M. Heller (Eds.), Touch,
representation and blindness (pp. 27-66), New York:
Oxford University Press.
Craik, (2002). Levels of processing: Past, present…and
future? Memory, 10, 305-318.
Fitzpatrick, P., Carello, C., & Turvey, M. T. (1994).
Eigenvalues of the inertia tensor and exteroception by the
“muscular sense”. Neuroscience, 60, 551-568.
Gibson, E. J., & Pick, A. D. (2000). An ecological approach
to perceptual learning and development. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Gibson, E. J. (1969). Principles of perceptual learning and
development. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual
systems. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Gilden, D. L., & Proffitt, D. R. (1994). Heuristic judgment
of mass ratio in two-body collisions. Perception &
Psychophysics, 56, 708-720.
Jacobs, D. M., & Michaels, C. F. (2001). Individual
differences and the use of nonspecifying variables in
learning to perceive distance and size: Comments on
McConnell, Muchisky, and Bingham (1998). Perception
& Psychophysics, 63, 563-571.
Kihlstrom, J.F., Dorfman, J, & Park, L. (2007). Implicit and
explicit learning and memory. In M. Velmans & S.
Schneider (Eds.), A companion to consciousness (pp.
525-539). Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.
Jacobs, D. M., Runeson, S., & Michaels, C. F. (2001).
Learning to visually perceive the relative mass of
colliding balls in globally and locally constrained task
ecologies. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 27, 1019-1038.
Michaels, C. F., & Isenhower, R. W. (2011). Information
space as action space: perceiving the partial lengths of
rods rotated on an axle. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 73, 160-171.

Michaels, C. F., & Carello, C. (1981). Direct perception.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Michaels, C. F., Weier, Z., & Harrison, S. J. (2007). Using
vision and dynamic touch to perceive the affordances of
tools. Perception, 36, 750-772.
Reber, A.S. (1993). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge:
An essay on the cognitive unconscious. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Reber, P. J. (2013). The neural basis of implicit learning and
memory: A review of neuropsychological and
neuroimaging research. Neuropsychologia, 51, 20262042.
Riley, M. A., Wagman, J. B., Santana, M. V., Carello, C., &
Turvey, M. T. (2002). Perceptual behavior: Recurrence
analysis of a haptic exploratory procedure. Perception,
31, 481-510.
Runeson, S., & Vedeler, D. (1993). The indispensability of
pre-collision kinematics in the visual perception of
relative mass. Perception & Psychophysics, 53, 617-633.
Shockley, K., Grocki, M., Carello, C., & Turvey, M. T.
(2001). Somatosensory attunement to the rigid body laws.
Experimental Brain Research, 136, 133-137.
Stephen, D. G., Arzamarski, R., & Michaels, C. F. (2010).
The role of fractality in perceptual learning: Exploration
in dynamic touch. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 36, 1161-1173.
Thomas B. T., & Riley, M. A. (2014). Remembered
affordances reflect the fundamentally action-relevant,
context-specific nature of visual perception. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 40, 2361-2371.
Wagman, J. B., Thomas, B. J., McBride, D. M., & Day, B.
M. (2013). Perception of maximum reaching height when
the means of reaching are no longer in view. Ecological
Psychology, 25, 63-80.

2385

