The “Fundamental Attribution Error” is rational in an uncertain world.
Drew E. Walker (dehoffma@ucsd.edu), Kevin A. Smith (k2smith@ucsd.edu), Edward Vul (evul@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
Others’ internal qualities (e.g. dispositions, attitudes) are
not directly observable so we must infer them from
behavior. Classic attribution theories agree that we consider
both internal qualities and situational pressure when making
these judgments. However, one of the most well known
ideas in psychology is that social judgments are biased, and
we tend to underestimate the pressure that situations exert
and overestimate the influence of disposition (known as the
Fundamental Attribution Error). We propose that the social
judgments made in classic studies of attribution have been
interpreted as biased only because they have been compared
to an inappropriate benchmark of rationality predicated on
the assumption of deterministic dispositions and situations.
We show that these results are actually consistent with the
behavior of a simple ideal Bayesian observer who must
reason about uncertain and probabilistic influences of
situations and dispositions.
Keywords: Social Inference; Bayesian Inference; Attribution
Theory; Fundamental Attribution Error

Introduction
To navigate our social world we must predict how others
will behave, and how we should act around them. Since we
cannot directly observe the internal qualities that motivate
others, we must infer them from their behavior. Imagine you
see someone drop money in a donation jar when entering a
donation-funded museum. Do you conclude that she is a
generous person or just succumbing to the pressure imposed
by a watchful docent? In all such cases, it is not only
internal qualities (generosity) – but also external
circumstances (docent’s attention) – that influence behavior;
thus attributing a behavior to a situational or a dispositional
cause is an underdetermined problem.
An extensive literature suggests that there are systematic
discrepancies between the social inferences people should
make, and the inferences they do make. A considerable
number of behavioral experiments using rich social
situations have concluded that we have a tendency to
disregard circumstantial pressures, and instead overestimate
the role of disposition. That is, when we witness someone
drop money in the museum donation jar we are prone to
think that she is a generous person, and not properly
consider the external pressure the docent is exerting. This
phenomenon, known as the Fundamental Attribution Error
(FAE), is one of the most prominent concepts in social
psychology, has spawned numerous theoretical explanations
(for review see Gilbert & Malone, 1995), and referenced in
popular culture (e.g. Gladwell, 2000). In the classic
demonstration of the FAE, university students read an essay,

ostensibly written by a classmate, which either favored or
opposed Fidel Castro (Jones & Harris, 1967). Even when
told that the opinion expressed in the essay had been
randomly assigned by a course instructor, readers still
thought that the author held the view expressed in the essay.
A large number of studies have since produced similar
results, yielding a net assessment in the literature that people
are “lay dispositionalists” (Ross & Nisbett, 1991) wired to
neglect the influence of situations and instead attribute
actions to stable internal qualities.
The inferences observers make in this and similar
experimental paradigms typically are considered to be
logically unwarranted. The classic normative models reason
that when you witness an outcome, and then learn that it
was caused by one event, it is inappropriate to also attribute
it to a second event (e.g. Kelly, 1973; Jones & Davis, 1965).
For example, if you plug your cell phone in and the battery
doesn’t charge, there are two likely explanations: there is
something wrong with your device, or the outlet doesn’t
work. If you learn that the outlet is dead there is now no
reason to worry that your phone is broken. According to this
deterministic logic, if a course instructor tells someone they
must write an essay in favor of Castro, it is irrational to take
a pro-Castro essay as evidence that the author really favors
Castro.
Most isolated situations, however, are not so powerful
that they completely constrain behavior. In daily life people
rarely encounter situations that are so extreme that everyone
acts uniformly within them. Even when society takes great
care to make behavior as constrained by the situation as
possible (e.g. locking someone in a jail cell), these situations
are still not totally deterministic (people still escape from
jail). Outside of such extremes, situational pressures are far
from deterministic, but rather act in conjunction with
internal qualities to produce behavior. Therefore, even when
a situation is presumed to be influential, it is not reasonable
for people to assume that its influence is so extreme that it is
sufficient to determine behavior. Situations akin to those
used in FAE tasks are certainly far from deterministic. For
example, Sherman (1980) asked university students to write
an essay supporting a controversial school policy and less
than 70 percent of students complied. Since situations are
rarely (if ever) entirely constraining, we should not expect
subjects in the classic FAE studies to attribute cause as if
they are. How can we reason about peoples’ dispositions in
non-constraining situations? For this we turn to the
formalism of causal attribution in probabilistic inference.
Recent work suggests that human causal learning and
inference can be explained within a rational probabilistic
inference framework across a number of domains. This
work proposes that we can form a causal model of the

2547

world, and condition on our observations to determine what
might have been true of the world to yield the observations
we have seen. This reasoning framework can account for a
wide range of the causal inductions made by humans
(Holyoak & Cheng, 2011), including social inferences, such
as inferring goals from the movement of simple animated
agents (e.g. Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum, 2009). We propose
that the social inferences made in classic FAE studies can
also be accounted for within this framework, and that given
uncertainty about the strength of situational variables,
human tendencies to make dispositional inferences in these
paradigms are quite sensible, and do not reflect a bias.
In the past there have been scattered proposals that the
social inference process could be accounted for in terms of
Bayesian inference (Azjen & Fishbein, 1975; Morris &
Larrick, 1995). However, these proposals predated modern
computational statistical methods (Griffiths & Tenenbaum
2005, 2009; Kemp & Tenenbaum 2009), and could offer
only verbal descriptions of conceptual possibilities1 without
being able to make concrete predictions about the variety of
manipulations in the decades of established FAE literature.
In this paper we first explain how a rational agent should
make inferences about dispositions in non-constraining
situations using Bayesian inference. We then apply this
framework to the results of two classic studies of the FAE –
Jones & Harris (1967) and Quattrone (1982) – to
demonstrate that the patterns of behavior that have been
used to argue that our social inferences are flawed can
instead be explained by considering what people ought to do
given their uncertainty about other people and the situation.

A Rational Model of Social Inference
Given the uncertainty inherent in reasoning about the causes
of others’ behavior, we cannot expect the social inferences
that people make to be errorless. The relevant question is
not whether we make errors when reasoning socially, but
rather if these errors consistent with the errors a rational
observer would make, or if they are systematically biased?
A simple causal inference account is sufficient to capture
how an ideal, probabilistic observer would make
dispositional and situational inferences in the classic FAE
task. For instance, how would an ideal observer infer the
generosity of a museum patron who makes a donation in the
presence of a docent?
We will assume that the influence of the situation and the
influence of the person’s disposition will combine to yield
the probability of an action. This can be expressed as a
simple three-node graphical model (Figure 1; Pearl, 1988):
Making a donation will be a function of the situation
(pressure imposed by the docent to leave a donation) and the
individual’s disposition (how generous the person is).

1

However, see Jennings (2010) for an alternate quantitative
Bayesian conceptualization of the FAE and the Discussion for a
comparison of his framework with the account proposed here.

Figure 1: Graphical model of an action arising from two
possible classes of causes: Situation and disposition influence the
probability that an action will occur. Various attribution
experiments amount to conditioning on (observing) two of the
three nodes, and inquiring about the third.

In this scenario and the scenarios considered in this paper
behavior can be treated as a simple, binary action2: the
museum patron either leaves a donation, or doesn’t. In such
situations the resulting probability (q) is the chance that one
of the two outcomes occurs, formalized as a draw from a
Bernoulli distribution. For simplicity and convention, we
will assume that the strength of the situational (s) and
dispositional (d) influences on the action (a) is represented
as additive in log-odds. Thus, they each take on real values
from negative infinity to positive infinity: positive numbers
reflect influences that favor a behavior (donating) and
negative numbers favor the alternative (not donating).
Therefore, the log-odds of an individual donating is the sum
of the situational and dispositional influences expressed in
this manner. The probability (q) of donating may be
calculated by applying the logistic transformation to the logodds of behavior:
1
q=
1+ e[−(s+d )]
A donation is therefore made with probability q, and is
not made with probability 1-q:
! 1
q
P(a | q, θ ) = "
0
1−
q
#
We can quantify both the strength of a person’s
disposition and the situation based on how we expect people
to act. A person with a disposition of d=0 is equally likely
to take the chosen action or not in an unconstrained situation
(e.g., will donate 50% of the time when not watched by the
docent). People with positive disposition scores are more
likely to take the chosen action in an unconstrained
2

Although the situations considered here lend themselves to
binary outcomes and thus make the logistic model appropriate, this
framework can be extended to continuous action spaces by
considering alternate linking functions between actions and the
sum of situational and dispositional influences. Indeed, we have
expanded the model to accommodate graded actions, but due to
space constraints this extension is not discussed here.

2548

situation, and people with negative disposition scores are
less likely. The situation strength then defines how much the
situation changes this probability. We define an
unconstraining situation to have the situation strength s=0,
and so the probability of taking an action (e.g., donating)
relies only on the actor’s disposition. Positive situation
strengths represent conditions that encourage taking the
chosen action (e.g., the docent watching), while negative
situation strengths represent conditions that encouraging the
alternative (e.g., you hear the museums’ board is skimming
money).
So, for example, you might expect 73% of people to
donate to the museum with no docent, which would
represent an average disposition of d=1, since 1/(1 +
𝑒 ! !!! ) = 0.73. If 92% of people donate when the docent
is watching, this would be captured by a situation strength
of s=1.5, since 1/(1 + 𝑒 ! !!!.! )    = 0.92.
This only explains how situation and disposition might
combine to determine the probability that a specific action
did or did not occur. But in most cases, people know the
situation and observe an action, but do not know
disposition. Now we consider how people might reason
backwards to disposition once they observe someone take
an action in a known situation.
This reasoning requires understanding how dispositions
are distributed in the world – e.g., how many people are
more generous or stingy than average? Given this prior
distribution on dispositions, and the observation of an action
a in a situation of some strength s, we can calculate the
posterior probability of the generosity of the actor using
Bayes rule:

P(d | a, s) =

P(a | d, s)P(d)
∑ P(a | d ', s)P(d ')
d'

This provides a posterior distribution over the disposition
that the actor might hold. We assume that when people are
asked to make a point judgment about disposition
afterwards, this judgment will be based on the expected
value of this distribution.

Some Situations are More Informative than Others
With this inference framework, upon observing an actor
take an action, that observer should always attribute some
causal role to the actor’s disposition. However, the amount
of attribution should depend on the strength of the situation.
Imagine we are now in a world with somewhat more
stingy museum patrons than before, where only 50% would
donate with no outside influences (here represented by the
prior 𝑑~𝒩 0,1 ). Now you observe that a visitor donates
money with no docent watching (s=0). Based on the
equation above, you should infer that the visitor is
somewhat
more
generous
than
average
(E[d|s=0,a=1])=0.39, Figure 2 point A).
But what if there is strong pressure against donating? For
instance, if a patron walks in and mentions that they are

broke and choosing between donating or eating lunch (s=-3)
yet donates anyway, you should infer even more strongly
that they are generous (E[d|s=-3,a=1])=.75, Figure 2 point
B). If the action occurred despite pressure against the action,
it must have been motivated by attitude, and strong attitude
inferences are made.
Conversely, if a person donates when the docent is
breathing down their neck and telling them the museum is
about to go bankrupt because not enough people are
donating (s=3), the ideal observer will infer something
about the patron’s disposition (E[d|s=3,a=1])=.08, Figure 2
point C), since a true Scrooge would simply ignore the
docent and walk through. As long as situations are not
deterministically strong, the ideal observer should make
some dispositional attribution, but the strength of that
attribution should be modulated by situation strength.

B

A
C

Figure 2: The strength and direction of the attitude that the ideal
observer infers depends on the situational pressure in combination
with whether the action occurred. When there is stronger
situational pressure toward an action and the actor performs the
chosen action (+), the ideal observer makes weaker inferences
about attitude. However, when there is stronger situational pressure
against the action and an actor does it anyway, the ideal observer
makes a much stronger inference about attitude. Symmetrically,
not doing the action (l) is more informative when the situation
was motivating the action, compared to when it was discouraging
the action. Until the situation becomes deterministically strong, the
ideal observer always infers an attitude that is consistent with an
observed action.

Inferring Attitude From Situationally
Motivated Behavior (Jones & Harris, 1967)
In the classic FAE experiment, Jones and Harris (1967)
examined how we account for situational pressures when
reasoning about other’s dispositions. Based on a
deterministic (Boolean logic) view of such inferences, they
reasoned that a behavior is evidence of a person’s
disposition, but when there is a situational explanation for
the behavior it no longer reveals anything about the actor’s
disposition. They asked university students to read an essay

2549

that either opposed or endorsed Castro. Participants were
told that the essay was written by a classmate who was
either instructed to argue for a particular position, or was
free to choose whether to write a pro or a con essay. After
reading the essay participants answered ten 7-point Likert
scale questions (1: strongly anti to 7: strongly pro) about
what they thought the author’s true attitude toward Castro
had been; these ten responses were summed, yielding an
overall scale from the strongest anti-Castro beliefs (10) to
the strongest pro-Castro beliefs (70). If the essay position
were freely chosen, then it obviously reveals the authors’
attitude; however, if instructions to write in support of one
position or another would make any person — regardless of
their disposition — produce a compelling essay for the
instructed position, then Jones and Harris suggest that the
essay content should not be informative of the authors’
attitude.
As predicted, when readers were told the essay position
was freely chosen they believed that the author had an
attitude about Castro consistent with the views expressed in
the essay. However, when the reader was told that the
position had been assigned, readers continued to estimate
the authors true attitude to be consistent with the essay’s
position, albeit more weakly (original data re-plotted in
Figure 3A). So, people do not behave logically according to
Jones and Harris: people infer attitudes when they should
explain behavior based on the situation.
But what inferences should we expect from a rational
observer who did not believe that instructions to write a
particular essay was completely deterministic? We can
characterize the behavior of such a rational observer via a
Bayesian causal inference model: given the observation of
either a pro or anti Castro essay (a binary action), and some
assumption about the influence of instruction (situation
strength) what might the actor’s attitude about Castro be
(disposition)? From the logic captured in Figure 2, we
would expect that such an observer would infer some
attitude that is consistent with the essay even when the
position had been assigned. If the instruction to write a proCastro essay does not completely determine behavior, then
those with vehemently anti-Castro views might still write an
anti-Castro essay; therefore, seeing a pro-Castro essay still
tells us something about the author’s attitude, namely that
they are not so strongly against Castro that the instructions
were insufficient to compel them to write a pro-Castro
essay. So, qualitatively, a rational observer believing in soft
(non-deterministic) influence of situations will still infer
some disposition, but just how much depends on the
observers’ assumptions about how compelling the situation
is. What assumptions about the “strength of the situation”
(of being assigned to write an essay supporting, or opposing
Castro) would such an observer need to make to yield not
just the qualitative, but also the quantitative pattern of
participants’ judgments?
To formalize this we must specify the “situation strength”
of being assigned to write an essay supporting or opposing
Castro, and those under free choice. Since the majority of

reader-subjects reported being anti-Castro, we assumed that
readers had strong prior belief that a majority of people
(about 70%) were against Castro. We assume that a neutral
person (not average, but split between positions) who
chooses what to write would be equally likely to produce a
pro or anti-Castro essay: this is equal to a neutral situation
strength. Further, we assume that the assignment to write a
pro- or anti-Castro essay have situation strengths that would
compel a perfectly neutral person to write the assigned essay
88% (s=2) of the time. Finally, we scaled posterior beliefs
about disposition to the 10-70 point scale using a logistic
transformation.
Under these assumptions,3 an ideal observer infers the
same pattern of dispositions as people do: when the
situation does not exert any pressure (the “choice”
conditions) the ideal observer treats the attitude expressed in
the essay as very informative, and infers that the author’s
true attitude roughly mirrors what was expressed in the
essay. When the situation does exert pressure to take a
particular position (the “no-choice” condition) both humans
and the ideal observer treat the behavior as informative
(though less so), and make correspondingly weaker
dispositional attributions (Figure 3B).

A: Human

B: Ideal Observer

Figure 3: Inferred attitude as a function of essay position, and
whether this position was chosen or assigned. A: People inferred
that the position expressed in an essay was indicative of the
author’s true attitude both when they chose their position, and
when it was assigned (Jones & Harris, 1967). The attitude
attributed to the author was stronger when the author chose his
position (solid line), and weaker when assigned (dotted line). B:
An ideal observer also infers that the essay is indicative of the
author’s true attitude, but more informative when the position was
chosen, and less informative when assigned (dotted line).

3
Prior beliefs about situations and attitudes, and interpretations
of the strength of the particular situations (for Jones & Harris,
1967) and attitude (for Quattrone, 1982) influences were not
collected in the original studies. Therefore we chose plausible
parameters to predict peoples’ inferences. Importantly, all
reasonable parameter choices yield the same qualitative patterns.

2550

Inferring Situation when Attitude is Known:
Inverting the FAE (Quattrone, 1982)
The theory of the FAE suggests that people are prone to
overestimate the influence of disposition and to
underestimate the influence of situation. If people indeed
have this tendency then we would not expect them to infer
additional situational pressure when a known disposition
has already accounted for an action. Yet there is a curious
finding in the literature that suggests the opposite: when
people know about an actor’s disposition, they are more
likely to “over-attribute” the actor’s action to situational
pressures.
Quattrone (1982) asked subjects to read an essay favoring
or opposing the legalization of marijuana, but rather than
knowing if the essay position was chosen or assigned,
subjects were told that the author was known to have either
a neutral opinion about legalization, or an opinion consistent
with the attitude expressed in their essay. Subjects were told
that the purpose of the study was to determine if extraneous
experimental factors (e.g. experimenter bias) might be
influencing the opinions people expressed. After reading the
essay, subjects were asked to estimate the likely situational
pressure on a 30 point Likert scale (-15: pressure to oppose,
15: pressure to favor). Even when subjects were told that the
author held a pro-legalization view, they believed there was
pressure to write a pro-legalization essay, and vice versa
(original data re-plotted in Figure 5A).
According to the logic of classic FAE studies, this could
be considered an “over-attribution” of the situation, since
the pre-experiment attitude is known to have caused
behavior. This finding is inconsistent with typical
explanations of the FAE and calls into question the
theoretical accounts of the FAE that claim that we have a
inclination to over-attribute behavior to dispositions, and not
attribute enough to situations (e.g. Taylor & Fiske, 1978;
Gilbert, Pelham & Krull, 1988).

motivated by their known disposition, it is still rational to
infer that the situation was also motivating the action, given
that probabilistic dispositions do not completely determine
behavior. Assuming the same generative process as
explained previously (Figure 1), inferring the unknown
situation strength given a known disposition is symmetric to
the inference process applied previously to the attitudeattribution paradigm. Here, we observe an action and know
the disposition but now must reason about the likely
situation strength (Figure 4). Knowing the disposition and
what action the agent chose, but having a prior distribution
over types of situations people encounter, we can use Bayes
formula to derive a posterior probability of the impact of the
situation:

P(s | a, d) =

s'

This framework provides mirrored inferences to the
framework used to reason about disposition: an ideal
observer should always infer that the situation has some
impact on an observed action. Just as the rational observer
would infer that a museum patron who gives a donation is
generous even when a docent is watching, it is also rational
to infer that if a generous friend donates, there was some
pressure for her to donate. And just as observing an action is
more informative about an actor’s disposition in some
situations compared to others, how much an action informs
you about the situation also depends on the how strong that
actor’s disposition is. But so long the actor’s disposition
does not compel them to act identically in all situations, it is
rational to infer that the situation had some impact.

A: Human

Figure 4: Graphical model show that situation and disposition
influence the probability that an action will occur. Instead of
conditioning on (observing) situation and the action, and inquiring
about situation, here we condition on disposition and action, and
inquire about the strength of the situation.

A Bayesian Inference account, however, predicts this
pattern of results. When someone behaves in a way that is

P(a | s, d)P(s)
∑ P(a | s', d)P(s')

B: Ideal Observer

Figure 5: Inferred situation as a function of the essay and the
known attitude. A: Subjects inferred that the position expressed in
an essay was evidence for how much the situation was motivating
behavior, both when they thought the author had a pre-existing
attitude, and when the didn’t. The situation inferred was stronger
when they thought the author had no pre-existing opinion. B: The
ideal observer also infers that the situation was pressuring the
essay position, but more so when the author had no existing
opinion.

2551

In the Quattrone (1982) task, the ideal observer once
again observes a binary action (either a Pro- or Anti-Castro
Marijuana essay) but now they known the strength of the
author’s true attitude and must infer the strength of the
situation. To formalize the “no opinion” condition we
assume that people would be equally likely to write a proor anti-legalization essay, and in the ”opinion” condition we
specify that that the proclivity to write a pro- or antilegalization essay has a strength of 1 and -1, respectively
(meaning that 73% of people would write an essay
consistent with their attitude in a neutral situation). Just as
before, we used a logistic transformation and rescaled the
expected posterior situation strength to place it on the same
scale as Quattrone (1982).
Consistent with a Bayesian Inference account, and in
contrast to what a FAE framework would predict, when the
reader thought the author had a no opinion before the
experiment they inferred that the experimental situation had
exerted some force on the writer. When the reader thought
the author had a pre-experiment opinion about marijuana
legalization, they still inferred that the experimental
situation exerted some pressure, just less than what readers
in the “no opinion” condition inferred (Figure 5A). An ideal
observer demonstrates the same pattern of results (Figure
5B), suggesting we can explain why people will in some
situations behave opposite to the predictions of the FAE.

Discussion
Our results show that human attribution of behavior to
situational and dispositional causes – which has long been
considered systematically biased – can be reconciled with
the inferences made by a rational observer reasoning in a
probabilistic world. We demonstrated how judgments in the
prototypical Fundamental Attribution Error paradigm are
not errors, but rather are the result of inferring internal
qualities in a world where situations do not fully constrain
behavior. Rational attitude attribution might be rendered
consistent with human judgments merely by adding a biased
prior about the strength of situations (i.e. by supposing that
situational constraints are systematically underestimated);
however this would amount to merely reframing the FAE in
Bayesian jargon. For instance, Jennings (2010) assumed that
reasoning about dispositions could be explained by
Bayesian inference using a biased prior, and showed that
people’s attributions could still be internally consistent.
Critically, however, we show that a situation in which
people behave inconsistently with the typical explanation of
the FAE – over-attributing behavior to the situation when
disposition is known – is also a natural consequence of
rational probabilistic reasoning, and could not be explained
simply by miscalibrated expectations about situations.
The mechanisms of our ideal observer model are not
particularly sensitive to parameters: all parameter values
capture the qualitative effects in the classic FAE studies,
and a priori plausible values yield a good quantitative fit.
Nonetheless, in future work we will empirically obtain
observers’ expectations about situations and dispositions, as

well as how they interpret the influence of specific
situations, to compare parameter-free predictions of our
model to human behavior.
In short, our work suggests that results from decades of
attribution experiments, which have been classically
interpreted as evidence that our social inferences are
fundamentally flawed, might instead be the natural outcome
of reasoning about a complex and uncertain world.

References
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1975). A Bayesian analysis of attribution
processes. Psychological Bulletin, 82(2), 261.
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Action
understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113(3), 329-349.
Gilbert, D. T., & Malone, P. S. (1995). The correspondence bias.
Psychological Bulletin, 117(1), 21.
Gilbert, D.T., Pelham, B.W., & Krull, D.S.(1988). On cognitive
busyness: When person perceivers meet persons perceived. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(5), 733.
Gladwell, M. (2000). The Tipping Point. Boston: Little, Brown
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure andstrength in
causal induction. Cognitive psychology, 51(4), 334-384.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Theory-based causal
induction. Psychological review, 116(4), 661.
Holyoak, K. J., & Cheng, P. W. (2011). Causal learning and inference
as a rational process: The new synthesis. Annual Review of
Psychology, 62, 135-163.
Jennings, K. E. (2010). Determining the Internal Consistency of
Attitude Attributions. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, Texas: Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 978-984).
Jones, E. E., & Davis, K. E. (1965). From acts to dispositions: the
attribution process in person perception. Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, 2, 219-266.
Jones, E. E., & Harris, V. A. (1967). The attribution of
attitudes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 3(1), 1-24
Jones, E. E., Worchel, S., Goethals, G. R., & Grumet, J. F. (1971). Prior
expectancy and behavioral extremity as determinants of attitude
attribution. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 7(1), 59-80.
Kelley, H. H. (1973). The processes of causal attribution. American
Psychologist, 28(2), 107.
Kemp, C., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Structured statistical models of
inductive reasoning. Psychological Review, 116(1), 20.
Morris, M. W., & Larrick, R. P. (1995). When one cause casts doubt on
another: A normative analysis of discounting in causal
attribution. Psychological Review,102(2), 3
Nisbett, R. E., Caputo, C., Legant, P., & Marecek, J. (1973). Behavior
as seen by the actor and as seen by the observer. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 27(2), 154
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks
of plausible inference. Morgan Kauffman.
Quattrone, G. A. (1982). Overattribution and unit formation: When
behavior engulfs the person. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 42(4), 593-607.
Ross, L. D., Amabile, T. M., & Steinmetz, J. L. (1977). Social roles,
social control, and biases in social-perception processes. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 35(7), 485.
Ross, L.D., & Nisbett, R.E. (1991). The Person and the Situation:
Perspectives on Social Psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill
Sherman, S. J. (1980). On the self-erasing nature of errors of prediction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(2), 211.
Taylor, S. E., & Fiske, S. T. (1978). Salience, attention, and attribution:
Top of the head phenomena. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, 11, 249-288.

2552

