The Standard Theory of Conscious Perception
Carolyn Dicey Jennings (cjennings3@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences, 5200 N. Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract

every creature would be a gray chaotic indiscriminateness, impossible for us even to conceive. (James, 1981, p.
403)

In this paper I argue that the prioritization of sensory input by
top-down attention is constitutive of and essential to
conscious perception. Specifically, I argue that top-down
attention is required to provide informational integration at
the level of the subject, which can be contrasted with
integration at the level of features and objects. Since the
informational content of conscious perception requires
integration at the level of the subject, top-down attention is
necessary for conscious perception as we know it. I present
this argument through a theory, which I call the “Standard
Theory.” According to this theory, top-down attention brings
about subject-level integration for sensory input by
prioritizing that input with respect to a subject-level standard.
Keywords: top-down attention; conscious
Tononi; integrated information; standard theory

James claims here that it is interest on the part of the subject
that determines the content of perception, both in quantity
and in quality. His claim rests on evidence of sensory
selection (“Millions of items...never properly enter into my
experience”) together with the idea that such selection must
be governed by interests. Of course, quantitative selection
need not be achieved by a subject, since it can take place
through bottom-up filtering and selection. Thus, the fact that
we do not perceive all of the “items” surrounding us does
not by itself show us that interest-based attention is the
gateway to conscious perception. Nonetheless, James’
intuition that interest-based attention provides for the
qualitative content of conscious perception finds support in
the Standard Theory.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty, on the other hand, entertains the
notion that attention is the key to the common spatiotemporal framework of conscious perception. In the
Introduction to Phenomenology of Perception, he makes the
following observation.

perception;

Introduction
In the cognitive sciences, top-down attention is understood
to prioritize select neural processing according to the
subject’s current task. Although this function of top-down
attention may not appear at first to play an important role in
the bringing about of conscious perception, I will argue here
that such prioritization is constitutive of and essential to the
structure of conscious perception, expanding on arguments
published elsewhere (Jennings, 2015). I present this
argument through a theory, which I call the “Standard
Theory.” According to this theory, top-down attention
integrates sensory input by prioritizing this input with
respect to a subject-level1 standard, using a spatiotemporal
framework common to all types of sensory input to do so.
The Standard Theory is original in its details but not in its
vision. William James connects attention to conscious
perception in his Principles of Psychology.

Attention first of all presupposes a transformation of the
mental field, a new way for consciousness to be present to
its objects. Take the act of attention whereby I locate a
point on my body which is being touched...A vaguely
located spot, this contradictory phenomenon reveals a
pre-objective space where there is indeed extension, since
several points on the body touched together are not
confused by the subject, but as yet no univocal position,
because no spatial framework persists from one
perception to another. The first operation of attention is,
then, to create for itself a field, either perceptual or
mental, which can be ‘surveyed’ (Merleau-Ponty, 1962,
pp. 33-34, translation amended)

Millions of items of the outward order are present to my
senses which never properly enter into my experience.
Why? Because they have no interest for me. My
experience is what I agree to attend to. Only those items
which I notice shape my mind – without selective interest,
experience is an utter chaos. Interest alone gives accent
and emphasis, light and shade, background and
foreground – intelligible perspective, in a word. It varies
in every creature, but without it the consciousness of

Here, Merleau-Ponty claims that although prior to the act of
attention experience is organized (e.g. two unattended points
on the body are easily distinguished), attention allows for a
new type of organization. Namely, attention transforms
conscious experience from a pre-objective space to an
objective space by invoking a common spatiotemporal
framework.
Merleau-Ponty argues for this role of attention by looking
at the phenomenon of directed search. Directed search
implies that the subject has a partly determinate and partly
indeterminate idea of its target (Merleau-Ponty, 1962, p.
33). When I search for a pen on the surface of my desk, for

1

“Subject-level” processing is taken to be the subset of
cognitive processing that is open to modification by “the
subject”—that to which we normally ascribe conscious experience,
thought, and high-level behavior, but which is not necessarily
equivalent to “the organism.”

986

example, I use the determinate idea that the pen is
somewhere on my desk to guide my search and the
indeterminacy of its precise location to drive the search.
That determinacy can guide the search reveals that the target
has conceptual qualities, and is not a pure sensory object
(contrary to the “empiricist” view, as Merleau-Ponty
construes it). Yet, that indeterminacy drives the search
reveals that the target has qualities that extend beyond our
current knowledge (contrary to the “rationalist” view, as
Merleau-Ponty construes it). Attention, as the mechanism of
search, will have to be the sort of thing that can connect the
realm of structured thought to the realm of pure sensory
objects to reveal a target of this sort, according to MerleauPonty.
The Standard Theory gives a working account of these
phenomenological intuitions. Namely, the Standard Theory
shows how top-down attention transforms sensory input into
conscious percepts by prioritizing the former with respect to
a ‘subject-level standard’–a standard rooted in or held by the
subject. According to the Standard Theory, this
transformation brings about both the informational content
of perception, as flagged by James, and the determination of
a shared perceptual space, as flagged by Merleau-Ponty.
Thus, the Standard Theory is an account of how the subject
brings about the structure of conscious perception through
the activity of top-down attention.

experience of sensory elements bound to a spatiotemporal
structure, where “elements” signifies the particularities or
instantiations of generalities, and where this spatiotemporal
structure may include localized events, patterns, or simply
spatiotemporal depth.3
A full characterization of such informational content has
been undertaken by Giulio Tononi as part of his integrated
information theory of consciousness4:
Every time we experience a particular conscious state out
of such a huge repertoire of possible conscious states, we
gain access to a correspondingly large amount of
information. This conclusion is in line with the classical
definition of information as reduction of uncertainty
among a number of alternatives (Shannon and Weaver,
1949)...the information generated by the occurrence of a
particular conscious state lies in the large number of
different conscious states that could potentially have been
experienced but were not. (Tononi, 2005, p. 111)
So the informational content of one’s current conscious
experience occurs through contrast with what is not
experienced. Tononi motivates this theory by describing the
visual experience of total darkness: such an experience only
has visual content if “content” measures what is present
against what is possible. That is, a room devoid of light has
visual content only when compared with other potential
visual experiences one could have. Normal visual sensation,
in contrast, relies on the presence of light. The fact that we
experience total darkness, then, shows us that conscious
content is inherently informational. In Tononi’s view, even
the conscious perception of a homogenous plane of light has
a lot of information for us, since its content is generated in
contrast to other potential experiences.
Tononi further notes that the information of conscious
content is integrated in a way that is not captured by
“Shannon Information.”5 As captured in the paragraph
above, we might say of the content of perceptual experience
that it is informational for us. Tononi suggests that

The Problem of Subject-Level Integration
To start, it may be helpful to clarify my working definitions
of top-down attention and conscious perception. As I use it,
“top-down attention” should be understood as the
prioritization of select mental or neural processing
according to the subject’s current interests. This can be
contrasted with prioritization that takes place solely through
filtering and bottom-up selection.2 “Conscious perception,”
on the other hand, normally refers to the experience of
informational sensory content within a spatiotemporal
framework. Although sensory input may include some
spatiotemporal information, it is thought to differ from
conscious perception in lacking informational content. That
is, unlike sensory input, conscious perception presents the
world as being a certain way to the subject. This “being a
certain way” involves both general or shared attributes
between the many items of content and particular
instantiations of those attributes held by each item. The
stargazer, for example, experiences the stars as each having
relative brightness: they share the perceptual quality of
brightness, but each of them instantiates a particular degree
of brightness. As Tyler Burge puts it: “a perception–a
representational perceptual state instance, or the content of a
perceptual state instance–must always involve the contextdependent singular application of (general) perceptual
attributives” (Burge, 2010, p. 381). Perhaps we could
provisionally characterize conscious perception as the

To measure information integration, it is essential to
know whether a system of elements constitute a causally
integrated system, or they can be broken down into a
number of independent or quasi-independent subsets
among which no information can be integrated. (Tononi,
2005, p. 113)6
3
Although I take it that these remarks hold for all varieties of
conscious perception, I focus here on visual perception.
4
While Tononi emphasizes the informational content of
consciousness, in general, I focus only on the informational
content of conscious perception, in particular.
5
“Shannon Information” was put forward as a partial account of
information—the data without its meaning (Shannon, 1948;
Floridi, 2009).
6
Note that Tononi’s use of the term “element” does not
necessarily include participation in a complex as a defining feature.

2

A more complete account of this form of attention can be
found in Jennings, 2012.

987

That is, Tononi claims that to get anything like conscious
content we require not only information but integrated
information, which we can measure by looking at causal
integration.
But integration with respect to what? Tononi says that
integration is implicated by the fact that we cannot
experience shape without color (Tononi, 2005, p. 112). He
also says that integration is implicated when a “conscious
state is experienced as an integrated whole” (Tononi, 2005,
p. 112). Yet these forms of integration do not seem
extensive enough to capture both actual and potential
experience, which is central to his account—one might have
integrated perceptual features and even an entirely
integrated experience without achieving integration across
actual and potential experience. Without this level of
integration the conscious experience of a completely dark
room would not be able to yield information through
contrast with other potential experiences, for instance. I thus
suggest that Tononi’s account of conscious content is best
understood as information that is integrated with respect to
the subject (a view that sometimes appears to be supported
by Tononi). Although I adopt Tononi’s basic perspective in
this paper, note that I am not arguing that all of conscious
experience is captured by integrated information, but only
that all of our perceptual experiences can be understood this
way.7
This understanding of conscious perception (as the
experience of integrated information within a spatiotemporal framework) raises a problem. Specifically,
assuming conscious perception is rooted in neural
processing and that this requires structural correspondence
between the two, neural processing must involve a partwhole structure that can support the experience of a unified
complex of sensory elements. The problem arises when we
note that the early processing of sensory input contributes
only half of this requisite structure: the early processing of
sensory input divides that input into feature-specific
processing without it yet having membership in a unified
complex of processing. The problem of discovering how
this unified complex comes about is known as the ‘problem
of unity,’ which has now been solved at the level of features
and objects, but not yet at the level of the subject.
Importantly, although recognition of this problem assumes
the possibility of a natural explanation of conscious
perception, it need not confuse the content of conscious
perception with its vehicles. That is, one can agree with
Susan Hurley that “the properties of subpersonal processes,
of vehicles of content, cannot simply be projected into
personal-level mental content, or vice versa” (Hurley, 2002,
p. 3) and still find particular vehicles wanting. As stated, it
is the presumption of structural correspondence, and not a
simple projection of properties, that drives the claim that
content-vehicles will have to instantiate a part-whole
relationship that corresponds to the division and unity of
integrated information. I assume structural correspondence

because I take this to be the minimal constraint on the “is
rooted in” relation.
Burge, mentioned above, claims that the development of
perceptual content occurs through perceptual constancies
(Burge, 2010, pp. 407-413), but I look further back to the
source of these constancies and find a role for the subject
through top-down attention. As I will argue below, a
solution to problem of integration at the level of the subject
will necessarily involve a subject-level standard, which can
only be applied through top-down attention. The solution to
this problem lies, in other words, in the adoption of the
Standard Theory.

The Standard Theory
From the work of Treisman and Gelade (1980); Treisman
(1988); Wolfe, Cave, and Franzel (1989); and others we
have an account of how objects are bound from the features
of separable feature sets (e.g. color and luminance), which
answers the problem of unity at the level of objects. Yet, if
we want to fill in the account of perceptual unity then we
need an explanation of the unity that exists across objects
and feature sets, which allows for integration at the level of
the subject. The Standard Theory provides this missing
explanation. The basic claim of the Standard Theory is that
top-down attention provides for conscious perception by
transforming sensory input into conscious percepts. Topdown attention achieves this by prioritizing (and thus
differentiating) the sensory input according to a subjectlevel standard, through which the sensory-input-turnedpercepts are “unified” or integrated at the level of the
subject.
To start, let’s reflect on conscious perception at the level
of objects and feature sets to examine the claim that
perceptual experience has a level of integration that goes
beyond objects and feature sets. If you look across the space
in front of you, you will probably note many specific shades
of color (e.g. the green of a plant, the red of a couch). Each
of these shades of color should be easily attributed to its
object, since color is normally integrated with other features
of an object. Yet, these objects share the feature of having
color. Thus, these shades of color are also integrated at the
level of the feature set, which exists across visual objects.
Similarly, the sounds around you each have a specific pitch
(e.g. the rumble of a car, the hum of a fan), easily attributed
to separable objects due to integration at the level of objects,
while nonetheless sharing the quality of having pitch, due to
integration of pitch across aural objects.
The above reflections reveal the existence of integration
at the level of both objects and feature sets. To see the
integration that occurs beyond objects and feature sets, note
the difference within experience that occurs when one
switches focus from one object to another (e.g. from the
plant to the couch, or from the car to the fan): the current
feature or object of interest gains a sort of proximity,
whereas other features and objects now seem more distant.
This is not a change in acuity or spatial distance–the change
occurs even if one keeps one’s eyes still. It is instead

7

See Jennings (in press) for those forms of conscious experience
that depart from this model.

988

experienced as an epistemic or valuational proximity: the
feature or object of interest appears more available for
knowledge, more valuable, or more meaningful, whereas
other features or objects appear less available for
knowledge, less valuable, or less meaningful. However
exactly one experiences the difference between the proximal
and distal objects, this structural difference reveals
integration that transcends objects and feature sets. Since
this integration changes with the subject’s interests, it
qualifies as subject-level integration (see Jennings, 2015 for
a more detailed account).
That perceptual experience has this structure was pointed
out by Gurwitsch in his Field of Consciousness (Gurwitsch,
1964). Gurwitsch claims that perceptual experience always
contains a “theme” and a “thematic field,” where the
separation between these can be as rough-grained as that
between two different sensory modalities. In “ganzfeld”
experiences, for example, where a single sensory modality
contains only homogenous information (as of a homogenous
plane of light), that modality may yet experienced as a
theme relative to other sense modalities (Wackermann et al.,
2008). Even in Balint’s syndrome, where a patient with
bilateral parietal lesions only recognizes one object at a
time, there is a contextual basis for the object that can serve
as its thematic field (Michel & Henaff, 2004, p.11).
How is this structure achieved? A spatiotemporal
framework common to objects and feature sets clearly plays
a role. The green of the plant and the red of the couch are
not confused, in part, because these objects and features are
separated in space and time (as is central to Treisman’s
account). Yet, a spatiotemporal framework common to
objects and feature sets cannot provide the relevant standard
of comparison for integration at the level of the subject.
What can provide this standard? A clear common factor in
all perceptual experience is the experiencing subject. Since
the determination of subjective value depends upon the
subject, it makes sense that subject-level integration,
according to the subject’s current interests and values,
would be brought about by the subject.
This is where the Standard Theory comes in. According to
the Standard Theory, conscious perception requires the
integration of early sensory processing by the subject
according to a subject-level standard through top-down
attention. It is based on a relatively simple argument:
1) An essential feature of conscious perception is that it is
informational for a subject
2) Early sensory processing is not integrated in a way that
could allow for this type of information without further
processing
3) Some process must bring about this integration for
early sensory processing to bring about conscious
perception
4) In order to bring about this integration, early sensory
processing will have to be differentiated according to a
subject-level standard
5) Only top-down attention differentiates sensory
processing according to subject-level standards

6) Thus, top-down attention is necessary for conscious
perception.
Further evidence for this argument comes from observing
the variation between perceivers. For two perceivers
watching someone bike past, one may perceive the color of
the bike but not that of the cyclist’s clothing, while the other
perceives the color of the cyclist’s clothing but not that of
the bike. The most natural explanation of this difference in
what is perceived is that the perceivers have different
interests. That is, the interests of the subject in each case
determine what is and is not consciously perceived.
I find it useful to think of the maintenance of the
boundary between what is consciously perceived and what
is not consciously perceived as being a form of consumption
by the subject. That is, just as the boundary between what
digestion and waste is internally regulated, the boundary
between perception and sensation is internally regulated.
When one digests peanut butter, the peanut butter is
(eventually) transformed into parts of the body. How is this
accomplished? It is not simply a process of the peanut butter
being taken in by the body; bodies have considerable
variation in what they will digest, and this variation is partly
regulated by the digestive system itself. Just as the digestive
system (partly) determines what will be incorporated into
the body, the claim here is that the subject (partly)
determines what will be integrated into the subject-level.
If these observations are correct, the integration of early
sensory processing into perceptual experience requires
action by the subject. Yet, sensory processing must also be
differentiated in order to be integrated as information. This,
I claim, is the role of prioritization. Importantly, integration
and differentiation are twin concepts. That is, for parts to be
integrated with respect to some standard is for the parts to
be differentiated, and for the parts to be differentiated with
respect to some standard is for them to be integrated. Thus,
the role of attention in differentiating and the role of the
subject in integrating are linked: the subject is the standard
of integration with respect to which attention differentiates.
To see the link between informational differentiation and
integration, consider that for something to count as
information it must be differentiated with respect to some
standard. The number “59” is not information, even though
it can be differentiated from other numbers, unless it is set
against some standard. The phrases “My father is aged 59
years” or “I saved 59 dollars on my wedding dress,” do
count as informational because they supply a context and an
implied standard. For something to be informational for a
subject, the subject must either hold the standard or the
standard must be rooted in the subject. That is, the
differentiated parts will have to point back to the subject
according to the subject-level standard. Otherwise the
information will not be integrated or unified with respect to
the subject. Top-down attention is a process of prioritization
by the subject or according to the subject’s current interests.
Thus, for the subject to differentiate those items it
integrates, it will have to use top-down attention. This
doesn’t mean, of course, that bottom-up attention cannot

989

also play a role, so long as top-down attention is involved to
some degree.
The most basic form of integrated information, in my
view, can be found in someone that perceives only in terms
of positive and negative valence. Let’s imagine such a
person named “Michéle,” who likes sitting on cool beaches
(in Scotland, say) but detests sitting on hot beaches (in
Florida, say). When presented with a particular beach in
Scotland, Michéle might have a perceptual experience of
positive valence at a particular intensity, shape, and
duration, which she calls “West Sands.” It may be that
“West Sands” for Michéle applies to beaches other than
what humans call “West Sands” so long as those beaches
produce just the same experience of positive valence. When
presented with a particular beach in Florida, Michéle might
have a perceptual experience of negative valence at a
particular intensity, shape, and duration, which she calls
“Naples Bay.”8 It may be that “Naples Bay” (for Michéle)
applies to other beaches, or even to other things that
Michéle detests, so long as those things produce just the
same experience of negative valence. Michéle will not have
a perceptual experience of anything that does not have a
ranking of positive or negative valence for her. Michéle may
have no feelings at all towards umbrellas, for example, in
which case she would not perceive them. For Michéle to
perceive something, that thing must be ranked according to
her subject-level standard. Otherwise that thing would not
be differentially integrated with respect to Michéle (qua
subject).
My claim is that all perceptual experience must be based
on a subject-level standard akin to Michéle’s beach
interests, by virtue of which it has subject-level integration.
The story so far supplies only the most universal and basic
form of integrated information. The conscious perception of
most humans has layers of differentiation and integration
beyond a single subject-level standard. It is the integration
of these further layers, I claim, that requires a common
spatiotemporal framework.
Returning to an example used at the start of this section,
there is unity of color in one’s visual field. How might this
occur? My suggestion is that it occurs through the presubjective prioritization of sensory input according to
habitual tasks that reliably fit the subject-level standard.
That is, for stable subject-environment couplings it may be
the case that the processing of sensory input becomes tuned
to goals that can reliably bring about value according to the
subject-level standard. Groups of neurons may become
tuned, for example, to the inputs that normally enable the
realization of subjective value and respond preferentially to
them. Thus, feature maps, or the mapping of inputs to presubject-level standards that regularly contribute to the
subject-level standard, will take place without top-down
attention for habitual or long-term goals. This explains how
it is that certain features of stimuli are pre-subjectively
prioritized by the visual cortex – the inheritance of neural
tuning created by millennia of other subjects matching goals
8

like ours to a world like ours does much of the dividing
work for us. Thus, one need not find top-down attention
necessary for each instance of integration, such as the
integration of individual feature sets, but only for
integration with the subject’s current interests.
To achieve this level of integration, across objects and
feature sets, it will be necessary to have a common
framework for comparison. That is, the application of a
unifying standard to multiple sets of features, for example,
will require a structure through which to compare the values
of each set without losing the internal structure of each set.
This is the role of the common spatiotemporal framework
found in nearly every perceptual experience. A common
spatiotemporal framework is required so that the
prioritizations found in the feature maps can be compared
with respect to the subject-level standard without losing the
particular information contained within those feature maps.
This common spatiotemporal framework need only be
general enough to combine all the feature sets, and not so
general as absolute or allocentric space-time. In such a
system the different feature dimensions will share a
framework or matrix that allows for prioritization across
dimensions but that sacrifices neither the bottom-up salience
values contained in each dimension nor the spatiotemporal
location values of the information sources. This
spatiotemporal framework helps us to solve the problem of
subject-level integration in that it provides a mechanism of
comparison for the application of an integrating standard.
Yet, even once we have a framework for comparison, we
will still need top-down attention to match the values from
pre-subject-level standards to the subject-level standard to
obtain subject-level integration.
According to the Standard Theory, all perceptual
experience minimally contains the structure yielded by
prioritization with respect to a subject-level standard, even if
it does not also contain other layers of prioritization that
need to be fitted to a common spatiotemporal framework, as
illustrated in the case of Michéle. Thus, although the
working definition of conscious perception supplied at the
start of this paper involved the experience of sensory
elements bound to spatiotemporal structure, the Standard
Theory does not depend on this limited understanding of
conscious perception to make its case. Any type of
perceptual content, in being integrated with respect to the
subject, will rely on top-down attention, according to the
Standard Theory.

Conclusion
Throughout this paper I have illustrated how the content of
conscious perception relies upon top-down attention. I have
claimed that although the integration of individual featuresets can be automatized, such that neural structures can
become tuned to particular types of features and collections
of features according to the habitual or long-term goals of
the subject, integration across features and objects will only
be achieved with the real-time application of a subject-level
standard through top-down attention. Thus, if the Standard

For the record, I love Naples Bay.

990

Theory is correct, top-down attention is necessary for
conscious perception as we know it, which minimally
involves the division of theme from thematic field, but also
normally involves deeper layers of differentiation and
integration.
.

References
Burge, T. (2010). Origins of Objectivity. Oxford University
Press.
Floridi, L. (2009). Philosophical conceptions of information.
In G. Sommaruga (Ed.), Formal Theories of Information.
Springer-Verlag.
Gurwitsch, A. (1964). Field of Consciousness. Duquesne
University Press.
Hurley, S. (2002). Consciousness in Action. Harvard
University Press.
James, W. (1981). The Principles of Psychology. Harvard
University Press.
Jennings, C. D. (2012). The subject of attention. Synthese,
189(3), 535–554.
Jennings, C. D. (2015). Attention and perceptual
organization. Philosophical Studies, 172(5), 1265-1278.
Jennings, C. D. (in press). Consciousness without attention.
Journal of the American Philosophical Association.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception.
Routledge. (Trans. C. Smith)
Michel, F., & Henaff, M. (2004). Seeing without the
occipitoparietal cortex: Simultagnosia as a shrinkage of
the attentional visual field. Behavioral Neurology, 15.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of
communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27, 379–
423.
Tononi, G. (2005). Consciousness, information integration,
and the brain. In S. Laureys (Ed.), Progress in Brain
Research. Elsevier.
Treisman, A. M. (1988). Features and objects: The
Fourteenth Bartlett Memorial Lecture. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 40(2), 201–237.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12(1), 97–136.
Wackermann, J., Putz, P., & Allefeld, C. (2008). Ganzfeldinduced hallucinatory experience, its phenomenology and
cerebral electrophysiology. Cortex, 44, 1364–1378.
Wolfe, J. M., Cave, K. R., & Franzel, S. L. (1989). Guided
search: An alternative to the feature integration model for
visual search. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 15(3),
419–433.

991

