The Symbolic Working Memory:
memory accommodations for schematic processing of symbolic information
Nader Noori (nnoori@usc.edu)
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles , CA 90089 USA
Abstract
This paper describes an evolutionarily plausible description of of
a specialized working memory system involved in information
management for high-order cognitive tasks through its capability
for controlled maintenance and schematic access to symbolic representations. Along a volatile serially accessible symbolic storage that serves a basic maintenance function the system utilizes
other accessory volatile memory systems along long-term memory (LTM) and learning systems for execution of schematic access
to its content. Accessory systems can help encode the episodic
information including the current state of the task and more importantly provide a means for address-based access to the content
of symbolic storage. LTM and learning systems help map the current state of the task onto execution programs and thus help render
schematic access and process of the retained symbolic information. Implications of this feature of the model are examined for
the case if concurrent-counting task.
Keywords: Symbolic Working Memory; Volatile Memory; State
Registry System; Working Memory; Selective Access;

The concept of working memory (WM) has emerged from
a general interest in understanding the function of memory in
the context of goal-oriented behavior. WM is often used to
refer to the capability of provisional retention of selective information in a mode which is accessible to running processes.
Research on working memory in cognitive science is traditionally concerned with high-order cognitive tasks. In this realm
WM is often described as a universal limited capacity pool of
information kept in an active state where cognitive processes
can bind to their needed information. This universal pool is
equipped with a universal set of processes which allow controlled utilization of its storage capacity with respect to the
status of the task. This view of a universal pool of information equipped with a universal set of control processes which is
deeply embedded in standard models of WM can barely stand
up to the challenge of explaining the body of evidence gathered
over near half a century. Here I give a brief summary of some
of these challenges that have recently motivated proliferation
of new WM models.

Involvement of long-term memory A monumental challenge facing standard models of WM is defining the nature
of WM storage and its relationship with long-term memory
(LTM). Popular models of WM either assume a complete dissociation between WM storage and LTM (Baddeley, 1992,
2000) or assume that WM as an entirely LTM-embedded construct (Cowan, 1999; Ruchkin, Grafman, Cameron, & Berndt,
2003; Oberauer, 2009). However, recent evidence suggests
‘selective involvement’ of LTM in storing information for WM
tasks which seems to equally challenge both these views. Recent neural evidence suggests that previous assumption about
complete dissociation between LTM and STM (Scoville &
Milner, 1957; Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968; Shallice & Warrington, 1970) need to be revised at least with respect to retain-

ing information in novel WM tasks where involvement of the
hippocampal area of the human brain –known for encoding
LTM – has become evident (Ranganath & Blumenfeld, 2005;
Ranganath, Cohen, & Brozinsky, 2005; Olson, Page, Moore,
Chatterjee, & Verfaellie, 2006; Jonides et al., 2008). Based on
behavioral evidences some researchers have reached to a similar conclusion in assuming non-waiverable role for a primary
STM along a secondary LTM component in working memory
(Davelaar, Goshen-Gottstein, Ashkenazi, Haarmann, & Usher,
2005; Unsworth & Engle, 2007). There have been some theoretical efforts for explaining a role for both LTM resources
and STM resources in WM storage determined by a trade-off
between the cost of capacity limitation in STM resources and
the cost of learning and interference of memory traces in LTM
resources (Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995; O’Reilly, Braver, & Cohen, n.d.). These models although assume a dual nature for
storage in WM tasks yet are not specific about where utilizing
LTM resources is obligatory (Ranganath & Blumenfeld, 2005;
Olson et al., 2006).

Ambiguity in describing control processes The concept of
‘control processes’ was first introduced to explain the variance
in the capacity of a presumed universal structural short-term
store (Miller, 1956; Broadbent, 1958) by considering the possibility of controlled and voluntary use of processes that can
help optimize encoding and retention of information in this
structure (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968, 1971). The idea of subject’s discretionary control over resources of memory became
the most distinctive aspect of WM research agenda and gained
a crucial theoretical status when inspired by the architecture of
digital computers Baddeley and Hitch assumed a central executive (CE) unit as the embodiment of control functions and in
charge of regulating storage components (Baddeley & Hitch,
1974). Yet, after four decades of efforts for describing functions and mechanisms of CE, this ‘most important’ component
of standard WM models is often described as the ‘least understood’ component of these model (Repovs & Baddeley, 2006;
Baddeley, 2012). Baddeley once revised his initial description
of CE as a collection of strategic control processes to a unit
which exert controls over its subsidiary storage units through
controlling limited executive attentional resources. This revision helped relate WM to executive resources of the brain
which are believed to be predominantly localized in prefrontal
regions of the brain. These resources are particularly necessary
for rendering complex and novel responses where automatic
responses need to be inhibited as their outcome may conflict
with the goal of the task. However, relating control processes
of WM to executive resources of the brain has broadened the
scope of questions facing WM models. The challenge lies in
articulating a relationship between CE and storage components
which is consistent with dominant views of functioning exec-

1727

utive resources through inhibition of automatic responses or
selection through biasing.

Inconsistencies with an evolutionary plausible narrative
It is well accepted in perception research communities that
working memory and short-term memory should be dissected
into functionally specialized faculties each serving a problem of adaptive importance to the function of brain. Functioning of these specialized short-term memory systems in
perception-action routines are described in terms of schemas
that explain the flow of information with respect to its specific function (Arbib, 1992). This functional modularity fits
standards of evolutionary psychologists in describing cognitive systems (Cosmides & Tooby, 1994b; Barrett & Kurzban,
2006). In comparison the dominant narrative of WM in cognitive psychology as a universal, general-purpose, functionally
non-modular and centrally controlled cognitive faculty does
not integrate well with growing trends in cognitive science
for viewing cognitive capabilities in a broader scope and in
relationship with low-level functions of the nervous system
(Barsalou, 1999) or as a continuation of an evolutionary process (Cosmides & Tooby, 1994a).
This paper gives a description of a working memory system whose functional domain spans high-order cognition by
virtue of its speciality in retaining symbolic codes of human
language that potentially empower a diverse set of tasks. The
proposed system features schematic use of sensorimotor systems for management of information which can be the target
of executive control mechanisms. In this sense, the proposed
model has necessary elements for integrating executive attentional resources into an information management system. The
proposed system also provides a novel explanation of contributions of volatile short-term and long-term memory resources in
providing different modes of access to information.

The Symbolic Working Memory
General framework
What is described here is a working memory system which is
fundamentally dependent on the evolution of human language.
The very systems that are at the core of perception and articulation of communication signals in an open ended communication system provide the capacity of controlled retention of
disposable information in the form of code segment with symbolic representation function that feed to cognitive processes.
This system is far from description of a universal and general
purpose WM system which can serve cognition in any form or
facet. In this sense storage capacity of such a system should
not be viewed as an instance of a universal store or pool of information (Broadbent, 1958; Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968). The
symbolic working memory system however, appears as a ubiquitous system with a crucial role in many high-order cognitive
tasks that in some form rely on processing abstract representation of specialized sensory and motor codes that belong to
human symbolic system for communication.
The system is a composite system with different functional
modes with a a variable configuration depending on the functional mode. Even for its most basic function in simple controlled retention of symbolic codes the system relies concerted
operation of a sensory and a motor system. The system relies
on a distributed control system when collaboration of several

subsystems is required. Functioning of the system at different level are described in terms of schema language a control
theoretic representation of functions and mechanisms in neural
systems (Arbib, 1992; Noori & Itti, 2013).
In a more complicated functional mode which supports selective access to content of SWM the system utilizes different
sources of volatile memory in addition to learning system to
employ a data structure that allows selection of a particular
segment symbolic code. It is in this latter functional mode that
involvement of hippocampal regions of the brain will become
necessary and LTM practically plays a role in executive functions and rendering complex access to the content of volatile
components of SWM which is required for schematic processing of information.

Components of the system
1. Volatile Serial Symbolic Storage The core component
of every SWM system which provides its basic functionality of
retention of symbolic codes is a volatile serial symbolic storage. The crucial role of this system stems from the functional
versatility of symbolic codes of human language in cognitive
functions. The most ubiquitous implementation of such a system is the phonological loop (PL) (Baddeley, Lewis, & Vallar, 1984) however, PL is not the only possible implementation of such system. Sign language as another alternative form
of human language features a a system similar to PL which
is capable of retention of symbolic codes of sign language
(Wilson & Emmorey, 1997). This system is indeed a necessary arrangement between perception and production systems
of every form of language which features open-ended set of
lexemes. This component can be described in a more generic
form and as a result of coupling of sensory and motor systems which are responsible for perception and articulation of
symbolic signal of the language. The evolutionary purpose for
forming a loop between the a sensory/perceptual system and
a motor/articulatory system is learning motor representations
for automatic articulation of signals which are similar to sample signals provided by a mentor. Both perceptual and production subsystems are equipped with a volatile memory whose
content is subject to a relatively rapid decay. Without refreshing the content of these volatile buffers in a loop by constant
exchanging segment codes between buffers their content will
vanish.
A critical feature of such a system is preserving the order
of segments in buffers and therefore, it stores information in
the form sequential arrangement of segment codes from subject’s repertoire of lexemes. Capacity limitation in this system is rather determined by the ability of the subject for reliable rehearsing or robust exchanges between articulatory and
perceptual subsystems before information in traces of activations in sensory or motor buffer fade away. As a result the
length of symbolic codes– determines the time needed for their
articulation– affects the number of symbolic segments that can
be retained reliably (Baddeley et al., 1984; Wilson & Emmorey, 1998). A sever limitation of this system which affects
its functionality is related to the fact that stored segments do
not have address and thus the system has no internal mechanism for granting selective access to a symbolic segment based
on its position in the store. This feature is restricting for supporting those tasks that at each stage need to have access to

1728

only a subset of symbolic codes for processing. Without a
random access functionality this system can support very well
trained cognitive functions which rely on serially stored symbolic segment. Integration with two other components which
are explained in next the two sections is a remedy for this handicap.

2. Volatile State Registry System An add-on mechanism
that gives the symbolic serial storage the needed capability of
selective access to particular retained segments is provided by
coupling with an accessory system that first, is capable of encoding addressable states that are subject to selective access
and second, operationally can be coordinated with the process
of rehearsing or serial monitoring symbolic segments in the serial symbolic storage. Such an arrangement provides a proxy
state for the content of serial symbolic storage by synchronizing the iteration through the content of serial segment and a
schema for changing in the state of the coupled system. In
this paper this accessory system is referred to as State Registry
System or (SRS).
State registry system is defined functionally which means
that unlike VSSS it does not refer to a particular system. There
are a number of systems with built-in location-based representation and mechanisms for controlled shift between those states
which fulfil above descriptions and thus can function as SRS
in the SWM system. These systems may have routine primary
function in other primitive and basic functions yet are capable
of being coupled with rehearsing process of VSSS. Recruitment of same brain regions in tasks that feature spatial/motor
functions and WM tasks with no immediate spatial/motor feature (Knops, Thirion, Hubbard, Michel, & Dehaene, 2009;
Tamber-Rosenau, Esterman, Chiu, & Yantis, 2011) along with
reports of systematic use of limbs (Noori, 2015) and occulomotor system in WM tasks (Noori & Itti, 2011) provide supporting evidence for this hypothesis. Moreover, this hypothesis
can help explain abundant evidence of extensive engagement
of the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) with conspicuous spatial
tuning characteristics and a critical role in wide range of sensorimotor functions in WM tasks that involve manipulation of
information (Olson & Berryhill, 2009).
Combining this added registry features with a system that
can learn and retain association between these proxy states and
processing programs creates a full fledged symbolic working
memory system with capability of schematic processing.
3. Symbolic Schema Learning System SWM system utilizes learning and LTM systems in a role other than retaining
episodic information across individual trials of the task and in
a way which is more balanced in terms of cost of learning and
in the meantime less susceptible to effects of interference. In
the proposed role, associative learning and associative memory help learn and retain a mapping between internal state of
the system reflected in current state of SRS and the content
of those volatile memories that retain the task status onto processing programs which take in symbolic codes. This role is
drastically different from functioning as a storage for episodic
information. The cost of using LTM for retention of episodic
information rises with the rate of updating episodic information (as a result of interference and relatively slow encoding
process) and interference between traces of stored information
across different episodes of the task is inevitable. In contrast,

the information about structure of the task reflected in the mapping between possible states onto processing programs remain
stable across different episodes of the task and reusable across
different episodes. In this schema VSSS and SRS as volatile
memory resources which are subject to control and are protected against interference. These resources play the role of
storing episodic information. In contrast LTM resources retain
data structures that reflect programs for tasks execution. In this
role LTM is in fact a part of executive system rather than storage of information in each trial. In a sense, LTM practically
becomes an essential part of memory management in those
tasks that draw on random or selective access to the information retained in the symbolic serial buffer. This assumption
has non-trivial implications for understanding deficit in function of WM in AD1 patient which was previously attributed
to a dysfunction in central executive system (Baddeley, 1996;
Baddeley & Wilson, 2002).
It is important to note that above description of SWM does
not preclude the use of LTM resources for directly retaining
episodic information. If the cost of learning and interference
allows then subject may opt for using these resources for storage of episodic information.

SWM in its fully integrated mode
This section gives an example of functioning of SWM in its
‘integrated mode’ where all components of the system collaborate toward supporting schematic processing of WM items. For
this purpose functioning of SWM in a self-paced concurrentcounting task is discussed in detail. The discussion here is then
used for developing a model and computer simulation of triple
concurrent counting tasks which allows quantitative evaluation
of the model and its distinctive prediction against real data.
Imagine you are handed a number of cards; randomly chosen from a deck of cards and you are allowed to see each card
once and one card each time. Your task is counting and then
reporting the number of cards belonging to each of four suits
after drawing the last card. The task is self-paced which allows allocating enough time for updating working memory
content before drawing the next card. The task in practice
needs concurrent counting of cards of each suit and retention
of four numbers (n♠ , n♡ , n♢ and n♣ ) in some form at each moment. Ideally, every time a card is drawn from the hand one
of these four numbers which represents the running count of
the matching suit should be increased by one leaving the sum
of counts equal to the number of cards in the end. Relying
only on LTM for retaining these four numbers requires creating an association between available cues and current values
(e.g. {n♠ ← ♠, n♡ ← ♡, n♢ ← ♢, n♣ ← ♣}). Since the associated running counts are subject to change every time a card
is drawn, these cues will become overloaded which make the
counting process susceptible to interference especially when
the subject is forced to perform the task as fast as possible.
The phonological loop as a volatile memory resource is well
protected against effects of interference and provides a better
means for keeping up with the fast pace of the task and frequent
changes of values. Retaining four word numbers by subvocal
rehearsing very well falls in the range of PL capacity in normal subjects (Baddeley et al., 1984). Let’s denote rehearsing

1729

1

Alzheimer’s Disease

process as follow: ⟨W1 ▷ W2 ▷ W3 ▷ W4 ▷ ⋯⟩ where Wi denotes the ith segment from the head of the rehearsal loop (e.g.
the first segment after a long pause). However, what renders
the difficulty of relying only on PL is that it has no internal
mechanism for distinguishing absolute order of these segments
and as a result locating a particular segment in the loop which
is associated to a particular type of suit is not possible. An
additional registry system equipped with enough number of
addressable states can help if the process of shifting between
states is synchronized with the rehearsing process. A potential
registry system needs to allocate four distinguishable states,
say S1 , S2 , S3 and S4 for performing this task. Let’s denote
the process of shifting from state Sx to Sy by Sx ↝ Sy . Then
synchronizing a shift between states of SRS with rehearsing
process is denoted as follow:
⟨W1 ▷W2 ▷W3 ▷W4 ▷⋯⟩
. .
.
. .
.
⟨ S1 ↝ S2 ↝ S3 ↝ S4 ↝⋯⟩

Where ▷. denotes synchronization between iterating through
↝
SRS and rehearsing in PL. Additionally, learning an arbitrary
association between these states and cards suits is necessary.
Let’s assume that A1 represents a learned association:
A1 = {S1 ← ♠, S2 ← ♡, S3 ← ♢, S4 ← ♣}
This association will help throughout an episode of the task
identify the state and its synchronized segment in the PL to
be accessed after a particular type of card is identified. The
target segment then is processed for running the addition process which yields a new value whose symbolic representation
in the form of phonological code should replace the previous
one. With respect to a specific order between states of SRS
the symbolic phonological segments in the loop are arranged
in the order which their associated states in SRS are associated
to the card suits. So, in an episode of the task which uses A1
as the association schema four segments in the loop (from the
head of the loop) will respectively correspond to n♠ , n♡ , n♢ and
n♣ . If instead A2 = {S1 ← ♡, S2 ← ♠, S3 ← ♣, S4 ← ♢} is learned
the segments in PL will respectively correspond to n♡ , n♠ , n♣
and n♢ .
A significant difference between a schema for associating
card suits to changing values and a schema for associating card
suits to the states of SRS is that the latter one stays unchanged
throughout an episode and can be learned in the beginning of
the episode while for the former schema associations should
be relearned each time counter values change which in turn
creates overloading cues and a within-episode interference effect. Even more importantly, once an association between card
suits and states of SRS is learned it can be used for different episodes of the task which offers an opportunity to avoid
overloading associations and a between-episodes interference.
This situation provides an opportunity to test the model. Since
the order of association matches the order of rehearsing if subjects use a fixed order of rehearsing (i.e. a fixed association
schema is used) then they are less likely to make error in retrieving or replacing the correct segment from PL. Thus this
model predicts that by changing the order of rehearsing between different episodes subjects are more prone to error in
counting as a result of between-episodes interference. Noori
has tested this prediction in a series of experiments involving a
triple concurrent-counting (TCC) task (Noori, 2015). In summary his studies show the advantage of adopting a fixed re-

hearsing strategy (FRS) compared with mixed rehearsing strategy (MRS) and choosing different orders for rehearsing in different episodes. This advantage can be observed even when
the sum of reported counts are compared with the sum of real
values. He also reports overt forms of body movement including hand movement, finger movement, finger tapping or foot
movement which despite their variability in manifestation follow a specific patterns in pointing to three locations in an order
which is synchronized with rehearsing process. His description of patterns of body movement matches with specifications
of iteration of states in SRS. The footnote here includes a link
to sample video recording of his experiment 2 .

Simulation of the triple concurrent-counting task
The above model for TCC task was used for implementing a
computer simulation for a qualitative evaluation. The focus
of analyses is on errors in performing the counting task. The
sequence of events and parameters for stimulus presentation
was similar to what is described in (Noori, 2015). The model
includes a registry system with three states in addition to an
array of three running numbers which simulates the symbolic
storage (VSSS). In this model iteration of items in VSSS and
states in SRS are completely synchronized. However, possible effects of slipping in synchronized iteration of VSSS and
SRS which leads to incorrect retrieval of running counts is considered via a perturbation effect which is independent of the
rehearsing strategy. For MRS blocks the association between
states of SRS and targets of counting is learned in the initial
phase of the trial where initial counters (0 or 1) are assigned
to each counter. During FRS blocks the order of registry is
learned once in the initial phase of the block’s first trial. Updating counters after each target identification invokes retrieval
process twice: once for retrieving the associated counter to be
increased by one and once for retrieving the position in which
the updated value should be inserted or replaced with the old
value. When a target appears repeatedly and sequentially the
retrieval phase is skipped and instead the previous updated
number is selected for the addition process. This will save
on retrieval operation for targets that are processed in immediately last operation. This aspect of the model is consistent
with this observation that reaction time in counting is faster
when the target was presented immediately before the current
operation (Garavan, 1998; Oberauer, 2002; Noori, 2015). The
retrieval process can return a wrong target with a small chance
represented by the coefficient of perturbation , Cp . The effect
of perturbation which is strategy independent can account for
slipping in synchronized iterations of VSSS and SRS. This effect is different from the effect of interference where a registry
state can be bound to its binding target of the previous trial
with additional probability of pi . In this simulation the effect
of interference is only limited to two consecutive trials.
Following the analyses of (Noori, 2015) two measures for
counting error were calculated: 1. SumError which is the distance between sum of counted values and sum of true values.
2. SoError which is the average of distances between counted
values and true values after sorting reported and true values in
order. These two measures are sensitive to different sources
of error and the relationship between them is determined by
the model of counting process and possible sources of error.

1730

2

http://tiny.cc/tc-motor

b.

1.0

SoError

SumError

0.6
Cp=0.06
Cp=0.03

0.5
0

Cp=0.0
0

0.5

pi

1.0

0.4
0.2
0

Cp=0.06

0.5

pi

y=
x

0.8

1

0

0.4

FRS (N=16)
MRS (N=16)

0

1
2
SumError (real values)

MRS

MRS

FRS

FRS

0
Real data Predicted

Figure 2: Predicted SumError vs. real data of subjects (N=16).

Cp=0.03
Cp=0.0

0

2

SumError (mean ±STE)

a.

1.5

data. To see how data points are scattered around the ideal
model (y = x) the coefficient of determination (r2 ) was calculated for sampled and predicted values. For FRS condition calculated r2 equals to 0.66 and for MRS condition calculated r2
equals 0.86, indicating even a better prediction of SumError
for this condition.
On the right panel the mean value of SumError for MRS and
FRS conditions for predicted values and real data are shown.
Error bars in this graph indicate the standard error of mean
above and below the average values.
SumError (predicted)

For example in a process model where retrieval of target items
and updating them is carried out in one stage (updated number replaces the retrieved number) SumError will be equal to
zero and SoError will depend on any factor which might affect
incorrect retrieval (e.g. error in target identification).
With the process model described here the simulation of
MRS blocks showed that for small values of Cp the behavior of
both SumError and SoError can be described as an exponentially decaying function of pi with increasing value (see Figure
1):
SumErrorMRS = αSum − βSum × e−γSum ×pi
SoErrorMRS = αSo − βSo × e−γSo ×pi
Examining different values of these function reveals that for
small values of Cp these functions can be estimated as follow:
αSum ≃ 4.2 ×Cp + 1.2; βSum ≃ −8.5 ×Cp + 1.2; γSum ≃ 6.05
αSo ≃ 1.9 ×Cp + 0.56; βSo ≃ −3.6 ×Cp + 0.56; γSo ≃ 5.41

The mean value of SumError for the case of MRS for real
data was 0.726 (SEM=0.132) the mean value for SumError for
the same condition for predicted data is 0.747 (SEM=0.132).
The mean value for SumError for the case of FRS for real data
was 0.326 (SEM=0.093) and for predicted data this value is
0.396 (SEM=0.105).

1.0

Figure 1: Simulated error measures for MRS condition.
In FRS blocks the interference is practically ineffective and
the error value is described with the same function when pi =
0. So, in practice, SumErrorFRS ≃ SumErrorMRS (0) = αSum −
βSum ≃ kSum × Cp . A similar relationship holds for SoError :
SoErrorFRS ≃ SoErrorMRS (0) = αSo − βSo ≃ kSo ×Cp .
These relationships quantitatively describe the model’s prediction. In particular, they show for each subject with a given
Cp how both SumError and SoError are expected to be higher
for MRS condition compared to FRS condition. The difference is attributed to the effect of between-episodes interference
which is represented by pi in this model.

Evaluation of the model
The model was tested against experimental data from a recent study of triple counting (Noori, 2015). Sixteen subjects
had performed the TCC task both under MRS and FRS conditions. To test the model, for each subject both parameters of
the model were calculated using the data of SoError as follow:
SoErrorFRS ≃ SoErrorMRS (0) = αSo − βSo ≃ 5.5 ×Cp
or : Cp ≃ SoErrorFRS ÷ 5.5. With the estimated Cp in hand
−SoErrorFRS
pi can be estimated as γ1So × ln( ααSoSo−SoError
) . With these esMRS
timation of Cp and pi values of SumError for FRS condition
can be estimated as follow: SumErrorFRS ≃ SumErrorMRS (0) =
αSum − βSum ≃ 12.7 ×Cp
And finally the value of SumError for MRS condition can be
calculated using estimations in the previous sections by considering Cp and pi for every individual subject.
The graph on the left panel of Figure 2 compares the predicted values for SumError for both conditions against the real

Conclusion
This paper presented an account for a working memory system
specialized in management of symbolic information. The proposed system serves those cognitive tasks that in some form
rely on symbolic features of human language. These tasks
make up a substantial body of evidence in working memory literature in cognitive psychology (CP) often referenced as cognitive WM tasks. These tasks have been extensively used to
speculate about a general-purpose, universal storage with a
centralized executive regime. The proposed model is different from previous models of WM in CP in many fundamental
ways while it borrows some of its key elements from standard
models.
From a broad perspective the goal of the present work is
explaining a specialized working memory system along other
working memory systems. This system is probably one of
most recently evolved working memory systems along with
evolution of human language. Many fundamental functions
of the brain which we have inherited from our non-human
primate ancestors still rely on their specialized WM systems
for retention and flow of information. This work is not even
an attempt for a universal description of working as multicomponent model of WM (MC-WM) tries to achieve. SWM in
its fully integrated mode employs different components, however, these components all collaborate for serving the task in
hand. This view is different from MC-WM which includes
modal storage units for storing information in different modes
of cognition function.

1731

Similar to MC-WM the role of storing episodic information
is given to volatile (or short-term) resources. However, the difference is that the episodic information in SWM is distributed
in different components with the symbolic storage system always present and engaged. These volatile working memory
systems are indeed embedded in sensorimotor systems with
ability of retaining information in stable and protected neural
activities. SWM is different from other models in assuming
a crucial and active role for associative learning and associative memory in providing the capability of schematic access
to the content of symbolic storage. Schematic access is a crucial feature of many working memory tasks that are used for
evaluating specifications of cognitive control.
Another distinctive feature of the model is the emphasis on schematic access to the content of working memory
which allows schematic processing of information. Symbolic
schematic processing is a characteristics of computational cognitive models which is generally attributed to cognitive processes as the consumers of information rather than the WM
system. In the presented paradigm a part of schematic process
is given to the WM system. This part is concerned with representation of limitations and constraints imposed by the very
specific mechanisms underlying retention and access to information in the Symbolic Working Memory.

References
Arbib, M. (1992). Schema theory. Encyclopedia of artificial intelligence, 2, 1427–1443.
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory: A proposed
system and its control processes. The psychology of learning and
motivation, 2, 89–195.
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1971, August). The control of shortterm memory. Scientific American, 225(2), 82–90.
Baddeley, A. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255(5044), 556.
Baddeley, A. (1996). Exploring the Central Executive. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A: Human Experimental
Psychology, 49(1), 5. doi: 10.1080/713755608
Baddeley, A. (2000). The episodic buffer: a new component of working
memory? Trends in cognitive sciences, 4(11), 417–423.
Baddeley, A. (2012). Working Memory: Theories, Models, and Controversies.
Baddeley, A., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. The psychology of
learning and motivation, 8, 47–89.
Baddeley, A., Lewis, V., & Vallar, G. (1984). Exploring the articulatory
loop. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36(2), 233–
252.
Baddeley, A., & Wilson, B. A. (2002). Prose recall and amnesia: implications for the structure of working memory. Neuropsychologia,
40(10), 1737–1743.
Barrett, H. C., & Kurzban, R. (2006). Modularity in cognition: framing
the debate. Psychological review, 113(3), 628.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. The Behavioral and
brain sciences, 22(4).
Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and communication. Pergamon
Press.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1994a). Beyond intuition and instinct blindness: Toward an evolutionarily rigorous cognitive science. Cognition,
50(1), 41–77.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1994b). Origins of domain specificity: The
evolution of functional organization. Mapping the mind: Domain
specificity in cognition and culture, 85–116.
Cowan, N. (1999). An embedded-processes model of working memory.
Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and
executive control, 62–101.
Davelaar, E. J., Goshen-Gottstein, Y., Ashkenazi, A., Haarmann, H. J.,
& Usher, M. (2005). The demise of short-term memory revisited:
empirical and computational investigations of recency effects. Psychological Review, 112(1), 3.

Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory.
Psychological Review, 102(2), 211–245.
Garavan, H. (1998, March). Serial attention within working memory.
Memory & Cognition, 26(2), 263–276.
Jonides, J., Lewis, R. L., Nee, D. E., Lustig, C. A., Berman, M. G., &
Moore, K. S. (2008, January). The Mind and Brain of Short-Term
Memory. Annual Review of Psychology, 59(1), 193–224.
Knops, A., Thirion, B., Hubbard, E. M., Michel, V., & Dehaene, S.
(2009). Recruitment of an Area Involved in Eye Movements During
Mental Arithmetic. Science, 324(5934), 1583–1585.
Miller, G. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some
limits on our capacity for processing information. Psychological review, 63(2), 81.
Noori, N. (2015). Schematic processing in working memory tasks relies
on learning and long-term memory resources. In The 37th annunal
conference of the cognitive science society.
Noori, N., & Itti, L. (2011). Spatial Registry Model: Towards a
Grounded Account for Executive Attention. Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 3187–3192.
Noori, N., & Itti, L. (2013). Schema-driven, space-supported random
accessible memory systems for manipulation of symbolic working
memory. In Proceedings of the 35th annunal conference of the cognitive science society.
Oberauer, K. (2002, May). Access to information in working memory:
exploring the focus of attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(3), 411–421.
Oberauer, K. (2009). Design for a working memory. Psychology of
learning and motivation, 51, 45–100.
Olson, I. R., & Berryhill, M. (2009). Some surprising findings on the
involvement of the parietal lobe in human memory. Neurobiology
of Learning and Memory, 91(2), 155–165. (Special Issue: Parietal
Cortex)
Olson, I. R., Page, K., Moore, K. S., Chatterjee, A., & Verfaellie, M.
(2006, April). Working Memory for Conjunctions Relies on the Medial Temporal Lobe. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26(17), 4596 –
4601.
O’Reilly, R. C., Braver, T. S., & Cohen, J. D. (n.d.). A biologically
based computational model of working memory. In A. Miyake &
P. Shah (Eds.), Models of working memory (chap. 11).
Ranganath, C., & Blumenfeld, R. S. (2005, August). Doubts about
double dissociations between short- and long-term memory. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 9(8), 374–380.
Ranganath, C., Cohen, M. X., & Brozinsky, C. J. (2005, July). Working memory maintenance contributes to long-term memory formation: neural and behavioral evidence. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(7), 994–1010.
Repovs, G., & Baddeley, A. (2006, April). The multi-component model
of working memory: Explorations in experimental cognitive psychology. Neuroscience, 139(1), 5–21.
Ruchkin, D. S., Grafman, J., Cameron, K., & Berndt, R. S. (2003).
Working memory retention systems: A state of activated long-term
memory. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Scoville, W. B., & Milner, B. (1957, February). Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 20(1), 11–21.
Shallice, T., & Warrington, E. K. (1970, May). Independent functioning
of verbal memory stores: a neuropsychological study. , 22(2), 261–
273.
Tamber-Rosenau, B. J., Esterman, M., Chiu, Y.-C., & Yantis, S. (2011).
Cortical mechanisms of cognitive control for shifting attention in vision and working memory. Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 23(10),
2905–2919.
Unsworth, N., & Engle, R. (2007). The nature of individual differences
in working memory capacity: active maintenance in primary memory
and controlled search from secondary memory. Psychological review,
114(1), 104.
Wilson, M., & Emmorey, K. (1997). Working memory for sign language: A window into the architecture of the working memory system. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 2, 121–130.
Wilson, M., & Emmorey, K. (1998). A word length effect for sign
language: Further evidence for the role of language in structuring
working memory. Memory & Cognition, 26(3), 584–590.

1732

