The Effects of Racial Similarity and Dissimilarity on the Joint Simon Task
Steve Croker (s.croker@ilstu.edu), J. Scott Jordan (jsjorda@ilstu.edu),
Daniel S. Schloesser (dschloe@ilstu.edu), Vincent Cialdella (vtciald@ilstu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Illinois State University
Campus Box 4620
Normal, IL 61790-4620 USA
representation of the ‘other’ in joint action tasks, as well as
(2) the degree of automaticity with which such corepresentations are constructed. Sebanz, Knoblich, and Prinz
(2005) assert that the content regarding the other is
formatted in terms of the other’s stimulus-response mapping
(e.g., press the right button in response to a green stimulus),
what they referred to as task co-representation. Sebanz et al.
(2005) assert such representations are constructed quasiautomatically due to the neural overlap in systems involving
action planning and action perception. On the other hand,
Hommel, Colzato, and Wildenberg (2009) propose that corepresentations are constructed separately (i.e., not as part of
an overall shared task representation), and influence each
other as a function of the relationship between the co-actors
(i.e., either a positive or a negative relationship). Hommel et
al.’s account is based on a manipulation whereby
participants were paired with a “nice” confederate, or an
“intimidating” confederate. RTs were faster for the latter
group, and there was no spatial compatibility effect.
As is clear in the studies mentioned above, most research
to date has focused on the content and the necessity of corepresentation. However, despite their differences, both of
the above-mentioned frameworks make the assertion that
representing the ‘other’ leads to a response conflict. Both
accounts also assert that response conflict is overcome by
inhibiting the inappropriate response. Given the important
role that inhibition is assumed to play in such tasks, the
purpose of the present study was to introduce variables into
a joint Simon task that might vary the amount of inhibition
generated prior to response execution. Consistent with the
ego depletion model, additional inhibitory demands may
affect the participants’ ability to inhibit the incorrect
response (Lurquin, McFadden, & Harbke, 2014). Thus, like
Sebanz et al. (2005) we asked participants to complete the
joint action task by giving them a color task (i.e., respond to
the right for a green ring) either alone, or with a confederate
who was given either (1) a color task—the joint-color
condition (i.e., respond to the left for a red ring), or a
direction task—the joint-direction condition (i.e., the
confederate responds to the direction of the pointing hand).
Sebanz et al. (2005) originally utilized the joint direction
condition to investigate whether or not an action conflict
would arise when a stimulus primed a competing response
for both participants even though the two were responding
to different stimulus dimensions (e.g., a right-pointing
finger wearing a green ring primes the “color-task”
participant for a right response, and the “direction-task”
primes a left response because the former responds right to a
green ring, while the latter responds left to a right-pointing

Abstract
We examined the effects of individual versus joint action and
racial similarity and dissimilarity on a Simon task using
mouse tracking to explore the implicit cognitive dynamics
underlying responses. Participants were slower to respond
when working with a partner than when working alone, and
their mouse movements also differed across conditions.
Participants paired with a different-race partner took longer to
respond than participants paired with a same-race partner. We
argue that, in the joint conditions, participants’ longer
responses were the result of automatic inhibitory processes
that arise within the social context.
Keywords: Joint action; Simon effect; Mouse tracking

The Simon Effect is an increase in reaction times that occurs
when a stimulus dimension (e.g., color) primes one response
(e.g., press right for green) while the stimulus’ spatial
location primes another (e.g., the green stimulus appears on
the left of the screen). Sebanz, Knoblich, and Prinz (2003)
found a Simon Effect for dyads by presenting a picture of a
hand wearing a ring pointing to the left or right. Response
buttons were located to the left or right of the screen. A joint
Simon effect (Dolk et al., 2014) emerged when the
participants did the task together by responding to one
component of the stimulus (e.g., one participant responded
right to a green ring, the other, left to a red ring). In this
paradigm, each trial was effectively a go/no-go trial for each
participant. Participants generated a response when the
stimulus was the appropriate color (i.e., a “go” trial), and
did not generate a response when the stimulus did not match
the target color (i.e., a “no-go” trial). Response times (RTs)
to the ring stimulus were significantly longer if the finger
pointed in the direction opposite the response option
indicated by the color of the ring (e.g., participant responds
with a right press and the finger points to the left).
Interestingly enough, this Simon effect did not occur if a
participant completed the same “go/no-go” type task alone.
Whether or not the response primed by the color of the ring
and the direction the finger pointed were the same (a
compatible trial) or different (an incompatible trial), only
mattered when the participant did the task with another
person. Sebanz et al. (2003) proposed that the Simon effect
emerged in the joint condition and not the individual
condition because, during the former, participants
automatically represented the action option of their partner
(i.e., action co-representation). As a result, when their
partner’s co-represented action conflicted with their own
action, a response conflict emerged. Different authors have
proposed different accounts of (1) the content entailed in the

489

and there will be greater deviation towards the distracter
response (e.g., the correct response is right, but the hand
points left). Such a finding can be interpreted as revealing
an evolving response in which the activations of multiple
competing and conflicting implicit evaluations change over
time until the activation of one judgment inhibits others and
resolves into an explicit response (e.g., Wojnowicz,
Ferguson, Dale, and Spivey, 2009). Mouse tracking has
been used in several social and cognitive domains, such as
race categorization (Freeman, Pauker, Apfelbaum, &
Ambady, 2010) and recognition memory (Papesh &
Goldinger, 2012). However, there has been no research to
date on the Simon task using this method. An analysis of
mouse movements allows us to examine the cognitive
dynamics underlying response choices in both individual
and joint conditions of the Simon task, and it reveals aspects
of the time-course of response inhibition that are difficult, if
not impossible, to find with RTs.

finger). Results revealed that RTs were significantly longer
on trials in which the stimulus primed responses for both
participants. Sebanz et al. (2005) interpreted these data to
imply that co-representation is practically automatic,
regardless of whether or not the other’s task is relevant to
one’s own. To further test this idea, we asked our
participants to respond on every trial (i.e., respond right if
the ring is green, or respond left if it is not green) instead of
responding in the go/no-go fashion of Sebanz et al.’s (2005)
participants. As a result, in our joint direction condition
participants responded to color while the confederate
responded to direction, and half of the trials were conflict
trials (i.e., the stimulus primed opposite responses), while
the other half were non-conflict trials. If co-representation
of the ‘other’ is automatic, RTs should be slower in conflict
trials. If no such difference occurs, it might indicate that the
co-representation revealed in Sebanz et al. (2005) was
contingent upon their go/no-go method.
To further manipulate inhibition, we systematically varied
the in-group/out-group status of the pair (i.e., participants
worked with a confederate who was from the same or a
different racial group). He, Lever, and Young (2011)
examined joint action effects on memory-based guidance of
attention, and found that in-group and out-group relations
modulated
these
effects.
An
in-group/out-group
manipulation activates inhibition that is context relevant
(i.e., one is currently in the presence of an out-group
member), but completely task irrelevant. If such inhibition
were to influence RTs in a joint-Simon task, it might
encourage us to move our explanation of the joint Simon
effect away from the content and automaticity of corepresentations toward a focus on inhibition and the multiscale social factors one must continuously navigate and
regulate (i.e., who one allows to influence oneself) during
any social interaction (Jordan & Wesselmann, 2014).
In addition to the above-mentioned differences between
the Sebanz et al. (2005) paradigm and ours, instead of
responding with button presses, participants indicated
responses (i.e., right or left) using a computer mouse to
move a cursor from a bottom-center location to a target
symbol in either the left or right upper corner of the
computer screen. In recent years, mouse trajectory recording
has emerged as a technique for recording an implicit
measure; specifically, the temporal motor dynamics of
response choice. Mouse trajectories can illustrate the
differences in hand movements across experimental
conditions. In the Simon task, it is rare for participants to
make an error: participants will almost always select the
appropriate response. However, they may be differentially
attracted to the distracter response, particularly on trials on
which the spatial component of the stimulus is incompatible
with the target response (e.g., the correct response is to the
right, but the stimulus points to the left). On compatible
trials, cursor trajectories should be attracted toward a single
strong attractor basin in the state space for that problem. On
incompatible trials there will be more competition between
the two stimuli, because two responses have been primed,

Method
Fifty undergraduate students from Illinois State University
volunteered as participants for extra course credit.
Participants identified themselves as belonging to the
following racial categories: white (40), black (3), Asian (2),
Hispanic (2), and other (3).
Stimuli consisted of a set of four images, and one image
appeared center screen on each trial. Every image was
comprised of two stimulus dimensions: hand direction and
ring color. In each trial, a hand was presented pointing
either left or right wearing a ring that was either green or
red. This yields four possible stimulus combinations: leftpointing hand/green ring, left-pointing hand/red ring, rightpointing hand/green ring, and right-pointing hand/red ring
(see Figure 1).
This experiment utilized the Sebanz et al. (2005) handpointing/ring color paradigm. At the beginning of each trial,
participants were required to use the mouse to click a “start”
button at the bottom of the screen, after which a stimulus
and two response options were presented and remained on
the screen until a response was selected. Participants were
told to always click on the checkmark at the right of the
screen if the ring was green, and click on the X at the left of
the screen if the ring was not green. If participants took
longer than 1000 ms to begin moving the mouse, a message
was presented informing them to start responding earlier in

Figure 1. Screenshot of the experiment.

490

the trial. On trials in which participants responded
incorrectly, a red X was presented in the center of the screen
for 1000 ms. On trials in which a correct response was
made, participants were presented with the next trial. After
completing four practice trials, participants completed three
blocks (100 trials each) of the Sebanz et al. task. In each
block, all four images (left-pointing hand/green ring, leftpointing hand/red ring, right-pointing hand/green ring, and
right-pointing hand/red ring) were presented 25 times each
in a randomized order. In the individual block participants
completed this task on their own. In the other two blocks,
participants sat to the right of a confederate and were told
that their partner would respond on every trial to the same
stimuli at the same time using a response box, but that the
partner was following a different rule. One of our
confederates was black and one was white; depending on
the race of the participant, each dyad was coded as samerace or different-race (e.g., a white participant with a black
confederate is a different-race dyad). In the joint-color
block, the confederate’s rule was to press a button on the
left of a button box (corresponding to the X at the left of the
screen) if the ring was red, and press the right button if the
ring was green. In the joint-direction block the confederate’s
rule was to press the left button if the hand was pointing in a
particular direction, and the right button for the opposite
direction. For half the participants, the confederate
responded left to left-pointing hands, and for the other half,
left for right-pointing hands. The order of the three blocks
(individual, joint color, joint direction) was counterbalanced
across participants.

distracter, and then subtracted the result from 1, yielding a
measure of proportional proximity to the distracter at each
timestep. From these data, we were able to find the point in
time at which each participant’s responses were closest to
the distracter.

Results
Response Times
Response times (RTs), defined as the time between clicking
the start button and clicking on one of the two response
options, were analyzed using a 2 (dyad race: same or
different) x 3 (task: individual, joint-color, joint-direction) x
2 (stimulus: compatible or incompatible) ANOVA (see
Figure 2). There was a main effect of spatial compatibility,
F(1,48) = 36.02, p < .001, ηp2 = .429, in that participants
were faster on compatible trials (i.e., the direction of the
finger and the color of the ring implied the same spatial
location) than incompatible trials. There was also a main
effect of task, F(2,96) = 11.35, p < .001, ηp2 = .191, in
which participants were faster in the individual condition
than in the joint conditions. Pairwise comparisons revealed
no significant difference in RTs between the two joint tasks.
There was also a main effect of dyad race, F(1,48) = 4.32, p
= .043, ηp2 = .083, in that participants were faster in the
same race dyad condition. This effect of race interacted with
task, F(2,96) = 3.56, p = .032, ηp2 = .069, such that RTs
were only faster in the individual versus the joint conditions
for participants in a different race dyad.

Maximum Deviations
Maximum deviations (MDs) were analyzed using a 2 (dyad
race: same or different) x 3 (task: individual, joint-color,
joint-direction) x 2 (stimulus: compatible or incompatible)
ANOVA (see Figure 3). There was a main effect of spatial
compatibility on MD, F(1,48) = 185.64, p < .001, ηp2 =
.795. Participants made relatively linear mouse movements
towards the correct response on compatible trials, compared
to incompatible trials. There was also a main effect of task,
F(2,96) = 30.70, p < .001, ηp2 = .390. Pairwise comparisons
revealed that MDs were significantly larger on the
individual task than the joint tasks. MDs did not differ
between the joint direction and joint color tasks. A task x
spatial compatibility interaction, F(2,96) = 4.06, p = .020,
ηp2 = .078, revealed greater differences between the
individual and joint tasks for trials on which the stimulus
was spatially incompatible with the response. There was no
main effect of, or interactions with, dyad race.

Design and Analyses
The dependent variables were response time, maximum
deviation from an idealized trajectory toward the correct
response, and time to maximum proximity to the distracter.
Maximum deviation is computed by comparing the x,y
coordinates of observed mouse trajectories for each trial
with a direct line between the start button and the correct
response. The greatest distance between the actual and
idealized trajectories is the maximum deviation. Only
correct responses were included for analysis. In order to
compare trajectories we inverted all left-target trajectories,
such that all correct responses are mapped to the right side
of the screen. In order to compare multiple trials of differing
lengths across and within participants, all individual
trajectories were normalized to 101 timesteps. This method
allows one to examine participants’ ongoing cognitive
dynamics as they decide which response to select. Time to
maximum proximity is the point in time at which each
trajectory was closest to the distracter response choice. For
this analysis we used raw time data, sampled at 50Hz, rather
than normalized data. We the recorded average x,y
coordinates every 20ms for each participant’s responses on
each of the three tasks, separated into spatially compatible
and incompatible trials. For each timestep, we divided the
Euclidean distance between the mouse position and the
distracter by the distance between the start button and the

Action Co-representation
According to Sebanz et al. (2005), the Joint Simon effect
occurs because participants automatically represent the
action option of their partner, even if the two respond to
different stimulus dimensions. To address whether or not
this finding generalizes beyond Sebanz et al.’s (2005)
go/no-go paradigm, we examined whether there were
differences between conflict trials (i.e., the participant and
confederate made different responses) and no-conflict trials

491

Maximum Deviation

Response Time (ms)

1350
1300
1250
1200
1150
1100
1050
1000
950
900
Individual

Joint-Color

0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Individual

Joint-Direction

Joint-Color

Joint-Direction

Same Race Compatible

Same Race Incompatible

Same Race Compatible

Same Race Incompatible

Different Race Compatible

Different Race Incompatible

Different Race Compatible

Different Race Incompatible

Figure 2. Response times, with standard error bars.

Figure 3. Maximum deviations, with standard error bars.

(i.e., both participant and confederate responded to the left
or to the right). All joint-color trials are no-conflict trials as,
if the ring is red, the confederate and partner both select left,
and if the ring is green, both select right. In the jointdirection condition, some trials are conflict trials, and some
are no-conflict trials. We distinguish between conflict and
no-conflict trials by focusing on the confederate’s task (i.e.,
either left responses to left pointing fingers, or left responses
to right-pointing fingers). If the confederate is tasked with
making left responses to left-pointing fingers, then trials that
are spatially compatible for the participant (e.g., right
pointing finger/green ring) are no-conflict trials for the dyad
because both members make responses to the same spatial
location (e.g., both press right for a green ring on a rightpointing finger), while trials that are spatially incompatible
for the participant (e.g., left pointing finger/green ring), are
conflict trials because the members make responses to
different spatial locations (e.g., a green ring on a leftpointing hand leads to a right response for the participant
and a left response for the confederate). This pattern of
conflict and no-conflict trials is reversed if the confederate
is tasked with the opposite mapping (i.e., left responses to
right-pointing fingers) because spatially compatible trials
for the participant are conflict trials for the dyad (i.e., the
members make responses to different spatial locations) and
spatially incompatible trials for the participant are noconflict trials for the dyad (i.e., both members make the
same response).
In order to examine whether participants responded
differentially on conflict trials, we conducted mixed
ANOVAs on the joint-direction condition, with confederate
task (left for left-pointing hands or left for right-pointing
hands) and spatial compatibility for the participant as the
independent variables. Given that each confederate task
entailed conflict trials, with the conflict occurring in the
incompatible trials for the left to left-pointing hands
condition, and the compatible trials for left to right-pointing
hand conditions, an action conflict between the participant
and the confederate should increase RTs in the conflict

trials, leading to an interaction between task and
compatibility. We found no such interaction for RT, F(1,48)
= 2.08, p = .156, ηp2 = .042, or MD, F(1,48) = .42, p = .522,
ηp2 = .009.

Time to Maximum Proximity to Distracter
As described above, we computed the average proportional
proximity to the distracter on each task, separated for
compatible and incompatible trials, yielding six timepoints
(3 tasks x 2 spatial compatibility) per participant. Times to
maximum proximity (TMP) were analyzed using a 2 (dyad
race: same or different) x 3 (task: individual, joint-color,
joint-direction) x 2 (stimulus: compatible or incompatible)
ANOVA (see Figure 4). There was a main effect of
compatibility, F(1,48) = 4.34, p = .043, ηp2 = .083, such that
participants were quicker to reach MP on compatible trials
than on incompatible trials. There was also a main effect of
task, F(2,96) = 7.48, p = .001, ηp2 = .135. Pairwise
comparisons revealed that TMP was earlier on the
individual task than either of the joint tasks, and there was
no difference between the joint-color and joint-direction
tasks. There were also no significant effects involving dyad
race. This latter fact is worth noting, for it reveals that while
participants in same- and different-race dyads reached MP
at roughly the same time, the overall RTs were different,
with participants in different-race dyads talking longer in
the joint-direction versus the joint-color task, and
participants in the same-race dyads expressing no such
increase. Collectively, these TMP and RT findings reveal
that the overall RT differences between participants in
same- and different-race dyads emerged later in the trial,
after the participant had reached the TMP.

Discussion
As expected, the spatial compatibility of a stimulus had an
effect on RTs; this is the basic Simon effect whereby
participants take longer to respond to stimuli with
conflicting spatial and non-spatial cues. In addition, the

492

Time to maximum proximity
(ms)

Simon effect was present in all three task-conditions. This
pattern of differences was basically replicated in the MD
data, with incompatible trials producing larger MDs in all
three task-conditions. Collectively the RT and MD data
reveal the presence of a Simon effect in all three conditions,
with longer RTs being at least partially due to the generation
of mouse trajectories that were more robustly attracted to
the stimulus-primed, incompatible response.
The finding of a Simon effect in all three conditions is
counter to Sebanz et al.’s (2003) finding of a Simon effect
in their joint condition, but not in their individual condition.
This difference is probably due to the fact that participants
in our study made a response on every trial, whereas
participants in the Sebanz et al. (2003) study only responded
when their target stimulus was presented (e.g., respond right
to a green ring). Given their participants were participating
in a go/no-go fashion, while ours were responding on every
trial, our participants may have been more vulnerable to a
Simon effect because they conceptualized both responses
primed by an incompatible trial (e.g., green ring on leftpointing finger) as being “their” responses, simply because
they were required to be prepared to make either response
on every trial. Sebanz et al.’s (2003) participants were able
to conceptualize the task in terms of only one response
because they had been trained to complete a go/no-go task.
On the one hand, these findings seem obvious, for the
very point of the go/no-go method of Sebanz et al. (2003)
was to test for the presence of the Simon effect in the joint
condition, and if they had found a Simon effect in their
go/no-go individual condition, there would have been
nothing remarkable about finding it in the joint condition.
On the other hand, by having participants in our experiment
make responses on every trial, we were able to test whether
Sebanz et al.’s (2005) finding that participants’ RTs were
longer in the joint condition when the stimulus primed
responses for both participants, even though both were
responding to different stimulus dimensions (i.e., color and
direction), was contextually dependent on their go/no-go
method. Given that we found no significant differences in
RTs between conflict and no-conflict trials, it seems that
asking our participants to respond on every trial prevented a
stimulus that primed opposite responses for the participant
and the confederate from producing an action conflict. This
result implies that the action conflict experienced by Sebanz
et al.’s (2005) participants was contextually contingent upon
the go/no-go method. More experiments are needed to
confirm this conclusion, but the finding is consistent with
other joint action research (Hommel et al, 2009) that
revealed shorter RTs and no Simon effect in the joint
condition when the confederate was an intimidating co-actor
versus a nice co-actor. In short, while activating a co-actor’s
response option seems to be an automatic process, whether
or not the automatic activation occurs seems to be a
contextually contingent phenomenon.
In addition to finding a Simon effect for RTs and MDs in
all three task-conditions, we further found that while RTs
were significantly larger in the joint versus the individual

550
500
450
400
350
Individual
Compatible

Joint Color

Joint
Direction

Incompatible

Figure 4. Time to maximum proximity to distracter.
conditions—replicating Sebanz et al’s (2003) finding—
MDs were actually smaller in the joint conditions. That fact
that participants took more direct routes to the answer
location (i.e., smaller MDs) in the joint conditions, yet took
longer to get there (i.e., longer RTs) implies that the longer
RTs were not due to the distractor, as longer RTs due to the
distractor should have been associated with larger, not
smaller, MDs. Rather, it may be the case that the longer RTs
were due to the presence of another person during task
performance. That is, simply by being in the room with
another person, as opposed to being alone, participants took
longer to reach the response location because their overall
level of automatic inhibition was higher. This interpretation
is consistent with a host of findings in developmental
psychology, social psychology, and neuroscience
(Asendorpf, 1990; Dijksterhuis & Bargh, 2001; Kinsbourne
& Jordan, 2009) that reveal that the perception of another’s
behaviors automatically primes one for the same behaviors.
As a result, competent social interaction requires the ability
to continuously inhibit socially primed responses. In short,
simply being around other people necessitates the inhibition
of actions generated by others.
Our inhibitory account of the social effects on RTs and
MDs is further supported by our finding of an interaction
between task and dyad race: RTs were significantly longer
in the joint condition than in the individual condition, and
were longer still for different-race dyads than for same-race
dyads. Many researchers (Bargh, Chen, & Burrows, 1996;
Kim, 2003) have demonstrated that the activation of racial
stereotypes is an automatic process requiring inhibition. Our
finding that RTs are even longer for different-race dyads
implies that in addition to the inhibition necessitated by
being in a social context (i.e., individual versus joint
difference), further inhibition was brought to bear due to the
presence of a different-race confederate.
While the RT data support an inhibition account of the
social effects in the present experiment, the MD data are, at
first glance, unclear. To be sure, the joint conditions do have
larger RTs and smaller MDs than the individual condition,
but the MDs do not become smaller in the different race

493

dyads versus the same race dyads. Thus the different race
effect on RTs does not seem to be present in the MDs. The
analysis of time to maximum proximity (TMP), however,
revealed a pattern that renders the mouse data consistent
with an inhibitory account. Specifically, while TMP was
significantly faster in the individual versus the joint
conditions, there were no differences between the same and
different race dyads, despite the fact the latter group took
longer to reach the response location. If one operationalizes
the location of the maximum proximity to the distracter as a
“decision point” at which the participant has decided among
response options (i.e., successfully inhibited competing
responses), the time following the TMP can be thought of as
post-decision time. From this perspective, (1) the longer
TMP in the joint conditions reflects additional overall
inhibition due to being in social situation, (2) the similar
TMPs in the same- and different-race dyads reveals
participants took the same amount of time to “develop” the
correct response, and then (3) following the TMP, additional
inhibition in the different-race dyads led them to take longer
than the same-race dyads to actually complete the trial.
Collectively, the present data are consistent with the
assertion that inhibition played a major and constructive role
across the entire temporal span of the mouse movement.
The need to inhibit the stimulus-primed, incompatible
response led to longer RTs and larger MDs. The need to
inhibit simply due to being in the presence of another led to
joint RTs and MDs being longer and smaller than individual
RTs and MDs, respectively. Finally, the additional
inhibition brought on by the presence of a different race
confederate rendered the “post-decision” movement time
even longer. To be sure, more research is necessary to
confirm these conclusions. What we can say for sure,
however, is that by measuring RTs alongside mouse
trajectories, we were able to gain access to the multi-scale
factors (i.e., stimulus-response compatibility, alone versus
social, and same- versus different-race dyad) that
continuously interacted and influenced every moment of the
participants’ mouse movements. In short, the movements
were much more than simple responses to stimuli. Rather,
they were real-time expressions of the manner in which the
participants addressed the constellation of interacting
stimulus and social factors that needed to be taken into
account in order for the participant to do the task (Jordan,
2003). Given what we found, we believe the mouse tracking
method will allow researchers to peer ever more keenly into
the continuous, multi-scale nature of joint-action in
particular, and cognition in general.

Dijksterhuis, A. & Bargh, J.A. (2001). The perceptionbehavior expressway: Automatic effects of social
perception on social behavior. In M. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology, 33. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Dolk, T., Hommel, B., Colzato, L. S., Schütz-Bosbach, S.,
Prinz, W., & Liepelt, R. (2014) The joint Simon effect: a
review and theoretical integration. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5:974.
Freeman, J. B., & Ambady, N. (2010). MouseTracker:
Software for studying real-time mental processing using a
computer mouse-tracking method. Behavior Research
Methods, 42, 226-241.
Freeman, J. B., Pauker, K., Apfelbaum, E. P., & Ambady,
N. (2010). Continuous dynamics in the real-time
perception of race. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46, 179-185.
He, X., Lever, A. G., & Humphreys, G. W. (2011).
Interpersonal memory-based guidance of attention is
reduced for ingroup members. Experimental Brain
Research, 211, 429-438
Hommel, B., Colzato, L. S., & van den Wildenberg, W. P.
M. (2009). How social are task representations?
Psychological Science, 20, 794-798.
Jordan, J. S. (2003). Emergence of self and other in
perception and action. Consciousness and Cognition, 12,
633-646.
Jordan, J. S. & Wesselmann, E. D. (2014) The contextually
grounded nature of prosocial behavior: A multi-scale,
embodied approach to morality. In D. A. Schroeder & W.
G. Graziano (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of prosocial
behavior. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kim, D. Y. (2003). Voluntary controllability of the implicit
association test. Social Psychology Quarterly, 66, 83-96.
Kinsbourne, M.
& Jordan, J. S. (2009). Embodied
anticipation: A neurodevelopmental interpretation.
Discourse Processes, 46, 103-126.
Lurquin, J. H., McFadden, S. L., & Harbke, C. R. (2014).
An electrophysiological investigation of the effects of
social rejection on self control. The Journal of Social
Psychology, 154(3), 186-197.
Papesh, M. H., & Goldinger, S. D. (2012). Memory in
motion: Movement dynamics reveal memory strength.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19, 906–913.
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2003). Representing
others’ actions: just like one’s own? Cognition, 88, 11-21.
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2005). How two
share a task: Corepresenting Stimulus-Response
mappings. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 31, 1234-1246.
Wojnowicz, M. T., Ferguson, M. J., Dale, R., & Spivey, M.
J. (2009). The self-organization of explicit attitudes.
Psychological Science, 20, 1428-14.

References
Asendorpf, J. B. (1990). Development of inhibition during
childhood: Evidence for situational specificity and a twofactor model. Developmental Psychology, 26, 721
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity
of social behavior: Direct effects of trait construct and
stereotype activation on action. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 71, 230-244.

494

