The influence of hand or foot responses on response times in investigating action
sentence processing
Franziska Schaller (franziska.schaller@uni-bielefeld.de)
Sabine Weiss (sabine.weiss@uni-bielefeld.de)
Horst M. Müller (horst.mueller@uni-bielefeld.de)
Experimental Neurolinguistics Group & Cluster of Excellence “Cognitive Interaction Technology”
Bielefeld University
Universitätsstraße 25
33615 Bielefeld, Germany

Abstract
In a response time experiment dealing with action language
comprehension, we investigated the question of whether the
execution of a hand-response would interfere with or facilitate
hand-related action sentence processing. We analyzed response times on concrete action, abstract action, and abstract
control stimuli, given by hand or with the foot respectively.
Beside the well-known concreteness effect, we found that responses by hand on concrete action sentences were relatively
prolonged in relation to responses with the foot. Thus, there is
a decisive interdependency between the effector-reference of
the action verb and the effector used for response detection.
We suggest that this has to be taken into account when analyzing action language comprehension and that response
effectors should be chosen in accordance with the action language stimuli used.
Keywords: action verb, abstract and concrete language, motor interference and facilitation, embodiment, response times

Introduction
The activation of sensory-motor areas during language
processing is an effect that has frequently been replicated in
numerous studies (e.g. Aziz-Zadeh et al., 2006; Desai et al.,
2010; Hauk, Johnsrude, & Pulvermüller, 2004; Hauk &
Pulvermüller, 2004; Moreno, de Vega, & León, 2013;
Pulvermüller, Härle, & Hummel, 2001; Pulvermüller,
Shtyrov, & Ilmoniemi, 2005; Tettamanti et al., 2005; van
Elk et al., 2010). Against the background of these findings,
compatibility and interference effects between action language processing and motor performance have been one of
the topics focused in related research projects. As early as in
1989, Klatzky et al. described facilitation of a sensibility
decision if a congruous movement was primed before the
judgment. In each trial, they primed the representation of a
previously trained hand shape before participants were
asked whether a subsequently presented object-action target
phrase referring to respective hand and finger movements
was sensible. In a series of four experiments, Klatzky et al.
(1989) reported that any handshape regardless of its precise
structure facilitated comprehension of the target phrase in
comparison to a neutral priming condition. This result gives
rise to the assumption that – as long as the same effector is
involved – the detailed representation of a motor action is
indecisive for its priming effect. Glenberg and Kaschak

(2002) summarized their results of related experiments in
defining the action-sentence compatibility effect (ACE). It
describes that congruency between a direction implied in a
sentence and the direction in which the response was to be
done lead to shorter response times (RTs) than in incongruent trials. In their stimuli, participants acted as firstperson referents. Bergen and Wheeler (2005) were able to
replicate the ACE for third-person referents and additionally
claimed that action execution is primed by action language
processing at a detailed motor level. Responses on sentences
expressing open palm vs. closed fist actions were faster if
participants responded with an open palm movement and
vice versa. This contradicts the findings by Klatzky et al.
(1989) but was further confirmed by an EEG-study conducted by Aravena et al. (2010), in which a more negative
N400-component was found for incompatible compared to
compatible trials in an ACE-paradigm.
In contrast to these observations of compatibility, matching action and language targets might also yield interference
effects. Bergen, Narayan, and Feldman (2003) visually presented comic-like line drawings of motor-actions prior to an
action verb. The verb either matched the action that was
depicted in the picture or did not match. If it did not match,
it either referred to an action done with the same or with a
different effector. Participants were asked to decide whether
pictures matched the verb or not. The authors report a significant difference in RTs between the match vs. the nonmatching same effector condition. They give the explanation
that there might be a circumscribed group of mirror neurons
coding a very specific gesture. If a participant was confronted with a gesture, then mirror circuits encoding very similar
gestures would be inhibited, which would lead to interference effects when rejecting compatibility of picture and
verb in the same effector condition (Bergen et al., 2003).
Narayan, Bergen, and Weinberg (2004) replicated the effect
for verb – verb instead of picture – verb combinations.
Reporting the results of these and other studies, Bergen
(2007) concluded that compatibility effects could be observed whenever two matching motor or perception processes
do not occur simultaneously and the verbal stimulus precedes the image. Interference, in contrast, would arise whenever the two matching processes occur simultaneously or
the verbal stimulus follows the image. However, the argu-

2098

ment of the sequence of events as being decisive is rather
weak, since in the studies cited in Bergen (2007) interference effects have been shown for both the sequence
image – verb and verb – image.
To our knowledge, none of the studies investigating compatibility vs. interference effects by means of behavioral
measures took into account the circumstance that most of
the time RTs are indicated by hand, which requires an
arm/hand/finger movement. Although the processing of
hand action words or movements in a certain direction
might prime the actual execution of a respective motor
program, the required finger movement might still positively or negatively influence RTs. After all, results concerning
the need for detailed vs. undetailed motor representations in
order to obtain a priming effect are controversial (Bergen &
Wheeler, 2005; Klatzky et al., 1989). This might be a minor
question if stimuli address only one effector but it becomes
a major question if more than one effector is addressed and
RTs are compared between the different modalities. In a
combined behavioral and EEG study, Pulvermüller et al.
(2001) presented arm-, face-, and leg-related action verbs in
a lexical decision task. They aimed at investigating RTs in
order to see whether wider cortical networks (as for legrelated verbs) would lead to longer RTs than more narrow
networks (as for face-related verbs). They found that responses on face-related verbs were significantly shorter than
on arm-related verbs and those on arm-related verbs were
significantly shorter than on leg-related verbs. However, the
RT difference between face- and arm-related verbs was only
about 10 ms. If one takes into account that there might have
been interference effects between the processing of armrelated verbs and the hand response, RTs might have been
the same for face- and arm-related verbs. Romero Lauro et
al. (2013) conducted an fMRI study to investigate the
activation of sensory-motor areas during literal, fictive,
metaphorical, and idiomatic action sentences. Action verbs
were either hand- or foot-related. The task for participants
was to decide whether a specific task sentence was congruent or incongruent to its preceding target sentence and to
respond by a button-press. The authors report that the interaction between sentence type and effector approached significance. However, if an interference effect occurred for
hand-related action sentences because of these stimuli being
judged by a button-press, RTs in these cases might actually
have been faster and the interaction might have come out
significant, which could have indicated some interesting
impact of effector on sentence type.
The current study addressed this issue in order to avoid
mistakes concerning significant RT differences in future
studies investigating questions of action language processing. We specifically addressed the following questions: Will
RTs on hand-related action sentences differ if they are
measured by means of a hand vs. a foot response? Will there
be any interference effect at all, since the hand response
does not share a detailed motor representation with the action described by the verb? Our hypotheses were that if
general movements of the hand (mouse-click) influence RTs

on hand-related action verbs, then we should detect differences between RTs measured by hand vs. with the foot.
Instead, no difference in RTs would suggest that unrelated
movements – no matter if executed by the same or a different effector – do not have any influence on RTs. A
further question in the current study was whether similar
effects could be found for abstract action sentences, which
is why we included these stimuli in the analysis.

Material and Method
We subsequently conducted two experiments with equal stimuli and very similar procedures. That is why in the Participants, the Procedure, and the Results section we report experiment 1 and 2 partially separate, while in the Stimuli
section, we do not differentiate between the two groups.
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants for publication of this study. All subjects declared that
they were neither under strong medication nor did they
suffer from auditory or motor diseases or other restrictions
that might have had an influence on RTs.

Participants
Experiment 1 Participants of the first experiment will be
referred to as group H (hand response). 22 monolingual
German students (13 females) of Bielefeld University aged
21 – 32 years (M = 24.9, SD = 2.8) participated in the first
RT-experiment. Subjects were right-handed with a mean
lateralization quotient of 92 (SD = 10.6) according to a
modified version of the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory
(Oldfield, 1971).
Experiment 2 Participants of the second experiment will be
referred to as group F (foot response). 16 different monolingual German students (8 females) of Bielefeld University
aged 20 – 36 years (M = 25, SD = 4.6) participated in the
second RT-experiment. Subjects were right-handed with a
mean lateralization quotient of 93 (SD = 10.9) according to
a modified version of the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory
(Oldfield, 1971). About 85 % of participants had a preference for the right foot as well.

Stimuli
197 sentences were used as stimuli, 50 of which were nonsense fillers. In a preparatory test, 27 different subjects rated
the stimuli on a scale ranging from 1 (nonsense) to 5 (sensible). A two-tailed independent samples t-test corrected for
inhomogenity of variances revealed that sensible stimuli
were rated significantly more plausible (M = 4.39,
SD = 0.45) than nonsense stimuli (M = 1.29, SD = 0.28),
t(74.25) = 42.26, p = .000. 147 sentences were crucial and
originated from the three categories concrete action (CA),
abstract action (AA) and abstract (A). Stimuli were set up
as triplets with one sentence out of each category. The category CA contained sentences like “Ich habe die Handbremse gezogen” (“I have pulled the hand break”), in which an
arm-/hand-related action verb was embedded in a literal

2099

context. In the AA category, the action verb was presented
in an abstract context, like in “Ich habe die Konsequenz
gezogen” (“I have drawn the consequence”). The third category (A) contained abstract control sentences, like “Ich habe
die Konsequenz gefordert” (“I have demanded the consequence”). Sentence structure was the same for every item so
that the target verb was always positioned at the end.
The mean length of verbs was 734.9 ms (SD = 129.2 ms).
In the preparatory test, subjects not only rated the stimuli as
sensible or nonsense but also rated sensible stimuli as
concrete or abstract on a scale ranging from 1 (abstract) to 5
(concrete). A repeated measures ANOVA showed a significant influence of the type of sentence on rating values, F(2,
52) = 196.59, p = .000. Pairwise comparisons revealed that
sentences in category CA were rated significantly more concrete (M = 4.62, SD = 0.32) than sentences in the categories
AA (M = 2.38, SD = 0.50) and A (M = 2.51, SD = 0.55).
There was no significant difference between the two categories containing abstract sentences. Stimuli of each triplet
were matched according to gender of nouns, number of
noun-syllables and number of verb-syllables. Stimuli of
each category were matched according to word frequency of
nouns and verbs and co-occurrence of nouns with verbs.
Sentences were recorded with a semi-professional speaker
in a sound-attenuated booth.

Procedure
Experiment 1 After instruction, participants of group H
were seated in an upright position one meter in front of a
computer screen in a sound-attenuated booth. A computer
mouse used for response detection was placed to their right
on a small platform at about the height of the subjects’
knees so that it was easy to reach.
The experiment was presented via a customized presentation software running under Ubuntu (vers. 8.04.2) detecting
responses with an accuracy of about 3 ms. A picture of the
mouse used for response detection signaled the beginning of
a new trial to participants. It stayed on the screen for 1.5 s
and then disappeared shortly before the sentence started.
Sentences were presented auditorily. Subjects were asked to
do a sensibility judgment in a Go-/No-Go-paradigm, so that
they would only have to respond if the sentence made sense.
They were instructed to respond as fast and as accurate as
possible as soon as they understood the sentence’s meaning.
Responses were given with the forefinger of the right hand.
Stimuli were fully randomized for each subject.
Experiment 2 The procedure was very similar to the one in
experiment 1, with the exception that participants in group F
responded by stepping on a foot-pedal with their big toe of
the right foot. They were asked to take off their shoe before
starting the experiment. Applying this method, accidental
responses due to the weight of the foot could be avoided.
The pedal was placed in front of subjects’ right foot. They
were asked to adjust its position themselves so that they
would feel comfortable during the experimental session and

would not suffer from any hardening in foot muscles or
joints.
Due to other research questions, we presented a picture of
a person sitting still on a chair as an alertness signal in this
experiment. It stayed on the screen for the whole length of
the subsequent stimulus. The method of presentation, the
presentation soft- and hardware and the task were the same
as for group H.

Results
The statistical analyses were conducted via SPSS 22 on Mac
OS X (vers. 10.8.5). RTs were measured from verb onset.
We corrected for outliers by means of boxplot analyses for
each sentence type in both groups.
Experiment 1 Mean accuracy for the semantic judgment
was 93.2 %. Three single responses were excluded due to
the outcomes of the boxplot analyses, which was about
0.1 % of all valid responses on sensible stimuli. However,
12 items had to be removed due to their error rates exceeding the mean error rate by two standard deviations. A repeated measures ANOVA with the within-subject factor
sentence type revealed a significant effect, F(2, 42) = 51.62,
p = .000. Responses on all three sentence types differed significantly, with subjects responding faster on CA than on
AA and A sentences and on AA sentences than on A items
(see figure 1a).
Experiment 2 Mean accuracy for the semantic judgment
was 93.4 %. Four single responses were excluded as outliers, which was about 0.2 % of all valid responses on sensible stimuli. The same 12 items as in experiment 1 had to
be removed. The repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant effect. As Mauchly’s test indicated a violation of
the assumption of sphericity (χ2(2) = 11.21, p = .004),
degrees of freedom were corrected using GreenhouseGeisser estimates of sphericity (ε = .65). The effect of
sentence type then was F(2, 30) = 29.02, p = .000. As for
group H, responses on all three stimulus types differed significantly (see figure 1b).
Comparison Data of the two experiments were analyzed in
a repeated measures ANOVA with the within-subject factor
sentence type (CA, AA, A) and the between-subject factor
effector (hand vs. foot). Mauchly’s test indicated a violation
of the assumption of sphericity, χ2(2) = 10.22, p = .006.
Degrees of freedom were therefore corrected using HuynhFeldt estimates of sphericity (ε = .80). Results show a significant main effect of sentence type, F(1.71, 61.37) = 76.01,
p = .000, but no significant interaction between sentence
type and effector, F(1.71, 61.37) = 2.03, p = .147. Univariate pairwise comparisons of the between-subject factor revealed a marginally significant effect of effector, F(1,
36) = 3.97, p = .054, with participants responding faster by
hand (M = 946.9 ms) than by foot (M = 1057.5 ms).
To further compare the relation of RTs on the different
sentence stimuli between the two groups, we calculated

2100

mean difference values (DVs) for each category. As a basis
for the mean DVs, we subtracted the mean RT given by
hand (RThand) from the mean RT given with the foot (RTfoot)
for every single item resulting in a DV for every item. The
mean DVs for the conditions CA, AA, and A were then analyzed in a one-way between-subjects ANOVA to compare
the effect of sentence type on DVs in the two groups.
Abstract sentences did not contain an action verb and
therefore served as the reference category. Since the
assumption of homogenity of variance was violated, the
Welch F-ratio is reported. There was a significant effect of
sentence type on DVs, F(2, 86.20) = 6.70, p = .002. GamesHowell post-hoc comparisons revealed significant differences between DVs on CA in comparison to AA and A stimuli,
but no significant difference between AA and A items.
Results are displayed in figure 1c.

Discussion
The aim of the current project was to find possible compatibility or interference effects between hand-related action sentence processing and a hand response. Participants
listened to sentences containing hand-related action verbs
and were asked to do a sensibility judgment. Responses
were given by hand in group H and with the foot in group F.
Overall, participants were slower to respond with the foot
than by hand. This effect was marginally significant and can
simply be explained by the greater distance motor potentials

have to cover when spreading to foot in comparison to hand
muscles. Further, in everyday life, much more actions are
performed with the hand than with the foot, which makes it
much easier to respond with the hand. We also found a
concreteness effect in both group H and F. Participants responded significantly faster on CA sentences than on AA
stimuli and on AA stimuli than on A items in both conditions. This is a well-known effect and is thought to go
back on the activation of a larger neural network in concrete
language processing. Accordant evidence has been found in
EEG studies, in which higher coherence effects between
electrodes for concrete than for abstract words could be
observed (Weiss & Müller, 2003; Weiss & Müller, 2013;
Weiss & Rappelsberger, 1998). Further, fMRI studies
support the assumption of stronger visual imagery processes
and demands on more different domains (visual, auditory,
tactile, etc.) to occur during concrete than during abstract
language processing (Ghio & Tettamanti, 2010; Jessen et al.
2000; Weiss et al., 2011). The difference between the AA
and the non-action A stimuli indicate a processing advantage for the abstract stimuli containing a motion verb. Since
both sentence types only differed with regard to the action
verb, this effect has to go back on processing differences
induced by that verb. Consequently, we suggest an activation of motor areas during action verb processing in both
concrete and abstract contexts, which support the process of
meaning constitution.

Figure 1: Mean response times in ms for A the hand and B the foot condition. Figure C displays the mean difference values
in ms defined as DVfoot - DV hand. Significant differences are marked by asterisks with ✻ = p ≤ .05 and ✻✻✻ = p ≤ .001. CA =
concrete action, AA = abstract action, A = abstract control

2101

The repeated measures ANOVA conducted in order to
find a possible interaction between effector and sentence
type did not reveal any effects. However, calculating mean
DVs for RTs in each condition and testing those on
significant differences between the three sentence types in
groups H and F showed that RTs on CA stimuli in group H
were prolonged relative to RTs in group F. Abstract control
sentences served as a baseline. Here, RTs should not be
influenced by the type of effector since these sentences did
not contain any action verbs. The mean DV for control
sentences was 127 ms. If there was no influence of type of
effector on the other two sentence types, then their mean
DVs should not differ significantly from the control
condition. We found that this was true for the AA items but
not for the CA stimuli. The mean DV for concrete sentences
containing a hand-related action verb was significantly lower than for the two abstract sentence types. This might be
either due to RTs on concrete sentences being shorter in the
F group or to RTs on concrete sentences being longer in the
H group. The distance between the RTs for the different
sentence types in the two groups suggests that the latter is
the case. In group F, participants responded 100 ms faster
on the AA than on the A stimuli. This is comparable to the
relation in group H, in which participants responded 113 ms
faster on the AA than the A sentences. The distance between
RTs on CA and AA stimuli in group F was 105 ms. In group
H, this distance was as low as 48 ms. It thus becomes clear
that the low mean DV for the CA stimuli is due to RTs
being prolonged when the response is measured by hand.
This finding leads us to conclude that the hand movement
executed as a response to hand-related action sentences interferes with processing the hand-related action verb. We
observed this effect for the CA stimuli only. Thus, although
there might be processing advantages for abstract sentences
containing an action verb due to an involvement of motor
cortices, this involvement might not be as strong and not as
definite as in concrete action language (Schaller, Weiss, &
Müller, in prep.).
On a neurobiological level, findings of both compatibility
and interference can be explained by the activation of motor
areas during action language processing. Hauk et al. (2004)
presented results of an fMRI study, showing the activation
of motor and premotor areas for both the execution of face,
arm, and legmovements and respective action word processing. Crucially, arm words activated premotor areas in the
middle frontal gyrus bilaterally and in the motor cortex of
the left hemisphere, whereas leg-related words elicited activation in left and midline areas of pre- and postcentral gyri
as well as dorsal midline premotor cortex (Hauk et al.,
2004). Quite similar findings were reported by Hauk and
Pulvermüller (2004). For action sentence processing these
results were replicated by Tettamanti et al. (2005) and Desai
et al. (2010). According to these outcomes, a pre-activation
of motor areas induced by a language stimulus might lead to
facilitation effects when a subsequent motor command has
to be executed and vice versa. However, as Bergen et al.
(2003) claimed, this will only be the case if the motor re-

presentation activated by the first stimulus and that needed
for processing the second stimulus are the same. The activation of neurons responsible for coding a certain motor representation is thought to inhibit motor representations which
are very similar. According to this view, a stimulus which is
only similar but not equal to a second stimulus will lead to
its inhibition (Bergen et al., 2003). This might be the case
whenever interference effects can be observed. In studies
reporting an ACE, the motor representation evoked by the
sentence (e.g. movement away from the body) was the same
as the motor representation needed to accurately solve the
task demands (movement away from the body). Interference
effects have been reported if the two stimuli were only similar but not equal, e.g. sharing the same effector.
The results of our study support these assumptions. We
primed a certain hand movement, which is done with the
same effector as the hand movement needed for the response but the actual motor representation is not equal. This
evoked an interference effect. The button-press itself is a
motor response that may facilitate comprehension if there
are sentences about button-presses but it may also interfere
with comprehension processes concerning every other handrelated action verb. We did not observe an interference
effect if participants responded with the foot because the
hand-related action verb and the foot response do not share
many neuronal resources.

Conclusion
We suggest that the level of similarity between a language
and a motor action is decisive for whether the parallel processing of two respective stimuli yields facilitation or interference effects. If the two actions are the same, that is,
referring to the same semantic content, then compatibility
occurs and the ACE can be observed. If, instead, the two
actions do not share the same semantic content but only the
same effector, interference occurs due to inhibition processes as suggested by Bergen et al. (2003).
This has important implications for research in the action
language domain since in behavioral studies, RTs are most
of the time measured by a hand response. However, a button-press might itself interfere with hand-/arm-related action
language, which might pose a problem whenever different
effectors are compared. Therefore, when analyzing effectorspecific action language, a response method unrelated to the
effector-reference needs to be used. Alternatively or additionally, RTs should be analyzed against a non-motor baseline, so as to adjust for interference effects elicited by the
response method.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the reviewers for their helpful
comments. This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), Cluster of Excellence 277
“Cognitive Interaction Technology” (CITEC).

2102

References
Aravena, P., Hurtado, E., Riveros, R., Cardona, J. F.,
Manes, F., & Ibáñez, A. (2010). Applauding with closed
hands: Neural signature of action-sentence compatibility
effects. PLoS ONE, 5, e11751.
Aziz-Zadeh, L., Wilson, S. M., Rizzolatti, G., & Iacoboni,
M. (2006). Congruent embodied representations for
visually presented actions and linguistic phrases describing actions. Current Biology, 16, 1818-1823.
Bergen, B. (2007). Experimental methods for simulation
semantics. In M. Gonzalez-Marquez, I. Mittelberg, S.
Coulson, & M. Spivey (Eds.), Methods in Cognitive
Linguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bergen, B., Narayan, S., & Feldman, J. (2003). Embodied
verbal semantics: Evidence from an image-verb matching
task. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Bergen, B., & Wheeler, K. (2005). Sentence understanding
engages motor processes. Proceedings of the TwentySeventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Desai, R. H., Binder, J. R., Conant, L. L., & Seidenberg, M.
S. (2010). Activation of sensory-motor areas in sentence
comprehension. Cerebral Cortex, 20, 468-478.
Ghio, M., & Tettamanti, M. (2010). Semantic domainspecific functional integration for action-related vs. abstract concepts. Brain and Language, 112, 223-232.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 558565.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004).
Somatotopic representation of action words in human
motor and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41, 301-307.
Hauk, O., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004). Neurophysiological
distinction of action words in the fronto-central cortex.
Human Brain Mapping, 21, 191-201.
Jessen, F., Heun, R., Erb, M., Granath, D.-O., Klose, U.,
Papassotiropoulos, A., & Grodd, W. (2000). The concreteness effect: Evidence for dual coding and context
availability. Brain and Language, 74, 103-112.
Klatzky, R. L., Pellegrino, J. W., McCloskey, B. P., &
Doherty, S. (1989). Can you squeeze a tomato? The role
of motor representations in semantic sensibility judgments. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 56-77.
Moreno, I., de Vega, M., & León, I. (2013). Understanding
action language modulates oscillatory mu and beta
rhythms in the same way as observing actions. Brain and
Cognition, 82, 236-242.
Narayan, S., Bergen, B., & Weinberg, Z. (2004). Embodied
verbal semantics: Evidence from a lexical matching task.
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley
Linguistics Society. Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistics
Society.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness: The Edinburgh Inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9, 97-113.

Pulvermüller, F., Härle, M., & Hummel, F. (2001). Walking
or talking?: Behavioral and neurophysiological correlates
of action verb processing. Brain and Language, 78, 143168.
Pulvermüller, F., Shtyrov, Y., & Ilmoniemi, R. (2005).
Brain signatures of meaning access in action word
recognition. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 884892.
Romero Lauro, L. J., Mattavelli, G., Papagno, C., &
Tettamanti, M. (2013). She runs, the road runs, my mind
runs, bad blood runs between us: Literal and figurative
motion verbs: An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 83, 361-371.
Schaller, F., Weiss, S., & Müller, H. M. (in prep.). Embodiment of action verbs in abstract contexts. Results of a motor-priming study.
Tettamanti, M., Buccino, G., Saccuman, M. C., Gallese, V.,
Danna, M., Scifo, P., Fazio, F., Rizzolatti, G., Cappa, S.,
& Perani, D. (2005). Listening to action-related sentences
activates fronto-parietal motor circuits. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 273-281.
Van Elk, M., van Schie, H. T., Zwaan, R. A., & Bekkering,
H. (2010). The functional role of motor activation in
language processing: Motor cortical oscillations support
lexical-semantic retrieval. NeuroImage, 50, 665-677.
Weiss, S., & Müller, H. M. (2003). The contribution of EEG
coherence to the investigation of language. Brain and
Language, 85, 325-343.
Weiss, S., & Müller, H. M. (2013). The non-stop road from
concrete to abstract: High concreteness causes the activation of long-range networks. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 1-13.
Weiss, S., Müller, H. M., Mertens, M., & Woermann, F. G.
(2011). “Tooth and truth”: Brain activation during passive
listening to concrete and abstract nouns. The Open
Behavioral Science Journal, 5, 37-47.
Weiss, S., & Rappelsberger, P. (1998). Left frontal EEG
coherence reflects modality independent language processes. Brain Topography, 11, 33-42.

2103

