The fan effect in overlapping data sets and logical inference
Kam Kwok (kamhung.kwok@carleton.ca),
Robert L. West (robert.west@carleton.ca),
Matthew Kelly (MatthewKelly2@cmail.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6, Canada

Abstract
We examine the fan effect in overlapping data sets and logical
inference. Three experiments are presented and modeled
using the ACT-R cognitive architecture. The results raise
issues over the scope of the memories that determine the fan
effect and the use of search strategies to retrieve from
memory.
Keywords: ACT-R; spreading activation; fan effect

Introduction
We apply the ACT-R model of the fan effect (Anderson &
Reder, 1999) to a more complex experimental paradigm.
We analyze how the ACT-R memory retrieval theory is
linked to higher-level cognitive processes by examining the
fan effect in overlapping data sets and in logical inference.
Our focus is on the memory retrieval aspect of logical
inference and not on the construction of situation models
(Graesser, Singer & Trabasso, 1994).
The fan effect (Anderson, 1974) is the name for a
collection of experimental results showing that people are
slower to identify probes as facts that they have previously
learned if the elements that make up the probe are also
associated with other previously learned facts. For example,
if asked about the fact (a probe) that the hippie is in the
park, people will be slower to confirm they have previously
learned this fact if they have also previously learned that the
hippie was in other locations or that other people were in the
park. Overall, the more associations there are, and the
slower the retrieval of the correct matching fact from
memory will be. The total number of associations for a fact
is referred to as the fan of the fact.
The focus of this paper is on the question of how the fan
effect plays out in more complex scenarios where there are
overlapping components. In real life, facts have overlapping
components. For example, consider the facts that the apple
is in the bucket and the bucket is in the yard. A person who
learned both these facts should be able to judge the truth of
“apple is in the yard” - a fact they had not previously
learned. So, overlapping components can be used for logical
inference (a restricted type of inference).
To experiment with this type of inference, the complex
fan paradigm was created. In this paradigm, subjects learn a
series of related and overlapping relationships and are tested
on the fan effect at various intervals. Subjects completed the
first three experiments in one sitting and completed the

fourth experiment ten months later. Subjects first learned a
list of objects in various containers and were then tested to
confirm the basic fan effect (Experiment 1). Next, the same
subjects learn a list of the same containers in various
locations. Following this they were again tested to confirm
the basic fan effect (Experiment 2). Then, subjects were
presented with a previously learned object in a previously
learned location and asked if it is a true fact, based on what
they had previously learned (Experiment 3). Finally, after
ten months, subjects returned to the lab to learn to associate
colors with the objects from Experiment 1 and were tested
on that (Experiment 4).

Fan Equations
The equations used in ACT-R for calculating reaction times
for the fan effect (Schneider and Anderson 2012) are shown
in Equations 1-4. In ACT-R, the retrieval of a proposition
from declarative memory is based on its activation level.
Activation (Equation 1) is central to the model:
 =  + ∑ 



(1)

 is the activation for fact i, which is the sum of the baselevel activation  of fact i and ∑   which is the
associative activation for fact i.  represents the influence
of practice, time-based decay, and recent accesses to fact i.
In the ACT-R analytical model of the fan effect (Anderson
& Reder 1999),  is an estimated constant. The concepts in
a fact are indexed by j.  is the associative activation
strength between fact i and constituent concept j.  is a
function of how many other facts ( ) are associated with the
concept j. If there are facts connected to j, is the fan of .
The conditional probability of retrieving fact i given concept
j will be l/ . We calculate  as:


=

− ln( )

(2)

where S is a scaling parameter.  is the attentional weight
for concept j. The sum of  s is equal to 1. It is generally
assumed that attention is equally distributed over all the
concepts in the fact; therefore  is equal to 1 divided by m,
the number of concepts in a fact:

1231

 = 1/m

(3)

 =  +  

(4)

The latency of recognizing a fact i (  ) is an exponential
function of its activation level (  ). F is a scaling
parameter. The value of F depends on the scale of the units
of time used by the model (seconds or milliseconds). I
represents the estimated time for all other productions in the
model, such as probe encoding, memory retrieval, and
motor operations. Based on Anderson’s 1974 experimental
data, the values for I and F are estimated to be 845 and 613
milliseconds (ms.) respectively and S is set to 1.45
(Anderson & Reder, 1999).

Experiment 1: Replicating the fan effect
The purpose of Experiment 1 was to replicate Anderson’s
(1974) fan effect result and show that the original ACT-R
fan model (Anderson & Reder, 1999) can be applied
accurately. For this we used Anderson & Reder’s (1999)
parameter values, so this was a zero parameter model. That
is, we did not fit the models to the data, all model
predictions for all of the experiments were calculated before
the experiments were run.
Experiment 1 was not an exact replication of Anderson’s
(1974) fan effect task. In Anderson’s task, participants
learned 26 propositions of the form “person in place”.
Experiment 1 used propositions of the form “objects in
containers” and had fewer conditions. This was due to the
need to link the propositions in Experiment 1 to the other,
subsequent experiments.

presented in sequences of three interspersed with fill-in-theblank tests. Participants need to correctly fill in all the
blanks to proceed to the next set of three propositions.
Phase II was the qualification test, where participants
were tested for accuracy on a fill-in-the-blank test for the
entire set of test data. Participants must achieve 90%
accuracy before they can proceed to the recognition test.
Phase III, the recognition test, was similar in design to the
recognition test in Anderson’s 1974 experiment procedure.
For the recognition test, 30 target and 30 foil probes were
presented to each participant; participants had to respond as
quickly as possible by pressing a key labeled in green (“L”
key) if he or she recognized the probe from the study set, or
pressed the red labeled key (“A” key) if the probe did not
belong to the study set. The test begins with a screen of
instructions. It is followed by a 2 seconds fixation cue. After
each key-press there is a 2 seconds pause before the next
probe appears. Reaction time is measured.
Model construction
All the ACT-R models in this paper are analytical models
based on the previously described ACT-R equations and the
analytical approach used in Anderson and Reder (1999).
These models are fully ACT-R compliant. The models were
constructed with MS Excel spreadsheets and the Spreading
Activation Modeling Environment (Kwok, West, 2010).
1700
response latency (milliseconds)

Equation (4) is the ACT-R analytical model for fan effect:

Method
Participants
Six male and four female volunteers were tested. All were
graduate students in cognitive science.

1600
1500
1400

ACT-R

1300

human

1200
1100
1000

Materials
A single integrated system for learning and testing was
developed (in Python) to support the execution and data
collection for the experiments. We also developed software
(in Python) to make sure all of the items produced the
required fans and were correctly counterbalanced, including
the foil (this is difficult to do by hand and it is easy for
errors to occur). The test data consisted of 30 two-term
propositions that each paired an object with a container. The
propositions were designed with different fan combinations:
1-1 (the object and container occur uniquely in that one
sentence), 2-1, (object occurs in one other sentence), 1-2
(the container occurs in one other sentence), 2-2, and 3-1.
For the recognition test there were 30 target and 30 foil
probes.
Procedure
Experiment 1 consisted of three-phases. In Phase I,
participants studied 30 propositions. Propositions are

1

2

3

4

product of the fans of the terms in the target

Figure 1: Model and human data for Experiment 1.

Results
Figure 1 shows the human results, with a small number of
outliers removed, compared to the model predictions. The
outliers were defined as RTs more than two standard
deviations from the mean. All of the outliers were above the
mean, indicating they were due to hesitation or secondguessing. All of the parameters in the model were taken
from Anderson & Reder (1999).
Reaction time in the ACT-R model of the fan effect is a
function of the product of the fans of each term that make
up a proposition. For example, a two-term proposition with
a term with a fan of 1 and a term with a fan of 4 is predicted
to take the same amount of time to recall as a proposition

1232

with two fans of 2 because 1 x 4 = 2 x 2 = 4. Therefore, to
maximize power we combine all fan combinations for
which ACT-R makes the same prediction into the same
condition. Participant reaction times are averaged together
for all propositions where the fans of the terms that make up
that proposition have the same product. In Figure 1, the
conditions on the x-axis are the products of the fans of the
two terms. The results show a good fit between the model
and the human data demonstrating a successful replication
of the fan effect. Given that this fit is obtained using
Anderson and Reder’s (1999) parameters without
adjustment, this result demonstrates the accuracy of the
ACT-R fan model.

Experiment 2: Overlapping data sets
In ACT-R, a chunk refers to a set of related elements,
constituting a fact or proposition. According to the ACT-R
theory of spreading activation, activation spreads from the
constituent elements of a target chunk to the chunks stored
in memory. The more spreading activation received, the
higher the activation of the chunk in memory. During
retrieval, the chunk with the highest activation is chosen and
the retrieval time is proportional to its activation level. The
amount of activation spread from an element in the target to
a chunk in memory is theorized to be based on prior
experience. Specifically, the amount of activation spread
reflects the extent to which the element can be used to
uniquely identify a chunk. For example, if prior exposure
was equal (i.e. counterbalanced), a target element with a fan
of 2 would have half the predictive power of a target
element with a fan of 1. But, if prior exposure was not
equal, e.g., the hippie was often seen in the park but only
rarely in the bank, then the spreading activation cannot be
determined from the fan of the target. The fan can only be
used when prior experience with the co-occurrence of the
elements has been counterbalanced, as in the current
experiment and other fan experiments.
However, determining the size of the fan depends on the
boundaries of the study set. This is because the probability
that an element can uniquely identify a chunk depends on
how many other chunks the element occurs in. Although we
will not discuss the learning mechanism for this, any
mechanism used would need to define the scope of the fan.
Therefore, for Experiment 2, the scope could be all the facts
in Experiment 2 (stand alone) or all the facts in Experiments
1 and 2 (combined). Note that the fan could still be used to
calculate the effect because Experiment 2 alone and
Experiments 1 and 2 combined were both designed to be
counterbalanced. If the scope of the fan in Experiment 2
included the facts from Experiment 1 then it would raise the
fan of the containers resulting in higher reaction times.

Method
In Experiment 2 the same subjects were asked to memorize
a second set of 26 propositions that pair the containers from
Experiment 1 with locations

Participants
The participants were the same six male and four female
volunteers from Experiment 1.
Materials
The test data consisted of 26 two-term propositions. Each
proposition paired a container from Experiment 1 to a
location. The facts were designed with different fan
combinations. For the recognition test phase there were 26
target and 24 foil probes.
Procedure and Model Construction
The procedures and model building process for Experiment
2 were the same as described in Experiment 1. Reaction
time was recorded for each probe.

Results
Figures 2 and 3 respectively show the results for the standalone model and the combined model. A small number of
outliers were removed in according to the same criterion as
Experiment 1 the outliers were due to hesitation or secondguessing. As in Experiment 1, the conditions are defined by
the model predictions. Specifically, the conditions are
defined by the product of the fans of the two terms in a
proposition. Here it is important to note that both the human
data and the model predictions are different in the two
graphs. The reason that the human data looks different is
that boundaries for how it lines up with the two models are
different. Since the two models predict different fans, the
conditions differ for the two models. This can be seen in
that the combined model divides the task into six conditions
whereas the stand-alone model divides it into five.
The graphs clearly show a better fit for the combined
model. To test this statistically, the RT scores for each
subject were contrasted with the model predictions. This
was done by subtracting the human RT scores from each
model’s predicted RT scores for each trial. This produced
two difference scores for every trial, for every subject. The
mean difference score for the stand-alone model was 358.61
and the mean difference score for the combined model was
276.20. Using a pairwise t-test we found that the difference
scores for the combined model were significantly (P<0.001)
lower than the difference scores for the stand-alone model
(note, we took a conservative approach and did not exclude
the outliers from this analysis).

Experiment 3: Logical inference
Experiment 3 was conducted immediately after Experiment
2. In Experiment 3, participants were presented with probes
that described an object in a location and they were asked to
respond if it was true or not. Explicit instructions were
given to the participants that the objects and locations were
the same ones they learned about in Experiment 1 and 2 and
that they can determine the answer by retrieving which
container the object is in and then checking if the container
is in the location.

1233

response latency (milliseconds)

1700
1600
1500
1400
ACT-R
1300
human

1200
1100
1000
1

2

3

6

8

product of the fans of the terms in the target

Figure 2. The stand-alone model predictions and the human
data for Experiment 2.

response latency (milliseconds)

1700
1600
1500
1400
ACT-R
1300
human
1200
1100
1000
2

3

4

6

9

12

product of the fans of the terms in the target

Figure 3. The combined model predictions and human data
for Experiment 2.

Method
Participants
The participants were the same six male and four female
volunteers from experiments 1 and 2.
Materials
The test data consisted of 24 targets and 25 foils for a total
of 49 probes for the inference test.
Procedure
The procedure for Experiment 3 was the same as the
recognition test procedure described in Experiment 1.
Reaction time was measured for each probe.

construct a query by using a partial fact as a cue to retrieve a
complete fact. For example, if the apple was in the bucket,
the retrieval cue apple ? would retrieve apple bucket. In this
case the fan is based on the elements present in the query
(so the fan of apple).
One way to extend the ACT-R fan model to model
Experiment 3 is to use a query to first retrieve a container
for the object and then check to see if it’s in the location.
For example, if the target fact is apple in the yard, use apple
? to retrieve apple bucket, then use bucket yard to retrieve a
match. The time for this would be the sum of the two
retrieval times, as determined by the fan, plus the time for
the associated productions (50 ms each) to direct the
actions, plus the times for perceptual and motor actions. We
will refer to this as the dual retrieval model.
However, although the facts were learned separately in
Experiments 1 and 2, that does not necessarily mean they
were stored separately. Subjects could have realized that the
new information learned in Experiment 2 was related to the
information learned in Experiment 1, leading them to store
the new information as three element chunks (i.e., object
container location). In this case, both the object and the
location can be used as a cue to retrieve a container. This
would require only one retrieval and, since activation would
spread from both the object and the location, this single
retrieval would be faster than the query retrieval in the dual
retrieval model. We will refer to this as the single retrieval
model.
The single retrieval model follows the logic of other ACTR fan models so only one retrieval is needed to determine if
the probe is a target or a foil. In the dual retrieval model, the
situation is more complex. Anderson and Reder’s (1999)
foil identification strategy was meant for matching and the
logic would not apply to queries. Therefore, in the dual
retrieval model, there is no way to know if the first query
retrieved the right container until the result of the
subsequent match is evaluated. Under these conditions it
makes sense to consider an ACT-R model that uses a search
strategy. That is, if it fails to make a match it goes back and
tries a different retrieval until either it correctly identifies
the probe as a target or the search is exhausted.
The single retrieval model predicts a faster retrieval time
than the dual retrieval model. We did not model the search
strategy but instead modeled the dual retrieval process as if
subjects always retrieved the correct chunk on the first
query. This produced a baseline of the fastest possible time
for responding. We expected that the search strategy would
add time beyond this, with the exception of the lowest fan
condition. This is because a fan of 1 guarantees that the
initial query will produce the correct result.

Models
ACT-R has two ways to retrieve facts from memory. The
first is to retrieve a match for a fact that has been presented
(as in the models for Experiments 1 and 2). The second is to

1234

Results
Figures 5 and 6 display the results. Outliers were not an
issue in this experiment so no trials were removed. Also,
note that although the number of conditions was the same in
each model, the internal boundaries between conditions
were different across the models.

response latency (milliseconds)

1700

Figure 4. Human data (blue) from the logical inference task,
compared to results from dual retrieval (green) and the
single retrieval (red) model. The confidence intervals on the
human data are set at 95%.

Results

1600
1500
1400
ACT-R

1300

human

1200
1100
1000

Experiment 4: Long Term Memory
Experiment 4 was done 10 months after Experiment 3, using
the same subjects. None of the subjects were aware that this
would happen. In Experiment 4 the list of objects that the
subjects had previously learned were paired with colors
(e.g., the red pen). They were then tested for the fan effect
in exactly the same way as in the other experiments. As in
Experiment 2 we could construct two models, a stand-alone
model, that assumed only what they studied and were tested
on was relevant for calculating the fan effect, and a
combined model, that assumed that the previously learned
information about what containers the objects were in was
still relevant for calculating the fan.

1

2

3

4

6

9

product of the fans of the terms in the target

Figure 5. The stand-alone model predictions and the human
data for Experiment 4.
1700
response latency (milliseconds)

As in Experiments 1 and 2, all of the models were
constructed using the original perception/motor estimates
from Anderson and Reder (1999), along with the times for
the minimum necessary productions (Anderson and Reder's
original model combined the times for perception, motor
actions and production firing, however, it is possible to
separate these out). Figure 4 shows the predictions of the
single retrieval model and the dual retrieval model
compared to the human data. The results indicate that the
single retrieval model is too fast, whereas the dual retrieval
model baseline prediction is plausible. As predicted, it is a
close match on the lowest fan condition and slower on the
other conditions that would involve additional search times
if the first retrieval was incorrect. Since search is
unnecessary for the single retrieval model we conclude that
the dual retrieval model plus search is the more likely to be
correct. Overall, this result is consistent with the hypothesis
that people store the individual pairings they have learned
(i.e., object-container and container-location) as separate
chunks and do not construct integrated chunks (i.e., objectcontainer-location)

1600
1500
1400
ACT-R

1300

human

1200
1100
1000
2

4

6

8

12

18

product of the fans of the terms in the target

Figure 6. The combined model predictions and the human
data for Experiment 4.
To test this difference we used the same method as in
Experiment 2 to generate and test difference scores. The
mean difference score for the stand-alone model was 72.69
and the mean difference score for the combined model was 11.65. These results were significantly different according
to a pairwise t-test (P=0.001), and indicate that facts learned
10 months ago were still relevant in the retrieval process.

Discussion
The results of these experiments results confirm that a zero
parameter ACT-R fan model can be used to accurately
predict the results of different types of fan experiments (see

1235

also West et al, 2010). However, the results of Experiments
2 and 4 show that recently learned facts and even facts
learned 10 months earlier contribute to the fan effect as
though they had been part of the learning set. In contrast,
when ACT-R fan models assume that facts can be treated as
counterbalanced because the material presented in the
experiment is counterbalanced, it creates an implicit
assumption that there is no effect of background experience
on the fan. For example, the fact that you may have had
more prior exposure to hippies in parks than in banks is not
taken into consideration. Likewise, the fact that you may
have seen more different types of people in parks than in
banks (i.e., park has a higher real life fan than bank) is also
not taken into consideration. Given that real life experience
is much more extensive than in the experiments, real life
experience should dominate and the assumption of
counterbalanced exposure should not hold. One reason that
it still works could be that the counter-balanced design of
the test data corresponds roughly to the average human
experience. Another possibility is that while the scope of the
fan effect extends beyond individual experiments, it may
still only apply to a limited set of data defined by the
context of being in a set of related experiments. That is,
there is a powerful effect of context that is undiminished
with time. However, this would be problematic to model in
the current version of the ACT-R fan model. More research
is needed to explore these issues.
However, more generally, the results of Experiments 2
and 4 indicate that the strengths of association do not
automatically decay with time. However, since it is unlikely
that subjects thought about the facts between experiments it
is still possible that in real life strengths of association can
be eroded through interference. Therefore, these results are
supportive of an interference-based account of memory as
opposed to a decay-based account. This finding is consistent
with other memory studies that found an effect of stimuli
learned a year ago (e.g., Kolers, 1976; Salasoo, Shiffrin, &
Feustel, 1985). The current ACT-R account of spreading
activation is consistent with the interference view (although
the ACT-R account of the effect of the passage of time in
memory recall experiments is not consistent with this view).
The results of Experiment 3 show how the fan effect plays
a role in logical inference. These results suggest that people
do not combine logically related facts at the time of
encoding but instead used sequential retrievals to do logical
inference. This does not mean that people cannot combine
logically related facts in memory. In fact, it seems clear that
this does happen. However, these results indicate that it does
not happen automatically. Experiment 3 also indicates that
people use a search strategy to find the appropriate
overlapping chunks to do logical inference. As we can see
from the first point in Figure 4, when fan=1 there is no
search. Arguably, the fan also plays an important role in
determining the length of the search. In figure 4, the longest
search times occur when the object and location both have a
fan of 2 or more. Although we instructed subjects to first
use the object to recall the container, this result suggests that

at least some subjects started by using the location to recall
the container. The most efficient search strategy is to
remember which objects and locations had a fan of 1 and to
start the search with them. Some subjects may have used or
partially used this strategy. Unfortunately, given the high
variability in the results, it is possible that subjects were
using different strategies from each other, in which case the
averaged data is of limited use.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1974). Retrieval of propositional
information from long-term memory. Cognitive
Psychology, 5, 451-474.
Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in
the physical universe. New York, NY, US: Oxford
University Press.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Lebiere C., & Matessa, M.
(1998). An Integrated Theory of List Memory. Journal of
Memory And Language, 38, 341–380
Anderson, J. R. & Reder, L. M. (1999). The Fan Effect:
New results and new theories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 128, 186-197.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review, 111(4), 1036–60.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101(3), 371-395.
Kolers, P. A. (1976). Reading a year later. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
2(5), 554-565.
Kwok, K., & West, R. (2013). SAME: An ACT-R
Spreading Activation Modeling Environment. IccmConference.org, 366–367. Retrieved from http://iccmconference.org/2013proceedings/papers/0065/paper0065.pdf
Salasoo, A., Shiffrin, R. M., & Feustel, T. C. (1985).
Building permanent memory codes: Codification and
repetition effects in word identification, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 114(1), 50-77.
Schneider, D. W., & Anderson, J. R. (2012). Modeling fan
effects on the time course of associative recognition.
Cognitive psychology, 64(3), 127-160.
West, R. L., Pyke, A. A., Rutledge-Taylor, M. F., & Lang,
H. (2010). Interference and ACT-R: New evidence from
the fan effect. In D. D. Salvucci & G. Gunzelmann (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Cognitive Modeling (pp. 277-281). Philadelphia, PA:
Drexel University.

1236

