THE INFLUENCE OF LANGUAGE ON MEMORY FOR OBJECT LOCATION

1

The Influence of Language on Memory for Object Location
Harmen B. Gudde (h.gudde@uea.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of East Anglia
Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK

Kenny R. Coventry (k.coventry@uea.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of East Anglia
Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK

Paul E. Engelhardt (p.engelhardt@uea.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of East Anglia
Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK

memory, it is not yet known how language affects memory.
Here we focus on spatial demonstratives and possessives, and
the possible effect these terms might have on memory for
object location. In doing so, the continuous nature of object
location memory errors allows us to contrast different
possible mechanisms regarding how language affects
memory for object location.
Demonstratives (this, that) have been shown to be
associated with discrete zones of peri-personal and extrapersonal (near and far) space (Diessel, 2006; Coventry et al.,
2008). However, this distinction is flexible. Near space can
be contracted or extended by weight or tool use (Longo &
Lourenco, 2006), and the use of “this” is similarly extended
when participants use a stick to point at objects (Coventry et
al., 2008). Object knowledge also affects both perception and
memory for object location. For example, Balcetis and
Dunning (2010) showed that participants perceived desirable
objects as being closer to themselves than less desirable
objects. Previous research has also shown that several object
properties, including ownership, visibility, and familiarity,
influence the use of spatial demonstratives in English and
memory for object location (Coventry et al., 2014).
In order to account for the influence of object knowledge
on memory for object location (and by extrapolation,
language), Coventry et al. (2014) proposed an expectation
model. In this model, memory for object location is a function
of the actual object location concatenated with where an
object is expected to be (with a constant estimation error). For
example, an object owned by the participant is expected to be
nearer than an object owned by someone else. This results in
the participant misremembering an object owned by someone
else as further away than an object they owned at the same
location. This expectation model also makes a prediction
(tested below) regarding the direction of memory errors when
demonstratives occur with objects at encoding. Specifically,
it might be expected that “this” activates near space and
“that” activates far space, and when conjoined with actual
location, should lead to objects paired with “that” being

Abstract
In this study, the influence of two types of language on memory
for object location was investigated: demonstratives (this, that)
and possessives (my, your). Participants read instructions
(containing this/that/my/your/the) to place objects at different
locations. They then had to recall those object locations.
Experiments 1 and 2 tested the contrasting predictions of two
possible accounts of language on memory: the expectation
model (Coventry, Griffiths, & Hamilton, 2014) and the
congruence account (Bonfiglioli, Finocchiaro, Gesierich,
Rositani, & Vescovi, 2009). In Experiment 3, the role of
attention as a possible mechanism was investigated. The results
across all three experiments show striking effects of language
on object location memory; objects in the “that” and “your”
condition were misremembered to be further away than objects
in the “this” and “my” condition. The data favored the
expectation model: expected location cued by language and
actual location are concatenated leading to (mis)memory for
object location.
Keywords: memory for
demonstratives; possessives

object

location;

spatial

Introduction
Language is often used to direct the attention of a conspecific
to the spatial world, and the pairing of language with visual
images affects what is recalled about those images. For
example, Loewenstein and Gentner (2005) found that
children performed better in a mapping task when spatial
relations were paired with spatial language at encoding.
Relational language fosters the development of
representational structures that facilitate mental processing
(see also Hermer-Vazquez, Spelke, & Katsnelson, 1999). But
language presented with a spatial scene can also lead to
memory errors. For instance, Feist and Gentner (2007)
showed that recognition memory for spatial scenes was
shifted in the direction of the spatial relational language
(spatial prepositions) presented with scenes at encoding.
Although these studies show an effect of language on

830

THE INFLUENCE OF LANGUAGE ON MEMORY FOR OBJECT LOCATION

(mis)remembered as being further away than they actually
were (relative to objects paired with “this”).
In contrast to the expectation model proposed by Coventry
et al. (2014), there is a considerable body of work within an
embodied cognition framework providing evidence for an
alternative “congruence account” between language and
space that makes different predictions from the expectation
model. For example, it has been shown that participants
respond more quickly to positive stimuli in a congruent high
location than an incongruent low location, and vice versa for
negative stimuli (e.g. Barsalou, 2008; Meier & Robinson,
2004; cf. Lynott & Coventry, 2014). Moreover, this
congruence account has been extended to movement
planning where movements were prepared based on language
(Bonfiglioli et al., 2009). Participants were required to grip
an object after listening to an instruction that indicated
whether the object was near or far; RTs were significantly
longer when language was incongruent with space compared
to when language and space were congruent. In extrapolating
this congruence account to memory, congruence in language
and space would be predicted to enhance the accuracy of
memory for location.
The goal of the present study was to test whether language
affects memory for object location, and to unpack the
mechanism involved. Specifically, we aimed to tease apart
these two accounts by examining the effects of
demonstratives and possessives on memory for object
location. The first experiment tested whether spatial
demonstratives affect memory for object location with
contrasting predictions from the two different accounts of
how language affects memory: congruence v. expectation.
Experiment 2 tests whether similar effects occur for
possessives (my, your) – terms which have also been
associated with the peripersonal/ extrapersonal space
distinction. Experiment 3 tests whether the effects found in
Experiment 1 might be a result of a third variable – i.e.
language affecting the amount of attention paid to an object
at a given location.

“Place that
black cross
on the
yellow dot”

2

Experiment 1
This experiment tested whether spatial demonstratives paired
with an object at encoding affected memory for object
location. The main goal was to test between the expectation
and congruence models. Critically the expectation model
predicts a main effect of demonstrative on object location
memory and the congruence account predicts an interaction
between demonstrative and distance, such that memory
should be more accurate when language and object location
are congruent.

Participants
In this study, 36 participants were tested. All were native
English speakers receiving either course credit or payment
for their participation. Stereoacuity was measured using the
Randot Stereotest (Stereo Optical Inc. Chicago, USA) and
participants who did not have a threshold of at least 40
arcseconds were excluded (N=2). Two additional participants
were excluded because they produced more than 10%
incorrect answers in the demonstrative memory task (see
below). This left 32 participants for the analyses, 9 male and
23 female, with an age range of 18 – 31 years (M = 20.8, SD
= 3.1).

Materials
Six distinguishable, different colored shapes on plastic discs
(e.g. yellow triangle, blue heart), 6.5 cm in diameter, were
placed on six different locations. The locations were spaced
equidistantly along a midline from the participants’ edge of a
large conference table (L = 320cm, W = 90cm), starting at
25cm from the participant up to 150cm (Coventry, Valdés,
Castillo, & Guijarro-Fuentes, 2008). The three dots that were
closest to the participants were located within their peripersonal space, while the remaining three dots were within
their extra-personal space (this was confirmed for each
participant). The table was covered with a black cloth so that
no spatial cues where present on the table.

Procedure and Design
Participants were asked to sit as close to the table as was
comfortable, to ensure that all participants were
approximately the same distance from the objects.
Participants were told the experiment was testing memory for
object location. On each trial, the participant read out an
instruction card indicating the placement of an object on a
location. The instructions all had the form: “Place
DEMONSTRATIVE, OBJECT, on the COLOR dot” (e.g.
Place this red triangle on the blue dot). Following the
instruction participants closed their eyes while the
experimenter placed the object as instructed. The participant
was then given 10 seconds to memorize the object location,
before the object and the dots were removed and the
experimenter went behind a curtain to present an indication
stick (to prevent the experimenter from cueing the
participant). The participant verbally instructed the

“Further”

Figure 1. The participant reads out the instruction card,
then memorizes the object location and finally instructs the
experimenter verbally to match the indication stick to the
object location.

831

THE INFLUENCE OF LANGUAGE ON MEMORY FOR OBJECT LOCATION

3

main effect of demonstrative F(2,62) = 6.68, p < .01, ηp² =
.18, showing a direct effect of language on memory for object
location: follow up t-tests showed significant differences
between locations accompanied by the demonstrative “that”
(M = 2.94, SD = .42) compared to both the “this” (M = 2.01,
SD = .41) and “the” (M = 1.84, SD = .47) conditions (both
p’s < .05; see Figure 21). There was a marginal effect of
location F(5,155) = 2.33, p = .08, ηp² = .07, revealing that
memory for object location deteriorated with distance. More
importantly, there was no significant interaction between
demonstrative and location F(10,310) = 1.4, p = .21, ηp² =
.04. The results therefore support the expectation model
rather than the congruence model; “that” leads to objects
being misremembered as further away compared to “this”,
irrespective of the congruence between the specific
demonstrative and location.

experimenter to match the near edge of the indication stick to
the remembered near edge of the object location (thus
ensuring that participants didn’t move and kept the same
distance from the table throughout the experiment). At the
end of each trial, participants were required to verbally
indicate the demonstrative used on the instruction card to
ensure they had attended to the instructions (see Figure 1).
There were two demonstratives (this, that) and a neutral
determiner (the), six locations and six objects. Participants
were presented with six practice trials, after which 54
experimental trials were conducted (consisting of 3 trials of
every term on every location: 3×3×6). The indication stick
was presented at a distance of 10cm (counterbalanced to be
further or nearer) from the actual object location. To prevent
the initial placement of the indication stick becoming a cue
for object location there were three filler trials within the first
10 trials, in which the indication stick was presented at 20cm
from the object location. Remembered distance was
measured in millimeters. When a participant couldn’t
remember the demonstrative the trial was repeated at the end
of the experiment (unless a participant couldn’t remember
>10%, in that case s/he was excluded). At the end of the
experiment reaching distance was measured to check that
every participant could reach only the first three dots but not
the furthest three dots. The “memory game” cover meant that
participants were not aware that we were interested in the
differences between demonstratives (confirmed during
debrief).

Experiment 2
Some studies have shown that ownership influences memory
for objects (Cunningham et al., 2008) and how people interact
with objects (Constable, Kritikos, & Bayliss, 2011). Coventry
et al. (2014), using the memory game, found that object
ownership affected memory for object location and
demonstrative choice. In Experiment 2, we investigated
whether possessives (my, your) have the same influence on
memory for object location as demonstratives, with the
prediction that “your” objects would be associated with
misremembered distances further away compared to “my”
objects.

Results and Discussion

Distance from actual object location (cm)
(cm) (in cm)

A 3 × 6 (demonstrative × location) ANOVA was performed
on the difference (in millimeters) between the remembered
position of the object and the actual position. There was a

5

Participants
In this study 39 participants were tested. All participants were
native English speakers receiving either course credit or

This

The

That

4
3
2
1

25

50

75
100
125
Locations (in cm) from participants

Figure 2. Results of Experiment 1, error bars are 95% confidence intervals.
1 On the Y-axis, the absolute difference is presented (cm). A
positive value means that objects were remembered as being further
away than they were.

832

150

THE INFLUENCE OF LANGUAGE ON MEMORY FOR OBJECT LOCATION

payment for their participation. Stereoacuity was measured as
in Experiment 1. Two participants did not score a threshold
of 40 arcseconds, two participants had more than 10% errors
in the possessive memory task and one participant could not
reach the second (50cm) dot. These participants were
excluded from analysis, leaving 34 participants; 14 male and
20 female, with an age range of 18 – 44 years (M = 23.8, SD
= 4.9).

for possessed objects maybe particularly enhanced,
overriding any effect of peri-personal versus extra-personal
space. Note that this interaction effect is not as predicted by
the congruency account (congruence between language and
space should lead to more accuracy; this is not what was
found).

Experiment 3
So far the results support the expectation account. However,
there is a third, alternative account that we have thus far not
considered. It could be the case that “this” causes
participants to look at an object and object location for
longer than “that”, leading to better accuracy of recall. In
this experiment, we used eye tracking to investigate this
alternative hypothesis.

Procedure and Design
The procedure was similar to Experiment 1, with the
exception that the demonstratives were replaced with
possessives (my, your).

Results and Discussion
A 3 × 6 (possessive: my, your, the × location) ANOVA was
performed on the difference (in millimeters) between the
actual position of an object and the memorized position.
There was a main effect of possessive F(2,66) = 8.25, p =
.001, ηp² = .2, showing that objects in the “your” condition
(M = 1.89, SD = .43) were remembered significantly further
away than objects in both the “my” condition (M = .81, SD =
.34) and the “the” condition (M = 1.11, SD = .34), both p <
.05; See Figure 3). A significant effect of location was found
F(5,165) = 3.47, p = .01, ηp² = .1, showing that accuracy
deteriorated as the objects were placed further away.
Additionally there was an interaction between possessive and
location F(10,330) = 2.25, p = .03, ηp² = .06. This effect
indicates that the influence of language is different at
different locations. To unpack this interaction three one-way
ANOVAs were performed, to test location effects per term.
These showed that there was only a reliable peripersonal/extra-personal effect in the “your” and “the”
conditions (p < .05). This effect was absent in the “my”
condition (p > .05; see Figure 3). This suggests that memory

Distance from actual object location (cm)

5

4

Participants
In this experiment, 19 participants were tested. All
participants were native English speakers receiving either
course credit or payment for their participation. Stereoacuity
was measured as in Experiment 1; all participants had
appropriate depth perception and their reach stretched
between the 75cm and 100cm location. For three participants
the eye-tracker could not be calibrated. These participants
were excluded from analysis. This left 16 suitable
participants for the analyses, 5 male and 11 female, with an
age range of 18 – 22 years (M = 19.2, SD = 1.2).

Procedure and Design
The procedure was based on Experiments 1 and 2, but in this
experiment, participants wore SMI eye-tracker glasses (30Hz
binocular eye tracking glasses). For this reason, only 4
positions were used (the first location was too close for the
eye-tracker and the furthest location was not useable because

My

The

Your

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
25

50

75

100

125

Locations (in cm) from participants
Figure 3. Results of Experiment 2, error-bars are 95% confidence intervals.

833

150

THE INFLUENCE OF LANGUAGE ON MEMORY FOR OBJECT LOCATION

the area of interest was too distorted). Before the experiment
started the glasses were calibrated using marks on the wall.
After that, calibration was validated four times throughout the
experiment by having participants look at the four different
locations on the table. The eye-tracking data were coded
using semantic gaze mapping2. As the visual angle from the
participant to the object was different for every location, the
standard error in calibration was slightly different per
location. These differences in error had to be accounted for
in the semantic gaze mapping. Therefore the coding was
slightly less stringent for further locations compared to closer
locations. For the furthest location any fixation within 6.5 cm
of the object was marked as a fixation on the object. In the
nearest location any fixation within half an object’s size of
the object was marked as a fixation on the object (see Figure
5). The gaze mapping data were used in a 3 × 4
(demonstrative × location) design, investigating the
differences in total fixation time (ms) on the object.

5

Regarding the gaze data; there was no significant
difference in the amount of time objects were fixated as a
result of language condition F(2,30) = .13, p = .81, ηp² =
.009, suggesting that language doesn’t change the amount of
time participants attended to a specific object/location. There
was a location effect F(3,45) = 4.66, p < .01, ηp² = .24,
showing that participants fixated longer on locations further
away, although the lack of measurement accuracy in the far
locations may have influenced this effect. There was no
interaction effect between demonstrative × location F(6,90)
= .62, p = .71, ηp² = .04, meaning that the influence of
language was similar across different location conditions.

Results and Discussion
The memory data was first analyzed in a 3 × 4 (demonstrative
× location) ANOVA. A main effect of demonstrative was
found F(2,30) = 5.77, p < .01, ηp² = .28, in which recalled
distances for object location in the “this” condition (M = -.07,
SD = .79) were closer than in the “that” condition (M = 1.77,
SD = .68) and the “the” condition (M = 1.2, SD = .59), both
p < .05 (See Figure 4). The significant difference between the
“this” and “that” condition is consistent with the results of
Experiment 1. There was also a main effect of location
F(3,45) = 9.69, p = .001, ηp² = .39, in which participants’
accuracy deteriorated as locations were further away. There
was no interaction effect between demonstrative and location
F(6,90) = 1.61, p = .15, ηp² = .1, which means that the effect
of language was the same across locations.

This

Distance from actual object
location (cm)

5

The

Figure 5. Object area in
semantic gaze mapping

General Discussion
The results of all three experiments show that language
affects memory for object location, with main effects of
language in all cases. The use of both demonstratives
(Experiment 1 and 3) and possessives (Experiment 2) affects
memory for object location. These results are consistent with
previous studies showing an influence of language on
memory for spatial relations (Feist & Gentner, 2007;
Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005), but our results show the first
evidence of the influence of language on memory for object
location. The results are also consistent with the
manipulations of object knowledge on object location
memory reported by Coventry et al. (2014).
In addition to the influence of language on object location
memory, the experiments also revealed effects of location
(the effect was marginal in Experiment 1), suggesting that
participants’ memory for object location deteriorates as the
object is further away. These results again replicate effects of
distance found in Coventry et al. (2014), and provide further
evidence of the mapping between perceptual space and
language and memory.
In these experiments, we have also been able to test
between rival accounts of the influence of language on object
location memory - the congruence account and the

That

3
1
-1
-3
50

75

100

125

Location (in cm) from participants
Figure 4. Results of Experiment 3. Error-bars are 95%
confidence intervals.
2

This involves the manual coding of video-based eyetracking data, by which fixations are coded on a gaze map.

834

THE INFLUENCE OF LANGUAGE ON MEMORY FOR OBJECT LOCATION

expectation account. We also considered a further possibility
that language might affect the amount of time participants
fixate an object. The difference between the expectation and
congruence models is the prediction of an interaction effect
in the latter, and the absence of an interaction effect in the
former. The expectation account maintains that language
elicits an expectation about an objects’ location which is
concatenated with actual object location, leading to the
prediction that the language effect should be the same for
objects in near space and far space. In contrast, the extended
congruence account predicts that memory should be better for
trials in which language is congruent with the situation,
predicting an interaction effect between language and
location; congruent trials (where this/ that are respectively
combined with near/ far space) should be remembered better
than incongruent trials (in which this/ that are respectively
combined with far/near space). In Experiments 1 and 3 there
was no interaction, supporting the expectation account. In
Experiment 2 there was an interaction. However, this effect
was driven by the absence of a location effect for the “my”
condition and not by congruence/incongruence contrasts.
Thus, as a whole, results of the current experiments all
support the expectation account.
Experiment 3 tested the third possibility that different types
of language might result in different amounts of attention
being paid to objects/locations, with associated differences in
memory performance. Put simply, the longer one spends
looking at an object, the better one’s memory for object
location. The eye tracking data from this experiment revealed
no differences in fixations on objects as a function of
demonstrative, allowing us to discount this third possibility.
Overall the results support the expectation model.
However, it remains to be established if this model operates
at the level of encoding or at retrieval. One possibility is that
“this”, for example, actually activates peripersonal space
more when looking at an object than “that”, and therefore
that the memory differences are a direct result of differences
in peripersonal space activation during encoding. Such a view
is consistent with recent models of perception (e.g. Bar,
2009) that incorporate top down predictions from memory as
a mechanism during the act of perceiving. Alternatively, it is
possible that the influence of language only occurs at
retrieval, with remembered distances migrating in the
direction of the remembered demonstrative/possessive. In
order to test between these alternatives, it is possible to run
neuroimaging studies to measure the degree of peripersonal
space activation while viewing objects under different object
knowledge and/or language conditions (see Coventry et al.,
2014 for discussion). We are currently exploring this
possibility.

6

References
Balcetis, E., & Dunning, D. (2010). Wishful seeing: more
desired objects are seen as closer. Psychological Science,
21(1), 147–52.
Bar, M. (2009). The proactive brain: Memory for
predictions. Philisophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London Series B, 364, 1235-1243.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617–45.
Bonfiglioli, C., Finocchiaro, C., Gesierich, B., Rositani, F.,
& Vescovi, M. (2009). A kinematic approach to the
conceptual representations of this and that. Cognition,
111(2), 270–4.
Constable, M.D., Kritikos, A., & Bayliss, A.P. (2011)
Grasping the concept of personal property. Cognition,
119, 430-437.
Coventry, K. R., Griffiths, D., & Hamilton, C. J. (2014).
Spatial demonstratives and perceptual space: describing
and remembering object location. Cognitive Psychology,
69, 46–70.
Coventry, K. R., Valdés, B., Castillo, A., & GuijarroFuentes, P. (2008). Language within your reach: near-far
perceptual space and spatial demonstratives. Cognition,
108(3), 889–95.
Cunningham, S. J., Turk, D. J., Macdonald, L. M., &
Macrae, C. N. (2008). Yours or mine? Ownership and
memory. Consciousness and Cognition, 17, 312-318.
Diessel, H. (2006). Demonstratives, joint attention, and the
emergence of grammar. Cognitive Linguistics, 17(4),
463–489.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (2007). Spatial language
influences memory for spatial scenes. Memory &
Cognition, 35(2), 283-296.
Hermer-Vasquez, L., Spelke, E. S., & Katsnelson, A. S.
(1999). Sources of flexibility in human cognition: Dualtask studies of space and language. Cognitive Psychology,
39, 3-36.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50(4), 315–53.
Lynott, D., & Coventry, K. R. (2014). On the ups and
downs of emotion: testing between conceptual-metaphor
and polarity accounts of emotional valence-spatial
location interactions. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 21(1), 218-226.
Longo, M. R., & Lourenco, S. F. (2006). On the nature of
near space: effects of tool use and the transition to far
space. Neuropsychologia, 44(6), 977–81.
Meier, B. P., & Robinson, M. D. (2004). Why the sunny
side is up: association between affect and vertical
position. Psychological Science, 15(4), 243–7.

Acknowledgments
This project has received funding from the European Union’s
Seventh Framework Programme for research, technological
development and demonstration under grant agreement no
316748.

835

