Toddlers Learn with Facilitated Play, Not Free Play
Zi L. Sim (zi@berkeley.edu)
Fei Xu (fei_xu@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94703 USA

Abstract
Can children of all age groups engage in self-directed
learning? While active learning has been widely advocated in
education, it remains unclear whether its benefits apply to
children at all developmental levels. In the present study, we
demonstrate that 19-month-old toddlers acquire higher-order
generalizations in the causal domain only when their play is
facilitated by an adult experimenter or a parent, and not when
they are provided with full instruction or complete free play.
These findings stand in contrast with earlier findings that 36month-old children can learn effectively from data they
generate by themselves under conditions of complete free
play. This difference suggests that the ability to engage in
self-directed learning may develop over early childhood.
Keywords: free play; facilitated play; self-directed learning

Introduction
In The origins of intelligence in children, Piaget (1952)
describes his infant son:
Laurent… grasps in succession a celluloid swan, a box,
etc., stretches out his arm and lets them fall. He distinctly
varies the position of the fall. When the object falls in a
new position (for example, on his pillow), he lets it fall
two or three more times on the same place, as though to
study the spatial relation (pp. 268-269).
To Piaget, his infant appears to be somewhat of a little
scientist, one who carefully varies his behaviors in a bid to
construct knowledge about his world. This observation,
together with many others like it depicting his own children,
led Piaget to theorize that children are constructivists, or
active learners, in that much of their development is driven
by their own activities and experiences. He believed that
like scientists, children generate hypotheses, perform
experiments, and make inferences about the world based on
their own observations.
While Piaget’s theory of cognitive development was not
explicitly related to teaching practices, his characterization
of children had lasting impacts on education: till today,
teachers continue to encourage their students to engage in
hypothesis testing and self-directed exploration in order to
boost their own learning (Berlyne, 1966; Bransford, Brown,
& Cocking, 1999; Bruner, 1961; Papert, 1980).
Recent empirical work have demonstrated the utility of
such active learning approaches for adults (e.g. learning
through participating in activities or discussion; engaging in
problem-solving; emphasizing higher-order thinking related
to analysis, synthesis and evaluation; Bonwell & Eison,
1991; Castro et al., 2008; Freeman et al., 2014; Markant &
Gureckis, 2013). For example, a recent large-scale meta-

analysis revealed that in the context of undergraduate
courses, instructors who employed active learning teaching
practices were more effective at raising their students’
performance, as compared to instructors that used traditional
lecturing methods (Freeman et al., 2014).
Advocates of active learning, however, have not been
specific about whether this form of learning is suitable at all
developmental levels. More specifically, do children of all
age groups benefit from such self-directed learning? In the
discussion that follows, we take the lead of Gureckis and
Markant (2012) and will focus on examining self-directed
learning only in contexts that involve allowing learners to
make decisions about the information that they experience.
Previous work suggests that 36-month-olds can acquire
higher-order generalizations effectively when placed in such
active learning contexts (Sim & Xu, 2014). In this study,
children were provided with either training, in which an
experimenter demonstrated the activations of three different
categories of machines (Training condition), or a play
opportunity, in which children could freely interact with the
machines for five minutes (Free Play condition). Then,
children were asked to choose among a novel set of blocks
to activate a familiar machine (first-order generalization
test) and a novel machine (second-order generalization test).
The children’s performance in the Free Play condition was
remarkable despite having had to generate their own data for
learning – they were able to choose accurately in both tests.
Their performance also did not differ from that of children
in the Training condition, who had received well-calibrated
and helpful experimenter-generated data. These results
provide evidence that at 36 months, children can learn
effectively under conditions of self-directed learning.
We thus examined if these results may be replicated with
19-month-old toddlers. If so, the ability to engage in selfdirected learning may be present early on in development.
However, in our pilot testing, we found a radically different
picture: 11 toddlers trained with experimenter-generated
data produced chance performance at test (31.8% accuracy),
while another 11 toddlers given the free play opportunity
activated the machines far fewer times as compared to the
36-month-olds, and their overall generalization performance
was found to be far below chance (13.6% accuracy). These
results suggest that 19-month-olds do not learn effectively
in such a causal learning task when given direct training, but
this remained the case even when they were given the
opportunity to make decisions about the information they
wanted to experience! Therefore, placing 19-month-old
toddlers in self-directed learning contexts may not
necessarily be beneficial for their learning.

2200

In that case, which learning contexts would actually boost
the learning of 19-month-olds? In the present study, we take
the first step towards addressing this question by examining
the conditions under which 19-month-old toddlers may be
able to succeed in our causal learning task. We hypothesize
that one such context may be when children engage in
collaborative play with adults, such that their spontaneous
exploration is supported by adult facilitation and instruction
(Rogoff, 1990; Vygotsky, 1978).
To test this hypothesis, we designed two causal learning
experiments based on a modified procedure of Sim and Xu
(2014). In Experiment 1, children’s play was guided by an
experimenter, such that the 19-month-olds observed both
experimenter-generated and self-generated evidence, while
in Experiment 2, children’s play was guided by their own
parents, who were told to play with their child just as they
would do at home. We then examined the toddlers’ learning
in two generalization tests where they were asked to activate
a familiar and a novel machine.

Procedure Toddlers were tested in the laboratory, with their
parents present in the testing room. Before starting, parents
were requested to encourage their toddlers to play during the
experiment by giving general instructions without additional
descriptors (e.g. “Put the block on the toy!”) and only when
they appear unresponsive to the experimenter’s prompting.
Parents were also reminded not to influence their toddlers’
responses during the test phase.
During the experiment, toddlers were introduced to the
machines and blocks under the pretext of the experimenter
showing them her toys. In the Shape condition, children
were presented with machines that were activated using a
shape rule: a shape-match block had to be used to activate
the machine’s effect. In the Color condition, children were
instead presented with machines that were activated using a
color rule: a color-match block had to be used to activate the
machine’s effect. The procedure consisted of two phases: an
interaction phase and a test phase.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we investigated whether 19-month-olds
can learn effectively when their play is facilitated by an
adult experimenter. Through such collaborative play, the
toddlers observed both experimenter-generated and selfgenerated evidence.

Method
Participants Forty English-speaking toddlers (20 boys)
with a mean age of 19.0 months (range = 17.7 to 20.0
months) were tested. All were recruited from Berkeley,
California, and its surrounding communities. 6 additional
toddlers were tested but excluded due to refusal to make a
choice at test (N=2), and parental interference (N=4). Each
toddler was assigned to a Shape or a Color condition.
Materials Four categories of toy machines were used in this
experiment, with two identical machines in each category.
The categories differed in shape and color, i.e. machines in
Category 1 were blue and rectangular; machines in Category
2 were red and triangular; machines in Category 3 were
green and circular; and machines in Category 4 were orange
and L-shaped (each about 30 cm x 10 cm x 5 cm). Each set
of machines produced a unique sound when activated.
A variety of small blocks (about 4 cm x 2 cm x 1 cm)
with different shapes and colors were used to activate these
machines. Some blocks matched the machines in shape but
not color (shape-match blocks), some matched the machines
in color but not shape (color-match blocks), and others did
not match the machines in shape or color (distracter blocks).
The machines were placed in three transparent boxes
(covered with an opaque lid), with each box containing one
category of machines and its activator block. In the Shape
condition, the machines and the block in the same box
shared the same shape but differed in color, and in the Color
condition, the machines and the block in the same box
shared the same color but differed in shape.

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of materials and procedure for
both experiments. Note that only the Shape condition is
shown for the interaction phase. Dotted lines indicate that
boxes were used only in Experiment 1.
Interaction Phase Upon entering the testing room,
toddlers saw three covered boxes containing the machines
laid out on the ground (Figure 1). They were given about 1
minute to familiarize themselves with the testing room.
The experiment began when the toddler reached towards
one of the boxes and attempted to open it. At that point, the
experimenter encouraged the toddler to return to his/her
parent’s lap, and opened the box revealing a set of toy
machines and its activator block. One of the machines was
then taken out of the box, and the experimenter activated
this machine by placing the available block on top of the

2201

machine. The experimenter drew attention to the activation
event by saying, “Look! The block made the machine go; it
made it go!” She then offered the block to the toddler,
encouraging him/her to make the machine go. The toddler
was now free to activate the machine as many times as
he/she wants, but the experimenter ensured that the toddler
saw each machine being activated at least twice, either by
the experimenter or the toddler him/herself.
When the toddler lost interest in the first machine, the
experimenter pointed to the other identical machine and
said, “I have another one over here! Let’s see what this one
does.” The second machine was then retrieved from the box,
and the toddler was again free to play with this machine for
as long as he/she wants. The experimenter only activated the
second machine if the toddler did not initiate play with it.
When the toddler lost interest in the second machine, the
experimenter then drew his/her attention to the remaining
boxes, and said, “Let’s see what I have in those boxes over
there!” The first set of machines and block were returned to
their box, and put away. This procedure was repeated with
the other two sets of machines, activating them with the
shape-match or color-match block available in each box.
After the toddler had played with all three categories of
machine, the experimenter put all the items away.
Test Phase The test phase followed, and it consisted of a
first-order or a second-order generalization test. In other
words, half of the toddlers received a first-order test, while
the other half received a second-order test. This step was
taken because pilot testing revealed that most toddlers were
unable to complete a second test trial, i.e. they were not
willing to hand the experimenter a second block, regardless
of whether it was a first- or second-order generalization test.
In the first-order test, each toddler was presented with 3
novel choice blocks: a shape-match block, which is similar
to the test machine in shape but not color, a color-match
block, which is similar to the test machine in color but not
shape, and a distracter block, which differed from the test
machine in both color and shape. The blocks were spatially
separated, and the toddlers were given about 1 minute to
familiarize themselves with them. The experimenter then
presented a familiar test machine, which is a machine that
was previously presented in the interaction phase. The
toddler was asked to make the test machine go.
In the second-order test, each toddler was also presented
with 3 novel choice blocks: a shape-match block, a colormatch block, and a distracter block. After approximately 1
minute of exploration with the test blocks, the toddler was
then asked to choose among these blocks to activate a novel
test machine, which is a machine that was not previously
presented in the interaction phase (See Sim & Xu, 2014).
Coding The toddlers’ responses in the test trials were
scored for accuracy according to the condition they were
assigned to. For the children who were exposed to the shape
rule, choosing a shape-match block was scored as 1 point.
Correspondingly, for children exposed to the color rule,

choosing a color-match block was scored as 1 point. The
toddlers’ scores were converted into percentage of accuracy.
A second coder recoded all of the children’s responses, and
the level of agreement between the coders was 100%.
Two coders also coded all videos for the number of
activations for each machine by the child, the parent and the
experimenter, and the duration of each interaction phase.

Figure 2: Percentage accuracy for two generalization trials
in Experiment 1. Dashed line represents chance
performance. Error bars represent standard error.

Results
An alpha level of 0.05 was used in all statistical analyses.
Preliminary analyses found no effects of gender or median
age-split on children’s accuracy at test. Subsequent analyses
were collapsed over these variables.
Due to the free play nature of the interaction phase,
several parameters of the experiment varied across toddlers:
the number of activations for each machine (M = 6.49, SD =
2.80), the number of times the child activated each machine
(M = 3.92, SD = 2.60), the number of times the parent
modeled the activation of each machine (M = 0.18, SD =
.53), and the duration of the interaction phase (M = 8.22
minutes, SD = 2.57 minutes). Regression analyses did not
reveal any effects on test trials related to these parameters.
As Figure 2 indicates, most of the toddlers performed
accurately during the test trials, selecting the correct
activator block according to the condition they were
assigned to. A logistic regression model is used to estimate
the factors which influence children’s accuracy at test,
revealing no effects of Condition (Shape vs. Color), p = .37,
or Generalization (first-order generalization vs. secondorder generalization), p = .37. There was also no interaction
between the two factors, p = .33.
Critically, we were interested in the effect of the
collaborative play on toddler’s accuracy on the test trials. A
binomial test indicated that the toddlers were significantly
more likely to choose the correct activator block in the first-

2202

order generalization test (proportion = .60) than chance
(0.33), p = .012. Their performance in the second-order
generalization test (proportion = .65) was also significantly
greater than chance by a binomial test, p = .0034.

Discussion
When their play was facilitated by an adult experimenter,
19-month-old toddlers successfully acquired higher-order
generalizations about the causal structure of the novel toy
machines. This finding stands in contrast to the results
obtained from our pilot testing, in which under conditions of
both training and complete free play, the toddlers performed
at chance levels in the same generalization tests.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we examined whether the 19-month-olds’
successful learning could be replicated when their parents
were the ones who were facilitating their play instead.

Method
Participants Twenty-four English-speaking toddlers (15
boys) with a mean age of 19.0 months (range = 18.3 to 20.0
months) were tested. All were recruited from Berkeley,
California, and its surrounding communities. 5 additional
toddlers were tested but excluded due to refusal to make a
choice at test (N=2), and experimenter error (N=3). Each
toddler was assigned to a Shape or a Color condition.
Materials The toy machines and blocks in Experiment 1
were reused in Experiment 2. An additional cross-shaped
yellow machine was used in this experiment; it was
activated by a cross-shaped yellow block.
Procedure The toddlers were tested in the laboratory, with
their parents present in the testing room. Before starting, the
experimenter asked that during the experiment, the parents
play with their toddlers in a natural way, just as they would
play with them at home. The toddlers began the experiment
while seated on the lap of their parent.
As in Experiment 1, half of the toddlers were presented
with machines that were activated by a shape-rule (Shape
condition), while the other half were presented with
machines activated by a color-rule (Color condition). The
procedure in Experiment 2 consisted of three phases: a
familiarization phase, an interaction phase, and a test phase.
Familiarization Phase To begin this phase, the
experimenter presented the child with a cross-shaped yellow
machine, together with its activator block. This block
matched the machine both in shape and color. The
familiarization phase served to introduce the child and the
parent to the sound-making function of these new machines.
This phase was not necessary in Experiment 1 since the
experimenter was directly introducing the machines’
function during the interaction phase. The experimenter
activated the cross-shaped yellow machine, drawing

attention to the event by saying, “Look! The block made the
machine go; it made it go!” Either the child or the parent
was then given the activator block, and they were allowed to
activate the machine freely, for as long as they wanted to.
The experimenter ensured that each child saw at least six
activations of this familiarization machine: two by the child,
two by the parent, and two by the experimenter.
When the toddler lost interest in the familiarization
machine, the experimenter put the machine and activator
block away. She then presented the toddler with three new
activator blocks that differed in shape and color. The toddler
was free to play with these blocks for 1 minute. After this
exploration, the blocks were removed. The experimenter
then exclaimed, “Oh no! I just remembered that I have some
work to do. While I’m doing my work, you can play with
some of my toys together with mommy/daddy!”
Interaction Phase The experimenter then requested that
the parent holds on to the toddler while she laid out the three
activator blocks from before, as well as the three sets of toy
machines. These items were laid out such that each activator
block was placed directly in front of its corresponding
category of machines (Figure 1).
After the blocks and toys had been laid, the experimenter
moved to a chair at the corner of the room and pretended to
work. She then told the parents and toddler, “You can go
ahead and play!” Each parent-child pair was given 10
minutes to play freely with the machines and blocks. After
10 minutes, the experimenter announced that she was done
with her work and it was time to put the toys away.
Test Phase Before beginning the test phase, the parent
was reminded not to influence their toddler’s responses. The
test phase of Experiment 2 was similar to that of Experiment
1, except that each toddler was presented with both the firstorder and the second-order generalization test. Unlike
Experiment 1, the toddlers in Experiment 2 were able to
respond to two test trials. This difference could be due to a
variety of reasons related to the parents being the ones who
played with their toddlers in the interaction phase: 1) the
toddlers may have been more comfortable in a situation that
reflected play time in their own homes; 2) the toddlers may
have had more experience handing blocks back and forth in
this context due to the prior play with parents, etc.
Coding The coding was identical to that of Experiment 1. A
second coder recoded all of the children’s responses, and the
level of agreement between the coders was 100%. Two
coders also recoded all videos for the number of activations
by the child, the parent and the experimenter, as well as the
duration of each interaction phase.

Results
An alpha level of 0.05 was used in all statistical analyses.
Preliminary analyses found no effects of gender, median
age-split, or the presentation order of generalization tests
(e.g. whether the first-order test was performed first or

2203

second) on children’s accuracy on the test trials. Subsequent
analyses were collapsed over these variables.
Once again, several parameters of the interaction phase
varied across toddlers: the total number of attempts to
activate each machine (M = 7.97, SD = 4.10), the number of
times the child attempted to activate each machine (M =
5.86, SD = 3.85), the number of times the parent attempted
to activate each machine (M = 2.12, SD = 1.62), the number
of times the child successfully activated each machine (M =
3.57, SD = 2.40), the number of times the parent
successfully activated each machine (M = 1.78, SD = 1.34),
and the duration of the interaction phase (M = 6.89 minutes,
SD = 2.04 minutes). As in Experiment 1, regression
analyses did not reveal any effects on the test trials related
to these parameters.
92% of the children and 70% of the parents activated
every category of machines presented during the interaction
phase, and the number of times that each toddler activated
each machine was not significantly different between the
experiments, t(54) = .515, p = .61, d = 0.14.

Figure 2: Percentage accuracy for two generalization trials
in Experiment 2. Dashed line represents chance
performance. Error bars represent standard error.
A 2x2 repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with Condition (Shape vs. Color) as a between-subjects
factor and Type of Generalization (first-order generalization
vs. second-order generalization) as a within-subjects factor
revealed neither a main effect of Condition, F(1, 22) = .13,
p = .72, η2 = .006, nor Type of Generalization, F(1, 22) =
.055, p = .82, η2 = .003, and there was also no interaction
between the two factors, F(1, 22) = .50, p = .49, η2 = .022.
Planned comparisons were performed to evaluate the
effect of collaborative play on the toddlers’ accuracy in the
generalization tests. The comparisons indicated that the
toddlers’ overall accuracy across two test trials was
significantly greater than chance (0.33), t(23) = 3.40, p =
.002, d = .69. A binomial test indicated that the toddlers

were marginally more likely to choose the correct activator
block in the first-order generalization test (proportion = .50)
than chance (0.33), p = .063. Their performance in the
second-order generalization test (proportion = .54) was
significantly greater than chance by a binomial test, p =
.023.

Discussion
Overall, the 19-month-old toddlers formed the appropriate
higher-order generalizations when they played with the
novel toy machines and blocks together with their parents.
However, the somewhat weaker performance of toddlers in
Experiment 2 may suggest that the evidence that the parents
generated for learning was not as effective as that of the
experimenter in Experiment 1.

General Discussion
The present study examined whether 19-month-old toddlers
can successfully acquire higher-order generalizations when
they engage in play that is facilitated by either an adult
experimenter or their own parent. Results from two
experiments indicate that the toddlers can do so – after a
short interaction phase where they either played with the
novel toys together with an experimenter or a parent, the 19month-olds formed first- and second-order generalizations
about how the blocks and toy machines interacted with one
another, and they extended these generalizations when
asked to activate a new machine. The current findings stand
in striking contrast to earlier results from our pilot study
demonstrating that 19-month-olds fail to form the same
generalizations under conditions of training or free play.
There thus appears to be a developmental difference
between 19-month-olds and 36-month-olds with regards to
their respective ability to engage in self-directed learning.
While the 36-month-olds learned effectively and efficiently
when they were allowed to independently generate data for
their own learning, the 19-month-olds failed to do so in our
pilot work. In fact, given the learning success of the 19month-old toddlers when their play was facilitated by an
adult, it appears that their learning was actually impeded
when they were placed in conditions of complete free play.
Work is currently underway to increase the number of 19month-old children tested in training and free play
conditions. We speculate that situations for optimal learning
for children in this age group reside in the middle zone
between full instruction and complete free play, where their
spontaneous exploration is being supported by parental or
experimenter facilitation.
It remains puzzling why the 19-month-olds failed to form
the appropriate generalizations under conditions of direct
training, despite being provided with the same data set as
that provided to 36-month-olds in Sim and Xu (2014). One
possibility is that although the data was informative, the
number of demonstrations during training was inadequate
for the toddlers to learn 1) the causal relationship between
the blocks and machines, and 2) the right way to generate
data in order to learn about the causal system. This reason

2204

may also account for why, despite being shown how to
activate the familiarization machine, the 19-month-olds
generated far less data in the pilot free play version.
The current results also seem to contradict previous
studies showing that even young learners are able to allocate
their attention in ways that reflect active learning. For
example, researchers found that 8-month-old infants prefer
looking at stimuli that provide the greatest information gain
(Kidd, Piantadosi, & Aslin, 2010), while others have
demonstrated that 17-month-olds devote more attention to
aspects of their environment that are learnable, rather than
unlearnable (Gerken, Balcomb, & Minton, 2011). Begus,
Gliga and Southgate (2014) also found that 16-month-olds
were able to point to an object of interest, and that their
subsequent learning was superior if a new label was
provided for this object as opposed to an alternative object.
But there is a critical difference between these
experiments and ours: in these infant studies, the active
learning that infants partake in involve selectively focusing
their attention on a subset of data that is already available in
their environment, while in our studies with the 19- and 36month-olds, children had to generate the evidence necessary
for their own learning. Although both senses of active
learning involve making decisions about the information
that one wishes to experience, only the latter requires the
child to independently generate data. And to date, there is
no evidence that children younger than 36 months are able
to learn under such conditions.
These different findings in the developmental literature
raise an important question: How do children go from being
able to engage in active learning only in the sense of
focusing their attention on a subset of available data in early
infancy, to being able to engage in active learning that
requires them to generate their own data in toddlerhood?
We speculate that conditions where a child’s free play is
facilitated by adults might hold the key to this puzzle. In the
course of such collaborative play, not only is the learning
about the task at hand boosted (as our results indicate),
children are also provided with an opportunity to observe
and pick up on appropriate strategies for generating the
evidence necessary to support one’s own learning. This
knowledge would prepare them well to reap the benefits of
self-directed learning later on in development (Bruner,
1961; Castro et al., 2008; Markant & Gureckis, 2013; Sim
& Xu, 2014). Future research should closely examine the
developmental trajectory of active learning, as well as
identify the specific features of such facilitated play that
may build up children’s ability to engage in self-directed
learning.
An emphasis on self-directed learning in education was a
consequence of Piaget and Vygotsky’s legacy. While it may
be effective, it should not be applied indiscriminately, as
conditions of self-directed learning may not be beneficial to
children at all developmental levels. Just as Piaget and
Vygotsky highlighted the importance of assessing children’s
readiness for the learning of certain concepts, educators

should also begin considering the readiness for learning
within active learning contexts.

Acknowledgments
We thank Shirley Chen and Sheila Tse for their help in
testing, and the parents and children for their participation.

References
Begus, K., Gliga, T., & Southgate, V. (2014). Infants learn
what they want to learn: responding to infant pointing
leads to superior learning. PloS one, 9(10), e108817.
Berlyne, D. E. (1966). Curiosity and exploration. Science,
153(3731), 25–33.
Bonwell, C. C., & Eison, J. a. (1991). Active Learning:
Creative Excitement in the Classroom. (p. 121).
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (1999).
How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
National Academy Press.
Bruner, J. (1961). The act of discovery. Harvard
Educational Review, 31, 21–32.
Castro, R., Kalish, C., Nowak, R., Qian, R., Rogers, T., &
Zhu, J. (2008). Human active learning. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 21, 241–
249.
Freeman, S., Eddy, S. L., McDonough, M., Smith, M. K.,
Okoroafor, N., Jordt, H., & Wenderoth, M. P. (2014).
Active learning increases student performance in science,
engineering, and mathematics. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1319030111
Gerken, L., Balcomb, F., & Minton, J. (2011). Infants avoid
“labouring in vain”by attending more to learnable than
unlearnable linguistic patterns. Developmental Science,
1–8. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01046.x
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S. T., & Aslin, R. N. (2010). The
Goldilocks Effect : Infants’ preference for stimuli that are
neither too predictable nor too surprising. Cognitive
Science.
Markant, D. B., & Gureckis, T. M. (2013). Is It Better to
Select or to Receive? Learning via Active and Passive
Hypothesis Testing. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
General, 142(2). doi:10.1037/a0032108
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and
powerful ideas. Basic Books, Inc.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in
children (Vol. 8, No. 5, p. 18). New York: International
Universities Press.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive
development in social context. Oxford University Press.
Sim, Z., & Xu, F. (2014). Acquiring Inductive Constraints
from Self-Generated Evidence. In P. Bello, M. Guarini,
M. McShane, & S. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the
36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1431–1436). Austin, Texas: Cognitive Science
Society.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). The role of play in development.
Mind in Society, 92–104.

2205

