Transitivity is Not Obvious: Probing Prerequisites for Learning
Eliane Stampfer Wiese (stampfer@cs.cmu.edu)
Rony Patel (rbpatel@andrew.cmu.edu)
Jennifer K. Olsen (jkolsen@cs.cmu.edu)
Kenneth R. Koedinger (krk@cs.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15232 USA
Abstract
Empirical results from a fraction addition task reveal a
surprising gap in prior knowledge: difficulty applying the
transitive property of equality in a symbolic context. 13 out of
the 182 4th and 5th graders (7%) correctly applied the
transitive property of equality to identify the sum of two
fractions in a step-by-step worked example. This difficulty
was robust to brief instruction on transitivity (after which
performance rose to 11%). Students’ demonstrated difficulty
with transitivity is surprising, especially because common
instructional techniques, such as worked examples, assume
that the learner understands this concept and where it applies.
Keywords: conceptual understanding; fraction addition;
mathematical equality

The Transitive Property of Equality: An
Expert Blind Spot?
The transitive property of equality is fundamental to
mathematics. It states that if a = b and b = c, then a = c. This
property appears self-evident, perhaps explaining its
absence from the common core state standards. However,
even standards for the earliest grades rely on the application
of this property. For example, the first grade standard “Add
and subtract within 20” proposes four strategies for such
problems, three of which use the transitive property (e.g.,
adding 8 + 6 with the ‘making ten’ strategy: “8 + 6 = 8 + 2
+ 4 = 10 + 4 = 14”; National Governors Association Center
for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers,
2010). Left unstated in this example is that one may then
conclude, by the transitive property, that 8 + 6 = 14.
Transitivity may seem so obvious to an expert that it
becomes an “expert blind spot”. Expert blind spots arise
when the use of certain knowledge becomes so automatic
that the expert does not realize it is being used. Blind spots
may cause experts to incorrectly predict which tasks will be
easy for novices, or to misdiagnose novices’ difficulty
(Asquith, Stephens, Knuth, & Alibali, 2007), and such
difficulties may even be reinforced by common instructional
designs (McNeil et al., 2006).

Transitivity and Fractions Concepts
The decision to investigate transitivity arose from the
qualitative findings of a small-scale, exploratory pilot study
with 6th grade students, which we illustrate with two
anecdotes. The experimenters (the first and second author)
conducted the pilot at the students’ school, where 7 students
were pulled out of class, one at time, for about 20 minutes.

The pilot was intended to assess the clarity of instruction
and assessment materials for use in a future study. Initial
items addressed fraction equivalence. When discussing
equivalence with one participant, the participant agreed that
1/4 was equivalent to 5/20. The experimenters produced a 0to-1 number line with 1/4 plotted, and the participant agreed
that the mark showed 1/4. When asked where 5/20 would be
plotted on the same number line, to our surprise, the
participant indicated that it would fall to the left of 1/4. This
response suggests that the student was not applying
transitivity: the student agreed that 1/4 is equivalent to 5/20,
and that 1/4 falls at a certain location on the number line,
but did not combine these two facts to reason that 5/20 also
falls at that location.
A discussion with another participant addressed how to
add 1/4 and 1/5. The experimenters explained that the
addends should first be converted to a common
denominator. The participant converted both fractions to
20ths, and agreed that 1/4 was equivalent to 5/20, and 1/5
was equivalent to 4/20. After converting, the participant
successfully added 4/20 and 5/20, yielding 9/20. However,
when asked, “what is 1/4 plus 1/5?” the participant was
unsure. The experimenters again verified that the participant
agreed with the chain of steps: 1/4 was equivalent to 5/20,
1/5 was equivalent to 4/20, 1/4 + 1/5 was equivalent to 5/20
+ 4/20, and the sum of 5/20 and 4/20 was 9/20. The
participant agreed with each statement of equivalence, but
still could not identify the sum of 1/4 and 1/5. Even when
the experimenters explained that the sum was 9/20, the
student still seemed a bit confused.
Together with similar areas of confusion demonstrated by
other participants, the qualitative findings of the pilot
suggested that middle school students had trouble applying
the transitive property of equality, both when determining
magnitude on a number line, and when reasoning about the
equality of expressions and quantities in a multi-step
problem. We hypothesize that difficulty applying
transitivity in a fraction addition worked example is
widespread, and is robust to brief instruction that points out
the correct answer.

Transitivity Experiment
This transitivity experiment was part of the delayed post-test
for a larger study that used within-class random assignment
to compare three versions of an online fraction addition
tutor. The main part of the larger study took place over three

2655

Participants and Grade Level Standards

to four days, and included a pre-test, instruction and practice
on fraction addition problems, and a post-test (all online).
There were no significant effects of the larger study
conditions on the transitivity experiment results (details in
the results section). The delayed post-test took place 3 to 6
weeks after the main part of the study. The transitivity
experiment consisted of the last items on the 31-item test.
Each test item appeared sequentially, and students could not
return to earlier questions. Students were not given any
particular instruction around the transitivity items.

Materials
The transitivity experiment consisted of a pre-question, the
solution to the pre-question, and then a post-question. In the
pre-question, students were shown a solved fraction addition
problem, including the sum, and were asked to enter the
sum of the original addends (pre-question, Figure 1). After
answering, students were shown a re-statement of the
problem (Figure 2), and then pressed a button to see the
answer, along with the instruction for their condition
(Figure 4). The students were randomly assigned to one of
four instructional conditions: (1) a conceptual text rule; (2)
an example of procedural steps; (3) both; and (4) no
instruction. The conceptual rule said “if you have three
things and the first two are equal and the last two are equal,
then all three are equal, so the first and the last are equal”.
The example of procedural steps first highlighted that the
right hand side of the first equation was the same as the left
hand side of the second equation, then placed all three
expressions on one line, with equal signs between them.
After seeing the solution to the pre-question (with
accompanying explanation depending on the condition),
students were given an isomorphic post-question. Both the
pre- and post-questions used addends with denominators
whose least common multiple (LCM) was smaller than their
product, and the converted and sum fractions used the LCM
as the denominator. These types of denominators help
distinguish between students who are solving the problem
from scratch (likely to use the product as the denominator)
and students who are using transitivity to identify the sum.
The brief instruction is intended to clarify the assessment
results, and not to provide in-depth teaching on the concept
of transitivity. Problem statements usually do not explicitly
include their solutions, and the instruction should reassure
students that these are not a trick questions. Poor
performance on the pre-item with high performance on the
post-item would suggest that students understand
transitivity, even if they need a quick reminder to use it.
Poor performance on both the pre- and the post-item would
suggest that students do not understand transitivity, at least
in the context of fraction addition.
The delayed post-test also included 6 fraction addition
items with unlike denominators, where neither denominator
was a multiple of the other (Figure 3). Differences in
performance between production and transitivity items
would indicate that students are not solving the transitivity
items from scratch.

132 5th graders and 50 4th graders at a public school near
Pittsburgh completed the transitivity experiment, which
took place in school during the normal school day. The
content of the larger fraction addition study aligns with the
common core state standards for 4th grade (finding
equivalent fractions; same-denominator fraction addition)
and 5th grade (using equivalency to add fractions with unlike
denominators; National Governors Association Center for
Best Practices & Council of Chief State School Officers,
2010). While the transitivity experiment involves unlikedenominator addition, a 5th grade standard, the provision of

Figure 1: Pre-question, assessing if students realize the
result of a multi-step problem is equal to the original
problem expression.

Figure 2: The first screen of the instruction. For the worked
example conditions, the right-hand side of the first equation
and left-hand side of the second equation were shown in
purple to highlight that they are the same.

Figure 3: A fraction addition production item. A text field
for optional scratch work was provided below (not shown)

2656

Worked Example
(highlighting the repeated expression and
showing the equation on one line)

No Worked Example

Text Rule

No Text Rule

Figure 4: The second instruction screen for each condition. All conditions show the correct answer.
a worked example may move this content to a 4th grader’s
zone of proximal development. Therefore, although the
qualitative pilot was with 6th graders, the common core state
standards support the use of the 4th and 5th grade
convenience sample from the larger study.

Results and Analysis
Table 1: Percentage of students per response category
(absolute number of students in parenthesis, n = 182)
Answer Type
Given Sum
Equivalent Sum
Incorrect Sum
Skipped

Pre-question
.07 (13)
.09 (17)
.79 (143)
.05 (9)

Post-question
.11 (21)
.08 (13)
.79 (144)
.02 (4)

Table 1 shows student’s answers, in four categories. Given
Sum: the given sum provided by the second equation (26/40
in the pre-question). We expect that students who can apply
the transitive property of equality will answer with the given
sum. Equivalent Sum: a mathematically correct sum that is
equivalent to the given sum (but is not the given sum). We
expect that students who are adding the numbers from
scratch will enter equivalent sums. While many responses

are theoretically possible, in practice the only equivalent
sums that students chose used denominators that were the
product of the original denominators (e.g., 52/80 for the prequestion). Incorrect Sum: a fraction that is not equivalent to
the correct sum. We expect that students attempting to add
from scratch may do so incorrectly and will enter incorrect
sums. Skipped: leaving either the numerator, denominator,
or both blank. We expect that students who are confused by
the question or are not motivated to answer will skip. 21
students (11%) entered the given sum on the post-question,
compared with 13 students (7%) on the pre-question.
However, collapsing response types into given sum and
other, Fisher’s exact test shows that the difference in
response rate for given sum between pre- and post-question
is not significant (p = .2).
Between-grade Comparisons All comparisons between the
grades use Fishers exact test. The response rate for given
sum on the pre-item was 4% for 4th graders (2 students) and
8% for 5th graders (11 students): this between-grade
difference is not significant (p = .52). Students who
answered with the given sum on the post-question but had
not done so on the pre-question were categorized as
‘transitivity learners.’ 6% of 4th graders were transitivity

2657

learners (3 students) as were 4% of 5th graders (5 students).
Again, this between-grade difference is not significant (p =
.69). However, there were significant differences in the
response rate for equivalent sum, both on the pre-item (p =
.004) and the post-item (p = .021). None of the 4th graders
entered equivalent sums, while 13% of 5th graders (17
students) did so on the pre-item and 10% (13 students) did
so on the post-item. Between-grade differences for
calculating the correct answer also held for the mean scores
on production items: 17% correct for 5th grade, 0% correct
for 4th. These results indicate that while 5th graders were
better able to produce a correct sum by calculation, they did
not outperform 4th graders on transitivity.

difference between answer-only and both (p = .06), with
answer-only taking less time. If students are reading all of
the instruction, both should take longest, answer-only
should be shortest, and example and rule should be in
between. The actual pattern of time taken is roughly
consistent with this prediction, though perhaps students may
not be reading all of the rule instruction.
Table 2: Mean time in seconds that students spent on the
transitivity instruction, by instruction type

Stability of Responses All 13 students who entered the
given sum on the pre-question also entered the given sum on
the post-question. Additionally, 8 students who did not enter
the given sum on the pre-question did enter the given sum
on the post-question. However, this improvement-only
pattern did not hold for the equivalent sum strategy.
Students were about as likely to enter an incorrect sum on
the first question and an equivalent sum on the second
question as they were to do the reverse (3 and 4 students,
respectively). For the most part, students gave the same
answer type on the pre-question as they did on the postquestion (158 students, 87%). Therefore, it is unlikely that
students who answered with the given sum did so by
randomly choosing between two equally likely options.
Response Times 13 students answered with the given sum
on both the pre- and post-question. On average, they spent
42 seconds on the pre-question and 18 seconds on the postquestion. A paired t-test showed that the difference in
response times between the first and second question for
students that responded with the given sum is significant (p
< .005). 10 students answered with an equivalent sum on
both the pre- and post-question. On average, they spent 37
seconds on the pre-question and 35 seconds on the postquestion. A paired t-test showed that the difference in
response times between the first and second question for
students that responded with the equivalent sum is not
significant (p = .85). These results indicate that students
entering the given sum are not adding the original fractions
from scratch and simplifying the sum.
Effect of Transitivity Instruction Type There were 8
transitivity learners (students who answered with the given
sum on the post-question but not the pre-question): 1 in the
example condition, 2 each in the answer-only and rule
conditions, and 3 in the both condition. Fisher’s exact test
showed no significant difference in the number of
transitivity learners among the four conditions (p = .95).
Average time spent on the instruction is given in Table 2.
An ANOVA showed that the time spent on the instruction
differed by instruction type (p = .02). Post-hoc tukey tests
reveal that the rule and both instruction differ from each
other (p = .03), with rule taking less time, and a marginal

Mean
Std. Deviation

Answer-only
13.1
11.9

Example
16.7
12.5

Rule
12.5
8.2

Both
19.6
15.9

Comparing Transitivity and Production When students
answered with the given sum, how likely is it that they
solved the problem from scratch instead of using
transitivity? Of the 13 students who responded with the
given sum on the transitive pre-question, 3 of those students
solved all 6 production questions correctly, while the
remaining 10 students solved 0 correctly. Of the 8
transitivity learners, 4 of them solved 5 or 6 production
questions correctly, while the remaining 4 solved 0
correctly. These results suggest that many students who
answered the transitivity items with the given sum were not
able to add the original fractions. Conversely, students with
a demonstrated ability to add fractions with unlike
denominators did not automatically ignore the provided
equations and solve the addition problem from scratch.16
students correctly answered all of the production items. 12
of them entered an equivalent sum on the pre-question, 3
entered the given sum, and 1 entered an incorrect sum.
Together, these results show that transitivity is a separate
skill from production: Students can score 0% on production
items and still get transitivity items correct, and students can
score 100% on production items and not recognize that the
correct answer is already provided in a worked example.
The average score on production items was .12, and the
average score on the two transitive items was .18 (counting
both given sum and equivalent sum responses as correct). A
paired t-test shows that this difference in scores is not
significant (p = .3). This result indicates that overall,
compared to production items, providing all of the steps to
an unlike-denominator fraction addition problem including
the sum did not significantly improve scores. However,
students did not spend the same amount of time on both
types of questions. On average, students spent 30 seconds
on the transitive pre-question and 21 seconds on the
production questions. A paired t-test shows that this
difference is significant (p < .005). This result indicates that
students were not simply ignoring the first two lines of
equations and jumping to the addition question. Students
took extra time on the transitivity pre-question compared to
production items, likely because they were processing the
equations. However, for many students the given equations
appear to have been a distraction: compared with production

2658

Discussion

items, the pre-question transitivity item took longer to solve
and was not significantly more likely to be solved correctly.
While overall scores did not differ significantly between
production items and the transitivity pre-question, certain
errors occurred with different frequencies between the two
question types. Table 3 shows response rates for
mathematically correct answers and various errors between
the production questions and transitivity questions. 60% of
Table 3: Error Rates on Production and Transitivity Items
Error
Mathematically Correct
Add both
First converted
Second converted
Skipped

Production
.12
.60
.0027
.014
.024

Transitivity
.18
.45
.027
.005
.035

responses on the production questions used the incorrect
strategy of obtaining the sum by adding both numerators
and both denominators (add both error). 45% of responses
on the transitivity items also demonstrated this error. A
paired t-test on the add-both error rates shows that this
difference is significant (p < .005). A small number of
students entered sums that were equivalent to one of the
addends (on production items) or were one of the two
converted fractions shown in the given equations (on
transitivity items). This error type was subdivided into first
converted (entered sum is equivalent to the first addend or
entered sum is the demonstrated first converted fraction)
and second converted (likewise for the second addend or
converted fraction). The rate of first converted errors was
higher on transitivity items than production items (.027 vs.
.0027). Collapsing response types into first converted and
other, Fisher’s exact test shows that the difference in
frequency between production and transitivity items is
significant (p < .005). While the rate of second converted is
lower on transitivity items than production items (.005 vs.
.014), Fisher’s exact test shows that this difference is not
significant (p > .9). Students who answered with first
converted may have interpreted the first equation to mean
that the left-hand side of the equation was equal to the first
term of the right-hand side, instead of the entire expression
on the right-hand side. Although this type of error is rare
overall, it was 10 times more likely to occur on the
transitivity items than production items. This suggests that
for some students, difficulty in applying transitivity may
stem from a misunderstanding of the equal sign.
No Effect of Larger Experimental Condition Fisher’s
exact test showed no significant differences between the
three instructional conditions in the larger study, both for
performance on the pre-question (p = .9), and for learning
from the transitivity instruction (p = .3).

Common instructional techniques for multi-step math
problems, such as worked examples, assume that the learner
understands transitivity. When learners themselves produce
an answer to a multi-step problem, they appear to be
demonstrating knowledge of transitivity. However, we are
not aware of any previous work that has directly measured
middle school students’ understanding of transitivity in the
context of mathematical symbols. This experiment shows
that students’ application of the transitive property of
equality in a fraction addition context is very low: the given
sum was entered for only 9% of answers across the two
items. Strikingly, there was no significant difference in
mathematically correct responses between production items
and transitivity items – even though the transitivity items
provided the converted fractions and the sum. Students’
poor performance with transitivity was robust to brief
instruction: though 8 students improved, this difference was
not statistically significant, and there were no significant
differences by instruction type. Average time spent on the
instruction ranged from 13 seconds (rule) to 20 seconds
(both), indicating that students were not completely ignoring
the instruction. If students’ poor performance on the prequestion was simply due to disbelief that the answer was
really provided as part of the question, performance should
have improved markedly after the brief instruction.
Validity of the Measures: The transitivity questions may
over-estimate students’ understanding, since students may
arrive at the correct answer by adding in their heads using
the least common multiple. However, most of the students
who entered the given sum on the post-question did not
answer a single production question correctly, suggesting
that students were not using the same strategy on both.
Further, students spent much longer on the transitive prequestion than the production questions (30 and 21 seconds,
respectively), indicating that they were not simply ignoring
the worked example. Conversely, the transitivity questions
may under-estimate understanding, since those questions
were the last test items and students may have been
fatigued. However, the rate of mathematically correct
responses to the transitivity items (18%) was not
significantly different than the rate of such responses on
production items (12%), which occurred earlier in the test.
Further, if students were answering poorly due to fatigue,
raw scores would not have improved between the pre- and
post-item.
Why Did Students Fail to Apply Transitive Reasoning?
On tasks involving physical objects, 5- to 6-year old
children can apply transitivity more than 50% of the time
(Andrews & Halford, 1998). Given that these 4th and 5th
grade students must have some knowledge of transitivity,
two possible explanations for their failure to apply it are
cognitive load and misinterpretation of the equal sign. A
cognitive load explanation would suggest that the task of
interpreting the fraction symbols is so demanding that

2659

students do not have the cognitive headroom to apply
transitivity. The test items in this experiment involved
fractions with two-digit denominators and equations with
operations on both sides. Items with reduced cognitive load
could have whole numbers instead of fractions, or
equivalence relations instead of operations. Comparisons of
performance on items with different levels of cognitive load
would indicate if students have difficulty with transitivity in
all symbolic contexts, or just in contexts that are novel or
complex. Indeed, on items asking if the sum of two positive
numbers is greater than either addend alone, 5th graders’
performance is lower for fractions than whole numbers
(Wiese & Koedinger, 2014). We expect a similar pattern for
transitivity.
Another explanation is that students misunderstand the
meaning of the equal sign. Even students in grades 6-8 often
misinterpret the equal sign to mean ‘the total’ or ‘the
answer’ – interpretations that are not relational (McNeil et
al., 2006). Indeed, one response from this study, answering
with a fraction that is equivalent to the first addend,
indicates a misunderstanding of the equal sign. Students
may have thought the left-hand expression was equal to the
first term that came after the equal sign rather than the entire
right-hand expression. This error also points to possible
difficulties in parsing and encoding equations with
operations on both sides. McNeil et al. provide several
assessments of students’ understanding of the equal sign:
verbal explanations, ratings of proposed explanations, and
performance on mathematical equivalence tasks (McNeil &
Alibali, 2000, 2005). Replicating these assessments in the
context of fraction addition and equivalence tasks would
illustrate if students’ interpretations of the equal sign were
affected by the fractions context. Assessing students’
interpretation of the equal sign and application of
transitivity in contexts with varying cognitive load would
help tease apart these factors.
Finally, students may have performed poorly because of
unfamiliarity with the materials. Though the intervention in
the larger study involved symbolic fraction addition on a
computer, it did not include worked examples. Specific
instruction for students to read the worked example and to
explain how the example relates to the question would help
determine if any extraneous features of the item design
impede students’ performance.
Students’ proficiency with fractions in middle school is a
predictor for achievement in algebra (Siegler et al., 2012).
However, the nature of this relationship between fractions
and algebra is not well understood. Further investigations of
the role of fundamental principles (such as transitivity) in
both domains may shed light on this relationship.

Conclusions
The transitive property of equality is not obvious. However,
this experiment does not show if recognition of the
transitive property is equally difficult for middle school
students in all contexts, or if the fractions context presents a
particular difficulty. Future work should investigate middle

school students’ use of the transitive property with different
types of numbers (i.e., whole numbers vs. fractions) and in
different problem contexts (e.g., when studying an example
vs. when producing an answer). These results further
suggest that instruction that uses written or verbal examples
may benefit from explicit assessments of how easily the
target learners can identify the relationship between the
problem and its solution.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported in part by Carnegie Mellon
University’s Program in Interdisciplinary Education
Research (PIER) funded by grant number R305B090023
from the US Department of Education, and by the Institute
of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,
through Grant R305C100024 to WestEd. The opinions
expressed are those of the authors and do not represent
views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

References
Andrews, G., & Halford, G. S. (1998). Children’s ability to
make transitive inferences: The importance of premise
integration and structural complexity. Cognitive
Development, 13(4), 479–513.
Asquith, P., Stephens, A. C., Knuth, E. J., & Alibali, M. W.
(2007). Middle School Mathematics Teachers’
Knowledge of Students' Understanding of Core Algebraic
Concepts: Equal Sign and Variable. Mathematical
Thinking and Learning, 9(3), 249–272.
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices &
Council of Chief State School Officers. (2010). Common
Core State Standards for Mathematics. Washington, DC:
Authors.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2000). Learning
mathematics from procedural instruction: Externally
imposed goals influence what is learned. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 92(4), 734–744.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2005). Knowledge
change as a function of mathematics experience: All
contexts are not created equal. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 6(2), 285–306.
McNeil, N. M., Grandau, L., Knuth, E. J., Alibali, M. W.,
Stephens, A. C., Hattikudur, S., & Krill, D. E. (2006).
Middle-school students’ understanding of the equal sign:
The books they read can't help. Cognition and Instruction,
24(3), 367–385.
Siegler, R. S., Duncan, G. J., Davis-Kean, P. E., Duckworth,
K., Claessens, A., Engel, M., … Chen, M. (2012). Early
predictors of high school mathematics achievement.
Psychological Science, 23(7), 691–697.
Wiese, E. S., & Koedinger, K. R. (2014). Investigating
Scaffolds for Sense Making in Fraction Addition and
Comparison. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane, & B.
Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

2660

