Turn, Turn, Turn:
Perceiving Global and Local, Clockwise and Counterclockwise Rotations
Robert M. French1, Helle Lukowski-Duplessy2, Cory Rieth3, Garrison W. Cottrell4,
1

robert.french@u-bourgogne.fr, 2helle.duplessy@free.fr
LEAD-CNRS UMR 5022, Université de Bourgogne
21000 Dijon, France
3

cory.rieth@gmail.com, 4gary@ucsd.edu,
Computer Science and Engineering, UCSD
La Jolla, CA 92093-0404, USA

object before turning their attention to its local
properties, implying that processing generally proceeds
in a global-to-local direction. This idea has received
much support from the time of the original experiments
by Navon (1977) to the present. Exceptions, however,
have been found to this general rule, such as a study by
Davidoff, Fonteneau and Fagot (2008) in which they
observed local precedence in a non-Western (Himba)
population of nomads. Visual hemifield studies have
shown that it depends on which hemisphere is
processing the stimulus, with a crossover interaction
showing that the right hemisphere (RH) exhibits global
precedence, but the left hemisphere (LH) exhibits local
precedence (Sergent, 1982).

Abstract
The processing of Navon figures (Navon, 1977), i.e.,
hierarchical letter stimuli, has been studied in experimental
settings for many years. In particular, they have been studied
in the context of visual hemifield studies and yielded an
interaction between hemifield and whether a target is at the
local or global level, with a right hemisphere advantage for
the global level, and a left hemisphere advantage for the
targets at the local level (Sergent, 1982). This is a ventral
stream process, however, and we were interested in whether
there might be a similar interaction for hierarchical motion
stimuli, presumably a dorsal stream process. Hence we
developed a series of dynamic geometric Navon figures in
order to study global/local rotation processing. These figures
consist of a global figure (a triangle or a square) made up of
local figures (also triangles or squares). Both global and local
figures can rotate in either clockwise or counterclockwise
directions independently. We found that there is no right or
left visual field perceptual advantage for either the global or
local levels of these figures. However, curiously enough, we
found that there is a significant processing advantage for
clockwise motion compared to counterclockwise motion. We
also found a highly significant interaction between the
detection of a particular rotational motion and the presence or
absence of that motion in the figure being examined. Finally,
our data strongly support the Global Precedence Hypothesis
which says that people generally tend to focus on the global
properties of an object before local properties and that
processing proceeds in a global-to-local direction.

Figure 1. Congruent and incongruent Navon figures
(from Watson, 2013).

Introduction

Navon figures have also been used in developmental
studies (e.g., Scherf, Behrmann, Kimchi, and Luna,
2009), autism (Gross, 2005), Williams Syndrome (Pani,
Mervis, and Robinson,1999; Fayasse and Thibaut,
2002; Abreu, French, Cowell, and de Schonen, 2006),
dyslexia (von Karolyi, Winner, Gray, and Sherman,
2003) and other disorders.
The study that served as the springboard for the
current work is the Sergent (1982) study described
above. Sergent showed that the RH shows global
precedence, while the LH shows local precedence. We
were interested if the same was true of motion
processing.

Navon figures (Navon, 1977, Figure 1) are figures in
which a global pattern is made up of smaller copies of
some local pattern. For example, an alphabetical letter
(e.g., the letter “H”) could made up of smaller copies of
another letter (e.g., “E”). These figures have been used
in many different types of experiments studying
attentional biases and deficits, in an attempt to learn
more about how people process hierarchically
structured information.
In particular, the Global Precedence Hypothesis
(Navon, 1977) has been the focus of a considerable
body of research. This hypothesis says that people
generally tend to focus on the global properties of an

740

There have been numerous similar studies involving
hemispheric asymmetries and global/local processing of
spatial frequencies (e.g., Martin, 1979b). Computational
models of these hemispheric asymmetries in
global/local processing have recently been developed
by Cipollini, Hsiao, and Cottrell (2012) and Hsiao,
Cipollini, and Cottrell (2013).
While there have been many studies of the brain
dynamics of processing static Navon figures, to our
knowledge, there have been only a relatively small
number of studies of the processing of dynamic Navon
figures (e.g., Pomerantz, 1983; Anstis and Kim, 2011).
The move to dynamic Navon figures is a natural one.
The brain, after all, is designed to process dynamic
information in the environment. There are many
situations in everyday life where the component parts of
an object do not necessarily move in the same direction
as the object itself. The wings of an in-flight bird, for
example, are moving up and down, whereas the bird is
moving horizontally. When backing up your car, you
turn the (local) steering wheel to the left in order to
make the (global) car turn in the opposite direction.
We have developed a set of dynamic geometric
Navon stimuli, some of which are shown in Figure 2
below. These stimuli were specifically designed to
study hierarchical rotational movement. We wanted to
investigate the central question raised by Sergent
(1982) in the context of our hierarchical rotational
stimuli. We were tentatively able to answer the
following questions:
–

–

–

we developed a set of “geometric” Navon figures
(Navon, 1977), whose global figure (either a square or
an equilateral triangles) was made up of either of
equilateral triangles or squares. These figures are based
on those used in Abreu et al. (2006). All global figures
consist entirely of either squares or triangles. We felt
that it was of particular importance that the stimuli be
very simple geometrical forms because we wanted them
to be easily recognized in any orientation. An upsidedown or sideways U, for example, bears little, if any,
resemblance to a U, whereas an equilateral triangle or a
square, in any rotated position, is still instantly
recognized as a triangle or a square. (It is true, however,
that a square rotated 45° is a rhombus and, so, perhaps
future studies should only use triangles.) We did not
want participants focusing on how a figure transformed
as it rotated, as would have been the case had we used
traditional letter Navon figures and rotated them.
There are two types of rotation, clockwise (C) and
counterclockwise (X). The global figures rotate either
in a clockwise or counterclockwise manner about their
center. Each of the local figures also rotates either
clockwise or counterclockwise about its center. Each
local figure rotates in the same direction and at the
same speed around its axis of rotation as the other local
figures. So, for example, participants will see (Figure 2,
panel 1) a global square rotating clockwise whose
component squares are each rotating in a
counterclockwise direction. The convention we have
adopted throughout this paper is to indicate the different
classes of items by two letters, the first in upper case
(“C” or “X”) to designate the global movement, the
latter in lower case (“c” or “x”) to designate the local
movement. There are, therefore, four classes of items:
Cc (global and local clockwise), Cx (global clockwise,
local counterclockwise), Xc (global counterclockwise,
local clockwise), and Xx (global and local
counterclockwise).
In addition, based on work by Martin (1979a), that
showed for static Navon figures, sparse figures can lead
to local dominance, we varied the sparsity (number of
components) making up the global figures. We used an
equal number of sparse and dense items. A dense global
square has 8 local figures; a sparse global square has 4
local figures, one at each of its vertices. A dense global
triangle has 6 local figures; a sparse local triangle has 3
local figures, one at each of its vertices. We
counterbalanced the number of dense and sparse figures
in the design of the experiment. We did not consider the
density of the items in the present analysis, as
preliminary analysis showed there was no effect of
sparsity on our results.

Is there, as in Sergent (1982), a left-visual-field
or right-visual-field preference for global/local
clockwise or counterclockwise rotation?
Answer: no.
Is there a preference for the detection of
clockwise
or
counterclockwise
rotation,
independent of the visual field?
Answer: yes.
Does the Global Precedence Hypothesis (Navon,
1977) hold for globally and locally rotating,
geometric Navon figures?
Answer: yes.

In what follows, we will first describe the dynamic,
geometric Navon figures that we have developed and
used in our experiments. We will then describe the
methodology of the experiment reported here. And
finally, we will show how the analysis of our results
allows us to tentatively answer the above questions.
The Global-Local Rotation Stimuli
We wished to examine various aspects of the perception
of global and local rotational movement and, therefore,

741

Figure 2. Four examples of the geometric Navon figures. The global and local figures can rotate in either clockwise
or counterclockwise direction, as shown in the first panel. The 2nd and 4th figures are sparse – the others dense.

Experiment

the other half were presented 4° to the left or 4° to the
right of the fixation point. Each item was left on the
screen for exactly 250ms.
A block design was used with a Clockwise block and
a Counterclockwise block. Half of participants saw the
Clockwise block first; half saw the Counterclockwise
block first. In the Clockwise block, participants were
asked whether or not they saw Clockwise (C) motion in
either the global figure or the local figures of the item
that appeared on the screen. In the Counterclockwise
block, they were asked if they saw Counterclockwise
(X) motion in either the global figure or its component
local figures. Half of the participants began the
experiment with the Clockwise block, the other half
began with the Counterclockwise block. In the
Clockwise block, participants saw 8 Cc, 8 Cx, 8 Xc,
and 24 Xx items. The reason that there were more Xx
items was to ensure that the yes/no answers to whether
or not there was the designated motion were balanced.
In an identical fashion, the Counterclockwise block
consisted of 8 Xx, 8 Xc, 8 Cx, and 24 Cc items and
participants had to say whether they saw
counterclockwise motion in the displayed item. Items
were displayed on the screen in a serial manner.
In the "clockwise detection" block, the participant
would look for clockwise motion in the items. If
clockwise motion was detected in the displayed item,
he/she would press the "L" (= “yes”) key on a computer
keyboard attached to the display. If no clockwise
motion was detected, the participant pressed the “S”
key (= “no”) on the keyboard. (The yes/no key
correspondence was counterbalanced over subjects.)
They were instructed to respond as quickly and
accurately as possible. Because the item remained on
the screen for only 250ms., participants often made
errors. For example, in the "clockwise detection" block,
they might have responded “no” to an Xc item, when in
fact, the local figures were moving in a clockwise
direction.
Items were chosen in such a way that there were as
many Dense items as Sparse items, and that there were
equal numbers of items displayed for each of the 4
visual angles (i.e., -2°, +2°, -4°, +4° with respect to the

Overview
We wished to establish whether there was a right/left
visual field preference for global/local rotational
movement similar to the one shown in Sergent (1982)
for static letter-based Navon figures. The design of the
present experiment, if not the stimuli, was largely based
on Sergent (1982). To our surprise we discovered an
overall preference for clockwise or counterclockwise
motion. And finally, we wanted to ascertain whether or
not the Global Precedence Hypothesis (Navon, 1977)
applied to the globally and locally rotating stimuli that
we developed.
Participants
The participants in this experiment were 81
undergraduate students, 69 women and 12 men
(average age: 19.7 years, age range: 17-37 years)
studying at the University of Burgundy, Dijon, France.
Three participants were removed because their
responses indicated that they had not understood the
instructions. All participants had normal or correctedto-normal vision. Of the remaining 78 participants 69
were right-handed and 43 had a right-eye ocular
dominance (Chaurasia
and Mathur, 1976). All
participants received course credit for their participation
in the experiment. Explicit informed consent was
obtained from all participants. All participants were
informed that they could terminate the experiment at
any time and for any reason without incurring loss of
course credit.
Stimuli
The stimuli were as described above in the section
“Global/Local Rotation Stimuli”.
Methodology
Participants were seated approximately 60 cm from
the computer screen on which the stimuli appeared.
Each global figure fit in a 10 cm x 10 cm square and the
local figures fit in a 1.8 cm x 1.8 cm square. There was
a fixation cross in the center of the screen. Half of the
figures were presented so that the center of the global
figure was either 2° left or 2° right of the fixation point;

742

fixation point). We randomly chose the types of
component figures (squares or triangles) used to build
the global figures. So, a global square comprised of
local triangles was considered to be equivalent for our
purposes to a global triangle made up of local triangles.
In short, we were concerned with the directions of
global and local rotations, not the exact composition of
the global-local figures. So, for example, for an Xc
item, a global shape (e.g., a square) and a local shape
(e.g. a triangle) were randomly selected and the Xc
movement imposed on these shapes.
The experiment lasted between 20 minutes and half
an hour.

with respect to the central fixation point (p = 0.122) or
of Visual Field (p = 0.55). Most importantly, with
respect to the results reported in Sergent (1982), there
was no significant interaction between Left Visual Field
(LVF) and Right Visual Field (RVF) and
Global/Location rotation (p = .605).
Detecting Clockwise vs. Counterclockwise motion
Of particular importance for the present paper is the
main effect of Detect Rotation (Clockwise,
Counterclockwise). We compared the time to determine
whether clockwise (C) motion was present in a Cc item
or absent in an Xx item with the time to determine
whether counterclockwise (X) motion was present in an
Xx item or absent in a Cc item. Clockwise motion
detection turns out to be significantly faster than
Counterclockwise motion detection. F(1,53) = 13.1, p =
0.0007, η2 = 0.20. There is also a highly significant
interaction between Detect Rotation (Clockwise,
Counterclockwise) x Rotation type (Cc, Xx). F(1,53) =
102.6, p < 0.00001, η2 = 0.66. (Figure 3). This result is
not particularly surprising, since it simply says that it is
easier to find something when it is present, than
discovering that it is not present. In the first case, the
search stops as soon as an instance of the sought-after
pattern (in this case a type of motion) is found. In the
latter case, all patterns must be searched to be sure that
the sought-after pattern is not present.
In addition, a Tukey HSD post-hoc shows that it
takes significantly less time (p = 0.026) to detect
clockwise (C) motion in Clockwise items (Cc) than it is
to detect counterclockwise motion (X) in
Counterclockwise items (Xx). The same analysis shows
that it does not take significantly longer to detect the
absence of clockwise motion in Counterclockwise items
than it does to detect the absence of counterclockwise
motion in Clockwise items (p = 0.148).

Results
For certain participants this experiment proved
difficult and tiring. We analyzed reaction time (RT)
data only for correct responses. For each of the
conditions, we removed RT outliers beyond 2 standard
deviations from the mean. We then excluded any
participant who, in either the Clockwise block or the
Counterclockwise block, did not have correct and nonoutlier responses for more than 50% of the items. In all,
63 participants met these criteria. The reported analyses
are using the data from these participants. No data
imputation was used to replace missing data.
We collected data on participants’ right- or lefthandedness and their ocular dominance. For the 63
participants whose data we analyzed, all but 6 were
right-handed. This overwhelming imbalance of righthanded participants meant that we did not analyze righthanded and left-handed participants as two separate
groups. On the other hand, 33 of the participants had a
right-eye ocular dominance, and 30 had left-eye ocular
dominance (Chaurasia and Mathur, 1976) and we
therefore treated Ocular Dominance as a betweensubjects variable in our analysis.
Further, and importantly, for the analyses concerning
rotation-type detection, we considered only items with
“pure” clockwise rotation or “pure” counterclockwise
rotation, i.e., items in which both the Global figure and
associated local figures rotated in the same direction
(i.e., Cc or Xx items). We used only these items
because we wanted to compare how quickly the
presence or absence of a rotation type could be detected
when it was either completely present or completely
absent from the observed item. This choice was, in
addition, particularly important because there were so
many errors when the answer for a “mixed” item (i.e.,
Xc or Cx) was at the local level. For this reason no
“mixed” rotation items were considered in this analysis.
An ANOVA on this data produced the following
results.
There was no significant main effect of Ocular
Dominance (right-eye, left-eye), p = 0.83. There was
also no significant main effect of Visual Angle (2°, 4°)

Figure 3. A strong interaction between the type of
rotation that is to be detected (either C or X) and the
type of item rotation (either Cc or Xx). (SEM error
bars)

743

Global Precedence Hypothesis
Our results also demonstrate the validity of the
Global Precedence Hypothesis (Navon, 1977) for
dynamic, geometric Navon figures in which there is
both global and local rotational movement. If we
collapse across the density of the local figures (which
had no significant main effect) in each of the items and
their location on the screen with respect to the fixation
point (which also had no main effect), there are four
item types, corresponding to the types of rotation at the
global and local levels. These item types are: Cc, Cx,
Xc, and Xx. To reiterate, for each Detection Block the
participant had to detect a certain type of motion in
each block, either clockwise (C) or counterclockwise
(X). This motion could either be at the global or local
level of the figure.
Across all participants, we recorded the number of
errors made for each category of items. The results are
shown in Figure 4. Participants accuracy for all item
types, except two, is anywhere between 77% and 95%.
So, for example, when detecting the presence or
absence of clockwise motion (C) in Cc, Cx, or Xx
items, participants’ accuracy is at 88%, 78%, and 95%
respectively. Likewise, when detecting the presence or
absence of counterclockwise motion (X) in Cc, Xc, and
Xx, their performance is 90%, 77%, and 83%
respectively. However, when detecting clockwise (C)
motion in Xc items or counterclockwise (X) motion in
Cx items, their performance plummets to an abysmal
35% and 36%, respectively. In other words, participants
are performing considerably worse than they would
have done had they simply been guessing!
However, these results can be explained very simply
by invoking the Global Precedence Hypothesis. If one
considers that participants are overwhelmingly
1

0.9

0.78

0.8

Fraction correct

0.95

0.88

0.9

0.77

problems are, indeed, those in which the rotation type to
be detected is the rotation type of the local figure. Now,
obviously, if participants were relying exclusively on
global rotation, then their rate of correct responses for
C_Xc (“Detect C in Xc”) and X_Cx (“Detect X in Cx”)
would be 0. Since this is not the case, it is reasonable to
assume that there is still some influence of the local
rotation on the answer. In any case, these results clearly
support the Global Precedence Hypothesis in the case
of dynamic (i.e., rotating) Navon figures. One
possibility that is closely in line with this explanation is
the motion-silencing illusion (Suchow and Alvarez,
2011), in which global rotation makes it hard to detect
changes in local elements, which in this case would be
their motion.

General Discussion
The general issue we were investigating was whether
the interaction between visual field and local or global
dominance that is presumably mediated by the ventral
processing stream (form perception) extended to the
dorsal (motion processing) stream. Hemispheric
asymmetry in processing of motion has been found in
deaf signers (Bosworth and Dobkins, 1999), with left
hemisphere dominance, but not in hearing individuals.
Our hypothesis was that, while there may be no main
effect of visual field in hearing subjects, there still
could be an interaction between visual field and
local/global processing. However, we found no
evidence of such an interaction.
On the other hand, we found, to our surprise, that
clockwise motion is more easily detected than
counterclockwise motion. We considered the fact that
perhaps clockwise motion is more common in the
environment than counterclockwise motion. But upon
reflection this is not obviously so. We drive
counterclockwise around traffic circles, observe
counterclockwise track races, remove screws, open tops
on jars, etc., all of which involve counterclockwise
motions. Perhaps the fact that in the West readers scan
written material from left to right could produce the
"clockwise bias" we observed, which is something that
could be empirically tested by seeing if this bias exists
in cultures where reading proceeds from right to left. In
any case, this puzzling finding has no obvious, simple
explanation that we can suggest, but if it replicates, then
it would be an interesting phenomenon to try to explain
with a model. Further experiments should be done to
verify this effect.
On the other hand, the finding that there is
dominance of global motion is consistent with the
global precedence hypothesis. However, global
precedence has been found in static displays to be
affected by visual field, sparsity, and culture, among
other things (Sergent, 1982, Martin, 1979a, Davidoff, et

0.83

0.7
0.6
0.5

0.36

0.35

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

RotType

Cc

Cx

Xc

Xx

Cc

Cx

Xc

Xx

Detect

C

C

C

C

X

X

X

X

Figure 4. The fraction of correct responses for each
item type and detection type.
influenced by the global rotation, then this is precisely
the pattern of results that would be expected. In other
words, ignoring, or largely ignoring local rotation
would produce the results in Figure 5. If one is focusing
on global rotation, the only items that will cause

744

Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Davidoff, J., Fonteneau, E., and Fagot, J. (2008). Local and
global processing: Observations from a remote culture.
Cognition, 108(3), 702–709.
Fayasse, M., and Thibaut, J.P. (2002). Local and global
processing by persons with Williams syndrome: The case
of visuo-constructive tasks. Journal of Cognitive Education
and Psychology, 2, 245-266.
Gross, T.F. (2005). Global-Local precedence in the perception
of facial age and emotional expression by children with
Autism and other developmental disabilities. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders 35(6), 773–785.
Hsiao, J.H., Cipollini, B., and Cottrell, G.W. (2013)
Hemispheric asymmetry in perception: A differential
encoding account. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
25(7), 998-1007.
Martin, M. (1979a). Local and global processing: The role of
sparsity. Memory and Cognition, 7, 476–484.
Martin, M., (1979b). Hemispheric specialization for local and
global processing. Neuropsychologia 17, 33-40.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of
global features in visual perception Cognitive Psychology
9(3), 353-383
Pani, J.R., Mervis, CB., and Robinson, B.F. (1999). Global
spatial organization by individuals with Williams
Syndrome. Psychological Science, 10, 453-458.
Pomerantz, J. R. (1983). Global and local precedence:
selective attention in form and motion perception.
JEP:General, 112(4), 516-540.
Scherf, K.S., Behrmann, M., Kimchi, R., and Luna, B.
(2009). Emergence of global shape processing continues
through adolescence. Child Development, 80(1), 162–177.
Sergent, J. (1982). The cerebral balance of power:
confrontation or cooperation? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8(2).
253-272.
Suchow, J. W. and Alvarez, G. A. (2011). Motion silences
awareness of visual change. Current Biology, 21(2), 140143.
von Karolyi, C., Winner, E., Gray, W., and Sherman, G. F.
(2003). Dyslexia linked to talent: Global visual-spatial
ability. Brain and Language, 85(3), 427-431.
Watson, T. L. (2013). Implications of holistic face processing
in autism and schizophrenia. Frontiers in Psychology, 4,
414.

al., 2008). We believe we can rule out that the global
dominance is affected by visual field, based on our
experiments. Sparsity in static displays can lead to local
dominance (Martin, 1979a). Since we found no effect
of sparsity either, and the levels of sparsity we used
were as sparse as possible given the shapes we used, we
don’t believe that future sparsity manipulations will
alter the result.
One issue with our results is that subjects actually
were worse than chance at detecting the local motion
when it was in the context of global motion in the
opposite direction. Our experiments should be repeated
with longer exposure time to see if this bias can be
overcome.
The interaction we found between the target type and
the rotation type seems less interesting, as it could
simply be the result of finding the target taking a
shorter time than not finding the target. This should be
confirmed in future experiments.
In summary, our results suggest that there is no
hemispheric asymmetry in motion processing at the
local versus the global level. However, our data are
consistent with the global precedence hypothesis for
static images. Finally, the finding that clockwise motion
is easier to detect than counterclockwise motion
deserves further study, as it is a finding that is as
puzzling as it is intriguing.

Acknowledgments
This work was financed in part by a grant (ORA-100056) from the French ANR to the first author, and
NSF grant SMA 1041755 to the Temporal Dynamics of
Learning Center, an NSF Science of Learning Center,
to the last author. The authors would like to extend
particular thanks to Stéphane Argon for the long hours
he spent getting the stimuli right.

References
Abreu, A., French, R. M., Cowell, R. A. and de Schonen, S.
(2006). Local-Global visual deficits in Williams Syndrome:
Stimulus presence contributes to diminished performance
on image-reproduction. Psychologica Belgica, 46(4), 269281.
Anstis, S. and Kim, J. (2011). Local versus global perception
of ambiguous motion displays. Journal of Vision, 11(3), 112.
Bosworth, R. and Dobkins, K. (1999). Left hemisphere
dominance for motion processing in deaf signers.
Psychological Science, 10(3), 256-262.
Chaurasia B.D. and Mathur B.B. (1976). Eyedness. Acta Anat
(Basel) 96(2), 301-305.
Cipollini, B., Hsiao, J. H-W., and Cottrell, G.W. (2012).
Connectivity asymmetry can explain visual hemispheric
asymmetries in local/global, face, and spatial frequency
processing. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, and R. P. Cooper
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the

745

