Understanding Deverbal Nominals:
World Knowledge or Lexical Semantics?
Anastasia Smirnova (smirnova@umich.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA
Abstract
The paper investigates how speakers understand constructions
with deverbal nominals, i.e. nominals such as destruction that
are morphologically related to verbs. Specifically, given the
expression the enemy’s destruction, how do the speakers
decide whether the possessive argument is the entity that
initiates the action (agent) or the entity that is causally
affected by the event (patient)? The results of an experimental
study show that this choice is dependent on the lexical
semantics of the nominal. The theoretical implication is that
deverbal nominals are similar to verbs in that they have
argument structure. By studying comprehension of deverbal
nominals the current study extends the scope of previous
experimental work on lexical semantics that has been
primarily concerned with verbs.
Keywords: lexical semantics; argument structure; thematic
roles; deverbal nominals.

Introduction
Language comprehension crucially depends on the listener’s
ability to identify the type of event denoted by a sentence
and the roles of event participants in the event. For example,
in the sentence The enemy destroyed the city, the enemy is
the actor, whose actions causally affect the city. This
information is encoded in the lexical semantics of the verb,
its event and argument structure. The event structure of the
causal verb destroy consists of two subevents and encodes
two event participants (Dowty, 1979; Jackendoff, 1990):
destroy: x CAUSE (BECOME (y be-destroyed))
The argument structure of the verb destroy encodes the
relation between the verb and its arguments and their
thematic roles:1
destroy: (xagent, ypatient)
Linking rules determine how arguments are mapped into
syntactic structure. In active sentences, the agent is mapped
to the subject position, and the patient – to the direct object
position. In passive sentences the mapping is reversed.
Lexical semantic properties of verbs have been studied
experimentally, and the processing correlates or event and
argument structure are relatively well understood. For
example, McKoon and McFarland (2000, 2002) provided
experimental support for the theoretical claim in Levin and
1

The status of thematic roles is not uncontroversial, and many
authors do not consider them to be theoretical primitives (cf.
Dowty 1989).

Rappaport Hovav (1995), according to which change-ofstate verbs belong to two classes, externally and internally
caused. McKoon and McFarland showed that constructions
with externally caused verbs, such as break, take longer to
process compared to sentences with internally caused verbs,
such as bloom. These processing differences are attributed
to the differences in event structure. Externally caused
change-of-state verbs lexically encode two subevents and
have two participants associated with these subevents, the
agent and the patient, while internally caused verbs have
only one subevent and one participant. These findings
suggest that lexical semantic templates, event structure,
specifically,
are directly involved in sentence
comprehension.
Mauner, Tanenhaus, and Carlson (1995) examined
constructions with implicit agent arguments, such as short
passives (The game show’s wheel was spun). The authors
showed that the processing cost of rationale clauses, such as
… to win a prize and lots of cash, was the same when it
appeared after short passives, after full passives, and after
active sentences. The fact that implicit and explicit
arguments have the same processing cost can be interpreted
as evidence that lexical semantic information, specifically,
the information that a transitive event involves two event
participants, agent and patient, is activated during
processing, even in constructions with syntactically
unexpressed participants. In a follow-up study, Mauner and
Koenig (2000) showed that processing of implicit
arguments is due to the activation of argument structure
rather than to world knowledge about the event denoted by
the verb.
In another line of research, Hartshorne et al. (2010)
examined linking rules of psych predicates in English and
Japanese, and showed that the duration of the state denoted
by a psych predicate affects the choice of linking rules. For
long-lived psychological states (cf. Mary loves John) the
mapping of the experiencer to the subject position is
preferred, while for short-lived states (cf. Mary frightens
John) the mapping to the object position is favored.
Compared to the impressive body of experimental work
on verbs, lexical semantic properties of deverbal nominals
– nouns derived from verbs, such as destruction, – have
hardly received any attention in psycholinguistic literature.
This oversight is surprising, since deverbal nominals, while
similar to verbs, differ from them in several respects. A
study of how speakers comprehend constructions with
deverbal nominals can contribute to a better understanding
of the role of lexical semantics in language comprehension.

2224

To address this question, the current paper studies how
arguments of deverbal nominals are interpreted. In what
follows, I first discuss the properties of deverbal
constructions, and review the theoretical literature. I then
present the results of an experimental study and conclude
the paper with the discussion of theoretical implications.

Deverbal Nominals
Similarly to verbs, deverbal nominals denote events or
states. However, there are several important differences
between these two lexical classes. First, arguments seem to
be optional in nominal constructions. Thus, while the
omission of the agent argument in active sentences leads to
ungrammaticality (cf. *Destroyed the city), the agent
argument of deverbal nominals can be unexpressed, as in
The city’s destruction was horrible to watch. This
observation might suggest that deverbal nominals lack
argument structure. An alternative explanation is that
deverbal nominals have argument structure but that the
mapping rules are more flexible in the nominal domain.
Second, in nominal constructions both the agent and the
patient can appear in the same syntactic position. For
example, in the enemy’s destruction the prenominal
possessive argument is usually interpreted as patient but in
the enemy’s invasion, the possessive argument receives an
agentive interpretation. On the first sight the ability of
different arguments to appear in the same syntactic position
seems to parallel the difference between active and passive
verbal constructions: the subject position is occupied by the
agent in active constructions (The enemy destroyed the city)
but by the patient in passive sentences (The city was
destroyed by the enemy). However, these similarities are
superficial: while in the verbal domain the mapping is
marked morphologically on the verb and thus can serve as a
cue to argument interpretation, there is no equivalent of
passive morphology in the nominal domain. These
observations suggest that the syntactic position is not a
reliable cue for argument interpretation in deverbal
nominals. In the absence of any reliable morphological and
syntactic cues, how do the listeners decide whether the
prenominal possessive argument in the enemy’s destruction
is an agent or a patient? 2 Before addressing this question, I
discuss current linguistic theories of deverbal nominals.

Theoretical Background
Apparent optionality of arguments in nominal constructions
led some authors to believe that deverbal nominals do not
have argument structure (Dowty, 1989; Higginbotham,
1983). This position was most notably challenged by
Grimshaw (1990), who showed that certain classes of
nominals – Argument Structure (AS) nominals – have the
properties associated with the corresponding verbs: they
2

In nominal constructions with two expressed arguments
morpho-syntax is a reliable cue for argument interpretation. In
such cases the prenominal argument is interpreted as agent, and the
argument realized with the preposition of is interpreted as patient,
as in the enemy’s destruction of the city.

denote events or processes and obligatorily realize their
patient arguments. Thus, the nominal destruction in the
enemy’s destruction of the city is an AS-nominal. The
nominal chair, as in John’s chair, is not an AS-nominal: it
refers to an object rather than to an event and does not have
associated arguments. Interestingly, under Grimshaw’s
analysis, the nominal invasion, as in the enemy’s invasion,
would be analyzed as a non AS-nominal. Even though it
refers to an event, it lacks the patient argument. The
distinction between AS-nominals and non AS-nominals
proposed by Grimshaw became a foundational assumption
for many linguistic theories of deverbal nominals. In what
follows, I discuss two alternative approaches to how
prenominal possessive arguments are interpreted, one that
adopts the proposed classification of nominals as AS and
non AS, and another that does not.

Syntax and World Knowledge Approach
Many authors assume that constructions with a single
possessive argument in the prenominal position, the socalled passive nominals such as the city’s destruction, are
AS-nominals (Alexiadou, 2001; Doron & Rappaport Hovav,
1991). According to Doron and Rappaport Hovav (1991),
the lexical semantic representation of these nominals
involves one subevent and one event participant. Thus, these
nominal constructions differ in complexity from the
corresponding verbs (cf. the representation of destroy in the
Introduction section).
destruction: (BECOME (y be-destroyed))
destruction: (ypatient)
The assignment of thematic roles also differs from that in
the verbal domain. According to Alexiadou (2001), the
single argument in passive nominals is directly merged in
the prenominal possessive position (Spec,DP). This
syntactic position is not associated with a particular
thematic role. As observed by Alexiadou, Anagnostopoulou,
and Schäfer (2009), the interpretation of the prenominal
possessive argument “is rather free, and is mainly dependent
on the concept expressed by the possessee […] In the case
of object nouns that lack argument structure, the possessor
can be interpreted as owner or author, [cf. John’s book]. In
the case of destruction, the possessor can be interpreted as
agent/cause, based on our encyclopaedic knowledge about
destroy.” According to this approach, the speakers interpret
the prenominal possessive argument in the enemy’s
destruction of the city as agent or cause, since they know
that events of destruction usually involve a cause. However,
since the interpretation of the possessive argument is free, in
the construction the city’s destruction the prenominal
argument can receive a patient interpretation. Under this
approach, it is difficult to see what would guarantee that the
prenominal argument in the latter construction receives the
patient interpretation. One can argue that if an AS-nominal,
such as the city’s destruction, realizes one argument only,
this argument would receive a patient interpretation, since

2225

AS-nominals by definition must realize their patient
arguments.
Non AS-nominals, such as John’s analysis or the enemy’s
invasion are assumed to lack event and argument structure.
Their lexical semantic templates do not encode any
information about event participants or their roles in the
event:
invasion: ()
Prenominal arguments in non AS-nominals are treated as
adjuncts, and their semantic interpretation is “freethematic”. As discussed by Doron and Rappaport Hovav
(1991), in a non AS-nominal, such as John’s analysis, John
can be either agent (John analyzed something) or patient
(someone analyzed John). This suggests that world
knowledge would play a role in how prenominal arguments
of non AS-nominals are interpreted.
To summarize, under the approach discussed in this
section, the interpretation of the argument in the prenominal
possessive position is to a large extent determined by world
knowledge. World knowledge supplies information about
the number of participants compatible with a given event
and their roles in this event. I refer to this approach as
Syntax and World Knowledge because the world knowledge
interpretation kicks in when the argument appears in a
particular syntactic position, the prenominal possessive.

Lexical Semantics Approach
An alternative approach developed in Smirnova (2015)
assumes that argument interpretation in deverbal nominals is
based not on encyclopedic or world knowledge but depends
on the lexical semantics of the nominal. In this approach
classification of nominals as AS and non AS becomes
irrelevant, since all deverbal nominals are assumed to have
argument structure.
Smirnova (2015) classifies nominals into Agent-dominant
and Patient-dominant groups, depending on how their single
possessive argument is interpreted. The nominal admiration
belongs to the former group, since its prenominal argument
is obligatorily interpreted as agent, as in John’s admiration.
On the other hand, destruction is a Patient-dominant
nominal, since its prenominal argument is interpreted as
patient, as in the enemy’s destruction. The membership in
Agent- and Patient-dominant groups is determined by the
behavior of the corresponding verbs, specifically, the type
of alternations that the verbs show, as discussed in Levin
(1993). If a verb participates in argument alternations that
favor one argument over the other so that the argument is
realized in a syntactically more prominent position, the
same mapping preferences are found in the corresponding
nominal. From this perspective, argument mapping patterns
in nominals are viewed as reflecting the same lexical
principles that determine argument alternation in the verbal
domain.
Patient-dominant nominals are nominals whose
corresponding verbs participate in alternations that favor the

patient argument. Verbal counterparts of these nominals
participate in Causative alternation, Instrumental Subject
alternation, etc., and are members of the following Levin’s
classes: Change of State, Murder, Destroy, and others. The
Causative alternation (The government escalated the
conflict / The conflict escalated) favors the patient argument
in a sense that this argument is unaffected by the alternation,
while the agent argument is deleted. Another example is the
Instrumental Subject alternation: The builders destroyed the
warehouse with explosives / The explosives destroyed the
warehouse (from Levin, 1993). In this alternation the agent
is replaced with an instrument, but the patient is unaffected.
The Lexical Semantics approach specifies that if a verb
participates in alternations that favor the patient argument,
the corresponding nominal favors patients as well. Thus, in
the nominal domain the builders’ destruction of the
warehouse alternates with the warehouse’s destruction (the
patient is preserved, the agent is absent) rather than with the
builder’s destruction (the agent is preserved, the patient is
absent). Under this approach, the possessive argument
receives a patient interpretation because of the lexical
semantic properties of the head nominal.
Agent-dominant nominals are deverbal nouns whose
corresponding verbs participate in alternations that
consistently favor the agent argument, such as the
Unspecified Object alternation, the Possessor Object
alternation, and others. The verbal counterparts of Agentdominant nominals are members of such Levin’s classes as
Admire, Avoid, Inherently Directed Motion, and others. The
Unspecified Object alternation – John attacked the library /
John attacked – favors the agent argument, since the agent
argument is obligatorily present in both constructions, while
the mapping of the patient is optional. Similarly, in the
Possessor Object alternation the patient argument is
absorbed into the argument that expresses the attribute,
while the agent is unaffected, as in John admired the
volunteers for their dedication / John admired the
volunteers’ dedication (adapted from Levin, 1993). The
corresponding nominals show the same pattern: the
prenominal argument of admiration receives the agent
rather than the patient interpretation.
To summarize, the Lexical Semantics approach makes
clear predictions about argument interpretation: nominals
derived from verbs that are members of Change of State,
Murder, and Destroy classes are nominals whose single
possessive argument would be interpreted as a patient.
Nominals derived from verbs belonging to Admire, Avoid,
and Inherently Directed Motion classes are Agent-dominant
nouns. Their single prenominal argument would be
interpreted as an agent. In what follows, we check the
predictions of this approach experimentally.

Experiment
Participants
Thirty participants were recruited through Amazon
Mechanical Turk web service. They were compensated with

2226

$3 for their time. All participants were native speakers of
English. 67% of participants were males, and 33% were
females. The average age was 33, with the youngest
participant being 21 and the oldest 55 years old.

was paired with a particular noun, so that in one sentence
the noun appeared as the verb’s subject, and in another
sentence the noun appeared as the verb’s object. For
example, the noun killer paired with the verb assassinate
resulted in the following two sentences:

Stimuli
I constructed two lists of nominals, representative of Agentdominant and Patient-dominant classes, using the criteria
identified in Smirnova (2015). Specifically, using Levin
(1993) as a source, I first constructed a list of verbs. For
Agent-dominant group, I used verbs that were members of
Admire, Avoid, and Inherently Directed Motion classes. For
Patient-dominant group, I selected members of Destroy,
Murder, and Change of State classes. 3 Next, I considered
whether the verb can plausibly appear with the same word
as subject and object. Verbs that impose different animacy
requirements on their subject and object arguments were
removed. For each of the remaining lexical items, three
sentences were constructed. The first two sentences
involved a verb, and the third sentence contained the
corresponding nominal. The stimuli for assassinate/
assassination looked as follows:
The killer assassinated the victim. (1)
The gang assassinated the killer. (2)
The killer’s assassination was recorded on camera. (3)
Zero-derived nominals and their corresponding verbs,
such as love, as well as nominals with -ing suffix, were
discarded at this stage. The sentence with the corresponding
nominal was constructed in such a way so that it does not
bias the interpretation towards the event reported in either of
the previous two sentences.
These sentences were read by 2 native speakers of
English, and were judged as natural or unnatural. Unnatural
sentences were removed from the list. Using this
methodology, I arrived at 16 items for the Agent-dominant
group, and 28 items for the Patient-dominant group. In order
to control for group sizes, I randomly selected 14 items
from the latter. Thus, the final list of stimuli consisted of 30
items. Full list of the items can be found in the appendix.

Subject form: The killer assassinated the victim. (1)
Object form: The gang assassinated the killer. (2)
Since each of the original 30 verbs was used twice, as
shown above for assassinate, there were a total of 60
sentences. I expected that all of these sentences would be
judged natural, which can potentially make the task
monotonous and boring. To control for this, I also included
40 filler items, which were deliberately constructed to sound
unnatural (The lamp chased the mouse). The order of all
sentences was randomized. The naturalness task was
included as a control to ensure that any observed
experimental effects are not due to unnatural language use.
In the second part the participants had to choose a
continuation of a story. The pairs of sentences with the same
verb were presented as the beginnings of two different
stories, i.e. (1) above as the beginning of Story 1, and (2) as
the beginning of Story 2. After reading the two beginnings,
the participants were presented with a new sentence. The
new sentence contained a deverbal nominal with the
prenominal possessive, as in (3) above. The prenominal
possessive has previously appeared as the subject (1) and
the object (2) in the verbal constructions.
The participants were asked if the new sentence continued
the first or the second story. Based on Smirnova (2015), I
expected that the new sentences will be more likely to be
paired with the object form in the Patient-dominant group
compared to the Agent-dominant group. For example, since
assassination is a Patient-dominant nominal, (3) should be
judged as a continuation of sentence (2) more often than
sentence (6) is judged as continuation of sentence (5), since
the latter has a nominal from the Agent-dominant group.
Subject form: The magician admired the singer. (4)
Object form: The child admired the magician. (5)
New sentence: The magician’s admiration became an
obsession. (6)

Design
The study consisted of two parts. In the first part I asked
participants to judge the naturalness of sentences. Each verb
3
Certain classes were excluded for syntactic and semantic
reasons. For example, the class of Correspond verbs (Agentdominant group) was not included because these verbs either
require a plural subject (The trucks collided) or a complement
introduced by with (The truck collided with the lamppost). Since
both constructions are syntactically different from plain transitive
constructions used in the experiment, this class was not included.
Amuse verbs (Patient-dominant group) were not included because
the group is not homogeneous: some of these verbs, such as amuse,
allow their subject arguments to receive an agentive interpretation,
while others, such as concern, do not (Levin, 1993). Since the
availability of an agentive interpretation is crucial to the study
design, Amuse verbs were not included in the experiment.

The answers to the continuation judgments task were
marked on an 11 point Likert scale, from 1.0 to 2.0 with one
decimal point interval between alternatives. The answers
between 1.0 and 1.4 indicated preference for Story 1, the
answers between 1.6 and 2.0 indicated preference for Story
2, and 1.5 indicated that the new sentence could be a
continuation of either story.

Procedure
After reading the instructions the participants were
presented with 60 experimental items and 40 filler items
from the naturalness judgments task. In the second part of
the experiment, participants were presented with 30 paired

2227

stories from the continuation judgments task. The study was
conducted on-line, using the Quartics survey software, and
for most participants it took between 15 and 20 minutes to
complete the study.

Results
First I checked if the target sentences in the naturalness task
were judged acceptable. If a sentence was judged natural,
the answer was coded as 1, and if it was judged unnatural,
the answer was coded as 2. Collapsing across individual
verbs, there was a strong pattern for judging the target
sentences as acceptable, for the Patient-dominant (M=1.08,
SD=0.05) and for the Agent-dominant groups (M=1.06,
SD=0.05), while the filler sentences were judged unnatural
(M=1.99, SD=0.01). There was a significant trend for the
Agent-dominant sentences to be judged more natural than
the Patient-dominant sentences (t(29)=2.30, p=0.03, twotailed), yet both types of target sentences were
overwhelmingly judged natural. The observed pattern is
illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1.

for the object versus the subject form, where 1.0 was
absolute preference for the object, and 2.0 was absolute
preference for the subject. For the Agent-domain group, the
mean was M=1.20, SD=0.13, indicating strong preference
for subject-based continuation (the mean was significantly
different from the chance level at 1.5, t(29)=13.08, p<.001,
one sample one-tailed test). The mean for the Patientdominant group was M=1.55, SD=0.14, which showed a
weak but statistically significant preference for object-based
continuation (t(29)=2.02, p=.03, one sample one-tailed test).
The pattern is presented in the bottom panel of Figure 1.
Most importantly, confirming my hypothesis, there was a
strong difference between the Agent-dominant and the
Patient-dominant groups (t(29)=10.15, p<.001, one-tailed
paired t-test), suggesting that subject-based continuations
were more likely for the Agent-dominant verbs, while
object-based continuations were more likely for the Patientdominant group.
Taken together, the observed results suggest that
deverbal nominals reflect the semantic properties of the
verbs from which they are derived, and that such differences
cannot be simply explained by the effect of world
knowledge.

General Discussion

Figure 1: Naturalness and continuation judgments
Knowing that both types of target sentences are perceived
as natural allowed me to proceed to testing my main
hypothesis, namely, that sentences with Patient-dominant
nominals will prompt object-based inferences more than
sentences with Agent-dominant nominals. The answers
from the continuation task were used to compute preference

Language comprehension crucially depends on the listener’s
ability to understand what roles participants have in a given
event. While previous experimental studies have focused
primarily on representation and processing of lexical
semantic information in verbs, I presented the results of
what I believe is the first experimental study on the
interpretation of arguments in deverbal nominals. The
results have a number of theoretical implications. First, I
showed that argument interpretation in nominals is sensitive
to the type of the corresponding verb. Nominals whose
corresponding verbs participate in alternations that favor the
agent argument are nominals whose single prenominal
argument tends to receive the agent interpretation. Nominals
whose corresponding verbs participate in alternations that
favor the patient argument are nominals whose single
prenominal argument tends to be perceived as patient. The
observed results provide empirical support for the
generalizations presented in Smirnova (2015).
Second, the observed correspondences between verbs and
nominals can be explained if we assume that nominals
inherit argument structure of the corresponding verbs. These
results are incompatible with the assumption that nominals
lack argument structure altogether (cf. Dowty, 1989;
Higginbotham, 1983).
Third, the results of this study contribute to the discussion
about the assumed ontological distinction between ASnominals, i.e. nominals that have verbal properties and
obligatorily realize the patient argument, and non ASnominals, i.e. nominals that surface without expressed
patient arguments. A general consensus in the literature is
that non AS-nominals, such as the magician’s admiration,
lack argument structure, and that the interpretation of their

2228

prenominal argument is “free-thematic” – it depends on the
speakers’ world knowledge about the type of the event or
state denoted by the nominal. The results of the
experimental study reported here show that the
interpretation of prenominal arguments in the so-called non
AS-nominals is not free: these nominals strongly favor the
agent interpretation. Importantly, this preference cannot be
explained in terms of world knowledge, since each event
had two plausible event participants, as naturalness
judgments indicated, yet the choices of the interpretation
differed from chance. These results challenge the analysis of
these nominals as lacking argument structure, and invite us
to reconsider the motivation for grouping constructions such
as John’s admiration together with nominals referring to
objects, such as John’s book.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Language Learning fund
from the Department of Linguistics at the University of
Michigan. I thank Ray Jackendoff for comments on the
theoretical proposal on which the experimental work
presented here is based.

Appendix
Patient-dominant Group
1. enlarge / enlargement
2. escalate / escalation
3. compress / compression
4. democratize / democratization
5. devastate / devastation
6. magnetize / magnetization
7. demolish / demolition
8. assassinate / assassination
9. harmonize / harmonization
10. eliminate / elimination
11. expand / expansion
12. decentralize / decentralization
13. levitate / levitation
14. improve / improvement

Agent-dominant Group
1. admire / admiration
2. tolerate / tolerance
3. appreciate / appreciation
4. depart / departure
5. enjoy / enjoyment
6. hate / hatred
7. venerate / veneration
8. exalt / exaltation
9. avoid / avoidance
10. revere / reverence
11. lament / lamentation
12. idolize / idolization
13. evade / evasion
14. resent / resentment

15. enter / entrance
16. adore / adoration

References
Alexiadou, A. (2001). Functional structure in nominals:
Nominalization and ergativity. Amsterdam/Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Alexiadou, A., Anagnostopoulou, E., & Schäfer, F. (2009).
PP licensing in nominalizations. Proceedings of the 38th
annual meeting of the North East Linguistic Society (pp.
39-52). Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts,
Graduate Linguistic Student Association.
Doron, E., & Rappaport Hovav, M. (1991). Affectedness
and externalization. Proceedings of the 21st annual
meeting of the North East Linguistic Society (pp. 81-94).
Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts, Graduate
Linguistic Student Association.
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague Grammar.
Dordrecht: Reidel.
Dowty, D. (1989). On the semantic content of the notion
‘thematic role’. In G. Chierchia, B. Partee & R. Turner
(Eds.), Properties, types, and meaning. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Grimshaw, G. (1990). Argument structure. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Hartshorne, J., O’Donnell, T., Sudo, Y., Uruwashi, M., &
Snedeker, J. (2010). Linking meaning to language:
Linguistic universals and variation. Proceedings of the
32nd annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1186-1191). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Higginbotham, J. (1983). Logical form, binding, and
nominals. Linguistic Inquiry, 14, 679-708.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations: A
preliminary investigation. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Levin, B., & Rappaport Hovav, M. (1995). Unaccusativity.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mauner, G., & Koenig, J.-P. (2000). Linguistic vs.
conceptual sources of implicit agents in sentence
comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 43,
110-134.
Mauner, G., Tanenhaus, M., & Carlson, G. (1995). Implicit
arguments in sentence processing. Journal of Memory
and Language, 34, 357-382.
McKoon, G., & Macfarland, T. (2000). Externally and
internally caused change of state verbs. Language, 76,
833-858.
McKoon, G., & McFarland, T. (2002). Event templates in
the lexical representations of verbs. Cognitive
Psychology, 45, 1-44.
Smirnova, A. (2015). Nominalization in English: Semantic
restrictions on argument realization. Linguistic Inquiry (to
appear).

2229

