Verbal Reports Reveal Strategies in Multiple-Cue Probabilistic Inference
Matthew M. Walsh (matthew.walsh.15.ctr@us.af.mil)
Michael Collins (michael.collins.74.ctr@us.af.mil)
Kevin A. Gluck (kevin.gluck@us.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory, 2620 Q Street, Building 852
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH 45433
Abstract

Multiple-Cue Probabilistic Inference

In multiple-cue probabilistic inference, people choose between
alternatives based on several cues, each of which is differentially
associated with an alternative’s overall value. Various strategies
have been proposed for probabilistic inference. These include
heuristics, simple strategies that ignore part of the available
information to make decisions more quickly and with less effort.
Heuristic models seek to explain the sequence of cognitive events
that occur as people make decisions. Validating these models
involves evaluating their predictions concerning both outcomes
and process measures. In this study, we gathered verbal protocols
from participants as they performed multiple-cue probabilistic
inference. We find converging evidence across decisions, search
behavior, and verbal reports that many participants use a
simplifying heuristic, take-the-best. These results provide novel
evidence for take-the-best as a process model of human decision
behavior in multiple-cue probabilistic inference.
Keywords: Multiple-cue probabilistic inference, verbal
protocols, take-the-best, tally, weighted additive

Introduction
Traditional utility theories postulate a decision maker with
unlimited time, unlimited mental resources, and complete
information about the choice problem (von Neumann &
Morgenstern, 1944). This idealization is overly optimistic.
In reality, choices must be made quickly, with finite mental
resources, and with incomplete information. One way to
cope with these challenges is to use simple strategies, or
heuristics, rather than complex analyses to decide (Simon,
1955). Heuristics are fast because they use simple mental
operations, they are frugal because they require little
information to enact, and they are surprisingly accurate.
Gigerenzer and colleagues have proposed that the mind
contains an adaptive toolbox (2011). The toolbox is
comprised of heuristics, their basic building blocks (e.g.,
search rules, stopping rules, and decision rules), and the
cognitive capacities they exploit (e.g., associative memory).
This view, though influential, is controversial (see Todd &
Gigerenzer, 2000, open peer commentary). The questions of
whether heuristics are fast, frugal, and accurate, are separate
from the question of whether they adequately describe the
sequence of psychological events that occur as people make
decisions. In this paper, we examine the last question. We
focus on one type of problem, multiple-cue probabilistic
inference, and on one heuristic, take-the-best (TTB). Given
the centrality of TTB to the adaptive toolbox theory it is
important to ask, what is the empirical evidence for TTB as
a process model of human decision making?

In multiple-cue probabilistic inference, people decide which
of two alternatives has greater value based on multiple cues.
Each cue is differentially associated with an alternative’s
overall value. For example, an investor might consider
multiple financial indicators before deciding which of two
stocks to purchase. Multiple-cue probabilistic inference is
complicated by the fact that no cue or combination of cues
perfectly predicts the correct alternative.
Various strategies have been proposed for probabilistic
inference.1 These differ in how many cues they require to
enact, and in how they weight each cue. Weighted-additive
(WADD) computes the sum of cue values weighted by their
importance, and selects the alternative with the greatest
resulting value. Tally (TAL) simply selects the alternative
with more positive cues. Lastly, take-the-best (TTB)
searches cues in order of their validity, and selects an
alternative based on the first discriminating cue. TTB is fast
because it uses simple mental operations, and it is frugal
because it requires little information to enact. Surprisingly,
despite its simplicity, TTB often performs as well as – or
better than – WADD (Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier, 2011).

Experiment Motivation
Although statistical analyses and computer simulations have
demonstrated the feasibility of TTB, they do not establish
that people actually use TTB. Doing so requires showing
that (1) pre-decisional behavior and (2) choices are
consistent with TTB. Empirical results that bear on these
issues are mixed. Some studies find that people acquire
information in the manner prescribed by TTB, but others do
not (Mata, Schooler, & Rieskamp, 2007; Newell & Shanks,
2003). Likewise, some, but not all studies find that the
majority of people’s decisions are consistent with TTB
(Bröder, 2000; Newell & Shanks, 2003). These findings
hold even in environments that decidedly favor TTB.
Though informative, the process and outcome measures
used to study probabilistic inference have limitations.
Search behavior shows what information people acquire and
the order in which they do so, but not whether or how they
use that information. Additionally, choices predicted by
TTB, WADD, and TAL overlap considerably, rendering
decisions inconclusive as evidence for process.
To overcome these limitations, we used verbal protocols

2589

1

These strategies assume that cue validities are known.

to study the cognitive processes underlying multiple-cue
probabilistic inference. Central to protocol analysis is the
idea that people can verbalize thoughts, and that mental
operations can be inferred from verbalizations (Ericsson &
Simon, 1993). Heuristics for probabilistic inference have
been formalized as process models (Gigerenzer &
Gaissmaier, 2011). These models predict the content of
participants’ verbalizations and their overt behaviors.
Although verbal protocols have not yet been used to study
heuristics in multiple-cue probabilistic inference, they have
been applied to other topics in judgment and decision
making research (Ericsson & Simon, 1993). In the context
of this task, verbal data can go beyond search and outcome
measures by revealing how people use information they
acquire to decide. As such, verbal protocol analysis is an
appropriate and overdue methodology to incorporate into
the scientific study of multiple-cue probabilistic inference.

Experiment
Nineteen people from the University of Dayton participated
in a one-hour experiment for monetary compensation. They
completed a simulated stock-market selection task that has
been used before to study multiple-cue probabilistic
inference (Newell, Weston, & Shanks, 2003). In each trial,
participants chose between two hypothetical stocks. Each
stock had four concealed indicators, which participants
could reveal to help guide their decisions (Fig. 1). When the
participant clicked an indicator for a stock, the value yes
appeared (Yes, company IFH has financial reserves), or the
value no appeared (No, company EUI does not have
financial reserves). The value remained visible for the

remainder of the trial. To choose a stock, the participant
clicked the stock’s button below the grid. The name of the
best stock and trial pay then appeared.
Trial pay depended on two factors. First, participants
received ten cents for selecting the winning stock and zero
cents otherwise. Second, participants paid one cent to view
each indicator. To maximize trial pay, they needed to view
enough indicators to make informed decisions without
spending too much acquiring information. Cue validities
were freely visible throughout the experiment, and were
identical to those used in other multiple-cue probabilistic
inference experiments (Bröder, 2000; Newell, Weston, &
Shanks, 2003). Assignment of cue validities to indicators
and screen locations was constant throughout the
experiment and varied across participants. The payoff
structure of the task was explained to participants before the
experiment, as was the meaning of cue validity.
The experiment contained 120 trials. Cue configurations
were created such that TTB and WADD predicted different
choices from one another in 20 trials (16%), and that
WADD and TAL predicted different choices from one
another in 30 trials (25%).
Participants were told to think aloud during the
experiment. Prior to beginning the experiment, they
received instruction about how to provide verbal reports,
and they practiced verbalizing in three warm-up tasks that
were not related to the main task (Ericsson & Simon, 1993;
Fox, Ericsson, & Best 2011). Following training,
participants received instruction about the experiment. If a
participant was silent for longer than one trial, they were
reminded to continue thinking aloud.

Results
Behavioral Outcomes
On average, participants selected the correct stock on 73%
(± 1 SE) of trials. They revealed 3.35 cues (± 0.24 SE) and
earned 3.97 cents (± 0.18 SE) per trial.
To characterize participants’ strategies, we compared
their decisions to the predictions of three choice rules: TTB,
WADD, and TAL. We used a maximum likelihood
approach to calculate the probability of each participant’s
decisions separately for the three strategies. The strategies
prescribe deterministic selections for each trial. To allow for
stochasticity, we incorporated application errors in the
strategy
models
(Scheibehenne,
Rieskamp,
&
Wagenmakers, 2013). The probability of the observed
choice in trial t (Ot) using strategy i (Si) was
𝑃 𝑂! |𝑆! , 𝜀! = 𝑃 𝑂! |𝑆! ∙ 1 − 𝜀! + 0.5 ∙ 𝜀! .

Figure 1. Experiment interface. Stock names appeared at the
top of the screen, and indicator labels and cue validities were
displayed along the left-hand side of the screen. Indicator
values were concealed in the gray grid.

Application error (εi) is the probability of applying a
strategy incorrectly. Under the assumption that application
errors result in random selection (i.e., “tremble errors”;
Scheibehenne, Rieskamp, & Wagenmakers, 2013), the
probability of the observed choice following an application
error is 0.5.

2590

Figure 2. Model weights of three strategies for each participant. Larger values denote greater support for that model.
For each participant and strategy, we estimated the value
of application error that maximized the sum of the loglikelihood of the observed choices across the sequence of
120 trials,
𝐿𝐿𝐸! =

𝑙𝑛 𝑃 𝑂! |𝑆! , 𝜀! .
!!!:!"#

We converted the likelihoods into model weights (Liu &
Smith, 2009). Weights add up to one across the three
strategies for each participant. Values near zero indicate
little evidence for that strategy, and values near one indicate
substantial evidence for that strategy.
Fig. 2 shows model weights for each participant. Weights
provided greatest evidence for TTB in most participants (12
total). For fewer participants, weights provided greatest
evidence for WADD (2 total) or TAL (4 total). On average,
participants adhered to the strategy that best fit their choices
in 87% of trials.
TTB is a non-compensatory strategy; cues with low
validity cannot compensate for the value of a more valid
cue. Conversely, WADD and TAL are both compensatory
strategies; cues with low validity can compensate for the
value of a more valid cue. For this reason, and because
model weights only weakly distinguished between them, we
combined WADD and TAL into a single category and
classified each participant as using a non-compensatory
strategy (TTB) or a compensatory strategy (WADD/TAL).
Twelve participants used a non-compensatory strategy, six
used a compensatory strategy, and one had identical weights
for non-compensatory and compensatory strategies.
We compared the performance of participants in the noncompensatory and compensatory groups. Those who used a
non-compensatory strategy selected the correct stock
slightly more often (74% versus 72% of trials, t(16) = 0.75,
n.s.) and revealed fewer cues (3.1 versus 3.8, t(16) = 1.29, p
< .1). The net effect was that participants who used a noncompensatory strategy earned significantly more per trial
(4.2 cents versus 3.3 cents, t(16) = 2.60, p < .05).

when search stops (stopping rules). Specifically, TTB
searches cues in order of their validity and stops after
finding one discriminating cue. To gather converging
evidence for the outcome-based classifications, we
examined participants’ searching and stopping behavior.
People classified as using a non-compensatory strategy
revealed the most-valid indicator first in 92% of trials, while
those who used a compensatory strategy only did so in 41%
of trials, t(16) = 6.07, p < .0001. Additionally, people
classified as using a non-compensatory strategy stopped
searching immediately after finding one discriminating cue
in 85% of trials, while those who used a compensatory
strategy only did so in 51% of trials, t(16) = 2.35, p < .05.

Verbal Reports
The experiment produced about 11 hours of verbal data,
which were transcribed and segmented into 12,602 taskrelated utterances. Each utterance was assigned to one of
nine categories: (1) search, (2) encoding, (3) single-indicator
elaboration, (4) multi-indicator elaboration, (5) unjustified
decision, (6) single-indicator decision, (7) multi-indicator
decision, (8) feedback evaluation, and (9) metacognitive.
One investigator coded 100% of utterances, and a second
investigator coded 10% of utterances. The mean inter-rater
reliability, measured by Cohen’s kappa, was 0.97.
Elaboration and decision statements are especially
informative with respect to decision process. Singleindicator elaboration statements compare one indicator
between stocks, and single-indicator decision statements
base choices on one indicator (Table 1). Conversely, multiindicator elaboration statements combine information across
multiple indicators within a stock, and multi-indicator
decision statements base choices on multiple indicators
(Table 1). Because TTB involves comparing indicators
Table 1. Examples of Single- and Multi-Indicator
Elaboration and Decision Statements
Elaboration

Search Process
Besides specifying decisions, heuristics models predict the
order in which information is acquired (search rules) and

Decision

2591

Single-Indicator
KRL is better on
the top indicator
Take TJM because
of share trend

Multi-Indicator
I have two yesses
and a no for RJB
Choose this since
it’s a yes for both

between stocks and selecting a stock based on the first
discriminating indicator, participants using TTB should
make more single-indicator elaboration and decision
statements. Alternatively, because WADD and TAL involve
combining information across multiple indicators within
stocks, participants using WADD and TAL should make
more multi-indicator elaboration and decision statements.
To test this hypothesis, we calculated the relative
proportions of single-indicator elaboration and decision
statements – that is the number of single-indicator
statements divided by the total number of single- and multiindicator statements. We compared these proportions
between participants who were classified as using a noncompensatory (TTB) or compensatory (WADD/TAL)
strategy based on their choices (Fig. 3). Relative to
participants who used WADD or TAL, those who used TTB
made more single-indicator elaboration (t(16) = 3.12, p <
.01) and decision statements (t(16) = 4.39, p < .001).
Elaboration
p < .01

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

TTB

WADD/TAL

Decision
1.0

Proportion Single−Indicator

Proportion Single−Indicator

1.0

p < .001

0.8

Figure 4. Scatter plot of normalized search measure
(termination), outcome measure (non-compensatory decision
weight), and verbal measure (proportion of single-indicator
elaboration and decision statements). Black circles denote
participants who acted according to TTB and red squares
denote participants who acted according to WADD or TAL.
Red stars denote two participants classified differently by
outcome-based and multi-dimensional approaches.

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

TTB

WADD/TAL

Figure 3. Proportion of single-indicator elaboration and
decision statements for participants classified as using a
non-compensatory strategy (TTB) or a compensatory
strategy (WADD/TAL).

Multi-Dimensional Classification
In the previous sections, we classified participants based on
their decisions, and we sought converging evidence in the
form of search behavior and verbal reports. This is the
predominant approach used in the literature. A potentially
more powerful approach is to classify participants based
jointly on their decisions, search behavior, and verbal
reports – that is, a multi-modal approach (SchulteMecklenbeck, Kühberger, & Ranyard, 2011).
To combine information from these three sources, we
performed a multi-dimensional classification. For each
participant we recorded (1) the model weight assigned to
TTB, (2) the probability of terminating search immediately
after the first discriminating cue, and (3) the relative
proportion of single-indicator statements. To place equal
emphasis on the three dimensions, we normalized the values
within each using z-scores. We then used a two-step kmeans cluster analysis to determine the number of clusters
of participants and to assign each participant to a cluster.

The analysis revealed two clusters with ten individuals
and nine individuals (Fig. 4). Participants in black acted
most consistently with a non-compensatory strategy: their
decisions were consistent with TTB, they stopped searching
after finding one discriminating cue, and they
predominantly made single-indicator statements.
Participants in red, though somewhat more variable, acted
most consistently with a compensatory strategy: their
decisions were consistent with WADD or TAL, they
continued searching after finding one discriminating cue,
and they predominantly made multi-indicator statements.
The results of the multi-dimensional classification
matched the outcome-based classification with the
exception of the two participants depicted by red stars.
These participants’ decisions were consistent with TTB, but
they continued searching after finding a discriminating cue
and they made many multi-indicator statements.

Consistency of Verbal Reports
One concern with verbal protocol analysis is that verbal
reports may deviate from behavior (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977;
Schooler, 2011). To address whether participants’
verbalizations were consistent with their choices, we
examined a subset of trials that satisfied two criteria. First,
the heuristics needed to predict different decisions based on
the set of cue values (16% of trials). Second, the participant

2592

needed to make an elaboration or decision statement that
was informative with respect to their decision process (33%
of trials). The conjunction of these relatively low-frequency
events limited our sample to a total of 92 trials across all
participants.
This occurred in 52 trials with elaboration statements, and
in 41 trials with decision statements. In these trials,
verbalizations were overwhelmingly consistent with choices
(elaboration statements: 37/52; decision statements: 35/41).
Elaboration statements were not as consistent with choices
as decision statements (71% versus 85%), χ2 = 2.65, p = .05
(one-tailed).
In a total of 21 trials from 8 different participants,
verbalizations and choices were inconsistent. We examined
these trials to determine why the verbalizations and choices
diverged. We found that most inconsistent trials could be
assigned to three categories (Table 2).
Table 2. Categorization of Inconsistent Trials
Category
Frugal WADD/TAL
Separate Search and Decision
Guessing
Unclassified

Number of Trials
8
6
2
5

In eight inconsistent trials, participants appeared to apply
WADD/TAL using only a subset of the cues (e.g., two of
the cue pairs rather than all four). Because they did not
reveal all of the cues, their decisions – which seemed to
follow a compensatory process – ended up coinciding with
TTB. Had they applied the same decision processes (i.e.,
counting the number of yesses for each stock) based on all
four cues, they would have likely selected the other stock, as
predicted by WADD/TAL. We labeled these trials frugal
WADD/TAL. Seven of the eight trials in this category came
from the two participants who were reclassified from TTB
to WADD/TAL in the multi-dimensional classification.
In six inconsistent trials, participants examined cues in the
order prescribed by TTB, and they made elaboration
statements consistent with that strategy. However, they did
not terminate search after the first discriminating cue.
Rather, they revealed additional cues and decided based on
the majority of values for the two stocks. We labeled these
trials separate search and decision.
In two inconsistent trials, participants began by
examining cues in order of their validity, but decided before
revealing any discriminating cue. That is, they abandoned
their strategy mid-trial and guessed rather than spending
more to find a discriminating cue. In the remaining five
unclassified trials, the reason for the inconsistency between
decisions and reports was unclear.

Conclusions
The two main results of this study can be summarized
simply. First, most participants’ decisions were consistent
with TTB, although a large minority appeared to use

WADD or TAL. Second, outcome measures, search
behavior, and verbal reports converged. Together, these
results strongly support the notion that many individuals
adopt TTB in this type of task and environment.
Heuristics models seek to explain the sequence of
psychological events that occur as people make decisions.
To adequately test these models, one must evaluate their
predictions concerning both outcome measures and process
measures (Schulte-Mecklenbeck, Kühberger, & Ranyard,
2011). A priori, it was unknown whether verbal protocols, a
high-density performance measure, would be consistent
with the predictions of TTB. We found that they were in
participants who decided in the manner prescribed by TTB.
This provides novel evidence for TTB as a process model of
multiple-cue probabilistic inference.

Verbal Reports as a Source of Process Data
A common concern with verbal protocols is that they may
be inaccurate (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977; Schooler, 2011). In
fact, verbal reports are less accurate when individuals must
retrieve information from long-term memory, and when
retrieval is difficult (Ericsson & Simon, 1993). This may be
the case with retrospective reports. To avoid this problem,
we gathered protocols concurrently with task performance.
We observed substantial consistency across outcome
measures, search behavior, and concurrent verbalizations.
Participants whose decisions were most consistent with
TTB also made more single-indicator elaboration and
decision statements. The correspondence between verbal
reports and decisions held at the level of single trials. When
informative verbalizations accompanied diagnostic choices,
reports were consistent with 77% of decisions (72/93).
Inconsistent trials, though uncommon, were nonetheless
informative. The finding that some participants applied a
compensatory strategy to a subset of cues makes the point
that variants of WADD and TAL can be used in conjunction
with non-exhaustive information search (SchulteMecklenbeck, Sohn, de Bellis, Martin & Hertwig, 2013).
The majority of frugal WADD/TAL trials (seven out of
eight) came from just two participants. These same
participants were classified differently based on decisions
alone, versus decisions along with search behavior and
verbal reports. The reason why these participants were so
difficult to classify is because their actual strategies likely
fell somewhere between TTB and WADD/TAL, or what we
identified above as frugal WADD/TAL.
Some participants made non-compensatory elaboration
statements but appeared to use a compensatory decision
rule. Heuristics are comprised of three basic building
blocks: search rules, stopping rules, and decision rules
(Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier, 2011). Dissociations between
elaboration statements, which occur during the search
portion of the trial, and choices reflect the separability of the
building blocks; the individual can examine cues in the
manner prescribed by one heuristic, but decide according to
another. This has led some researchers to question the utility
of process measures that focus on search. Indeed, we found

2593

that decision statements were more consistent with choices
than elaboration statements. That fact notwithstanding, the
majority of elaboration statements were consistent with
choices as well.
A second concern with protocol analysis is that thinking
aloud may interfere with the cognitive processes under
investigation (i.e. reactivity; Nisbett & Wilson, 1977;
Schooler, 2011). To control for this possibility, we gathered
data from additional participants in a silent, control
condition. There were no differences between groups in
terms of information acquisition or decision behavior.

Limitations and Future Directions
According to the adaptive toolbox theory, the mind contains
a collection of heuristics, one of which is TTB (Gigerenzer
& Gaissmaier, 2011). The adaptive toolbox theory predicts
that people will only use TTB when it is adaptive to do so.
For example, when cue validities are non-compensatory and
when information is costly. These conditions were met in
our experiment. Accordingly, more than half of participants
used TTB.
The adaptive toolbox theory also predicts that people will
use other strategies like WADD and TAL when cues are
compensatory and when information is free. Other studies
have confirmed these predictions (Bröder, 2003). If we
replicated our experiment under such conditions, we expect
that more participants would decide according to WADD
and TAL, and that the relative frequency of multi-indicator
elaboration and decision statements would increase.
Although these predictions remain to be tested, participants
classified as using compensatory strategies did exhibit the
expected verbalization patterns for elaboration and decision
statements in this experiment.
Simon (1992) stated that our methods for gathering data
must fit the shapes of our theories. The primary innovation
of this work is the application of verbal protocols to the
study of heuristics in multiple-cue probabilistic inference.
Participants’ verbalizations provided critical information
about how they used the information they acquired to make
decisions. Of course, people do not always take-the-best.
The method used here, verbal protocol analysis, has
considerable potential to enhance understanding of the
strategies people use in different environments, for different
types of problems, and in different tasks.

Acknowledgments
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not reflect the official policy or position of the
Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. This
research was performed while M.M.W. held a National
Research Council Research Associateship Award with the
AFRL’s Cognitive Models and Agents Branch. The authors
thank AFRL for supporting this research.

References
Bröder, A. (2000). Assessing the empirical validity of the
“take-the-best” heuristic as a model of human

probabilistic inference. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 13321346.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis.
Verbal protocols as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fox, M. C., Ericsson, K. A., & Best, R. (2011). Do
procedures for verbal reporting of thinking have to be
reactive? A meta-analysis and recommendations for best
reporting methods. Psychological Bulletin, 137, 316-344.
Gigerenzer, G., & Gaissmaier, W. (2011). Heuristic decision
making. Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 451-482.
Liu, C. C., & Smith, P. L. (2009). Comparing time–
accuracy curves: Beyond goodness-of-fit measures.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 190-203.
Mata, R., Schooler, L. J., & Rieskamp, J. (2007). The aging
decision maker: Cognitive aging and the adaptive
selection of decision strategies. Psychology and Aging,
22, 796-810.
Newell, B. R., & Shanks, D. R. (2003). Take the best or
look at the rest? Factors influencing “one-reason”
decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 53-65.
Newell, B. R., Weston, N. J., & Shanks, D. R. (2003).
Empirical tests of a fast-and-frugal heuristic: Not
everyone “takes-the-best”. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 91, 82-96.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than
we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes.
Psychological Review, 84, 231-259.
Scheibehenne, B., Rieskamp, J., & Wagenmakers, E. J.
(2013). Testing adaptive toolbox models: A Bayesian
hierarchical approach. Psychological Review, 120, 39-64.
Schooler, J. W. (2011). Introspecting in the spirit of William
James: Comment on Fox, Ericsson, and Best (2011).
Psychological Bulletin, 137, 345-350.
Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M., Kühberger, A., & Ranyard, R.
(2011). The role of process data in the development and
testing of process models of judgment and decision
making. Judgment and Decision Making, 6, 733-739.
Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M., Sohn, M., de Bellis, E., Martin,
N., & Hertwig, R. (2013). A lack of appetite for
information and computation. Simple heuristics in food
choice. Appetite, 71, 242-251.
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 99-118.
Simon, H. A. (1992). What is an “explanation” of behavior?
Psychological Science, 3, 150-161.
Todd, P. M., & Gigerenzer, G. (2000). Précis of simple
heuristics that make us smart. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 23, 727-741.
Walsh, M. M., & Gluck, K. A. (2015). Verbalization of
decision strategies in multiple-cue probabilistic inference.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of
gambles and economic behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

2594

