Visual-motor coordination in natural reaching of young children and
adults
John M. Franchak (franchak@ucr.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of California, Riverside
Riverside, CA 92521 USA

Chen Yu (chenyu@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract

of natural reaching differ between actors of different skill
levels—novices (young children) and experts (adults)?

The current study investigated eye-hand coordination in
natural reaching. We asked whether the speed of reaching
related to the quality of visual information obtained by young
children and adults. Participants played with objects on a
table while their eye and hand movements were recorded. We
developed new techniques to find reaching events in natural
activity and to determine how closely participants aligned
gaze to objects while reaching. Reaching speed and eye
alignment were related for adults but not for children. These
results suggest that adults but not children adapt reaching
movements according to the quality of visual information (or
vice-versa) during natural activity. We discuss possibilities for
why this coordination was not observed in children.

Visually-guided reaching in adults
In laboratory tasks, aligning the eye to the target of a reach
results in better reaching execution. Spatial acuity in the
periphery is worse than in central vision, thus, viewing
targets in the periphery leads to poor localization of the
target (Levi & Klein, 1996) and the hand relative to the
target (Saunders & Knill, 2004). Lacking accurate
information for guiding the reach, actors compensate by
adapting the kinematics of transport and prehension. When
eye alignment is experimentally manipulated by viewing
targets in the periphery at varying eccentricities, adults’
maximum grip aperture increases to compensate for
uncertainty in target size and location when grasping
(Schlicht & Schrater, 2007). Similarly, endpoint accuracy
becomes more variable when rapidly pointing to targets
viewed in the periphery compared to targets in central vision
(Ma-Wyatt & McKee, 2006). Forcing participants to view
targets peripherally by wearing a contact lens that blocks
central vision reduces reaching velocity and disrupts
prehension (Sivak & MacKenzie, 1990). Moreover, the
effects of peripheral viewing on reaching are not “all or
nothing”: Parametric manipulations of eye alignment reveal
a linear relation between target eccentricity and maximum
grip aperture (Schlicht & Schrater, 2007).
Because viewing targets in central vision facilitates
reaching performance, it would be reasonable to expect that
actors would choose to align gaze to reaching targets during
natural manual activity. Indeed, participants fixate objects
before reaching to them in head-mounted eye tracking
studies of natural tasks such as making a cup of tea (Land,
Mennie, & Rusted, 1999) and preparing a sandwich
(Hayhoe, Shrivastava, Mruczek, & Pelz, 2003). In these
tasks, observers are free to look wherever they want, unlike
in experimental tasks that manipulate participants’ vision of
targets. Although participants reliably look to objects before
reaching, object fixations are not stereotyped. The timing of
object fixations varies considerably and gaze often leaves
the target object before the hand arrives (Hayhoe et al.,
2003; Land et al., 1999; Pelz, Hayhoe, & Loeber, 2001).
Moreover, object fixations are not obligatory. Hayhoe and
colleagues (2003) found that 13% of reaches were not
accompanied by object fixations. In these cases, actors

Keywords: reaching; visual guidance; eye tracking; natural
vision; motor development

Introduction
Infants’ learning is rooted in more than passive observation
of objects in the world. Infants actively engage with objects,
and, as such, object engagement depends on infants’
developing action systems. Indeed, motor development and
cognitive development are closely linked in development
(Iverson, 2010; Ruff & Rothbart, 1996). For example,
learning to reach allows infants to acquire objects and
explore them manually, and visual-manual exploration
facilitates learning about object properties (Soska, Adolph,
& Johnson, 2010). However, reaching depends on learning
how to acquire visual information for guiding action—
selecting where to look to support the task at hand from
many potential gaze targets in the environment.
Visual information is critical for planning and guiding
manual actions. In laboratory experiments with adults,
reducing or removing access to visual information reliably
degrades performance (Ma-Wyatt & McKee, 2006; Schlicht
& Schrater, 2007; Sivak & MacKenzie, 1990). But in real
life, visual information is not manipulated; it is actively
selected. Observers choose where to direct gaze from
moment to moment from a variety of targets that compete
for attention. Eye movements may be recruited to gather
information relevant to guiding action, but may also be used
to observe events or interact with social partners. How do
observers coordinate gaze when controlling manual actions
in a real world task? In addition, how does visual guidance

728

might have relied on peripheral vision to guide the hand.
But was reaching performance hindered when gaze was not
aligned to the target? Because reaching kinematics were not
measured, it is unknown whether aligning the eyes to the
target related to reaching performance.

performance identified in laboratory tasks might generalize
to natural reaching. Although studies of natural manual
activity found that observers tend to fixate objects (Hayhoe
et al., 2003; Land et al., 1999), the role of object fixations is
unclear because reaching performance was not assessed.
Moreover, eye alignment was scored as a binary measure in
prior naturalistic studies (e.g., did observers fixate the object
or not) as opposed to a continuous measure as in
experimental work (e.g., target eccentricity).
Thus, in the current study we addressed these limitations
by correlating continuous measures of eye alignment and
reaching performance during natural manual activity.
Participants wore head-mounted eye trackers and motion
trackers while manipulating objects on a table. We
developed a novel procedure to segment reaching events
from natural activity, providing a way to assess the eye
alignment and reaching kinematics of each individual reach.
In addition, we used computer vision algorithms to
automatically detect objects and calculate the alignment of
the eyes to the target object during each reaching event.
If eye alignment is related to reaching performance, we
would expect participants to coordinate eye alignment with
respect to reaching kinematics. We chose to focus on one
particular aspect of reaching kinematics: the speed of the
hand while reaching. Participants might look near the target
when reaching rapidly, but when targets are viewed at
greater eccentricities participants might reach more slowly.
The second goal of the current study was to compare how
visually-guided reaching differs between children and
adults. Naturalistic studies show that infants and adults
reliably fixate objects while reaching, however, prior
experimental work indicates that children might benefit
from visual feedback only after 15 months. Thus, we tested
18- to 24-month-olds, an age group that should benefit from
visual feedback, to determine how well experimental
findings generalize to children’s natural reaching.

Development of visually-guided reaching
The role of vision in guiding reaching changes over
development. When reaching first emerges around 4 months
of age, infants’ reaches are inefficient: The hand speeds up
and slows down multiple times as it takes a circuitous route
to the target (von Hofsten, 1991). Historically, researchers
believed that infants’ jerky reaches resulted from overcorrecting the hand’s trajectory based on visual feedback,
but later studies showed that reaching in infancy, unlike in
adulthood, does not benefit from visual feedback about the
hand relative to the target. Infants reach to targets with or
without sight of the hand (manipulated by presenting a
glowing target in a dark room) at the same age (Clifton,
Muir, Ashmead, & Clarkson, 1993), and reaching
kinematics are similar in conditions that permit or deny
visual feedback (Babinsky, Braddick, & Atkinson, 2012b;
Clifton, Rochat, Robin, & Berthier, 1994). Visual feedback
begins to facilitate reaching around 15 months (Carrico &
Berthier, 2008)—reaches in the dark are less straight and
take longer to complete compared to reaches in the light.
Like adults (Babinsky et al., 2012b; Connolly & Goodale,
1999), children reach more slowly without visual feedback
(Babinsky, Braddick, & Atkinson, 2012a).
Do infants and children align gaze to objects to guide
reaching in natural tasks? Natural reaching depends on
coordinating movements of the whole body—the hands,
eyes, and head need to be controlled within a stable base of
postural support (Bertenthal & von Hofsten, 1998). Only
recently has technology become available to measure
infants’ and children’s eye movements during natural
activity when the body is free to move; thus, little data are
available on the development of visual guidance of natural
manual activity. Prior work demonstrated that in a
naturalistic play session, 14-month-old infants, like adults,
reliably align gaze to objects while reaching (Franchak,
Kretch, Soska, & Adolph, 2011). But laboratory studies
suggest that visual feedback would not affect reaching
kinematics at 14 months (Babinsky et al., 2012b). However,
as in naturalistic studies of adult reaching, kinematics were
not measured; thus, it is unknown whether aligning gaze to
targets was related to infants’ reaching performance.
Infants (as well as adults) may choose to look at objects
for reasons other than guiding actions. Observers may look
to objects to visually explore an object’s properties (Soska et
al., 2010), to engage in joint attention with a social partner
(Yu & Smith, 2013), or simply because objects are
interesting or salient. Comparing how reaching performance
varies according to eye alignment would provide evidence
about how vision and action are coordinated in children.

Method
Participants
Twelve parent-child dyads participated in the study.
Children were 18 to 24 months old (M = 20.8). Six children
were female and 6 were male. Data were culled from a
larger study that investigated parent-child interactions
during object play, using the same procedure as in prior
work (Yu & Smith, 2013). Dyads were selected if both the
child and the parent provided accurate eye tracking and
motion tracking data for the duration of the session to avoid
data quality as a potential confound between ages. One dyad
was excluded because the child did not reach for toys.

Apparatus
Participants sat on opposite sides of a small, white table;
children sat in a high chair and parents sat on the floor.
During each trial, three brightly colored objects (Figure 1)
were placed on the table. Objects were approximately 290
cm3 in size and could be grasped uni-manually by children.
Participants were dressed in white clothing and the room
was ringed with white curtains to facilitate computer vision

Current study
The current study has two main goals. The first goal is to
test how the link between eye alignment and reaching

729

Field of view camera

Point of gaze

Infrared eye camera
Eye alignment to
target object

Figure 1: Child wearing head-mounted eye tracker (left). Miniature cameras record videos of the observer’s eye and field of
view (center) that are used to calculate the point of gaze (red circle). Computer vision algorithms automatically segment the
colored objects from the white background (yellow outlines). In this example, the child is about to reach to the blue object.
Eye alignment was defined as the distance between the center of the target object and the point of gaze (red line).
segmentation of the colored objects from the white
background. Two third-person cameras recorded views of
both participants and the table surface for later coding.
Each participant wore a head-mounted eye tracker
(Franchak et al., 2011). As seen in Figure 1, each eye tracker
consisted of two miniature cameras: An eye camera pointed
in towards the face and recorded movements of the
observer’s eye, and a scene camera (100° diagonal field of
view) pointed out and recorded the observer’s egocentric,
head-centered field of view. Participants fixated known
locations in order to calibrate the eye tracker; Yarbus
software (Positive Science) generated eye movement time
series indicating the point of gaze within the observer’s
egocentric field of view (red circle in Figure 1). Eye
Segmenting a reach
using motion data

500

Velocity (mm/s)

Distance (mm)

After the participants were fitted with recording equipment
and completed the eye tracking calibration, parents were
instructed to engage their children with the three provided
objects in a manner of their choosing. No particular
instructions were given about how parents should interact—
the goal was to encourage a natural, free-flowing play
session in which parents and children reached for and
manipulated objects in the context of play. Depending on
children’s compliance, each experimental session lasted
between 2 and 8 minutes. Object sets were replaced every 2
minutes to ensure children’s continued interest.

Reach velocity

100
75
50
25
0

400
300
200
100
0

Change in distance-to-contact

Eye alignment (%FOV)

Eye alignment to target

0

d(distance)/dt

Procedure

Kinematic and visual
measures during a reach

Distance to hand contact

-2
-4
-6
-1.5

movements were recorded at 30 Hz (smoothed over two
successive samples) with a spatial accuracy of ~3° (for more
details, see Franchak et al., 2011).
In addition, participants wore magnetic motion sensors on
the wrists of each hand. Each motion sensor tracked hand
position with 6 degrees of freedom (Polhemus Liberty).
Motion tracking data were recorded at 60 Hz and were
synchronized with eye tracking data and third person videos.
A second-order low-pass Butterworth filter with a 12 Hz
cutoff frequency was applied to smooth motion tracking
data as in previous research (Babinsky et al., 2012b).

-1

-.5

Time to hand contact (s)

0

Data analysis

40

In experimental studies of reaching, a common practice is to
define reach onset when hand velocity exceeds a threshold
value (e.g., Babinsky et al., 2012b). However, in natural
action hands can move at high velocities for a variety of
reasons (e.g., gesturing). Because there were no clearly
defined reaching trials, analyzing eye-hand coordination
required a method for segmenting reaching events from
other manual behaviors. Our solution was to start by finding
the end of a reaching event (contact with an object) and
work backwards to determine when the reach began.
Coders used custom software to view third-person videos
frame-by-frame and determined each time that a participant
touched an object. We defined the time of reach offset based
on the frame in which the hand made contact with an object
(time 0 in Figure 2). The coder noted which hand made

30
20
10
0

min. eye
alignment
-1.5

-1

-.5

Time to hand contact (s)

0

Figure 2: Example of a single reaching event over the 1.5
s before hand contact (0 on the x-axis). Left column
shows segmentation based on distance-to-contact time
series (top) and its derivative (bottom). Red arrow shows
the resulting reach onset. Right column shows raw data
for calculating reach velocity (top) and eye alignment
(bottom) for the reaching period (shaded region). Black
arrow shows minimum eye alignment during the reach.
730

500

12

Min. eye alignment (% FOV)

Average reach velocity (mm/s)

contact (right or left) and which object was contacted (red,
green, or blue). To avoid counting accidental object touches
as reaches, we excluded hand contacts less than .5 s.
Next, we extracted a time series of the hand’s distance-tocontact (relative to the hand’s position at reach offset) in the
1.5 s before reach offset using positional data from the
motion tracker in three dimensions (Figure 2, top-left). We
defined reaching as the period over which the hand’s
distance-to-contact decreased monotonically. The first
derivative of the distance-to-contact time series (Figure 2,
bottom-left) indicates change in the hand’s position relative
to its position at reach offset. When the derivative is
negative, the hand’s distance to contact is decreasing. We
found the last zero-crossing of the distance-to-contact
derivative time series and defined this time as reach onset
(red arrow in Figure 2). Thus, we segmented reaching from
the stream of natural activity based on a simple heuristic—
the period during which the hand decreased in distance to its
position at object contact.
For each reaching event we calculated two dependent
measures that assessed eye-hand coordination: Average
reach velocity and eye alignment to the target object.
Average reach velocity was calculated by averaging
instantaneous hand velocity at each time sample during the
reach (Figure 2, top-right). Peak reaching velocity was also
calculated but omitted from this report for the sake of
brevity; the direction and significance of all reported results
were the same for average and peak reaching velocity.
In order to calculate the eye’s alignment to the target of
the reach, we automatically detected the target object in the
field of view video using a series of computer vision
algorithms as described in prior work (Yu, Smith, Shen,
Pereira, & Smith, 2009). Figure 1 illustrates the colored
objects segmented from the background in the child’s view.
Next, we calculated the Euclidean distance between the
point of gaze (red circle in Figure 1) and the geometric
center of the target object. We defined this distance as eye
alignment (red line in Figure 1). Eye alignment was
expressed as a proportion of the diagonal of the field of
view video and calculated for the entire duration of the
reach (Figure 2, bottom-right).
Because actors do not typically keep their eyes fixed on a
target for the entire duration of a reach and often look away
before hand contact (Hayhoe et al., 2003; Land et al., 1999),
we analyzed the minimum eye alignment value over the
course of reaching. Smaller eye alignment minima mean
that participants looked close to the target object at some
point while reaching. Larger eye alignment minima indicate
that participants never directed gaze near the target object.
Figure 2 shows data from one reach. In this example, gaze
became increasingly aligned to the object leading up to the
moment of contact, resulting in a minimum eye alignment
value of 7%. Note, eye alignment minima were rarely 0
because alignment was measured to the center of the target
object, not the object boundary. We acknowledge that our
eye alignment measure is not a perfect measure of viewing
eccentricity due to camera parallax and lens distortion.
However, it is a reasonable approximation to use in
naturalistic situations where the head and eyes are free to
move.

10

*

400
300
200
100
0

8
6
4
2
0

Children

Adults

Children

Adults

Figure 3: Average reach velocity and minimum eye
alignment to the target object for children and adults.

Results
Overall, the dataset consisted of 316 reaching events (152
from children and 164 from adults). Figure 3 shows average
reaching velocity and eye alignment to the object for
children and adults. On average, adults (M = 350.9 mm/s,
SD = 182.2) reached faster than children (M = 215.3 mm/s,
SD = 80.9; t(20) = -2.26, p = .035). We found no significant
difference in eye alignment between adults (M = 7.95%, SD
= 2.73) and children (M = 8.99%, SD = 2.73; t(20) = .893, p
= .383). As seen in Figure 4, both average reaching velocity
and minimum eye alignment had wide ranges for both
children and adults, and the ranges of each variable
overlapped substantially between age groups. In other
words, natural reaching in children and adults varied greatly
in terms of reaching speed as well as viewing eccentricity
when looking to the target object.
Next, we asked whether reaching speed and alignment
were related in natural reaching for children and adults. We
used linear generalized estimating equations (GEE) to
model whether eye alignment predicted averaging reaching
speed. As in a linear regression, GEE models can estimate
how a predictor accounts for change in a dependent
measure. Moreover, GEEs can estimate the overall group
model based on each individual contributing a variable
number of data points.
In our first model, we asked whether age group and
reaching speed could predict eye alignment while reaching
(choosing to predict reaching speed from eye alignment was
arbitrary—the results hold if predicting eye alignment from
reaching speed). We found no overall effect of age group
(Wald’s χ2 = 2.02, p = .155), as was expected based on the
overall similarity in eye alignment between age groups.
However, we found a significant effect of reaching speed
(Wald’s χ2 = 7.34, p = .007) and a significant age group by
reaching speed interaction (Wald’s χ2 = 5.25, p = .022).
To explore the interaction between age group and
reaching speed, we asked if a link between reaching speed
and eye alignment could be found in each age group
separately. Thus, we calculated two GEE models—one for
children and one for adults—that tested whether reaching
speed predicted eye alignment. The scatterplots in Figure 4
show the relation between reaching speed and eye alignment

731

Min. eye alignment (% FOV)

Min. eye alignment (% FOV)

Children

50
40
30
20
10
0
0

200

400

600

Adults

50
40
30
20
10
0
0

Average reach velocity (mm/s)

200

400

600

Average reach velocity (mm/s)

Figure 4: Relation between average reach velocity and minimum eye alignment to the target object. Each circle represents
one reaching event. Solid black lines show GEE model predictions from each age group.
for each age group, plotting prediction lines from each
model (solid black lines).
For children, we did not find a significant relation
between reaching speed and eye alignment, B = -0.001
(Wald’s χ2 = .127, p = .721). In contrast, the adult model did
find a significant link between reaching speed and eye
alignment, B = -0.016 (Wald’s χ2 = 9.491, p = .002),
suggesting that adults drove the main effect of reaching
speed in the overall model. Adults reached more slowly
when their eyes were not aligned to the target. Because of
concern that extreme eye alignment values in adults might
be responsible for the effects, we recalculated all three
models excluding reaches where minimum eye alignment
was greater than 30% of the field of view. However, the
significance and direction of all results hold when those
reaches were excluded.

adjusted reaching speed to match the quality of visual
information during the reach, as in the laboratory studies.
However, participants might have collected visual
information depending on the requirements of the action
they planned to perform (i.e., choosing to fixate the target
when planning to reach rapidly). These possibilities are not
mutually exclusive. In everyday life, adults must coordinate
eye and hand movements to optimize multiple trade-offs in
a complex landscape of tasks.
Although reaching speed and eye alignment were linked
in adults, we found no such relation in 18- to 24-month-old
children. One possibility is that children’s use of visual
feedback is still weak at the end of the second year. Indeed,
although some studies find evidence that visual feedback
facilitates reaching performance at 15 months (Carrico &
Berthier, 2008), others failed to find an effect at 16 months
(Babinsky et al., 2012b). Although an extreme manipulation
of visual feedback may hinder infants’ reaching (e.g.,
removing all visual cues about the hand relative tot he
object), it is possible that a more subtle change in visual
information (e.g., viewing the target in the periphery) might
not be enough to significantly affect reaching at this age.
It is important to note, however, that the coordination
between adults’ reaching speed and eye alignment observed
in the current study was fairly weak. Although the two
variables were related, adults (and children) often executed
slow reaches while looking closely to the target. In other
words, participants might have collected better visual
information than was necessary. Given the characteristics of
the task—playing with brightly colored objects on a table—
it should come as no surprise that participants (especially
children) frequently attended to the objects. Indeed, other
investigations of children’s eye movements in object play
show that children frequently attend to objects even at the
expense of looking at other relevant stimuli, like faces
(Franchak et al., 2011; Yu & Smith, 2013). Thus, the fact
that we did not observe children coordinating reaching
speed with visual information should not be taken as
negative evidence: Children might have looked at objects
even when it was not necessary. Indeed, the brightly colored

Discussion
In summary, we tested whether children and adults
coordinate eye alignment and reaching speed during natural
reaching. Using a novel method for segmenting reaching
events, we analyzed reaching in a naturalistic context—a
child and parent playing with toys. Computer vision
algorithms automatically detected the toys in each
observers’ egocentric view, and head-mounted eye tracking
data were used to calculate how closely participants’ aligned
gaze to the target of their reach. Adults reached more slowly
when they did not align gaze close to the target object. In
contrast, we found no link between eye alignment and
reaching speed for children.
These findings suggest that the effects of vision on
reaching performance observed in laboratory tasks (MaWyatt & McKee, 2006; Schlicht & Schrater, 2007; Sivak &
MacKenzie, 1990) do generalize to more natural tasks. In
those studies, experimental manipulation of target viewing
affected reaching performance. In the current study, we
found a correlation between reaching speed and eye
alignment, both of which were selected by the participant.
We make no claim about the causal direction between
reaching speed and eye alignment. Possibly, participants

732

toys on the white background, needed for the computer
vision algorithms, may have been particularly salient. In
future work, employing a task that draws attention away
from action targets (Franchak & Adolph, 2010) or varying
task difficulty would provide a stronger test.
The current study employed a new method for segmenting
reaches. Typical laboratory studies control many aspects of
the task, such as target size, target distance, starting position
of the hand, and time allowed to complete the reach. How
comparable was reaching in natural activity to reaching
observed in the laboratory? Although we observed a wide
range of reaching speeds (Figure 4), on average, reaching
velocity in natural activity fell within the range of values
reported in laboratory studies (for an overview of the
literature, see Table 3 in Berthier & Keen, 2006).

reaching. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 20, 876-886.
Connolly, J. D., & Goodale, M. A. (1999). The role of visual
feedback of hand position in the control of manual
prehension. Experimental Brain Research, 125, 281-286.
Franchak, J. M., & Adolph, K. E. (2010). Visually guided
navigation: Head-mounted eye-tracking of natural
locomotion in children and adults. Vision Research, 50,
2766-2774.
Franchak, J. M., Kretch, K. S., Soska, K. C., & Adolph, K.
E. (2011). Head-mounted eye tracking: A new method to
describe infant looking. Child Development, 82,
1738-1750.
Hayhoe, M. M., Shrivastava, A., Mruczek, R. E. B., & Pelz,
J. B. (2003). Visual memory and motor planning in a
natural task. Journal of Vision, 3, 49-63.
Iverson, J. M. (2010). Developing language in a developing
body: The relationship between motor development and
language. Journal of Child Language, 37, 229-261.
Land, M. F., Mennie, N., & Rusted, J. (1999). The roles of
vision and eye movements in the control of activities of
daily living. Perception, 28, 1311-1328.
Levi, D. M., & Klein, S. A. (1996). Limitations on position
coding imposed by undersampling and univariance. Vision
Research, 36, 2111-2120.
Ma-Wyatt, A., & McKee, S. P. (2006). Initial visual
information determines endpoint precision for rapid
pointing. Vision Research, 46, 4675-4683.
Pelz, J. B., Hayhoe, M. M., & Loeber, R. (2001). The
coordination of eye, head, and hand movements in a
natural task. Experimental Brain Research, 139, 266-277.
Ruff, H. A., & Rothbart, M. K. (1996). Attention in early
development: Themes and variations. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Saunders, J. A., & Knill, D. C. (2004). Visual feedback
control of hand movements. The Journal of Neuroscience,
24, 3223-3234.
Schlicht, E. J., & Schrater, P. R. (2007). Effects of visual
uncertainty on grasping movements. Experimental Brain
Research, 182, 47-57.
Sivak, B., & MacKenzie, C. L. (1990). Integration of visual
information and motor output in reaching and grasping:
The contributions of peripheral and central vision.
Neuropsychologia, 28, 1095-1116.
Soska, K. C., Adolph, K. E., & Johnson, S. P. (2010).
Systems in development: Motor skill acquisition facilitates
three-dimensional object completion. Developmental
Psychology, 46, 129-138.
von Hofsten, C. (1991). Structuring of early reaching
movements: A longitudinal study. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 23, 280-292.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2013). Joint attention without gaze
following: Human infants and their parents coordinate
visual attention to objects through eye-hand coordination.
PLoS ONE, 8.
Yu, C., Smith, L. B., Shen, H., Pereira, A. F., & Smith, T. G.
(2009). Active information selection: Visual attention
through the hands. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous
Mental Development, 2, 141-151.

Conclusion
Perceptual-motor development is more than simply learning
how to use visual information to guide actions. Infants need
to learn how to distribute limited visual resources to meet
task demands. Many types of tasks—motor, perceptual,
cognitive, and social—compete for visual attention. Adults
are sensitive to visual-motor trade-offs and distribute eye
gaze efficiently. In future work, investigating how children
learn to select where to look in natural tasks will help us
better understand the constraints on learning across all
domains of development.

Acknowledgments
We thank Erin Babinsky for sharing code for motion
tracking analyses. This work was supported in part by the
NIH (R01 HD074601), the NSF (IIS-1253549), and the
Indiana University Office of the Vice President for Research
through an IU Collaborative Research Grant. JMF was
supported by NICHD Training Grant 5T32HD7475-17.

References
Babinsky, E., Braddick, O., & Atkinson, J. (2012a). The
effect of removing visual information on reach control in
young children. Experimental Brain Research, 222,
291-302.
Babinsky, E., Braddick, O., & Atkinson, J. (2012b). Infants
and adults reaching in the dark. Experimental Brain
Research, 217, 237-249.
Bertenthal, B. I., & von Hofsten, C. (1998). Eye, head and
trunk control: The foundation for manual development.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review, 22, 515-520.
Berthier, N. E., & Keen, R. E. (2006). Development of
reaching in infancy. Experimental Brain Research, 169,
507-518.
Carrico, R. L., & Berthier, N. E. (2008). Vision and
precision reaching in 15-month-old infants. Infant
Behavior and Development, 31, 62-70.
Clifton, R. K., Muir, D. W., Ashmead, D. H., & Clarkson,
M. G. (1993). Is visually guided reaching in early infancy
a myth? Child Development, 64, 1099-1110.
Clifton, R. K., Rochat, P., Robin, D. J., & Berthier, N. E.
(1994). Multimodal perception in the control of infant

733

