We Readily Anchor Upon Others, But it is Easier to Anchor on the Self
Daniel F.X. Willard (dwillard@utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, 198 E. Dean Keeton St.
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Arthur B. Markman (markman@utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, 198 E. Dean Keeton St.
Austin, TX 78712 USA
Abstract

adjusting away (Tamir & Mitchell, 2013). While this is a
promising step forward in understanding social inferences, it
is unclear if anchoring and adjustment can only be done for
similar others, and whether stress affects these judgments.
This paper aims to investigate anchoring upon those other
than ourselves, and how cognitive load affects the process’
engagement.

Research on social inferences demonstrates that when
thinking about minds similar to our own, we anchor and
adjust away from ourselves (Tamir & Mitchell, 2013).
However, research on relational self theory (Andersen &
Chen, 2002) suggests the possibility of using knowledge
about others as an anchor when they are more similar to a
target than ourselves. We investigated whether social
inferences are made on the basis of significant other
knowledge through an anchor and adjustment process, and
whether this ability would be reduced under load. Participants
answered questions about their likes and habits, as well as the
likes and habits of a significant other, a target similar to their
significant other, and a yoked control. We found that
differences between the significant other and similar target
were related to participants’ reaction time, and found the
opposite effect for self and target differences, suggesting
anchoring and adjustment from the significant other rather
than the self. However, inferences about the others tended to
be more similar to the self under load, suggesting that the self
serves as the primary source of information about others.

Anchoring and Adjustment

Keywords: anchoring and adjustment, social cognition, self,
mentalizing, cognitive resources

Introduction
Successful navigation of the human social arena
requires keeping in mind more than one’s own thoughts,
desires, and habits. While we possess a reliable reference
about what other minds are like (i.e. our own mind), it is not
generally advisable to assume the whole of humanity is
viewed through our single lens. And it seems that, in
general, we don’t. We finish close friends sentences, avoid
touchy subjects with friends who don’t share the same
political or religious beliefs as us, and we purchase gifts for
our loved ones that (hopefully) they are fond of. While
under normal circumstances these tasks are accomplished
with relative ease, there are times of stress when it feels
much harder to care about, indeed, to even consider, the
properties of other minds. Making inferences about others’
preferences is something that comes with time. The better
we get to know someone, the quicker we are to come to a
conclusion about what they are thinking and feeling.
The cognitive instantiation of social inference is not
entirely understood, but advancements are shedding more
light on the phenomena. Recent research suggests that social
inferences about people similar to ourselves are achieved
through the process of anchoring on ourselves and serially

When creating mental estimates of an unknown quantity,
people have been shown to use readily available sources of
information (anchors) and serially adjust away. Thus, these
estimates will tend to assimilate closer to the anchor value,
as adjustment ends once a satisfactory estimate has been
found (Epley and Gilovich, 2006). Since Tversky and
Kahneman’s (1974) introduction of the phenomena,
research has demonstrated that this tendency emerges in
diverse domains like monetary appraisal (Northcraft &
Neale, 1987), probability estimates (Einhorn & Hogarth,
1985), and mock legal verdicts (Chapman & Bornstein,
1996).
While some procedures involve providing a source anchor
to participants, other procedures allow participants to selfgenerate anchor values themselves. Related research on
egocentric bias has found that people routinely assume that
their beliefs about the state of the world are more common
to others than they truly are (Allport, 1924; Kruger, 1999;
Epley et al., 2004). Tamir and Mitchell (2013) recently
consolidated these findings by demonstrating in a series of
studies that social inferences about the mental states of
others appear to unfold via the process of anchoring upon
the self, and adjusting away serially. Participants were asked
questions about their own likes, habits, and attitudes, using a
scale ranging from “very unlikely” to be applicable to
themselves, to “very likely” to be applicable to them. They
found that when making inferences about a novel,
ostensibly unknown person, the response differences
between participants and the strangers shared a positive
linear relationship with the amount of time it took
participants to respond, implicating serial adjustment from a
self-knowledge anchor. Importantly, however, this effect
was only true for stranger profiles that were described to
participants as being similar in many ways to themselves.
Profiles described as dissimilar to participants shared no
linear relationship between reaction time and response
differences. This finding demonstrates that similarity

2661

between the self and other provides a boundary to
egocentricity, but it remains unclear how judgments about
dissimilar others unfold. The authors suggest a number of
possibilities including stereotype heuristics, rejection of
self-knowledge validity, and use of self-as-anchor without
adjustment. While these are all plausible explanations for
the differences between similar and dissimilar other
judgments, herein we explore the idea that people may,
under certain circumstances, anchor upon knowledge about
well known, significant others (SO’s).

Chronic Access to Significant Other Information
While the concept of self-knowledge being the primary, or
at least most easily accessible set of mental information is
likely not controversial, conceptualizing immediate access
to information about others is not quite as obvious. In recent
decades, however, social cognitive research has provided
evidence that understanding the conceptual self requires the
acknowledgement that it is fundamentally interpersonal
(Aron et al., 1991; Baldwin, 1992). Indeed, research on the
relational self theory (Andersen & Chen, 2002) suggests
that people readily access information about SO’s in their
lives even without conscious knowledge of having done so.
The theory states that the concept of the self is
fundamentally relational in the sense that it is connected to
other people in our lives. Information about SO’s in our
lives is intrinsically linked with our own knowledge, and
activation of these relationships serves to guide
interpersonal encounters. Critically, this knowledge is used
extensively in the process of transference, where past
assumptions and experiences with SO’s guide our behavior
and expectations when engaging with new people. For
example, when meeting someone new, transient cues
(contextual features of the person/current environment)
activate the chronically accessible information about similar
SO’s (Chen et al., 1999). This information is then used as a
guide for how to engage with the new person, as
information about the relevant SO can be used in the interim
period of actually learning about the person’s idiosyncratic
traits. This has been demonstrated in various domains like
creating false memories about new people (Andersen,
Glassman & Chen, 1995), subliminally changing self-worth
based on SO relationships (Horberg & Chen, 2010), and
activating a specific relational view of the self when
engaging with the SO (Andersen & Chen, 2002).

The Present Research
The present research is intended to consolidate and extend
research on social inferences about others in two domains;
namely, to explore whether the ability to anchor and adjust
from a social knowledge model applies exclusively to the
self for similar others, and to understand the effect of
cognitive load upon applying these models.
Research on anchoring in social inferences indicates that
self-knowledge is both readily accessible and a useful

source of information in guiding inferences about people we
meet when they bear some resemblance to ourselves,
allowing us to adjust away based on contextual or perceived
idiosyncrasies. However, evidence from relational self
theory suggests that social inferences about new
acquaintances are strongly tied to the readily accessible
information we have about those important to us, SO’s.
Together, this suggests that when meeting someone that is
more similar to an SO than they are to the self, our
knowledge of the SO serves as a better basis to anchor and
adjust from. However, despite the ease with which this
information is accessed under normal conditions, inhibiting
self-knowledge in favor of SO knowledge may be mentally
taxing, and adjustment from the SO may be incomplete or
impossible altogether under conditions of cognitive load.
We asked participants to describe someone in their life
that is significant to them, and to answer questions about
their own preferences as well as the preferences of their
significant others. In a follow-up session, we introduced
participants to two novel profiles, one of which was
designed using the descriptions of participants’ own SO’s,
and one that was a yoked control. Participants answered the
same questions about the preferences of the similar target
and the yoke under conditions of cognitive load and no
cognitive load.
If perceivers are able to anchor and adjust from a SO
anchor, we expected to see the same positive linear
relationship between SO and novel social target judgment
differences and reaction times as observed in Tamir &
Mitchell (2013) only when participants judged others that
are similar to SO’s. No such relationship for self-other
differences was predicted. However, when compared to
yoked control profiles, we expected a linear relationship for
self-yoke differences with reaction times. As we suspected
that the implementation of SO knowledge as anchors is
effortful, we predicted that under cognitive load participants
would resort to the self as the primary source of information
when making social inferences. This effect was expected to
be particularly pronounced in the yoked controls, as the
profiles were not expected to be as similar to participant
selves or SO’s.

Method
Participants
Forty-eight students at the University of Texas at Austin
completed the experiment for course credit. Informed
consent was obtained in accordance with procedures
approved by the UT Austin Human Subjects and
Institutional Review Board.

Procedure
Day One.
In the first part of the study, participants
were given informed consent and told they were completing
a study on personality similarities in social networks. First,
participants completed a brief version of the feature listing

2662

procedure used in Andersen, Glassman & Chen (1995).
Participants were asked to describe a significant other,
defined as someone known very well, for a long time, who
has had a major impact on the person’s life, and is evaluated
positively on the whole. Thus, a significant other could be a
parent, friend, romantic partner, etc. Participants were asked
to provide 14 descriptive statements about their significant
other, 7 positive and 7 negative, that were relatively unique
to them (e.g. “always puts others first,” or “can be
overprotective”) and numerically rank them from “most
descriptive” to “least descriptive”. After completing the
descriptions, participants were asked to check off at least 12
traits from a list of 95 traits such as “sentimental” and
“disciplined.”
Once participants completed the description materials,
they were seated in front of computers to complete what
they were told was a personality questionnaire for both
themselves and the significant other they had described. The
task used is a variant of that used in Tamir & Mitchell
(2013). In the “self” part of the task, participants answered
80 questions about their own personal attitudes and habits.
On each trial, participants were shown a statement (e.g.
“fears speaking in public,” “supports affirmative action”)
and instructed to provide a numerical response as to how
applicable that statement is to them using the keyboard.
Reponses could be made using the 1-9 keys, where
extremely low values were labeled as “extremely unlikely”
and extremely high values were labeled as “extremely
likely.” Participants had 10 seconds to respond on each trial.
In the “other” part of the task, participants completed the
same exact set of questions, this time answering for their
significant others.
Once participants completed this task, they were given
credit and told that a graduate student in the lab was having
a difficult time recruiting subjects for a similar project, and
asked if they would be willing to come back in to complete
the other study for credit. If they agreed, participants were
scheduled to come back to the lab at least one week later
from the original study date. The second study was actually
a follow-up to the original, in which they would be asked to
make inferences about profiles constructed from materials
gathered on Day One. 1
Day Two.
Upon returning to the lab, participants
were told they were completing a study about how people
make personality inferences about others based on little
information. Participants were seated in front of computers
to complete a variant of the personality task they had
1
The 48 participants run on both Day One and Two protocols
were a minority subset of 125 participants run on Day One. After
being asked to participate in the follow-up portion of the study,
most participants stated that they had already completed all of their
course credits for experiments, based on the time of testing late in
the semester. Although many volunteered to help despite having
credit, IRB guidelines did not allow running participants without
providing experimental credit. Though this artificial selection of
participants may impact results, it is difficult to infer a systematic
impact aside from, perhaps, high engagement with the experiment
amongst those who continued into Day Two.

completed in their last session, but for two different people.
In each of the two blocks, participants first read fake online
profiles and then answered the same 80 questions about
their likes, dislikes, and habits. Unbeknownst to the
participants, one of these profiles was created using the
descriptive traits and statements they had provided about
their significant other in their first session (heretofore called
the “target” profile).2 Participants also completed the
questions for a yoked profile constructed for a different
participant’s significant other, thus there was no relationship
between participants and the yoked profile. Only one
participant surmised the origin of the profiles, and was
subsequently excluded from analysis.
In addition to answering the questions about others, on
half of the trials participants were given a manipulation
designed to induce cognitive load, previously used in Otto et
al. (2013). Before each statement about the target on a load
trial, two single-digit numbers appeared for two seconds in
the top left and top right corners of the screen. The numbers,
from 0 to 9, varied along three dimensions: brightness, size,
and value. These numbers would disappear, participants
would be given 10 seconds to answer the statement about
the respective profile, and finally they were asked which of
the two previously seen numbers were of either greater
brightness, size, or value. Participants were given 3 seconds
to respond to this question, and were given feedback as to
whether their response was correct or incorrect. “No load”
trials appeared exactly as those in the Day One task. Upon
completing the task, participants were debriefed and given
credit.

Analysis
Using responses from each of the statement trials, we
created a measure of similarity for participants between
each person asked about (self, SO, target, and yoke),
creating item-by-item discrepancy scores. As adjustment
from an anchor is a serial process, we used absolute value
differences, since the direction of the adjustment should not
affect reaction time.
We tested only trials where the absolute difference
between the self and SO were greater than 2 so that we
could observe adjustment without items where strong
similarities existed between the self and the SO. As
responses between the two were frequently similar, this
dropped the number of trials tested from a total of 3,827 to a
total of 1,310. If participants anchored on their SOs during
the target profile questions, we would expect a positive
relationship between judgment difference and reaction time
for the SO and the target, but not for the self and the target.
The condition of cognitive load was predicted to make

2

Participants were told that target profiles were created from
descriptive information taken from online social media profiles
from people named “Terry” and “Pat.” In reality, they were created
by lifting the statements ranked by participants as “most
descriptive” in feature listing procedure to fill in blanks in a profile
template. A sentence in the profiles used the participant selected
traits in a statement of how others describe the target.

2663

judgment differences between the self and the target and
yoke profiles smaller, but not for the SO.
As such, eight hierarchical linear models were tested. Four
models tested the hypothesis of anchoring and adjustment
from a significant other, and four models tested the
hypothesis that cognitive load reduces differences between
the self and the target profile.
The dependent variables in the models testing the first
hypothesis were judgment differences between the 1. Self
and target profile, 2. Self and yoke profile, 3. SO and target
profile, and 4. SO and yoke profile. Logged reaction times
on the Day Two profile task for the respective profiles was
entered as a continuous predictor and load was entered as a
binary predictor variable. Each model was compared to its
respective null model for comparison.
The four models testing the effect of cognitive load used
the same dependent and independent variables, and included
an additional predictor variable of the self-SO judgment
differences. This additional predictor controlled for variance
accounted for by both self and SO in trial to trial differences
between the self and SO such that it would be clear which of
the two dependent people were being mentally anchored
upon. We predicted that the binary cognitive load variable
would predict smaller differences between the self and
target and yoke profiles, but not between the SO and target
and yoke profiles. Finally, subject number was included as a
nested variable in these models. Each of these models were
also compared to their respective null models.

Results
There were 196 trials in which participants failed to
respond to the statement trials in the given response interval.
These trials were excluded from the relevant analysis.
The hierarchical models testing the role of a well-known
significant other in anchoring and adjustment during social
inferences revealed the predicted results. First, the model
testing reaction time and load upon SO-target judgment
differences revealed a positive linear relationship between
discrepancy between the SO and the target, b = .456,
t(1,244) = 2.32, p = .02, such that as reaction times
increased, so too did differences between the SO and the
target (load non-significant, b = -.038, t(1,244) = -.348, p =
.73). Secondly, the model testing the same independent
variables against self-target judgment differences revealed a
negative relationship between reaction time and
discrepancy, b = -.428, t(1,244) = -2.05, p = .04, such that
increases in reaction time were associated with lower
differences between the self and the target (load nonsignificant, b = -.153, t(1,244) = -1.3, p = .193). Though not
predicted, this is even stronger evidence that the self was
not being anchored upon in target profile judgments. Further
support for this hypothesis is found analyzing yoked profile
differences. Similar to the self-target analysis, a negative
relationship between SO-yoke differences and reaction time
was found, b = -.683, t(1,242) = -3.48, p = .0005, (load nonsignificant, b = -.05, t(1,242) = -.412, p = .68),
demonstrating that to reduce differences between the SO

and the yoke, reaction time increased. No relationship was
found between self-yoke differences and reaction time, b =
.04, t(1,242) = .245, p = .8, but there was a negative trend of
cognitive load on self-yoke differences, b = -.224, t(1,242) =
-1.89, p = .06. Compared to a null model, however, this
model was both higher in AIC (5661.721 vs. 5663.659,
respectively) and no more explanatory (deviance = .062, p =
.803). All other models had lower AIC values and
significantly higher deviances than their respective null
models (all deviances > 4.2, p < .05).
The hierarchical models testing the effect of cognitive
load upon adjustment from self and SO anchors revealed
results consistent with the prediction that cognitive load
reduces adjustment, but only away from the self anchor. In
all four subsequent models, since differences with between
the self and the SO were entered as predictors into the
models, these differences were all highly significant, as the
correlation amongst judgments for all profiles was high (all
p’s < .0000). The model testing the effect of cognitive load
upon self-target differences revealed a negative trend of
load, b = -.177, t(1,243) = -1.83, p = .067, such that
cognitive load tended to reduce the differences between the
target and the self (reaction time non-significant, b = -.15,
t(1,243) = -.84, p = .4). This model also had a lower AIC,
but only marginally outpredicted the null model (deviance =
3.364, p = .067). The model examining the effect of load on
SO-target differences revealed no effects of either load, b =
-.12, t(1,243) = -1.31, p = .19, or reaction time, b = -.119,
t(1,243) = 1.48, p = .13. This model was also did had a
higher AIC 4965.219 vs. 4964.957) and did not predict
more variance than a null model (deviance = 1.73, p = .18).
In examining the analysis of load upon self-yoke
differences, a negative effect of load was again found, b = .25, t(1,243) = -2.45, p = .014, and a negative trend of
reaction time was found, b = -.303, t(1,243) = -1.8, p = .07.
Finally, the analysis of SO-yoke differences revealed no
effect of load, b = -.167, t(1,241) = -1.61, p = .11, but a
negative relationship between reaction time and SO-yoke
differences, b = -.653, t(1,241) = -3.87, p = .0001.
Additionally while this model had a slightly lower AIC, it
did not outpredict its null model (deviance = 2.61, p = .1).
These last two analyses are intriguing as they reveal not
only that cognitive load appears to make inferences of
others more similar to the self, but also that an anchor other
than the self or the SO appears to be taking place, despite
not having asked any questions about a significant other
similar to the yoke.

Discussion
The present study revealed that social inferences can be
made using a process of anchoring and adjustment when
targets are dissimilar from ourselves, as long as we have a
significant other knowledge base that resembles the target.
Specifically, we found a positive linear relationship between
SO-target differences and reaction time and a negative
relationship between self-target differences and reaction

2664

time. Although this self-target relationship was not
predicted, it is even stronger evidence that participants had
anchored upon their SO’s, rather than themselves. To adjust
away from an anchor takes time, and as this adjustment
takes place serially, the linear relationship between the SO
and the target is in line with this phenomena. The negative
relationship between self-target differences suggests that, in
order to make judgments about the target that are more
similar to the self, one must serially adjust away from their
SO anchor, taking time. Thus, the smaller the difference
between the self and the target, the longer the reaction time.
The inverse of this pattern was found for the yoked profiles,
in that the positive relationship existed between self and
yoke, and the negative relationship between SO and yoke.
Again, this demonstrates that the self served as a better
model for making social inferences than the SO, further
clarifying the tendency to anchor on SO’s as being specific
to the profiles designed to be similar to the SO, not someone
else’s SO.
Further, we showed initial evidence that mentalizing
about others using SO knowledge as an anchor is a
cognitively demanding process, such that when under
cognitive load, responses tended to be more similar to the
self (and not the SO) for both the target and yoke profiles.
The self is a critically important part of social cognition,
and serves as a fundamental way to understand others.
These results indicate that, in line with previous findings,
the self seems to serve as a default model to make social
inferences, as in the cognitive load conditions and yoked
profile comparisons. However, given the presence of a more
applicable social knowledge base, people seem to be
capable of using the process of anchoring and adjusting
upon their knowledge of another, so long as they are well
known to them.
Here we see an elaboration of social cognitive processes
such that several research domains are consolidated, and
expanded upon. As anchoring and adjustment from the self
in social inferences of similar others naturally proceeded
from research on similarity and basic cognition, so too does
the concept of using knowledge about well known SO’s to
inform inferences about those similar to a SO, given the
research on chronic access to SO information and the
relational self theory.
There are several ways this process could be instantiated.
The most parsimonious theory appears to us in the use of
SO knowledge as an exemplar. Previous research on
anchoring and adjustment by Mussweiler and Strack (2000)
has demonstrated that easily accessible exemplar knowledge
is regularly used to make estimates about anchor-consistent,
but not anchor-inconsistent information. Similarly, Epley et
al. (2004) found that the egocentric bias was enhanced when
under conditions resembling cognitive load. In this way, one
could think of the relational self theory as an extension of
categorization and exemplar representation into the field of
social cognition.
Further, the finding that cognitive load seems to cause
people to default back to their own preferences provides

evidence that this process is cognitively effortful, and that,
lacking resources, we default back to the most readily
available source- ourselves. This is in line with the theory of
model-based reinforcement learning and decision-making
put forth by Daw and Doya (2006). Specifically, when we
are trying to navigate an environment that is not well
known, cognitive resources are required to mentally explore
the environment to better understand it. However, a lack of
resources leads people to behave as they do in other, already
well-learned settings. Our results indicate that one might be
able to perceive novel social targets as novel environments
unto themselves, and that understanding them can be made
easier by looking for similarities with those we know well.
We assume that traits of our close friends and family must
be shared with this person who seems somewhat similar to
them. Upon employing cognitive resources for other tasks,
however, we end up resorting to the easiest model we have,
our own self knowledge. Thus, we simply assume that
others are more like ourselves and adjust for idiosyncrasies
from there, rather than using the better, more cognitively
expensive model.
While the current findings demonstrate novel features
about social cognitive functions (and shortcomings thereof),
it is important to note features of the study that leave further
questions to be addressed. First, it is unclear if people are
actually anchoring upon themselves when making yoke
inferences, or on someone else. As a result, it is unclear just
how similar a social target has to be to a SO in order to
initiate the process of SO anchoring and adjustment. It
would be useful to know if certain types of information
about others or certain amounts of information can enhance
or dampen this effect. Second, the finding that cognitive
load makes judgment differences more similar to the self is
only strongly indicated in yoke judgments, and is
marginally significant in target judgments. It is possible that
the process of adjusting away from a self anchor vs.
adjusting from a SO anchor can be traded off, resulting in
either a combination of the two, or a trial by trial
instantiation of one process or the other. Further research is
required to determine the specific impact of cognitive load
in these types of social judgments, as well as other
judgments of new preferences for our selves and others.

Acknowledgments
We thank Neal Doughty and Bethany Hamilton for their
assistance in collecting and organizing the data presented.

References
Allport, F. H. (1924). Social Psychology. Cambridge, MA:
Houghton Mifflin.
Andersen, S. M., & Chen, S. (2002). The relational self: an
interpersonal social-cognitive theory. Psychological
review, 109(4), 619.
Andersen, S. M., Glassman, N. S., Chen, S., & Cole, S. W.
(1995). Transference in social perception: The role of

2665

chronic accessibility in significant-other
representations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69(1), 41.
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., Tudor, M., & Nelson, G. (1991).
Close relationships as including other in the self.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 60(2),
241.
Baldwin, M. W. (1992). Relational schemas and the
processing of social information. Psychological
Bulletin, 112(3), 461.
Chapman, G. B., & Bornstein, B. H. (1996). The more you
ask for, the more you get: Anchoring in personal injury
verdicts. Applied cognitive psychology, 10(6), 519-540.
Chen, S., & Andersen, S. M. (1999). Relationships from the
past in the present: Significant-other representations
and transference in interpersonal life. Advances in
experimental social psychology, 31, 123-190.

tasks. Journal of personality and social psychology,
78(6), 1038.
Northcraft, G. B., & Neale, M. A. (1987). Experts,
amateurs, and real estate: An anchoring-and-adjustment
perspective on property pricing decisions.
Organizational behavior and human decision
processes, 39(1), 84-97.
Otto, A. R., Gershman, S. J., Markman, A. B., & Daw, N.
D. (2013). The curse of planning dissecting multiple
reinforcement-learning systems by taxing the central
executive. Psychological science.
Tamir, D. I., & Mitchell, J. P. (2013). Anchoring and
adjustment during social inferences. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 142(1), 151.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. science, 185(4157),
1124-1131.

Daw, N. D., & Doya, K. (2006). The computational
neurobiology of learning and reward. Current opinion
in neurobiology, 16(2), 199-204.
Daw, N. D., Niv, Y., & Dayan, P. (2005). Uncertainty-based
competition between prefrontal and dorsolateral striatal
systems for behavioral control. Nature neuroscience,
8(12), 1704-1711.
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. (1985). Ambiguity and
uncertainty in probabilistic inference. Psychological
review, 92(4), 433.
Epley, N., Keysar, B., Van Boven, L., & Gilovich, T.
(2004). Perspective taking as egocentric anchoring and
adjustment. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 87(3), 327.
Epley, N., & Gilovich, T. (2006). The anchoring-andadjustment heuristic Why the adjustments are
insufficient. Psychological science, 17(4), 311-318.
Horberg, E. J., & Chen, S. (2010). Significant others and
contingencies of self-worth: activation and
consequences of relationship-specific contingencies of
self-worth. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 98(1), 77.
Kruger, J. (1999). Lake Wobegon be gone! The" belowaverage effect" and the egocentric nature of
comparative ability judgments. Journal of personality
and social psychology, 77(2), 221.
Mussweiler, T., & Strack, F. (2000). The use of category
and exemplar knowledge in the solution of anchoring

2666

