What is the Role of Conceptual Analysis in Cognitive Science?
Liam C. Kavanagh* (lkavanag@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, UC San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA

Christopher L. Suhler* (csuhler@ucsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy, UC San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive La Jolla, CA

* Both authors contributed equally to this paper.

are those which tend to play greater roles in
mechanistic accounts of empirical results, while highlevel concepts are those that do not (for example, we
rarely, if ever, would explain some empirical result
simply by saying that it is “cognitive”).
We argue that these efforts of conceptual analysis
would benefit from greater appreciation of the
importance of such high-level concepts in supporting
association or semantic priming, as opposed to
deduction. In this associative role, they provide the
basis for making connections between related
concepts, connections that can then be explored by
empirical methods, which in turn yield more precise,
but often quite novel, concepts In combination with
well-established work in cognitive psychology on the
structure of natural concepts, this perspective
suggests that researchers should be cautious about
investing substantial time and energy in attempts to
define concepts like COGNITION.

Abstract
Cognitive scientists sometimes find themselves embroiled
in debates over the precise definitions of high-level
concepts in their fields – COGNITION, EMOTION, SENSE, and
so on. The idea behind these debates seems to be that
achieving a precise definition of these concepts will be a
boon to scientific inquiry. We argue that these efforts of
conceptual analysis would benefit from greater appreciation
of the importance of such high-level concepts in supporting
association or semantic priming, as opposed to deduction.
In this associative role, they provide the basis for making
connections between related concepts, connections that can
then be explored by empirical methods, which in turn yield
more precise, but often quite novel, concepts.
In
combination with well-established work in cognitive
psychology on the non-classical structure of natural
concepts, this perspective suggests that researchers should
be cautious about investing substantial time and energy in
attempts to precisely define concepts like COGNITION.

Keywords: concepts & categories; philosophical
issues; philosophy of science

The Allure of Precise Definitions

Introduction and Background

There is something about precise conceptual
definitions – definitions which lay out the
characteristics that all members of a category must
have – that continues to attract our curiosity. This is
despite the fact that introductory cognitive
psychology texts have for several decades stated
plainly that natural concepts almost never take such a
form. Persistent targets of definition-seeking include
concepts such as COGNITION (e.g. Adams & Garrison,
2013), EMOTION (e.g. Mulligan & Scherer, 2012), and
SENSE (Keeley, 2002).
We believe that there are two major assumptions,
often tacit, which together explain the continuing pull
of precise conceptual definitions.
The first
assumption is that precise definitions are out there
waiting to be found, if only we look (and think and
argue) hard enough – or at least that there’s a good
enough chance that such definitions are out there to
make the pursuit worthwhile. The second assumption
is that obtaining such precise definitions will be a
boon to scientific inquiry and understanding . Both
of these assumptions, we will argue, turn out to be
dubious. This, in turn, casts doubt on whether
rigorously delineating the set of referents of terms
such as COGNITION is a good use of researchers’ time.
Part of the appeal of precise definition is likely
attributable to vestigial influence of the classical view

The investigation of concepts has been a central
part of intellectual inquiry since at least the time of
Socrates. Today, conceptual analysis remains a
cornerstone of academic philosophy. Cognitive
psychology, too, has taken a keen interest in the
meaning of concepts; inquiries here have often taken
the approach of first investigating “simpler” and
more tangible object concepts, in the hopes of
working their way up to a grasp of more abstract
concepts. Despite the substantial effort invested in
precise accounts of concepts’ meanings, the results
have been uneven and at times frustrating. In
particular, practitioners of conceptual analysis often
doggedly pursue efforts to arrive at precise
definitions of high-level concepts, such as
COGNITION, EMOTION, SENSE, and so on with less
stellar results than are arrived by investigating lowerlevel concepts such as SMILE, SYSTEM, or CIRCUIT.
We will make frequent use of COGNITION as an
example of a high-level concept, but the same points
apply, mutatis mutandis, to other high-level concepts.
We also readily admit that the distinction between
“high-level” and “low-level” concepts is, itself, not
perfectly precise, but do propose the following as a
general marker of the distinction: low-level concepts

1057

of reasoning and concepts (Smith & Medin, 1981),
according to which concepts (and their associated
categories) are defined in terms of necessary and
sufficient conditions. This was the dominant view of
concepts for almost the entirety of western thought,
with its origins often traced back to Aristotle (Smith,
1997). Concepts of this kind are the epitome of
precision; a classical definition of a concept promises
precise demarcation of the boundaries of that
concept, and allows precise, deductive inferences.

cognitive psychologists and the dubious record of
attempts at classical conceptual analysis. We expect
that some will continue to hold the intuition that a
definition of COGNITION is possible, just as many
philosophers hold the very strong intuition that
classical analyses of their most cherished concepts
are possible despite decades or even centuries of
failure (Suhler, in preparation).
Further, even if there is a (satisfactory) precise
definition of cognition to be found, history strongly
suggests it will be achieved because theoretical and
empirical inquiry reveals a similar underlying nature
of things we take to be cognitive; it will not, in other
words, come about through standard methods of a
priori conceptual analysis (reflection on our folk
concepts, thought experiments, etc.).
We will
develop this point later in the paper by examining the
history of conceptual evolution in physics. Before
that, however, we want to look more specifically at
why, despite the vanishing rarity of classically
defined concepts, there exist strong intuitions that
concepts like COGNITION admit of classical definition.
Though intuitions are indeed often valuable things,
they are not beyond criticism. The most effective
response to the belief that we can precisely define
concepts like COGNITION, we feel, is to explain how
these intuitions in favor of pursuing precise
definitions are driven by factors that do not track the
actual probability that such definitions are attainable.
There are two such factors we wish to highlight here.
The first is saliency. The scientific concepts that are
likely to be most salient qua scientific concepts tend
to be those drawn from mature sciences dealing with
relatively simple phenomena – viz., physics and
physical chemistry (see below). The second is
confirmation bias – the tendency to notice the
examples that fit with one’s preexisting commitments
rather than those that do not.
In suggesting a
definition of a particular concept, one will tend to
notice the examples that fit it but be less attentive to
those that don’t fit. Similarly, at the level of theories
of concepts, adherents of the classical view are likely
to seek out those examples that (perhaps) fit the
classical structure to the neglect of those that do not –
hence the ubiquity of the example of BACHELOR in
philosophy papers as a natural concept with a
putative classical definition. Such cognitive biases
do not change the fact, however, that classical
definitions are in fact vanishingly rare – all the more
so for high-level concepts like COGNITION.
Proposing and critiquing precise definitions of
cognition is an appealing topic for academic
discussion and publication, since there will always be
something to say: extant proposals will always be
subject to counterexamples – encompassing
exemplars that they shouldn’t include and/or missing

The Classical View of Concepts
The familiar tale of the failure of the classical view
of concepts hardly needs detailed recounting, and as
such we will be exceedingly brief here. The key
point is simply that empirical research has established
that concepts usually do not have a unified definition
(i.e., a set of features common to all and only
members of the concept) or sharply demarcated
boundaries – Mervis & Rosch, 1981). This historical
record provides strong reason to think that any
proposal of classical criteria for a given concept will
fail to capture all of the phenomena that intuition
demands. Thus, in the case at hand, it is likely that a
definition of COGNITION will fail to capture all (and
only) those phenomena that we regard as cognitive.
Furthermore, even if it gets most of those right, it will
fail to recognize degree, since on a classical view of
concepts something is either part of the concept (i.e.,
possesses the necessary and sufficient features) or not
(i.e., does not possess the necessary and sufficient
features), with no gradations or gray areas.
Debates over the precise criteria for COGNITION are
therefore likely to lead to a great deal of ink being
needlessly spilled trying to impose a structure that the
actual mental concept likely doesn't have. A given
definition will include some desirable things, and
even where it gets the basic verdict right will fail to
recognize gradations of typicality/atypicality. For
instance, proposals which assign cognitive status to
cellular information processing will be intuitively
inadequate if they fail to recognize that these
processes, despite possessing features associated with
cognition, are not paradigmatically cognitive. 1
The aforementioned considerations are of course
not definitive proof that definitions of cognition are
undesirable or impossible. It is not clear that there is
any way to prove that definition-seeking for any
specific natural concept will, as a matter of necessity,
fail, despite the rejection of the classical view by
1

These general points also provide strong reason to
doubt the attainability of satisfactory conceptual
analyses in contemporary philosophy, a point
developed in Suhler (in preparation).

1058

one says “biology” such as HORMONES, and
NEUROTRANSMITTERS, or couched in terms of
DESIRES, OBSESSIONS, and RELATIONSHIPS, that come
to mind when one says “psychology”.
In this example, the cognitive utility of the
concepts of PSYCHOLOGICAL and BIOLOGICAL lies not
in their being explanatory themselves; rather, their
value lies in their ability to organize groups of
associated terms/concepts that may eventually figure
into an explanation. We contend that this associative
role of high-level concepts is, in the vast majority of
cases, more important than their ability to support
deduction, both in scientific and everyday inquiry.
That is, these overarching concepts – what we are
calling “high-level” concepts for short – are powerful
drivers of association, but few play a direct role in
mechanistic explanations; for example we seldom
make strong, specific empirical claims about
particular phenomena simply because “they are
psychological/biological”. Though we do not deny
that concepts whose form allows for broad deduction
are useful, it is not the case, as mentioned, that
natural concepts typically have such a structure, nor it
is it the case that concepts must be forced into such a
form in order to help us to generate explanations.
Statistical knowledge must be relied upon in the
early stages of investigation – when our investigatory
approaches are based on hunches, necessarily entered
into with highly imperfect knowledge of eventual
results. For instance, EMBODIED COGNITION seems, at
this stage, to be a concept that mainly serves to
associate a number of disparate approaches motivated
by the idea that an organism’s physical form and
environment cannot be abstracted away usefully from
questions about cognition (Ziemke, 2003); it is, in
essence, the broad claim that satisfying explanations
of core cognitive phenomena will nontrivially
involve bodies and their environs.
If we use high-level concepts to help us home in on
explanatorily valuable associates, it’s tempting to
suggest that we should strive for greater conceptual
precision. However, rather than being dictated by an
imposition of formal definitions, semantic
associations are built up over time by repeated coactivation of concepts, as during reading,
conversation, or inner speech. Reflecting this historydependent nature of association, individual
researchers will, and should, tend organize their own
workspace in a way that is suited to their particular
problems. With the many kinds of cognitive science
being done, the associations of cognition are bound to
be promiscuous. We would simply add that this is not
quite so undesirable as is often assumed.
Still, it is true that we associate precise ideas with
good science. The great exemplars of scientific
concepts are those that emerged as precise categories

ones that they should. Such proposals and critiques
are not, however, likely to be steps toward a fully
adequate, precise definition of COGNITION. As
discussed, efforts at conceptual analysis are probing
mental concepts that likely have a non-classical
structure and therefore are not amenable to the sort of
precise demarcation being sought. As long as faith
persists in science’s need for precise definition,
critiques of particular definitions simply perpetuate
this misguided process. Therefore we will focus on
criticizing the underlying rationale at a process level.
The Value of Associations
A further legacy of classical view of reasoning is a
heavy emphasis of the role of logic and deductive
reasoning in thought. Recent work, especially from
Bayesian perspectives, strongly contradicts such
views, arguing that thought is more statistical than
formal-logical (Chater, 2009). High-level concepts
likely deviate most strikingly from classical structure
because their role is to cope with a massive, and
poorly understood, world by holding vast numbers of
statistically related ideas together into relatively few
clusters. Crucially, this associative role does not
require – and indeed can be undermined by – precise,
exhaustive specification of conceptual content.
It is well known that exposure to a particular word
or concept brings semantically related concepts
sometimes including opposing concepts, into
working memory. Thus subsequent thoughts are more
likely to involve these related concepts. This priming
role is important because our conceptual workspace
is limited (e.g. Baars, 1997) and so there are finite
number of concepts that have a chance, at any one
time, to fit together into an explanation that will in
turn fit with reality, producing a “eureka moment”.
As such, explanations will only avail themselves to
us if a good number of the needed components are
“close to mind”. Useful high-level concepts bring to
mind other concepts, such that as a whole the
contents of the workspace are set up to yield
explanations efficiently. Some authors go so far as to
propose that a word’s meaning is its statistical
relations with other words (Lund, & Burgess, 1997),
but even authors such as Barsalou (2008), who see
little role for abstract symbol manipulation in
cognition, acknowledge this power of words.
To see why this is of critical importance for
science, consider an example from clinical
psychology: what is meant when one asks whether a
disorder such as depression is “psychological” or
“biological”. We would submit that the questioner is
basically wondering whether the explanation (or “the
story”) of the disorder would be most usefully
constructed using concepts that come to mind when

1059

(ATOM, MOLECULE, ENERGY, etc.). However, these
concepts are precise because it is the nature of their
referents to lend themselves to precision – they are
putative “natural kinds”. These conceptual success
stories, coming mainly from physics, were not
arrived at by tirelessly interrogating and refining
preexisting ancient folk-physical concepts. Rather,
precision in physical concepts was achieved through
tireless empirical inquiry, and the positing of theories
to make sense of these empirical observations.

concepts arose quite anew out of a process of
discovery, and might even have been closed off from
discovery if the content and nature of the field had
been fixed more than two millennia ago in the name
of trying to precisely define the concept PHYSICAL.
Prospects for a Precise Definition of COGNITION
The pursuit of the unknown by any research method
must be based on a guess at its potential benefit. It is
impossible to prove, for example, that experimental
work on any given question will yield enlightening
results, but we intuit that it will because of
experimentation’s past record of success. In contrast,
attempts to find, via conceptual analysis, precise
definitions of concepts like EMOTION, SENSE, and
COGNITION have so far not proven very successful.
This may be because these concepts do not admit of
precise definitions, or it may simply be that we have
not achieved insights necessary for precise
definitions. If precise definitions are “out there” then
the experiences of other sciences give us the best
means of guessing at how best to find them.
Experience in physics (see above) shows that
intuitively appealing and precise definitions, when
discovered, are extremely useful. But it is also clear
that these come after great empirical effort, and are
unlikely to correspond neatly to the natural concepts
that a science has at its outset. So it might be that
cognitive scientific concepts such as INTENTION,
while intuitively appealing and arguably as real,
psychologically, as HEAT, will not be foundational to
the field’s mature theories (for related discussion,
see, e.g., Churchland, 1981; Thagard, 1990).
It is instructive to relate the above ideas to a recent
proposal that the “mark of the cognitive” consists of
actions that have reasons (Adams & Garrison, 2013).
Recent research shows that humans seem to have
very stable tendencies to perceive minds (and
reasons/intentions) without much prompting. Seeing
an entity as having reasons requires that different
neural networks are engaged, and we then think about
that entity differently than when we do not see it as
motivated by reasons (Epley & Waytz, 2009). Thus,
while perceptions of reasons behind actions may not
be as experientially primitive as experiences of (say)
heat and pressure, they are quite hard to avoid.
Nevertheless, despite the importance of our
perception of minds and intentions in motivating
interest in sciences that might help explain them, it is
very possible that intentionality will end up taking a
position in mature cognitive science is more
analogous to that of heat, rather than that of energy in
modern physics. For instance, recent influential
proposals posit that human cognition is centrally
concerned with explaining primary sensory data and

Historical Evidence from Physics
Like most special sciences, the origins of physics
were in philosophy; more specifically, it evolved out
of what was called natural philosophy from antiquity
through much of the 19th century. Initially, rather
than there being any field called physics, which
precisely defined its explananda and proceeded to
explain them, there were instead a number of
interests in specific natural (as opposed to man-made)
phenomena. It was gradually realized, however, that
explanations of such phenomena as heat, magnetism,
and light could be made in terms of similar processes
and entities. In more recent times, physics has
become defined as the study of matter and energy
(and even this definition may become obsolete),
entities that actually would be rather foreign to the
ancients from whose work the modern field descends:
the Greeks thought that water fire, air, and earth were
separate elements, of which all things were
admixtures, including minds.
What the history of physics suggests is that fields
of inquiry may discover what their explananda
“actually are” as they move forward (Einstein &
Infeld, 1961). The term “physics”, rather than
timelessly referencing a clearly defined set of
concepts, questions and tools all revealed through
analysis of the folk concept PHYSICAL, carries
constantly updated statistical information about what
ideas, facts, and phenomena have, to date, been found
to “go together”. What the ancients more likely had
in common with us were very basic immediate
sensory experiences, such as the sensations of light,
sound and heat, of pressure, and of movement. These
sensory experiences were what originally demanded
explanation; however, these same entities have not
ended up defining a coherent science. Rather, their
study produced a cluster of explanatory concepts that
continued to co-occur over and over again such that
when one turned to be an important part of a
particular story, another almost always did as well.
At any point in time, then, an attempt at precisely
defining the subject matter of the field of physics
would have proved descriptive rather than
prescriptive. Paradigmatic examples of precise

1060

this drives our neural activity, so that perceived
minds, like objects, must be seen as part of our
attempt at predicting the world (Friston & Frith,
2015). If so, then pursuit of deep principles of
prediction, rather than of intentions, may eventually
define our field. However, much like in physics,
such sweeping redefinition will come after theories
have proven their ability to explain empirical facts.
Finally it is worth noting that some commentators
have argued that, in general, biology and cognitive
science tend to provide us with explanations not via
general laws (Bechtel, 2008), but rather by positing
specific mechanisms and their interactions. Given
that the discovery of law-like relations has driven the
emergence of our most precisely defined high-level
concepts from physics and physical chemistry (e.g.
ELEMENT), sciences that do not produce laws would
seem especially unlikely candidates to produce
precise high-level definitions.

article than inattention to the different ways in which
a key term/concept is used in the body of research
supposedly being reviewed. When this occurs, the
review becomes little more than a bibliography, with
the responsibility of achieving a degree of
reconciliation and synthesis having been abdicated.
If conceptual clarity is important in these cases,
then why not in the case of COGNITION? The reason,
as already mentioned, is that unlike concepts such as
IMITATION, EMPATHY, and ENERGY, high-level
concepts like COGNITION and PHYSICAL do not figure
very directly into investigations of specific
phenomena. As with the concept PHYSICAL in
physics, experiments and theories in cognitive
science do not examine and explain cognition qua
cognition; rather, they examine and explain more
specific phenomena and processes.
Consider, by way of elaboration, an analogy to
biology. Biology is, literally, the study of life, but
biological experiments and theories are almost
entirely concerned with more specific questions that
in some way or another connect to living things. A
precise definition of the concept LIFE is not going to
help molecular geneticists or evolutionary theorists
do their jobs better, since the concepts and methods
that they use in day-to-day inquiry within their
subdisciplines are much more specific – and
empirically grounded – than that (see, e.g., Crick,
1966). Suggestions of and debate over a precise
definition of LIFE are mostly philosophical
curiosities, orthogonal to the methods, theories, and
concepts that actually animate the daily work of
scientific research. It is unclear why the great
progress that biological science has made without a
precise definition of its eponymous concept should
necessarily be denied to a cognitive science that lacks
a precise definition of COGNITION.
As we have emphasized throughout, the value of
overarching disciplinary concepts like COGNITION
and LIFE is likely to lie in their ability to organize
mental workspaces and suggest connections between
various lines of inquiry. Given this, the lack of sharp,
pre-defined boundaries on what counts as cognition
may actually help produce occasions for associations
to be made and new lines of investigation to be
opened. The potential restrictiveness of precisely
fixing a definition of COGNITION can be seen by
applying lessons from the history of physics to the
history of cognitive science. As with physics in
ancient times, a definition of COGNITION fixed in the
early days of cognitive science (say, the late 1960s)
would likely have centered upon logical symbol
manipulation that goes on “inside the head”. Such a
definition would have closed off even connectionism
as relevant to cognition, not to mention frameworks
of embodiment (Varela, Thompson & Rosch, 1991;

What Role for Conceptual Analysis in Science?
The inadequacy of the classical view of concepts
and the nature of progress in other sciences (esp.
physics) provide reasons to doubt the first key
assumption we identified, at the outset, as underlying
interest in defining terms like COGNITION: that an
adequate, precise definition can be achieved if we
think and argue hard enough about it.
The
associative role of concepts, meanwhile, provides
reason to doubt the second key assumption – that
precisely defining cognition will be a boon to
cognitive scientific inquiry – since association does
not require precise, fixed definitions.
Before elaborating on these points and why they
cast doubt on the value of much conceptual analysis
in cognitive science, it’s worth pausing to emphasize
that clarity about the meaning of concepts does have
its uses.
In particular, concepts that describe
observed phenomena need to be defined clearly
enough to allow interpretation and synthesis of
empirical results. Most cognitive scientists have had
the experience of going to read up on a particular
research topic only to find that the key concept
around which that topic is organized – IMITATION,
EMPATHY, etc. – is used in a wide variety of ways in
different papers and by different research groups. As
mentioned briefly above, this variety itself is not
necessarily a bad thing, so long as the authors of a
given study are clear about how they are using a
given concept and how their usage relates to other
common usages in the literature. But when the time
comes to reconcile and synthesize these results – a
function typically performed by review articles – a
degree of conceptual clarity is a must. Few things
more effectively undermine the utility of a review

1061

Barsalou 2008), extended cognition (Clark, 1997),
and metaphor (Lakoff & Johnson, 2008). These new
frameworks expand the number of perspectives
associated with COGNITION, thereby allowing further
connections to be drawn and further lines of
experimental inquiry to be opened up. The results of
such inquiries, then, in turn, continue to modify our
concept of COGNITION, and the process repeats itself.
Our argument, then, is that the value of the concept
of COGNITION does not lie in any fixed definition, for
such a definition will inevitably be beholden to the
state of knowledge in the field and to the empirical
and theoretical fashions of the day. Rather, concepts
like COGNITION evolve with the field(s) in which they
are used, providing a basis for associations and
connections that generate empirical inquiries, and
with them further conceptual modification. If a
precise definition of COGNITION is possible at all, it
will be achieved through a long, messy process of
grappling with empirical reality, not traditional
methods of conceptual analysis.

Bechtel, W. (2008). Mental mechanisms:
Philosophical perspectives on cognitive
neuroscience. Taylor & Francis.
Churchland, P.M. (1981). Eliminative Materialism
and the Propositional Attitudes. Journal of
Philosophy, 77(2), 67-90.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body,
and world together again. MIT Press.
Crick, F. (1966). Of molecules and men. University
of Washington Press.
Einstein, A., & Infeld, L. (1961). The evolution of
physics: the growth of ideas from early concepts to
relativity and quanta. CUP Archive.
Epley, N., & Waytz, A. (2009). Mind
perception. Handbook of social psychology.
Friston, K., & Frith, C. (2015). A Duet for
one. Consciousness and cognition.
Griffiths, P. E. (1997). What emotions really are: The
problem of psychological categories (p. 114).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Keeley, B. L. (2002). Making sense of the
senses. The Journal of Philosophy,99(1), 5-28.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (2008). Metaphors we live
by. University of Chicago Press.
Lund, C. & Burgess, K. (1997). Modelling parsing
constraints with high-dimensional context
space. Language and cognitive processes, 12 (2-3),
177-210.
Mervis, C. B., & Rosch, E. (1981). Categorization of
natural objects. Annual review of
psychology, 32(1), 89-115.
Mulligan, K., & Scherer, K. R. (2012). Toward a
working definition of emotion.Emotion
Review, 4(4), 345-357.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2009). Précis of
Bayesian rationality: The probabilistic approach to
human reasoning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences,32 (1), 69-84.
Rosch, E., Thompson, E., & Varela, F. J. (1992). The
embodied mind: Cognitive science and human
experience. MIT Press.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). Categories and
concepts (p. 89). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Smith, R. (Ed.). (1997). Aristotle. Topics. Books I
and VIII: With Excerpts from Related Texts.
Oxford Univ. Press.
Thagard, P. (1990). Concepts and conceptual
Change. Synthese, 82(2), 255-274.
Rosch, Eleanor, Evan Thompson, and Francisco J.
Varela. The embodied mind: Cognitive science and
human experience. MIT press, 1992.
Ziemke, T. (2003, July). What’s that thing called
embodiment. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual
meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 13051310). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Conclusion
Both the allure and dangers of precise conceptual
definitions are likely to be especially acute when a
scientific field is in its early stages of understanding –
as cognitive science currently is. Clarity and
precision are often frustratingly hard to come by, a
problem compounded in the case of cognitive science
by the sheer complexity of the phenomena under
investigation. Precise definitions are appealing in no
small part because they promise such clarity and
precision. The danger, however, comes from the near
certainty that any definitions we strongly commit to
at such an early stage will misguide future inquiry by
ensconcing in those definitions all the empirical and
theoretical limitations of the time at which they are
fixed. For instance, even if our investigations
ultimately yield an picture of cognitive systems that
is not meaningfully “embodied” or “extended”, the
fact that we are so caught up with these ideas – ideas
which would have been anathema to most cognitive
scientists even 40 years ago – is surely a sign that we
still have much to learn about what cognition is.
References
Adams, F., & Garrison, R. (2013). The mark of the
cognitive. Minds and Machines, 23(3), 339-352.
Baars, B.J., (1997). In the theater of consciousness:
The workspace of the mind. Oxford Univ. Press.
Barsalou, L. W., Santos, A., Simmons, W. K., &
Wilson, C. D. (2008). Language and simulation in
conceptual processing. Symbols, embodiment, and
meaning, 245-283.

1062

