When to use which heuristic: A rational solution to the strategy selection problem
Falk Lieder (falk.lieder@berkeley.edu)

Thomas L. Griffiths (tom griffiths@berkeley.edu)

Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute
University of California at Berkeley, CA, USA

Department of Psychology
University of California at Berkeley, CA, USA

Abstract

This paper proposes a rational solution to the strategy selection problem: in analogy to model-based reinforcement
learning (Dolan & Dayan, 2013) our theory posits that people learn a mental model that enables them to predict each
heuristic’s accuracy and execution time from features of the
problem to be solved and choose the heuristic with the best
predicted speed-accuracy tradeoff.
In the remainder of this paper we first review previous
strategy selection theories and introduce our new theory of
strategy-selection. We then test our theory against those previous accounts by fitting published data on multi-attribute decision making, conducting a novel experiment, and demonstrating that our theory can account for people’s adaptive flexibility in risky choice. We close with a discussion of the implications of our results for the debate about human rationality and directions for future research.

The human mind appears to be equipped with a toolbox full
of cognitive strategies, but how do people decide when to use
which strategy? We leverage rational metareasoning to derive
a rational solution to this problem and apply it to decision making under uncertainty. The resulting theory reconciles the two
poles of the debate about human rationality by proposing that
people gradually learn to make rational use of fallible heuristics. We evaluate this theory against empirical data and existing accounts of strategy selection (i.e. SSL and RELACS). Our
results suggest that while SSL and RELACS can explain people’s ability to adapt to homogeneous environments in which
all decision problems are of the same type, rational metareasoning can additionally explain people’s ability to adapt to heterogeneous environments and flexibly switch strategies from
one decision to the next.
Keywords: Strategy Selection; Decision Making; Heuristics;
Bounded Rationality; Cognitive Control; Learning

Introduction
Many of our decisions and judgments systematically violate
the laws of logic and probability theory (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). These violations are known as cognitive biases.
Cognitive biases have been interpreted as evidence that people do not reason by the rules of logic and probability theory
but by simple yet fallible heuristics. Whether or not these
findings prove that humans are irrational has been debated
for decades (Stanovich, 2009). While some view heuristics
and biases as a sign of human irrationality, recent work suggests that some heuristics can be understood as rational strategies once computational costs are taken into account (Lieder,
Griffiths, & Goodman, 2013; Griffiths, Lieder, & Goodman,
2015; Lieder, Hsu, & Griffiths, 2014). Furthermore, Gigerenzer and colleagues argue that having a toolbox of simple
heuristics that are well adapted to the structure of our environment makes us smart (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999).
Yet, being a skilled carpenter requires more than a toolbox: you also have to know when to use which tool. Todd and
Gigerenzer (2012) postulate that we choose heuristics that are
well-adapted to our current situation (i.e. ecologically rational), but they do not explain how we are able to do so. Empirical evidence suggests that people do indeed choose heuristics
adaptively (Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, 1988; Bröder, 2003;
Pachur, Todd, Gigerenzer, Schooler, & Goldstein, 2011). Despite some progress, the computational principles of strategy
selection remain unclear (Marewski & Link, 2014). Previous theories of strategy selection, namely SSL (Rieskamp &
Otto, 2006), RELACS (Erev & Barron, 2005), and SCADS
(Shrager & Siegler, 1998) predict the formation of rigid mental habits that always pursue the same strategy, whereas people are more flexible (Lieder, Plunkett, et al., 2014; Payne et
al., 1988).

Models of Strategy Selection
According to previous theories of strategy selection we learn
to choose the strategy that works best on average across all
problems in an environment (Rieskamp & Otto, 2006; Erev &
Barron, 2005) or category (Shrager & Siegler, 1998). This approach ignores that every problem has distinct characteristics
that determine the strategies’ effectiveness. After reviewing
these context-free theories, we propose a model that chooses
strategies based on the features of individual problems.

Context-free strategy selection learning
According to the SSL model (Rieskamp & Otto, 2006) the
probability that strategy s will be chosen (P(St = s)) in trial t
is proportional to its reward expectancy qi :
P(S = s) ∝ qt (s),

(1)

where qt (k) is the sum of the rewards obtained when strategy
k was chosen prior to trial t plus the initial reward expectancy
q0 (k) = rmax · w · βk ,

(2)

where rmax is the highest possible reward, w is the strength
of the initial reward expectancy, and β1 , · · · , βN ∈ [0, 1] are
the agent’s initial relative reward expectancies for strategies
1, · · · , N and sum to one.
The RELACS model (Erev & Barron, 2005) chooses strategies according to their recency-weighted average payoffs
(
α · rt + (1 − α) ·Wt (k) if St = k
Wt+1 (k) =
(3)
Wt+1 (k) = Wt (k)
else

1362

P(St = k) ∝ eλ·

Wt (k)
Vt

(4)

where the parameters α and λ determine the agent’s learning rate and decision noise respectively, and Vt is the agent’s
current estimate of the payoff variability.
The SCADS model (Shrager & Siegler, 1998) presupposes
that each problem has been identified as an instance of one or
more problem types and assumes associative learning mechanisms similar to those of SSL.

Feature-based strategy selection learning
In this section, we present a theory according to which people
learn a mental model predicting the effectiveness of cognitive
strategies from features of the problem to be solved.
Strategy selection is a metacognitive decision with uncertain consequences. We therefore leveraged rational metareasoning – a decision-theoretic framework for choosing computations (Russell & Wefald, 1991) – to develop a rational
model of strategy selection that is theoretically sound, computationally efficient, and competitive with state-of-the-art algorithm selection methods (Lieder, Plunkett, et al., 2014).
Rational metareasoning chooses the strategy s? with the
highest value of computation (VOC) for the problem specified by input i:
s? = arg max VOC(s, i),
s∈S

(5)

where S is the set of the agent’s cognitive strategies. The
VOC of executing a cognitive strategy s is the expected net increase in utility over acting without deliberation. If the strategy chooses an action and the utility of the available actions
remains approximately constant while the agent deliberates,
then the VOC can be approximated by the expected reward
of the resulting action minus the opportunity cost of the strategy’s execution time T :
VOC(s; i) ≈ E [R|s, i] − E [TC(T )|s, i] ,

(6)

where R is the increase in reward and TC(T ) is the opportunity cost of running the algorithm for T units of time. The reward R can be binary (correct vs. incorrect output) or numeric
(e.g., the payoff). Equations 5-6 reveal that near-optimal
strategy selection can be achieved by learning to predict the
strategies’ expected rewards and execution times from features f(i) of the input i that specifies the problem to be solved.
These predictions can be learned by Bayesian linear or logistic regression as described in Lieder, Plunkett, et al. (2014).
Equation 5 is optimal when the VOC is known, but when
the VOC is unknown the value of exploration should not
be ignored. To remedy this problem, we employ Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933) – a near optimal solution
to the exploration-exploitation dilemma (May, Korda, Lee, &
Leslie, 2012). Concretely, each strategy s is chosen (S = s)
according to the probability that its VOC is maximal:


P(S = s) ∝ P s = arg max VOC(s; i) .
(7)
s

This is implemented by drawing one sample from each strategy’s VOC model and picking the strategy with the highest

sampled value (ties are broken at random). This proposal is
line with behavioral (Vul, Goodman, Griffiths, & Tenenbaum,
2014) and neural evidence (Fiser, Berkes, Orbán, & Lengyel,
2010) for sampling as a cognitive mechanism.

Learning when to use fast-and-frugal heuristics
Fast-and-frugal heuristics perform very few computations
and use only a small subset of the available information
(Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier, 2011). For instance, the Takethe-Best (TTB) heuristic for multi-attribute decision making
chooses the option with the highest value on the most predictive attribute that distinguishes the options and ignores
all other attributes. This strategy works in so-called noncompensatory environments in which the attributes’ predictive validities fall off so rapidly that the recommendation of
the most predictive attribute cannot be overturned by rationally incorporating other attributes. Yet it can fail miserably
in compensatory environments in which no single attribute
reliably identifies the best choice by itself.
Bröder (2003) found that people use Take-the-Best more
frequently in non-compensatory environments than in compensatory environments. Rieskamp and Otto (2006) conducted an experiment suggesting that this adaptation might
result from reinforcement learning: Two groups of participants made 168 multi-attribute decisions with feedback in a
compensatory versus a non-compensatory environment. Over
time, the choices of participants in the non-compensatory environment became more consistent with TTB, whereas the
choices of participants in the compensatory environment became less consistent with TTB and more consistent with
the weighted-additive strategy (WADD) that computes the
weighted average of all attributes.
These findings raise the question how people learn when
to use TTB. This problem could be solved either by learning how well TTB works on average, as postulated by SSL
and RELACS, or by learning to predict the performance of
TTB and alternative strategies for individual problems as suggested by rational metareasoning.
As a first test of our model we demonstrate that it can explain the findings of Experiment 1 from Rieskamp and Otto
(2006). This experiment was structured into seven blocks
comprising 24 trials each. In each trial participants chose
between two investment options based on five binary attributes whose predictive validities were constant and explicitly stated. To apply our general rational metareasoning theory to multi-attribute decision making, we manually selected
a small set of simple features that are highly informative
about the relative performance of TTB versus WADD: The
first feature predicts the performance of TTB by the validity
of the most reliable discriminative attribute ( f1 ), the second
and the third feature measure the potential for WADD to perform better than TTB by the gap between the validity of the
most reliable attribute favoring the first option and the most
reliable attribute favoring the second option ( f2 ) respectively
the absolute difference between the number of attributes fa-

1363

Rational Metareasoning

voring the first option and the second option respectively
( f3 ). The simulated agent’s toolbox contained two strategies:
Take-The-Best (s1 = TTB) and the weighted-additive strategy (s2 = WADD). The probability that strategy s leads to
the correct decision was modeled by
1
.
1 + exp(−f · αs + bs )

0.7

Prob. of choosing TTB

P(R = 1|s) =

0.8

(8)

P(bs ) = N (µ

= τ).

Noncompensatory Env. (RM)
Noncompensatory Env. (People)
Noncompensatory Env. (SSL)
Compensatory Env. (RM)
Compensatory Env. (People)
Compensatory Env. (SSL)

0.4
0.3

0.1
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Block Number

(10)

where b0 and τ are free parameters and 0 and I are the zero
vector and the identity matrix respectively.
We created compensatory and non-compensatory environments similar to those used by Rieskamp and Otto (2006): In
the non-compensatory environment TTB always makes the
Bayes-optimal decision, and in the compensatory environment WADD always makes the Bayes-optimal decision. In
both environments TTB and WADD make the same decision
on exactly half of the trials. To determine the Bayes-optimal
decision and generate payoffs, we computed the probability
that option A is superior to option B by Bayesian inference
under the assumption that their order is uninformative and
that positive and negative ratings are equally common. Payoffs were sampled from the posterior distribution given the
attributes’ values and validities. Furthermore, we assumed
that the participants’ opportunity cost c corresponded to $5
per hour at 1 computation per second. Since the initial bias
in strategy selection only depends on the difference between
(TTB)
the prior beliefs about the two strategies, we set b0
to zero
(WADD)

0.5

0.2

To accommodate people’s prior knowledge about the strategies’ performance we parameterized its prior distribution by

P(αs ) = N µ = 0, Σ−1 = τ · I
(9)
(s)
= b0 , σ−2

0.6

(TTB)

and fit ∆b0 = b0
−b0
and τ to the average frequency
with which Rieskamp and Otto’s participants used TTB versus WADD in each block by minimizing the mean squared error using grid search. For each grid point we simulated trialby-trial learning and decision making and averaged the choice
frequencies within each block across 1000 simulations. The
resulting parameter estimates were ∆b̂0 = 0.14 and τ = 80.
We found that rational metareasoning can explain people’s
ability to adapt to compensatory as well as non-compensatory
environments (see Figure 1): When the environment was noncompensatory rational metareasoning learned to use TTB, but
when the environment was non-compensatory rational metareasoning learned to avoid TTB and use WADD instead. Our
simulation results show that rational metareasoning captured
that people gradually adapt their strategy choices to the decision environment. The fits of rational metareasoning and the
fit of SSL reported by Rieskamp and Otto (2006) were about
equally good (MSE: 0.0050 vs. 0.0048; see Figure 1).

Strategy selection in mixed environments
Since both SSL and rational metareasoning can explain
the results of Rieskamp and Otto (2006), a new exper-

Figure 1: Rational metareasoning explains experimental findings by Rieskamp and Otto (2006).
iment is needed to determine if strategy selection learning is context-free as postulated by SSL and RELACS or
feature-based as postulated by rational metareasoning. We
thus investigated under which conditions rational metareasoning predicts different strategy choices than SSL and
RELACS: We evaluated the performance of context-free versus feature-based strategy selection learning in 11 environments with p ∈ {0%, 10%, 20%, · · · , 100%} compensatory
problems (in which WADD makes the right and TTB makes
the wrong decision) and 1 − p ∈ {100%, 90%, 80%, · · · , 0%}
non-compensatory problems (in which TTB makes the right
and WADD makes the wrong decision). Each environment
comprised 168 decision problems in random order. We evaluated the performance of rational metareasoning with b0 = 0
and τ = 1, SSL with β1 = β2 = 0.5 and w = 1, and RELACS
with α = 0.1 and λ = 1. These parameters correspond to a
weak bias towards using both strategies equally often, but this
is not critical since any bias is eventually overwritten by experience. Our simulations revealed that the variance p · (1 − p)
of the problems’ compensatoriness has qualitatively different
effects on the performance of feature-based versus contextfree strategy selection learning; see Figure 2. Concretely, the
performance of context-free strategy selection learning drops
rapidly with the variance in the environment’s compensatoriness: As the ratio of compensatory to non-compensatory
problems approaches 50/50 the performance of SSL and
RELACS drops to the chance level. The performance of rational metareasoning, by contrast, is much less susceptible to
the variance and stays above 70%. The reason for this difference is that rational metareasoning learns to use TTB for
non-compensatory problems and WADD for compensatory
problems whereas SSL and RELACS learn to always use the
same strategy. Rational metareasoning outperforms RELACS
across all environments. In purely (non)compensatory environments SSL and rational metareasoning perform equally
well, but as the environment becomes variable the performance of SSL drops below the performance of rational metareasoning. Thus context-free and feature-based strategy selection make qualitatively different predictions about people’s

1364

performance in mixed environments. We can therefore determine if people use context-free or feature-based strategy
selection by measuring their performance in a mixed environment with the following experiment:

Rational Metareasoning
SSL
RELACS
People

Optimal Choices in % with 95% CI

100

Methods
We recruited 120 participants on Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Each participant was paid 50 cents for about five minutes of
work. The experiment comprised 30 binary decisions. Participants played the role of a banker deciding which of two
companies receives a loan based on the companies’ ratings
on six criteria. The criteria and their success probabilities
were the same as in Rieskamp and Otto’s first experiment.
On each trial, the two companies’ ratings on these criteria
were presented in random order, and the criterias’ validities
were stated explicitly. After choosing company A or company B participants received stochastic binary feedback generated according to the cue validities. The relative frequency
of positive feedback was 75.96% following the correct response and 25.04% following the incorrect response. The
decision problems were chosen such that TTB and WADD
make opposite decisions on every trial. In half of the trials,
the decision of TTB was correct and in half of the trials the
decision of WADD was correct. Thus, always using TTB,
always using WADD, choosing one of the two strategies at
random, or context-free strategy selection would result in an
accuracy of 50%; see Figure 2.

Results and Discussion
People chose the more creditworthy company in 64.6% of
the trials. Assuming a uniform prior on people’s performance, the 99% highest-posterior density credible interval
is [62.5%; 66.6%]. We can thus be more than 99% confident that people’s average performance is above 62.5% and
conclude that they performed significantly better than chance
(p < 10−15 ). This is qualitatively consistent with featurebased strategy selection but inconsistent with context-free
strategy selection; see Figure 2. Consistent with Rieskamp
and Otto (2006) performed worse on non-compensatory trials than on compensatory trials. Thus the deviation from optimal performance is not due to saving mental effort by using
the simpler TTB strategy when the more demanding WADD
strategy would be required. To measure learning we regressed
our participants’ average performance on the trial number and
a constant. We found that the increase in our participants’
performance was not statistically significant (95% CI of the
slope: [−0.1%, 0.2%]). The observation that participants nevertheless performed above chance, suggests that they entered
the experiment with moderately high strategy selection skills.
Alternatively, participants could have used a single, more
complex strategy that works for both kinds of problems, but
note that with a larger number of trials systematic changes in
strategy use have been demonstrated in a similar task; see Figure 1. The absence of evidence for learning is not necessarily
incompatible with previous findings, because Rieskamp and
Otto (2006) found small changes in performance after 168

90

80

70

60

50
0

20

40

60

80

100

Compensatory Trials in %

Figure 2: Rational metareasoning outperforms SSL and
RELACS–especially when the environment is heterogeneous.
trials in a simple environment, whereas our participants performed only 30 trials and the environment was very complex.
Future experiments will employ a larger number of trials and
more reliable feedback to explore whether people learn in the
mixed decision environment too. In conclusion, people’s performance in homogeneous decision environments is consistent with feature-based and context-free strategy selection,
but context-free strategy selection is insufficient to explain
human performance in heterogeneous environments whereas
feature-based strategy selection can account for it. Thus our
results suggest that human strategy selection is feature-based.

Adaptive flexibility in strategy selection
People adapt their strategy not only to reoccurring situations,
but they can also flexibly switch strategies as soon as the situation changes. This flexibility has been empirically demonstrated in decision making under risk: Payne et al. (1988)
found that people adaptively switch decision strategies in the
absence of feedback.
To determine whether rational metareasoning can account
for this adaptive flexibility we simulated Experiment 1 from
Payne et al. (1988). This experiment presented ten instances
of each of four types of decision problems in random order.
The four problem types were defined by the time constraint
(15 seconds vs. none) and the dispersion of the outcomes’
probabilities (low vs. high). In each decision problem participants chose between four gambles with four possible outcomes. The four gambles assigned different payoffs to the
four outcomes but they shared the same outcome probabilities. The payoffs (range 0–999 cents) and their probabilities were stated numerically. To see an outcome probability
or payoff participants had to click on the corresponding outcome. This allowed Payne et al. (1988) to infer which kind
of strategies their participants were using. They measured the
use of fast-and-frugal attribute-based heuristics, that is TTB
and elimination-by-aspects (EBA; Tversky (1972)), by the
proportion of time participants spend processing the options’
payoffs for the most probable outcome. For the compensatory

1365

rrel (s) =

V (s(D), o)
,
max V (c, o)

Time on Most Important Attribute in %

50
No Time Pressure
High Time Pressure
45

40

35

30

25

20

Low Dispersion

High Dispersion

Rational Metareasoning
Predicted Use of TTB or EBA in % (with 95% CI)

People

expected value strategy WADD this proportion is only 25%,
but for TTB and EBA it can be up to 100%. When the dispersion of outcome probabilities was high, people focused
more on the most probable outcome. Time pressure also increased people’s propensity for such selective and attributebased processing; see Figure 3. Thus, people seem to use
non-compensatory strategies such as TTB and EBA more frequently when time is limited or some outcomes are much
more probable than others.
To simulate this experiment we applied rational metareasoning to choosing when to use which of the ten strategies
considered by Payne et al. (1988). These strategies included
WADD as well as fast-and-frugal heuristics such as TTB and
EBA. To simulate the effect of the time limit we counted
each strategy’s elementary operations according to Johnson
and Payne (1985), assumed that each of them takes one second, and returned the strategy’s current best guess when it
exceeded the limit as described by Payne et al. (1988). Rational metareasoning represented each risky-choice problem
by five simple and easily computed features: the number
of attributes, the number of options, the number of inputs
per available computation, the highest outcome probability,
and the difference between the highest and the lowest payoff. These features were manually chosen to capture highly
predictive dimensions along which decision problems were
varied by Payne et al. (1988). Our rational metareasoning
model of strategy selection in risky choice learns to predict
each strategy’s relative reward

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Low Dispersion

High Dispersion

Figure 3: Rational metareasoning predicts the increase in selective attribute-based processing with dispersion and time
pressure observed by Payne et al. (1988).
Rational metareasoning correctly predicted that timepressure and probability dispersion increase people’s propensity to use TTB or EBA; see Figure 3. SSL and RELACS, by
contrast, predict that there should be no difference between
the four conditions. This is because SSL and RELACS cannot learn to choose different strategies for different kinds of
problems. Their strategy choices only change in response to
reward or punishment but the experiment provided neither.
In conclusion, rational metareasoning can account for adaptive flexibility in decision making under risk but SSL and
RELACS cannot.

General Discussion

(11)

c

where s(D) is the gamble that strategy s chooses in decision
problem D, V (c, o) is the payoff of choice c if the outcome is
o, and the denominator is the highest payoff the agent could
have achieved given that the outcome was o. The priors on all
coefficients in the score and execution time models of rational
metareasoning were standard normal distributions.
We performed 1000 simulations of people’s strategy
choices in this experiment. In each simulation, we modeled
people’s prior learning experiences about risky choice strategies by applying rational metareasoning to ten randomly generated instances of each of the 144 types of decision problems
considered by Payne et al. (1988). We then applied rational metareasoning with the learned model of the strategies’
performance to a simulation of Experiment 1 from Payne
et al. (1988). Since their participants received no feedback,
our simulation assumed no learning during the experiment.
Outcome distributions with low dispersion were generated by
sampling unnormalized outcome probabilities independently
from the standard uniform distribution and dividing them by
their sum. Outcome distributions with high dispersion were
generated by sampling the outcome probabilities sequentially
such that the second largest probability was at most 25% of
the largest one, the third largest probability was at most 25%
of the second largest one, and so on.

We have proposed a rational solution to the strategy selection
problem: feature-based strategy selection by rational metareasoning. We have previously shown that feature-based strategy selection can – but context-free strategy selection cannot
– account for people’s adaptive choice of sorting strategies
(Lieder, Plunkett, et al., 2014). Here we have extended this
conclusion to decision-strategies that operate on internal representations. The theoretical significance of rational metareasoning is twofold: First, it reconciles the two poles of the
debate about human rationality by proposing that people learn
to make rational use of fallible heuristics. Our theory formalizes the strategy selection principle of ecological rationality
(Todd & Gigerenzer, 2012) and specifies the computational
mechanisms of learning and cognitive control through which
it could be realized. Second, strategy selection by rational
metareasoning completes the resource-rational approach to
cognitive modeling: the principle of resource-rationality can
be used not only to derive heuristics (Lieder et al., 2013; Griffiths et al., 2015; Lieder, Hsu, & Griffiths, 2014) but also to
predict when people should use which heuristic. Strategy selection by rational metareasoning thereby provides the conceptual glue necessary to build integrated theories out of our
scattered bricks of knowledge about tens or hundreds of cognitive strategies.
If the brain had sufficient computational power and sophistication to perform near-optimal strategy selection, then why
would it rely on simple heuristics to make economic decisions? The reason might be that real-life decisions are much

1366

more complex than the decisions modeled above: The computational complexity of optimal decision making increases
with the size of the decision problem but the computational
complexity of strategy selection does not. Thus, as decision
problems become more complex normative decision strategies take prohibitively long, but the time required for strategy
selection remains the same. Therefore, rational metareasoning is not only tractable but also worthwhile in complex reallife decisions where the normative solution is intractable and
applying the wrong heuristic can have dire consequences.
The exact conditions under which the benefits of strategy
selection by rational metareasoning offset its cost will be determined in future work. In addition, rational metareasoning
can be a used as a computational level theory (Marr, 1983) of
metacognition–just like Bayesian inference is a used as computational level theory of inductive reasoning and learning.
In conclusion, strategy selection by rational metareasoning
is a promising framework for cognitive modeling. It could,
for instance, be used to explain paradoxical inconsistencies in
risky choice by identifying why people use different heuristics in different contexts. Furthermore, our model of strategy
selection learning can be applied to education and cognitive
training: First, our model could be used to optimize problem
sets for helping students learn when to apply which procedure
(e.g. in algebra) rather than drilling them on one procedure at
a time. Second, our model could be used to design cognitive
training programs promoting adaptive flexibility in decision
making and beyond. Future work will also explore learning the VOC of elementary information processing operations
(Russell & Wefald, 1991) as a model of strategy discovery.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by ONR MURI
N00014-13-1-0341 and grant number N00014-13-1-0341 from the
Office of Naval Research.

References
Bröder, A. (2003). Decision making with the” adaptive toolbox”: Influence of environmental structure, intelligence,
and working memory load. J. Exp. Psychol.-Learn. Mem.
Cogn., 29(4), 611.
Dolan, R. J., & Dayan, P. (2013). Goals and habits in the
brain. Neuron, 80(2), 312–325.
Erev, I., & Barron, G. (2005). On adaptation, maximization, and reinforcement learning among cognitive strategies. Psychological review, 112(4), 912–931.
Fiser, J., Berkes, P., Orbán, G., & Lengyel, M. (2010). Statistically optimal perception and learning: from behavior to
neural representations. Trends Cogn. Sci., 14(3), 119–130.
Gigerenzer, G., & Gaissmaier, W. (2011). Heuristic decision
making. Annual Review of Psychology, 62(1), 451–482.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Simple heuristics that
make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Griffiths, T. L., Lieder, F., & Goodman, N. D. (2015). Rational use of cognitive resources: Levels of analysis between
the computational and the algorithmic. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 7(2), 217-229.

Johnson, E. J., & Payne, J. W. (1985). Effort and accuracy in
choice. Management science, 31(4), 395–414.
Lieder, F., Griffiths, T. L., & Goodman, N. D. (2013). Burnin, bias, and the rationality of anchoring. In P. Bartlett,
F. C. N. Pereira, L. Bottou, C. J. C. Burges, & K. Q. Weinberger (Eds.), Adv. neural inf. process. syst. 25.
Lieder, F., Hsu, M., & Griffiths, T. L. (2014). The high availability of extreme events serves resource-rational decisionmaking. In Proc. 36th ann. conf. cognitive science society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Lieder, F., Plunkett, D., Hamrick, J. B., Russell, S. J., Hay,
N., & Griffiths, T. (2014). Algorithm selection by rational
metareasoning as a model of human strategy selection. In
Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, &
K. Weinberger (Eds.), Adv. neural inf. process. syst. 27 (pp.
2870–2878). Curran Associates, Inc.
Marewski, J. N., & Link, D. (2014). Strategy selection: An
introduction to the modeling challenge. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 5(1), 39–59.
Marr, D. (1983). Vision: A Computational Investigation into
the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information. W. H. Freeman.
May, B. C., Korda, N., Lee, A., & Leslie, D. S. (2012). Optimistic Bayesian sampling in contextual-bandit problems.
J. Mach. Learn. Res., 13.
Pachur, T., Todd, P. M., Gigerenzer, G., Schooler, L. J., &
Goldstein, D. G. (2011). The recognition heuristic: a review of theory and tests. Frontiers in psychology, 2.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1988). Adaptive strategy selection in decision making. J. Exp. Psychol.Learn. Mem. Cogn., 14(3), 534.
Rieskamp, J., & Otto, P. E. (2006). SSL: A theory of how
people learn to select strategies. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.,
135(2), 207–236.
Russell, S., & Wefald, E. (1991). Principles of metareasoning. Artificial Intelligence, 49(1-3), 361–395.
Shrager, J., & Siegler, R. S. (1998). SCADS: A model of
children’s strategy choices and strategy discoveries. Psychological Science, 9(5), 405–410.
Stanovich, K. E. (2009). Decision making and rationality in
the modern world. Oxford University Press, USA.
Thompson, W. R. (1933). On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the evidence
of two samples. Biometrika, 285–294.
Todd, P. M., & Gigerenzer, G. (2012). Ecological rationality:
Intelligence in the world. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of
choice. Psychological review, 79(4), 281.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157), 1124–
1131.
Vul, E., Goodman, N., Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B.
(2014). One and done? optimal decisions from very few
samples. Cognitive science, 38(4), 599–637.

1367

