Young Children’s Understanding of the Successor Function
Jennifer A. Kaminski (jennifer.kaminski@wright.edu)
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Wright State University
Dayton, OH 45435 USA

Abstract
This study examined 4-year-old children’s understanding of
the successor function, the concept that for every positive
integer there is a unique next integer. Children were tested in
the context of cardinal numbers and ordinal numbers. The
results suggest that knowledge of the successor for cardinal
numbers precedes that for ordinal numbers. In addition, for
both cardinal and ordinal numbers, children generally failed
to demonstrate understanding that the successor of a given
number is unique.
Keywords: Counting; Natural Numbers; Cardinal Number;
Ordinal Number; Successor Function.

Introduction
A large amount of research has examined children’s
understanding of natural numbers (i.e. positive integers) and
counting (e.g. Baroody, 1987; Fuson, 1988; Gelman &
Gallistel, 1978; Piaget, 1952; Schaeffer, Eggleston, & Scott,
1974; Wynn, 1990, 1992). One interesting phenomenon that
has been observed is that children aged two to three years
may appear at first glance to know how to count; they may
correctly recite the count list (“one, two, three, four, …”)
and even point to items in a collection and tag them with a
number (e.g. Briars & Siegler, 1984; Fuson, 1988).
However, when asked “how many” items are in a collection
they just “counted”, these children often do not know
(Schaeffer, Eggleston, & Scott, 1974; Wynn, 1990, 1992).
Moreover, many children who can correctly answer the
“how many” question are unable to produce a collection of
objects of a specific cardinality (Le Corre & Carey, 2007;
Wynn, 1992). For example, an experimenter might ask a
child to “give three toys to a puppet” and the child would
give an incorrect number. Failure on these basic tasks
suggests that young children (typically those under four
years of age) do not understand fundamental aspects of
natural numbers, including the Cardinality Principle. (see
Gelman and Gallistel, 1978 for principles of counting) This
principle states that when counting a collection of items, the
number associated with the final item counted represents the
cardinality of the collection of items (i.e. the number of
items).
Accurate performance on such “Give-N” tasks has been
taken as evidence that children have knowledge of the
cardinality principle (Le Corre & Carey, 2007; Wynn,
1992). This knowledge emerges in a series of stages. First
children respond by giving an arbitrary or an idiosyncratic
number of items (e.g. always a handful or always one). By
age 2 ½ to 3 years, children typically respond correctly
when asked to give one item, but give an incorrect number

for numbers larger than one. Then children become “twoknowers”, correctly responding to requests for one or two
items, but incorrectly for larger numbers. Subsequently,
they become “three-knowers” and possibly later “fourknower”. After several months as a “subset-knower” (for
collections less than five), a child typically reaches a stage
where they can respond correctly to a request for any
number of items (i.e. cardinal-principle knower).
Some researchers have suggested that children transition
from subset knowers to cardinal-principle knowers through
a bootstrapping process (Carey, 2004). Children who have
knowledge of cardinality for collections of one, two, and
three items extend this knowledge to larger collections of
items by the inductive inference “If the number N represents
the cardinality of a set of N items, then the next number in
the count list, N+1, represents the cardinality of a set of N
+1 items. Sarnecka and Carey (2008) describe this notion
of a “next number” representing cardinality of a set one unit
larger than currently under consideration as knowledge of
the mathematical concept of successor. They suggest that
cardinal-principle knowers have implicit knowledge of the
successor function that enables them to make the induction
from knowledge of cardinalities of small sets (e.g. less than
four) to cardinalities of larger sets. They support their
argument by demonstrating that cardinal-principle knowers,
and not subset-knowers, recognize (1) that adding one item
and not subtracting one item to a set of cardinality five
produces a set of cardinality six and (2) that adding one item
to a set of cardinality four results in five while adding two
items results in six.
While it is clear from these results that children who
understand the cardinality principle, as evidence by accurate
performance on “Give-N” tasks, perform better on other
numerical tasks than children who don’t understand the
cardinality principle, these results do not necessarily imply
that cardinal-principle knowers have knowledge of the
successor function. The interpretation of successor that
Sarnecka and Carey (2008) employ is essentially a notion of
“there is a next”. This interpretation is inconsistent with a
formal mathematical definition of successor function, and
more importantly it is insufficient to generate the natural
numbers and hence explain the acquisition of the natural
numbers. As Lance, Asmuth, and Bloomfield (2005) point
out, the simple notion that there is a “next” number can
describe sets other than the natural numbers. For example,
the set of integers with addition modulo 12 (i.e. equivalent
to telling time on a standard clock face) has a successor
function; the successor of one is two, the successor of two is

1045

three, etc. However, unlike the natural numbers, the
successor of twelve is one.
The problem with the Sarnecka and Carey interpretation
is that they omitted two necessary characteristics of the
successor function. First, that the number one is not the
successor of any number (if we do not include zero in the
set of natural numbers). Second, the successor of a number
is unique. For example, the successor of two is only three;
and three is the successor only of two. Specifically, the
natural numbers can be defined by the Dedekind/ Peano’s
Axioms that state the following (Dedekind, 1901).
1. One is a natural number.
2. Every natural number has a successor that is a natural
number.
3. One is not the successor of any natural number.
4. Two natural numbers for which the successors are
equal are themselves equal (i.e. the successor of any
natural number is unique).
5. If a set, S, of natural numbers contains one and for
every k in S, the successor of k is also in S, then every
natural number is in S.
These axioms provide necessary and sufficient criteria to
generate the set of natural numbers and therefore knowledge
of these axioms could explain the acquisition of natural
numbers.
The interpretation of successor used in the Sarnecka and
Carey (2008) study does not demonstrate uniqueness of the
successor function. Specifically, demonstrating that a child
recognizes five as the cardinality of a set that contained four
and then another item was added, does not imply that the
child knows that cardinality of five cannot be achieved by
adding one to another set size. In our everyday lives, as
adults we take this implication for granted, but we cannot
assume that children do. Therefore demonstrating that
children have knowledge of the successor without
demonstrating its uniqueness cannot fully explain how
children acquire knowledge of natural numbers.
Additionally, the concept of successor is an ordinal
concept, yet is has been tested in the context of cardinality.
The goal of the present study was to examine the
conditions under which young children demonstrate
knowledge of the successor function. If children who
understand the cardinality principle demonstrate knowledge
of a unique successor for cardinal numbers, then perhaps, as
Sarnecka and Carey suggest, knowledge of the successor
function “turns a subset knower into a cardinal principle
knower”. Furthermore, if children demonstrate this
knowledge in the context of both cardinal number and
ordinal numbers, then knowledge of the successor may
explain the acquisition of natural number and their ordinal
properties.
However, if children fail to appreciate the uniqueness of
the successor, then we cannot conclude that children’s
understanding of the successor is sufficient to give rise to
knowledge of the cardinality principle and to the natural
numbers.

Mathematically, uniqueness can be proven by
demonstrating that for two natural numbers, a and b, if the
successor of a = the successor of b, then a = b. Knowledge
of a unique successor can be tested in an analogous way by
stating a number and asking the participant what number
immediately precedes it. Two testing contexts were created,
one cardinal and one ordinal. Participants were tested on
their ability to state a next number when given a number
(i.e. successor). These questions are denoted as +1
questions in the Method section. Participants were also
tested on their ability to state a preceding number when
given a number (i.e. uniqueness of the successor). These
questions are denoted as -1 questions in the Method section.
The cardinal context involved collections of circular disks
that were placed under a cup. Participants needed to state
how many disks were under the cup when a disk was added
or removed. The ordinal context involved a simple board
game in which participants were asked the number
associated with locations before or after the location of a
game pawn (see Figure 1).

Experiment
Method
Participants Participants were 35 preschool children (21
girls, 14 boys, M = 3.86 years, SD = 0.15) recruited from
preschools and childcare centers in the Columbus, Ohio area.
Materials and Design Participants were given a series of
different tasks, How-Many task, Give-N task, Cup task, and
Game task.
How-Many task. This task consisted of six questions and
involved black circular chips approximately 1 inch in
diameter. For each question, the experimenter placed a
collection of chips on a plastic plate approximately 7 inches
in diameter. The experimenter then showed the child the
collection of chips and asked, “Can you tell me how many
chips are here?” The questions presented collections of size
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 in a pseudo-random order.
Give-N task. This task consisted of six questions testing the
numbers 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 in a pseudo-random order. The
experimenter placed a collection of ten chips in front of the
child. The experimenter then gave the child the plastic plate
and asked, “Can you give me N chips on this plate?”
Cup task (Cardinal Test). This task was designed to
measure knowledge of the successor function in the context
of cardinal numbers. Materials for this task included black
circular chips and a red, plastic cup. For each question, the
experimenter placed a specific number of chips in front of
the child and clearly stated the number of chips presented.
Next, the experimenter covered the chips with the cup and
did one of two things. Either the experimenter added
another chip to the hidden amount or took a chip away from
the hidden amount. To prevent the child from seeing the
adjusted number of chips, the chip was added or removed by
lifting a corner of the cup only slightly and sliding a chip in
or out. After the adjustment was made, the child’s job was
to tell the experimenter the number of chips under the cup.

1046

Two practice trials with feedback were given before the test
questions. A total of twenty-two questions were presented.
There were ten questions in which one chip was added (i.e.
Cardinal +1 questions), two for each initial number of 1
through 5. For example, for an initial number of 1, one chip
was placed under the cup and then an additional chip was
added. There were eight questions in which one chip was
removed (i.e. Cardinal -1 questions), two for each initial
number of 2 through 5. For example, for an initial number
of 2, two chips were placed under the cup and then one chip
removed. There were four additional questions in which
two chips were added or removed (i.e. 2+2, 3+2, 3-2, and 42). Questions were presented in a pseudo-random order.
Board Game task (Ordinal Test). This task was designed to
measure knowledge of the successor function in the context
of ordinal numbers. Prior to administering the actual
successor game task, participants were given a short test of
understanding of the board game. This test was administered
to ensure that participants understood how to move a game
pawn across spaces on a board by counting contiguous
spaces.
Materials for this task consisted of a laminated “game
board” with ten contiguous, linear spaces and several colored
game pawns (see Figure 1). Three arrows were placed on the
board game to guide the direction of movement along the
spaces on the game board. For half the participants the
arrows pointed left, and for the other half the arrows pointed
right. The experimenter told the child that they were going to
play a number game. Both the child and the experimenter
chose a game pawn to use. The experimenter told the child
that he/she can count on the board by counting and moving
the pawn one space at a time in the direction of the arrows on
the board. The experimenter demonstrated this and then told
the child, “the funny thing about this game is that you never
know where I am going to start my counting”. The
experimenter showed the child two examples. The following
is an excerpt of the script.
I might start counting on any one of these spaces. So for
example, maybe I would start here (placing the game
piece on the 3rd space on the board). If I count to 5, I
would count like this; count 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 (tapping on each
subsequent space with the game piece) and stop here, at
5.
After the two examples, the participant was given five
questions to measure understanding of the game (i.e.
practice game test). For these questions, the experimenter
pointed to a specific space on the board, asked the child to
count from that space to a given number (2 through 6 in
pseudo-random order), and leave his/her pawn on the
stopping space. The child was told to use his/her game
pawn and tap each passing space as he/ she counted. Each
of these trials had a different starting space.
For the ordinal successor test, the experimenter
explained to the participant that in the game the child will
not know the space on which the experimenter will start
counting, the experimenter will count in her head, not out
loud, and then tell the child the number that she stopped at,

Figure 1. Picture of the game board and pawn used to
test knowledge of the successor function in the context
of ordinal numbers.
leaving her pawn on the stopping location. The following
is an excerpt of the script.
I am counting in my head. You don’t know where I
started, but I am stopping right here (placing the game
pawn on a specific space on the board) at this number, X
(where X ranged from 1 to 6). What number did I stop
at?
Corrective feedback was given if necessary. Then the
experimenter asked one of two questions, either “What
number would I count if I kept counting until here
(pointing to the next space forward)” or “What number did
I count when I was here (pointing to the space before the
stopping space)?” Twenty-two questions were presented in
a pseudo-random order. These questions were analogous to
those in the Cardinal Test (i.e. cup task) and included
Ordinal +1 questions, Ordinal -1 questions, and four
additional questions in which two chips were added or
removed (i.e. 2+2, 3+2, 3-2, and 4-2).
Prior to the actual ordinal test just described, the
experimenter gave the participant four practice questions
with corrective feedback. For two of the questions, the
experimenter actually indicated her starting position and
counted out loud. For two questions, the experimenter did
not indicate her starting position and did not count out
loud.	  
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
between-subjects condition that differed in the order of two
successor tasks (i.e. the cup task and the game task).
Procedure Participants were tested in a quiet room at their
preschool by a female experimenter. The experiment was
conducted in two sessions over two days. In the first
session, participants completed the How-many task, the
Give-me task, and one of the successor tasks. In the second
session, participants completed the second successor task.
Responses were recorded on paper by the experimenter.

Results
Each participant was categorized as a cardinal principle
knower (CP-knower) or non-cardinal principle knower
(Non-CP-knower) based on his/her performance on the
“How Many” and “Give-N” questions. A participant was
considered to be a CP-knower if he/she achieved scores of
at least 83% correct (i.e. 5/6) on both the “How many” and
the “Give-N” tests. The criteria for knowledge of the

1047

cardinality principle were similar to that of previous
research (e.g. Sarnecka & Carey, 2008; Wynn, 1992).
Seventeen participants were categorized as CP-knowers and
18 participants were categorized as Non-CP-Knowers.
Unlike previous research, the present analysis did not
examine performance of specific subset-knowers. The
present analysis focused on performance on the successor
tasks (i.e. Cardinal +1, Cardinal -1, Ordinal +1, and Ordinal
-1 questions).
Tasks similar to the cardinal successor task have been
used in previous research (e.g. Sarnecka & Carey, 2008).
However, the ordinal successor task has not been used in
previous research. Therefore, to ensure that any poor
performance on this task was due to lack of knowledge of
the successor function and not due to failure to understand
the task, the primary analysis included only those
participants who demonstrated understanding of the context
of the game (the ordinal successor task) by scoring at least 4
of 5 correct on the practice game test. Seven children were
excluded from the analysis for scoring below 4 (M = 1.00,
SD = 1.15). Accuracy on the practice game test was high for
the participants who scored above 4 (M = 4.89, SD = .31).
There were differences between the seven excluded
participants and the remaining participants in the frequency
of CP-knowers. Only one of the excluded seven participants
met the criteria for CP-knower, while 16 of 28 (57%) of the
remaining participants were CP-knowers, this difference in
proportion was significant, Fisher Exact Test, p = .05. Also
note that for these participants, the mean scores on the
Cardinal +1 questions (M = 58.6%, SD = 20.7%) and on the
Cardinal -1 questions (M = 64.3%, SD = 26.4%) was not
statistically different from those of the participants who did
understand the game (M = 72.9%, SD = 19.8% and M =
71.9%, SD = 18.2% for the Cardinal +1 and Cardinal –1
questions respectively), independent samples t(33)s < 1.74,
ps > .09. In addition, there was no difference in age
between these groups of children (M = 3.8 years SD = .17
and M = 3.9 years SD = .14 for the seven excluded
participants and the remaining participants respectively).
The remaining analysis focuses on performance on the
four types of successor questions (i.e. Cardinal +1, Cardinal
-1, Ordinal +1, and Ordinal -1). No differences in
performance between the two between-subject conditions
(i.e. Cup 1st and Game 1st) was found for any of these
measures, independent samples t(26)s < 1.15, ps > .25.
There was also no difference between the two conditions in
proportion of CP-knowers (60% of Cup 1st participants and
54% of Game 1st participants), 𝜒 !    1, 𝑁 = 28 =    .11, 𝑝 =
.74. There was no difference in performance on the Ordinal
+1 and Ordinal -1 tests for participants who moved the
game pawn to the left and those who moved the game pawn
to the right, independent samples t(26)s < .13, ps > .89.
Therefore, data was collapsed across these conditions.
Figure 2 presents mean accuracy on each Cardinal +1
question and each Ordinal +1 question for Non-CP-knowers
and CP-knowers. Figure 3 presents mean accuracy on each

Figure 2. Mean Accuracy (% Correct) on Cardinal and
Ordinal +1 Questions. Error bars represent standard error
of the mean.

Figure 3. Mean Accuracy (% Correct) on Cardinal and
Ordinal -1 Questions. Error bars represent standard error
of the mean.
Cardinal -1 question and each Ordinal -1 question for NonCP-knowers and CP-knowers. Both CP-knowers and NonCP-knowers were more accurate on cardinal questions than
ordinal questions. Scores on Cardinal +1 questions were
higher than scores on Ordinal +1 questions, paired sample ts
> 4.63, ps < .001; scores on Cardinal -1 questions were
higher than scores on Ordinal -1 questions, paired sample ts
> 5.63, ps < .001. However, beyond this comparison,
different patterns of results emerged for CP-knowers and
Non-CP-knowers.
On both Cardinal +1 questions and Ordinal +1 questions
(Figure 2), CP-knowers were more accurate than Non-CPknowers, independent samples t(26)s > 2.06, ps < .05. On
Cardinal +1 questions, Non-CP-knowers had a clear drop in
accuracy as the test numbers increased. Repeated Measures
ANOVA shows significant differences in accuracy on the
different test questions, F(4, 44) = 4.99, p < .01,  𝜂 ! = .31
and downward trend in accuracy, linear and cubic contrasts
F(1, 11)s > 6.40, ps < .03,  𝜂 ! s = .36. CP-knowers did not
have a significant drop in performance on the Cardinal +1
question, repeated measures ANOVA, F(4, 60) = .98 p >
.42. On the Ordinal +1 questions for Non-CP-knowers,
there was a moderate difference in accuracy across the
different test numbers, repeated measures ANOVA F(4, 44)
= 2,37 p =.06,   𝜂 ! = .18. No significant difference in

1048

accuracy on the Ordinal +1 questions was found across the
different test numbers for CP-knowers, repeated measures
ANOVA F(4, 60) = 1.97 p =.11.
While CP-knowers were more accurate than Non-CPknowers on the Cardinal +1 and Ordinal +1 questions, there
were no differences in accuracy between these two groups
on Cardinal -1 and Ordinal -1 questions (Figure 3),
independent samples t(26)s < 1.34, ps > .19. Both CPknowers and Non-CP-knowers had a linear drop in accuracy
on Cardinal -1 questions as the test number increased,
repeated measures ANOVA Fs > 6.27 ps < .001,  𝜂 ! s > .29,
linear contrasts Fs > 17.9 ps < .01,  𝜂 ! s > .59. On Ordinal 1 questions, there were no differences in accuracy across
questions for either the CP-knowers or Non- CP-knowers,
repeated measures ANOVAs Fs < .26 ps > .85.
There were also no significant differences in accuracy
between CP-knowers and Non-CP-knowers on the Cardinal
and Ordinal +2 and -2 questions (see Table 1), independent
samples ts <1.16, ps > .25. Both CP-knowers and Non-CPknowers were more accurate on Cardinal questions than on
Ordinal questions, paired samples ts > 2.34, ps < .04.
Additionally, Non-CP-knowers scored higher on Cardinal
+2 questions than on Cardinal -2 questions, paired sample
t(11) = 3.00, p < .02. CP-knowers were moderately more
accurate on Cardinal +2 questions than on Cardinal -2
questions, t(15) = 1.81, p = .09. Scores on the Ordinal +2
and Ordinal -2 were quite low with no differences between
+2 and -2 questions for either group, paired samples ts <
1.15, ps > .27.

Discussion
The goal of the present study was to investigate young
children’s understanding of natural numbers by examining
the conditions under which they demonstrate knowledge of
the successor function. Specifically, do children have
knowledge of the successor function that can explain the
emergence of the cardinality principle? Do children have an
understanding of the successor function in both cardinal and
ordinal contexts?
The results indicate that CP-knowers have some
understanding of the concept of a successor that Non-CPknowers do not have. When asked to state a successor of a
given number (i.e. +1 questions), CP-knowers outperformed
Non-CP-knowers in both cardinal and ordinal contexts. CPknowers were quite accurate stating a successor for cardinal
numbers (M = 80.0, SD = 7.5 on all Cardinal +1 questions),
but their accuracy was much lower for ordinal numbers (M
= 51.9, SD = 8.7 on all Ordinal +1 questions).
However, the results provide no evidence that CPknowers appreciate uniqueness of the successor function.
They could not reliably state a correct preceding number (-1
questions). In both the cardinal and the ordinal contexts,
their accuracy on stating a preceding number was no higher
than that of the Non-CP-knowers. Therefore, the extent of
CP-knowers’ knowledge of the successor cannot explain the
acquisition of the cardinality principle and of natural
numbers.

Table 1: Mean Accuracy (% Correct) for +2 and -2
Questions. Standard deviations are in parentheses.

Cardinal Questions
+2
-2
Ordinal Questions
+2
-2

Non CPknower

CPknower

42 (36)
79 (26)

56 (40)
78 (26)

8 (19)
17 (25)

22 (36)
13 (29)

The fact that accuracy on Cardinal -1 questions drops
linearly as the test number increases suggests that an
awareness of unique successors may emerge in stages with
smaller numbers preceding larger numbers. Therefore
young children’s understanding of unique successors is not
an understanding of a general principle, but rather it is
isolated and tied to specific numbers.
It is also interesting to note that overall, CP-knowers
outperformed Non-CP-knowers only on the Cardinal and
Ordinal +1 questions. This suggests that knowledge of the
cardinality principle provides no better insight into the
uniqueness of the successor (Cardinal and Ordinal -1
questions) and no better accuracy on the +2 and -2 questions
than the absence of this knowledge.
The present findings also suggest that acquisition of
cardinality precedes that of ordinality (see Colome & Noel,
2012 for similar findings). The fact that young children can
correctly recite the count list might suggest that they have
an appreciation of order and an understanding of successor
in the context of order. However, in the present study,
participants could not reliably determine successors in a
simple ordinal number task. This indicates that the count
list that children recite is simply a memorized sequence that
does not reflect the properties of natural numbers. At the
same time, both CP-knowers and Non-CP-knowers were
more able to determine the successor in the cardinal number
task than in the ordinal task. Performance on the +2 and -2
questions provides additional evidence that knowledge of
cardinal numbers precedes that of ordinal numbers; both
CP-knowers and Non-CP-knowers were markedly more
accurate on the cardinal questions than the ordinal
questions.
The results of this study demonstrate that young children
do have some knowledge of the successor, but the nature of
this knowledge is not sufficiently constrained to explain the
emergence of the cardinality principle and full
understanding of the natural numbers. What knowledge or
experience does provide sufficient constraints to account for
mature representations of natural numbers is unclear and
requires further investigation.

1049

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education
(#R305B070407).

References
Baroody, A. J. (1987). Children’s mathematical thinking: A
developmental framework for preschool, primary, and
special education teachers. New York: Columbia
University Teachers College.
Briars, D., & Siegler, R. S. (1984). A featural analysis of
preschoolers’ counting knowledge. Developmental
Psychology, 20, 607–618.
Carey, S. (2004). Bootstrapping and the origins of concepts.
Daedalus, 133, 59–68.
Colome, A., & Noel, M. P. (2012). One first? Acquisition of
the cardinal and ordinal uses of numbers in preschoolers.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 113, 233-247.
Dedekind, R. (1901). The nature and meaning of numbers
(W. W. Beman, trans.). In Essays on the theory of
numbers. London: Open Court. Available online:
https://openlibrary.org/works/OL2409707W/Essays_in_th
e_theory_of_numbers_1._Continuity_of_irrational_numb
ers_2
Fuson, K. C. (1988). Children’s counting and concepts of
number. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Gelman, R., & Gallistel, C. R. (1978). The child’s
understanding of number. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Le Corre, M., Van de Walle, G., Brannon E. M., & Carey,
S. (2006). Re-visiting the competence/performance debate
in the acquisition of the counting principles. Cognitive
Psychology, 52, 130-169.
Piaget, J. (1952). The child’s conception of number.
Routledge & Kegan Paul: London, England.
Rips, L. J., Asmuth, J., & Bloomfield, A. (2006). Giving the
boot to the bootstrap: How not to learn the natural
numbers. Cognition, 101, B51-B60.
Sarneka, B.W., & Carey, S. (2008). How counting
represents number: What children must learn and when
they learn it. Cognition, 108, 662-674.
Schaeffer, B., Eggleston, V. H., & Scott, J. L.(1974).
Number development in young children. Cognitive
Psychology, 6, 357-379.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36, 155–193.
Wynn, K. (1992). Children’s acquisition of number words
and the counting system. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 220–
251.

1050

