UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
4-month-olds Discover Algebraic Patterns in Music That 7.5-month-olds Do Not

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7204x90h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Dawson, Colin
Gerken, LouAnn

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

4-month-olds Discover Algebraic Patterns in Music That 7.5-month-olds Do Not
Colin Dawson (CDawson@Email.Arizona.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 1503 E. University Blvd
Tucson, AZ 85719

LouAnn Gerken, Ph.D. (Gerken@U.Arizona.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 1503 E. University Blvd
Tucson, AZ 85719
possesses a hierarchical structure, with units of different
sizes nested within each other. Whereas in language the set
of nested units might include phonemes, syllables and
words, in music the units are notes, chords and phrases of
various lengths. The input can contain structure at each of
these levels; which level is the most salient will depend in
part on the expectations of the listener. The second question
addressed by this paper is whether, over time, a learner’s
expectations will come to correspond to the sorts of
structure frequently encountered in a particular domain.

Abstract
The recent language acquisition literature has revealed
powerful, domain-general learning mechanisms that rely on
frequency and distributional properties of the input. A second
set of research investigates generalization of learned patterns
to new input. The relationship between these two bodies is
not entirely clear. The present paper demonstrates that the
latter mechanism appears to be domain-general as well,
although, in the domain of musical chord sequences, there is a
decrease in sensitivity to algebraic patterns between 4 months
of age and 7.5 months of age. We show that 4-month-old
infants can discriminate three-chord patterns based on their
AAB or ABA structure after being exposed to a set of patterns
representing one of the structures. By 7.5 months, however,
infants do not seem to make the discrimination, probably due
to their experience with musical sequences, in which
repetition plays less of a role than tonal structure.

What is Statistical Learning?

Introduction

To begin with, a brief discussion of the general cognitive
ability in question is warranted. The phenomenon referred
to as “statistical learning” (SL) has been of great interest to
those studying cognitive development over the past decade.
Broadly construed, SL refers to an unsupervised learning
process wherein an organism extracts frequency, probability
and/or distributional information from a set of input, thereby
structuring perception of the input.
One set of SL studies concerns subjects’ ability to parse
input into constituent elements – a critically important skill
for learning language. Saffran, Newport and Aslin (1996)
and Saffran, Aslin and Newport (1996) familiarized adults,
pre-school-aged children and 8-month-old infants with a
continuous stream of syllables comprising tokens of several
back-to-back, three-syllable pseudowords drawn from a
given “vocabulary”. When tested, all three groups could
discriminate between constituent strings and those that
occurred in the input stream, but which spanned word
boundaries.
In order to successfully perform this
discrimination, subjects had to track some sort of frequency
information in the familiarization stream. Further research
suggested that the relevant information might be the set of
transitional probabilities between elements (syllables and/or
segments), and not simple pattern frequency (Aslin, Saffran,
& Newport, 1998).
Maye, Werker and Gerken (2002) have observed infants
making use of a different kind of frequency information.
They show that infants make use of distributional properties
of the input, appearing to form either one or two phonetic
categories depending on whether instances of a consonant in
a familiarization stream have a unimodal or bimodal
distribution with respect to voice onset time.
A second set of research examines learners’ abilities to
detect relational properties in the input, and to discriminate

Until recently, it was thought in language acquisition circles
that the linguistic input a child receives is much too
impoverished to provide her with the rich structure
necessary to support observed production; that is, unless her
genetic endowment provided an intricate scaffolding in the
form of a Universal Grammar. On this view, much of the
structure was built in, and all that remained was for a set of
“switches” to become “triggered” by a few relevant
examples.
It has now become clear that the linguistic input available
to the child is vastly richer in information than previously
believed. Much of this information exists as statistically
reliable relationships among components of the input. This
discovery has led to a burgeoning line of research in
cognitive science, dedicated to examining a phenomenon
labeled “statistical learning”. One of the questions raised by
the research on statistical learning is whether the same
learning mechanisms apply across a range of domains and
not just to language. The first question directly addressed by
the experiment discussed here is whether the ability to make
a generalization based on the abstract relational properties
contained in an input set is unique to the domain of
language, or whether it might be applied to analogous
structure in musical input.
In order to discover statistical structure pertaining to
abstract relational properties across the units in an input set,
the learner must be inclined to analyze the input with
respect to that particular unit. Music, like language,

1198

new items that contain the same relational properties from
those that violate those relations. Gómez and Gerken (1999)
show that infants can learn rather complicated artificial
grammars with relatively little exposure, generalizing
“rules” to entirely novel strings. Marcus, et al. (1999) show
that 7.5-month-old infants can detect higher-order,
“algebraic” structure in a series of trisyllables,
discriminating an AAB structure from an ABA structure.
It is not clear how, or to what extent, this last type of
“rule-learning” is related to the type of statistical learning
that relies on frequency information. In particular, voice
onset time is a very low-level property, closely tied to the
surface form of a token. Similarly, transitional probabilities,
though relational in nature and somewhat less closely tied to
surface forms, nonetheless involve specific tokens. Even
the kind of relational dependency explored by Gómez and
Gerken (1999) involves relations between specific elements.
The commonality among instances of an AAB pattern,
regardless of the specific elements, is a strictly relational
one on the other hand, and seems very distant from surface
form.
Marcus, et al. (1999) invoke variables in their explanation
of this phenomenon. One could imagine, however, that all
that is necessary to detect an AAB pattern is the ability to
judge whether two successive items are the same or
different. If one simply stores a sequence of “sames” and
“differents” relative to pauses, the problem is not
qualitatively so different from one where surface form is
important.

Is SL Specific to Language?
The ability to segment a stream of information into
constituent units is undeniably necessary for the learner of
language; lumping together similar tokens into linguistic
categories greatly increases processing efficiency, while
making generalizations about relational properties is the
basis of syntax. Frequency and distributional information
clearly provide useful information that could assist the
infant in the first two tasks and possibly also the third. An
obvious question, though, is whether these abilities are
uniquely applied to language, or whether they are more
general cognitive phenomena. If the discovery of abstract
relationships is qualitatively different from statistical
learning about particular units, the question of domainspecificity might have a different answer for each of the two
cases.
Several experiments have demonstrated that SL-based
segmentation occurs not only with linguistic stimuli, but
also with tone stimuli and visual stimuli. Saffran, Aslin and
Newport (1999) substituted a tone for each syllable in the
familiarization streams used in the original experiments, and
demonstrated that all three groups learned the tone-word
boundaries just as easily as they had learned the syllable
pseudoword boundaries. Fiser and Aslin (2002) and
Kirkham, Slemmer and Johnson (2002) found similar
results, with adults and infants respectively, using
sequentially presented shapes. Learners can also segment a

visual scene into statistically reliable elements; Fiser and
Aslin (2001, 2002) combined spatially arranged base pairs
of shapes onto a grid, and showed that both adults and
infants could discriminate constituent base pairs from pairs
that appeared in the input only by a chance alignment of two
base pairs.
An alternative approach to the question of specificity to
language involves learners that do not use language.
Hauser, Newport and Aslin (2001) and Toro and Trobalon
(2005) familiarized tamarind monkeys and rats,
respectively, with the original stimuli from the 1996
segmentation study. They found that these animals, too,
could discriminate coherent from incoherent strings. Taken
together, these two collections of findings provide strong
evidence that at least the ability to segment using statistical
cues is not part of a modular language faculty, but rather a
general cognitive phenomenon.
It may be the case, however, that while a segmentation
ability is domain-general, the abstraction ability observed by
Marcus, et al. (1999) is reserved for language alone. This
would be a surprising result, in light of the wide range of
domains in which humans make abstract analogies (e.g.
Forbus, et al., 1998; Perott, Gentner & Bodenhausen, 2005);
nonetheless, it is the very view held by Fernandes, et al.
(2005). They substituted tones for the syllabic elements
from Marcus, et al. (1999), and found that 7.5-month-old
infants no longer appeared to detect the algebraic forms.
They claim that, while segmenting a stream of input using
statistical information appears to be a domain-general
ability, detecting abstract structures such as AAB is not
statistics but rule-learning, and is preferentially tuned,
perhaps even exclusive, to linguistic structures.
It is possible that the discrepancy between syllable
sequences and tone sequences found by Fernandes, et al. is
not due to a difference in learners’ abilities to discover
abstract relations in the input, but rather is due to a
difference in their willingness to consider a specific type of
relation at a certain level in the hierarchy. In particular, it
may be that after a certain amount of experience with a
domain where a certain kind of relation does not occur
systematically, learners might lose a degree of sensitivity to
that type of relation.

Input-dependent shifts in processing

1199

A loss of sensitivity to unsystematic characteristics of the
input is would not be unprecedented. For example, Werker
and Tees (1984) found a loss of sensitivity to those phonetic
contrasts that did not occur systematically in the languages
of infant perceivers. There are examples in the domain of
music as well. Saffran and Griepentrog (2001) found that
while 8-month-old infants readily make use of statistically
reliable absolute pitch cues to segment atonal tone streams,
adults do not succeed in segmenting these tone streams.
Adults will, however, make use of relative pitch cues to
segment atonal tone streams. Interestingly, Saffran (2003)
has shown that when tone streams are constructed within a
major key, adults can make use of absolute pitch cues or

relative pitch cues equally well. It is possible that the
reason for this discrepancy is that when absolute pitches
reoccur in the context of a tonal key, they can be
differentiated not only on the basis of their absolute pitch,
but also on the basis of their pitch relative to the tone center
of the key.
In any case, a shift in musical cognition from a focus on
local properties to a focus on more global properties makes
adaptive sense. In the case of phonetic discrimination, the
loss of sensitivity to non-native contrasts can be attributed
to a need to spend cognitive resources on determining
meaning in language, rather than on making fine-grained
perceptual discrimination that are irrelevant to the identity
of a word. In other words, a priority is placed on more
global, semantic distinctions, at the expense of local, surface
perception. In music, the specific key of a melody does not
change its identity; instead, determining whether a person is
humming “Happy Birthday” or “The Volga Boat Song”
requires detection of the relative pitch structure. If either of
these melodies is transposed, it will still be recognizable,
but if any interval is altered, it will be immediately noticed.
Music is in some sense two-dimensional, containing pitch
and time information. Both of these dimensions contain
both atomic and relational properties. The evidence for a
developmental shift from a focus on absolute pitch to a
focus on pitches in relation to each other and within a scale
structure is evidence of a shift of perceptual emphasis
toward relational properties along the pitch dimension.
It would not be surprising if a similar shift were found in
perception along the temporal dimension. In fact, Hannon
and Trehub (2005) found a loss of sensitivity to metric
discrepancies, between infancy and adulthood, when the
metric ratios that were used deviated from the small integer
ratios commonly found in Western music. This finding
suggests that while infants are sensitive to fine-grained
temporal variation, adults tend to assimilate durations into a
relational scheme.
Perhaps the most important cognitive process with respect
to the temporal dimension of music is the grouping of
events into larger constituents. In this, music is similar to
language. Successful temporal grouping can greatly reduce
the memory load required to “appreciate”, and especially to
reproduce, the music. A potential consequence of this
grouping, however, is a loss of sensitivity to group-internal
structure.
The present study may provide some insight into changes
in the perception of music within the first year of life. Of
particular interest is the relationship between learners’
expectations about structure in particular domains on the
one hand, and the kinds of structures reliably found in those
same domains. Specifically, our prediction is that learners
with less experience with music will readily detect arbitrary
structural patterns in music, while more experienced
learners will be less able to quickly pick up on structures
that are not typically found in the music they have had
experience with.

Method
Participants
Twenty-seven infants, recruited from the Tucson area,
participated in this study. Of those, nine were between four
months and four months and two weeks old (mean age = 19
weeks), and eighteen were between seven and eight months
old (mean age = 32 weeks). Four of the 4-month-olds and
eight of the 7.5-month-olds were female. Data from three
additional 4-month-olds and six additional 7.5-month-olds
were excluded from analysis due to these infants’ failure to
complete the required number of trials.

Stimuli
Familiarization trials contained eight distinct three-note
chords, half major triads and half minor triads, randomly
sampled without replacement from among the twelve roots
between middle C and the B above it. The set of chords was
pseudorandomly divided in half, four labeled “A” and four
labeled “B”, with the following constraints: major and
minor triads were distributed evenly, at most one of the
three notes was contained in both of any possible pair of A
and B elements, and of the sixteen possible pairs of A and B
elements, the root of the B chord was the higher of the two
half the time, and the lower of the two half the time. Each
chord was 625 msecs long.
Three-chord phrases of the forms AiAiBj and AiBjAi were
then constructed, such that all sixteen combinations of A
and B elements were represented in each type. Two
familiarization trials were constructed, one containing each
pattern. Each trial contained three blocks, each of which
contained a different randomized order of the sixteen
chords. The same randomized orders, with respect to the
combinations of A and B elements, were used for each
pattern. There were no pauses between chords within a
phrase, and 625 msecs of silence between phrases. An
entire familiarization trial lasted two minutes.
Four additional triads were generated, two major and two
minor, using the four remaining root notes. These chords
made up the test trials. One each of the major and minor
chords was assigned at random to the “A” category, the
other two to the “B” category. Once again, in two of the
four possible combinations of A and B triads, the root of the
B chord was higher than that of the A chord; in the other
two it was lower. Four AAB phrases and four ABA phrases
were created. Two AAB and two ABA test trials were built
from these phrases, such that each phrase occurred three
times per trial, orders randomized by block and matched
between AAB and ABA trials. The tempo and spacing was
identical to that in the familiarization trials.
No two three-chord phrases, across familiarization and
test trials, contained exactly the same relative pitch patterns.

Procedure

1200

The headturn preference procedure (Kemler Nelson,
Jusczyk, Mandel, Myers, Turk, & Gerken, 2005) was used.
Infants were seated on a parent’s lap in a small room. The

parent listened to popular music through headphones, in
order to mask the music heard by the infants and to prevent
inadvertent influence on the infant by the parent. Parents
were instructed that they could end the study at any time by
signaling to the observer via the camera.
During the familiarization phase, a light directly in front
of the infant flashed until the observer judged the infant to
be looking at it, at which point a light on the left or right
would begin flashing. When the infant looked first at the
side light and then away for two consecutive seconds, the
center light would flash again, and the cycle would begin
again. This continued for the duration of the familiarization
music, which played uninterrupted for two minutes. Note
that in this stage there was no correspondence between
infants’ looking behavior and the music.
After the familiarization sequence ended, the test phase
began immediately. The flashing lights behaved the same
way, except that now the sound was contingent on the infant
orienting to a side light. Each time a side light began
flashing and the infant oriented toward it, one of the four
test trials would play, continuing until either the infant
looked away for two consecutive seconds or 30 seconds had
elapsed. Each infant heard three blocks of test trials. Each
of the four trials occurred once per block, the order
randomized on-line within each block.
The observer controlling the presentation of the music
sequences could not hear anything happening within the
booth, and so was blind to the category of each test trial.
The computer automatically recorded the looking time for
each test trial.

Results
Criteria for Inclusion
In order for the infant to determine whether the pattern from
familiarization was being heard in a given test trial, she had
to hear at least one complete phrase. Therefore, if any trial
was shorter than two seconds, it was not included in the
analysis. This is standard practice in headturn preference
experiments. If any infant did not have at least three trials
of each type over two seconds, that infant’s data was
excluded from the analysis entirely.

Analysis
Two mean looking times were computed for each subject,
one for consistent pattern test trials and one for inconsistent
pattern test trials. Paired samples t-tests were conducted for
each age group. The 4-month olds showed a significant
preference for the test trials that were inconsistent with their
familiarization condition (t(8) = 2.77, p=0.02, two-tailed).
Eight of the nine infants of this age showed this pattern.
The 7.5-month-olds did not have a significant preference
(t(17) = 0.33, p=0.74, two-tailed). Seven of the eighteen
infants of this age showed a preference for inconsistent
trials. A chi-square test using the number of infants having
longer listening times for consistent trials versus

inconsistent trials was performed to contrast the two age
groups, and it was highly significant (χ2 (27)=6.08, p=.01).

Discussion
The preceding experiment contains two important findings.
First, the ability of 4-month-olds to discriminate old and
new algebraic patterns suggests that the ability to make
generalizations based on these patterns is not specific to
language. In fact, the infants that we have shown to possess
this ability with respect to music are a full 3.5 months
younger than the youngest infants that have demonstrated
the ability with respect to language.
The second interesting finding is that, at least with
respect to algebraic patterns in sequences of three musical
chords, it appears that infants’ readiness to categorize
musical phrases based on the abstract relationships among
component chords decreases somewhat between 4 and 7.5
months of age.

Interpreting the Performance Decline
There are a number of possible interpretations of this
finding. It may be that the two age groups perceive the
three-chord phrases with a different level of detail. If the 4month-olds are registering only the rise-fall contours of the
phrases, then the discrimination task might simply be a
matter of detecting rise-fall patterns that have been
encountered before. If, on the other hand, the 7.5-montholds are noticing specific intervals within the phrases, they
may be distracted from the properties shared within and
between familiarization and test. A possible source of
evidence against this hypothesis comes from Trehub,
Thorpe and Morrongiello (1987), who show that 10-montholds can group melodies based on common contour, even
when specific intervals are variable. In fact, performance in
this task was as good as in a task where intervals were not
variable. It should be noted, however, that in that
experiment, melodies consisted of single tones, as opposed
to chords, and could be attributed to a single, tonal key. The
aforementioned results are consistent with an interpretation
where infants are perceiving intervals and contours
simultaneously, and so the increased interval complexity in
our experiment could conceivably detract from processing
of contour.
Another potential source of distraction for the 7.5-montholds (not mutually exclusive with the one discussed above)
might be the pseudotonality of the stimuli. The individual
A and B elements in our experiment were major and minor
triads, each of which contained consonant intervals within
it. Horizontally, however, the chords did not fit into a single
scale structure; triads based on all 12 semitones in the
chromatic scale were used, and so no single key across
chords would be identifiable. This non-tonality is a
characeristic of the stimuli used by Fernandes, et al. (2005)
as well.
Trehub, Schellenberg and Kamenetsky (1999) report that
9-month-olds detect mistuned notes in unequal interval
scales (such as those used in traditional Western music), but
not in equal interval scales (of which the 12 tone chromatic

1201

scale is one), indicating that infants can make use of global
scale structure to organize their perception of music. If this
ability is in place by 7.5 months, the older infants in our
experiment could be attempting in vain to find the scale
structure across entire trials, which might keep them from
noticing the relational structure that exists within phrases. If
4 months olds are not snared in such a way, it may be that
they have not yet begun to perceive music for its scale
structure, or it may be that their smaller working memory
capacity leads them to focus on smaller units. On this
hypothesis, it would be interesting to test 7.5-month-olds on
strictly tonal stimuli. Perhaps once the global structure is
apparent, they will have more resources to direct at local
structure.
Finally, it could be the case that the two age groups are
simply focusing on units of a different size. For example,
while the 4-month-olds might be treating each chord as an
atomic unit, and phrases as compositional, 7.5-month-olds
could be treating phrases as atomic and perceiving entire
trials as compositional melodic units. Drake and Bertrand
(2001) suggest that a universal characteristic of perception
of temporal grouping might be to place homogenous
rhythmic textures together into a single “object”. Our
stimuli had two levels of rhythmic homogeneity: one within
phrases and one across phrases. Every chord within a
phrase was the same length, and spacing between chords
was identical, perhaps motivating a treatment of phrases as
units. This might have been the grouping used by 4-montholds. However, each phrase was also the same length, with
identical spacing between phrases, potentially motivating a
grouping of phrases into larger phrases. It may be that the
7.5-month-olds were perceiving this higher-level grouping.
In our experiment, there are two types of test trials with
respect to composition of individual phrases, but if phrases
are atomic, then the two types of test trials are identical with
respect to patterns across phrases.
One possible explanation for the discrepancy in unit size
is a difference in working memory capacity, combined with
a general preference for focusing on the highest-level unit
available. It is unlikely that 7.5-month-olds generally
cannot detect commonalities of within-phrase patterns,
however, in light of numerous experiments that show an
ability of infants this age and older to detect, for example,
commonalities in pitch contour between phrases (e.g.
Trehub, Schellenberg and Kamenetsky, 1999). Instead,
there may be something about the particular property of
interest in our experiment that causes 7.5-month-olds to
ignore commonalities between non-identical phrases.
Perhaps something about the infants’ experience with music
has led them to the conclusion that, with respect to algebraic
identity, it is entire phrases that are important. Indeed,
children’s songs contain quite a bit of repetition of entire
phrases, both immediately and with intervening phrases (i.e.
of the AAB and ABA variety), but within phrases, repetition
of single notes is idiosyncratic. For example, think about
the song “Three Blind Mice”. It contains several different
phrases, each of which is repeated two or three times. The
entire song could be described by the pattern AABBCCCA.
This structure is immediately apparent to a listener. Where
there is repetition of single notes, on the other hand, it is not

especially striking. Perhaps with their greater exposure to
music, 7.5-month-olds have learned to ignore algebraic
patterns of single notes or chords.

Innate vs. Learned Constraints and Biases
The preceding experiment gets at a question that is
fundamental in linguistics, and cognitive science generally.
It is often the case that, upon discovering some cognitive
discrepancy of one sort or another, whether it is a preference
for certain types of structure, a difference in processing
between language and another domain, or an apparent
specialization of function in the brain, we conclude that the
discrepancy reflects humans’ innate endowment. However,
we also need to consider that the discrepancy in cognition
could have arisen because of a discrepancy in the
environment. On occasion, examination of a population that
has had a lesser degree of exposure to the portion of the
environment in question could reveal that a cognitive
discrepancy, thought to be of the first type, is in fact of the
second.
We have shown that parallels in learning between
language and a non-linguistic domain exist not only in
segmentation, but also in a task that requires detection of
relational properties. With respect to the particular task
involved, however, these parallels begin to fade with age.
Our tentative conclusion is that this developmental shift is
due to differences in the structures found in the two
environmental domains. However, further research is
needed to convincingly determine whether the reason for
this fade is in fact due to differentiation of the structures
found in the two input environments, or whether there may
be some other reason for the performance decline.

References

1202

Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1998).
Computation of conditional probability statistics by
human infants. Psychological Science, 9, 321-324.
Drake, C. & Bertrand, D. (2001). The quest for universals in
temporal processing in music. Annual Proceedings of the
New York Academy of Science, 930, 17–27.
Fernandes, K., Marcus, G., & Little, J. (2005). On domainspecificity and a possible dissociation between rule
acquisition and rule generalization. Paper presented at the
2005 Boston University Conference on Language
Development.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12, 499-504.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. N. (2002). Statistical learning of new
visual feature combinations by infants. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 99, 15822-15826.
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., Markman, A. B., & Ferguson,
R. W. (1998). Analogy just looks like high-level
perception: Why a domain-general approach to analogical
mapping is right. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 10(2), 231-257.
Gerken, L. A. (2006). Decisions, decisions: infant language
learning when multiple generalizations are possible.
Cognition, 98, 67-74.

Gerken (submitted). Infants are biased to learn properties of
human languages. Manuscript submitted for publication.
University of Arizona.
Gómez, R. L. & Gerken, L. A. (1999). 11-month-olds are
sensitive to structure in an artificial grammar. Cognition,
70, 109-135.
Hannon, E. E. , & Trehub, SE (2005). Metrical categories in
infancy and adulthood. Psychological Science, 16, 48-55.
Hauser, M. D., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2001).
Segmentation of the speech stream in a nonhuman
primate: Statistical learning in cotton top tamarins.
Cognition, 78, B53-B64.
Kemler Nelson, D. G., Jusczyk, P. W., Mandel, D. R.,
Myers, J, Turk, A. & Gerken, L. A. (1995). The headturn
preference procedure for testing auditory perception.
Infant Behavior and Development, 18, 111-116.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2002).
Visual statistical learning in infancy: evidence for a domain
general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83, B35–B42.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Rao, S. B., & Vishton, P. M.
(1999). Rule learning by seven-month-old infants.
Science, 283, 77–80.
Maye, J., Werker, J. & Gerken, L. A. (2002). Infant
sensitivity to distributional information can affect
phonetic discrimination. Cognition, 82, 101-111.
Perrott, D. A., Gentner, D., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2005).
Resistance is futile: The unwitting insertion of analogical
inferences in memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
12. 696-702.

Saffran, J. R. (2003). Statistical language learning:
Mechanisms and constraints. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 12, 110-114.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., & Griepentrog, G. J. (2001). Absolute pitch in
infant auditory learning: Evidence for developmental
reorganization. Developmental Psychology, 37, 74-85.
Saffran, J. R., Johnson, E. K., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E.
L. (1999). Statistical learning of tone sequences by adults
and infants. Cognition, 70, 27-52.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996). Word
segmentation: The role of distributional cues. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Toro, J. M., & Trobalon, J. B. (2005). Statistical
Computations Over a Speech Stream in a Rodent.
Perception & Psychophysics, 67(5), 867-875.
Trehub, S. E., Schellenberg, E. G., & Kamenetsky, S.B.
(1999). Infants' and adults' perception of scale structure.
Journal of Experimental Psychology and Human
Perception and Performance, 25, 965–975.
Trehub, S. E., Thorpe, L. A. & Morrongiello, B.A. (1987).
Organizational processes in infants' perception of auditory
patterns. Child Development, 58, 741-749.
Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. C. (1984). Cross-language speech
perception: evidence for perceptual reorganization during
the first year of life. Infant Behavior and Development, 7,
49–63.

1203

