UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Catalytic Theory of Embodied Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7fp452k2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Carpenter, P.A.
Davia, Christopher J.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Catalytic Theory of Embodied Mind
P. A. Carpenter (Carpenter+@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Christopher J. Davia (c.j.davia@Sussex.ac.uk)
Centre for Research in Cognitive Science, University of Sussex
Sussex, UK

sensory receptors that transmit the signal. For example, it
assumes that we see because of our eyes and hear because of
our ears, an assumption that is called ‘Muller’s Doctrine of
Specific Nerve Energy.’ But both this doctrine and the
assumption that the perceiver is representing an independent
environment have been challenged by research on ‘sensory
substitution.’

Abstract
This paper describes a catalytic theory that grounds cognition
in biology, building on the proposals of (a) Gibson and
ecological psychologists concerning the role of invariance and
(b) Shepard, Gestaltists and neuroscientists concerning the
role of ‘resonating’ neural waves. Enzyme catalysis increases
the speed of a molecular reaction, perhaps via a type of wave,
a soliton, whose formation, persistence and form depend on
the structural invariance of its environment. Generalizing to
cognition (Davia, 2006), the waves of neural activity
constitute a catalytic process, with the organism’s perceptionaction invariance playing the role of the environmental
structure. This ‘generalized catalysis’ is a process by which an
entity mediates its environment and is the organism’s
experience.

Sensory-Substitution Research

Keywords: Perception; Consciousness; Neuroscience

Over the last two and a half decades, research has
demonstrated that individuals who are blind can learn to use
other modalities in order to recognize objects and navigate
the world (White et al., 1970). The use of the eyes is not
critical to experiencing the visuo-spatial environment;
instead, it appears to be dependent on the invariant patterns
that relate the organism’s perceptions and actions. This
point is best explained by briefly describing the research.
In tactile-visual substitution systems, the input from a
camera is fed to a vibro-tactile array located either on the
person’s back or tongue (Bach-y-Rita, Tyler & Kaczmarek,
2003). Importantly, the individual must manipulate the
camera, by panning or zooming, for a tactile sensation to be
experienced as an event or object. If the camera is kept in a
static position, the person’s experience of ‘the environment’
ceases. Also, another person cannot control the camera; its
movements must be linked to those of the perceiver/actor.
Participants initially report sensing the stimulation as
coming from the location of the device. But with practice,
they locate the source as outside themselves, and the
patterns become interpretable in terms of visuo-spatial
events and objects. The stimulation at the device’s location
is less salient. For example, after only 10 hrs of practice
with a vibro-tactile array on the tongue, congenitally blind
individuals can catch and throw balls and report perceiving
the flicker of candle flame for the first time.
Another mapping is given by an auditory-visual system
called vOICe (Oh-I-See). Grey-scale images from a video
camera are mapped into sounds via a left-to-right scan, with
pitch indicating elevation and loudness indicating brightness
(Meijer, 1992). Considerable practice is needed with this
device. One individual, who had lost her eye-sight as an
adult through an industrial accident, practiced for two years
in her bedroom, and she reported gradually acquiring spatial
navigation and object recognition in that context before
acquiring sensitivity to visual texture, depth, object

An Independent World vs. Invariance
In this paper, we will consider the relation of ‘mind and
brain,’ a phrase that expresses a problematic duality for our
field. In one attempt to bridge it, some scientists assume the
reductionist stance that the ‘mind’ eventually will be
understood in terms of the neurology or biochemistry of the
brain and body. Other researchers, inspired by the computer
metaphor, study the ‘mind’ as though it were independent of
its biological implementation. But benefits might arise from
examining the nature of the relation between life and its
environment. We will discuss one such proposal based on
enzyme catalysis (Davia, 2006). We explain how it accounts
for ‘sensory substitution’ data that are problematic for
conventional approaches and briefly consider some of its
potential implications for cognitive science.

The Modal Theory
The modal theory of the relation of mind and brain is based
on a causal sequence of physical processes. An event occurs
in the environment; ambient energy from the event impinges
on the receptors of the organism. The organism’s nervous
system transmits this signal to the brain. The organism’s
experience is a psychological correlate of the code that the
nervous system uses to transmit information about the
environment. In this model, the environment is independent
of the organism. The model also assumes that the quality of
the perceptual experience depends upon the particular
1080

recognition and navigation skills in new environments
(Fletcher, 2002). Individuals who use sensory-substitution
devices do not experience the environment in exactly the
same way as someone who uses their eyes; in that way,
‘substitution’ may be a misleading term. But Fletcher’s
report and those of others suggest considerable overlap in
the experiences.
This dissociation argues against Muller’s doctrine that
the quality of visuo-spatial experience is due to the
particular sense, e.g., eyes (O’Regan & Noë, 2001). The
phenomenon also provides evidence against the modal
model of perception as representing an independent
environment.

Autopoiesis and Experience

Perception-Action Invariance

In focusing on ‘experience’ as a key to understanding
‘mind,’ we are building on the ideas of Maturana and Varela
(1980, 1987), two brilliant neuroscientists who challenged
the assumption that a perceiver represents information about
an independent environment. They proposed a theory called
Autopoiesis, meaning ‘self-making.’ To explore how the
organization of a living system may give rise to cognition,
they began by considering a cell. Each cell has a boundary
that establishes its autonomy. The cell’s metabolism
determines what crosses the boundary, and it also
determines what changes occur within the cell. Generalizing
this insight to entire organisms, Autopoiesis proposes that
the organism brings forth its environment. This theory has
greatly influenced some researchers in AI (Brooks, 1987)
and situated cognition (Winograd & Flores, 1986).
By rooting ‘cognition’ in a living cell, Autopoiesis shifted
the definition of ‘cognition’ from the conventional meaning,
‘perception, action, and (human) thought,’ to ‘experience,’ a
concept that is so basic that it is associated with life itself.
Although the Catalytic theory also focuses on ‘experience,’
unlike Autopoiesis, it does not propose that an entity is
autonomous of its environment. Rather, it proposes that the
two are intimately related, specifically, that an entity lives
by virtue of mediating, or catalyzing, its environment.
At this point, we have argued that the assumption of an
independent environment fails, and instead, we pointed to a
role for perception-action invariance. We now turn to an
alternative understanding of the brain’s activity in terms of
the organism’s perception-action invariance.

In sensory substitution, the organism’s perception depends
critically on its actions. This conclusion comes not just
from sensory substitution research, but also from data on
‘normal’ perception. For example, it has long been known
that normal visual experience ceases if the visual display is
stabilized on the viewer’s lens, so that it moves with their
eyes and no new pattern occurs as a consequence of eye
movements.
The invariance arising from the interaction of an organism
in its ‘environment’ has been a key construct in the
Ecological Theory of perception inspired by Gibson (1979).
The role of perception-action invariance is also evident with
the skilled use of tools and athletic equipment. For example,
skilled rowers report feeling the water through their oars.
Given sufficient skill, the equipment becomes ‘transparent,’
analogous to the shift that occurs with sensory-substitution
devices. Ecological psychologists argue from such data that
perception is constrained by the environment, rather than
dependent on sensations (Carello & Turvey, 2000).
Dynamic Systems researchers also have pointed to the
intimate interrelation of perception and action, and used it to
argue against the assumption of an independent
environment (Kelso, 1995; Thelen, 1993). For example, the
placement of the walker’s feet when she is walking on a
sandy beach dynamically changes the compactness and
slope of the sand, which simultaneously affects her feet.
After reviewing a large number of such perception-action
‘contingencies’ in the visual domain, O’Regan and Noë
(2001) concluded that visual perception is visual
exploratory behavior.
The idea that the environment has patterns, including
complex, statistical contingencies, is the basis of many
psychological studies of ‘implicit learning.’ Acquiring
sensitivity to such patterns underlies the learning that is
modeled in many connectionist models. But the data
summarized by O’Regan and Noë (2001) and Ecological
psychologists suggest that the invariance is not ‘out there’ in
an environment that is independent of the organism. Rather,
the invariance is in the relations of the organism’s
perceptions and actions. We will argue that the invariance
may be only implicit relations that are made explicit in the
organism’s experience.

Resonance & Neural Waves

1081

Tracing back to the Gestalt psychologists and up to the
present, a minority of researchers have suggested that neural
and psychological processes are characterized by wave-like
activity. One of the best known proposals is Hebb’s
‘reverberatory cell assemblies,’ and others include Ashby’s
‘reverberatory circuits,’ Lashley’s ‘cortical standing waves’
and ‘resonance’ (Lehar, 2004; Shepard, 1984).
Neuroscientists have related sensory consciousness to the
wide-spread, synchronized, neural traveling waves in the
cortex and thalamus (e.g., Crick & Koch, 2003; Edelman
2003; Freeman, 1999; Grossberg, & Grunewald, 1997;
Llinas, 2001; Singer, 1993; Thompson & Varela, 2001).
For example, Freeman described his EEG results as: “…the
construction by nonlinear dynamics of macroscopic,
spatially coherent oscillatory patterns that cover the entire
cortex….”
A few researchers, including Shepard and Gibson, also
pointed to the wave-like or resonance-like nature of
perceptual experience itself. Shepard (1984, p. 433) claimed
that “the organism is, at any given moment, tuned to
resonate to the incoming patterns that correspond to the
invariants that are significant for it.”
These observations may reflect a single, unifying
principle; namely, the wave-like processes are the way by
which living organisms mediate (catalyze) their

environment, and they relate directly to the organism’s
experience (Davia, 2006).

Generalizing Catalysis
A catalyst increases the speed by which molecular reactants
form a thermodynamically more stable product, and the
catalyst emerges from the reaction able to catalyze another
such reaction. All catalyzed reactions run in the same
direction as they would without a catalyst, but the speed
increase is enormous, by factors of 106 to 1012 times.
Enzymes are biological catalysts, typically proteins.
Enzyme catalysis involves changes in the positions of
electron(s) and proton(s). Most researchers believe that
enzyme catalysis is ubiquitous in metabolism.
Theories of how enzymes work in metabolism
increasingly resemble massively parallel networks of
intercorrelated relations. The earlier model of metabolism in
biology was that enzymes worked in a specific linear
sequence to control a pathway. Such models are giving way
to models of metabolism as self-reinforcing cycles of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions (Weber & Depew, 2001),
essentially dynamic systems. Bechtel (1998) illustrated the
two contrasting models for the process of fermentation, as
shown in Figure 1.
In enzyme catalysis, the reaction ultimately occurs
because the product(s) is/are more thermodynamically
stable than the individual reactants. The catalytic process
facilitates the transition from the reactant(s) to the
product(s) by overcoming the structural constraints of the
reactants’ structure and dynamics. Research suggests that
catalysis takes advantage of the invariance (symmetries) of
the biological structure (the protein-substrate complex) to
deliver energy where it is needed to change the molecular
structure. The process appears to be ‘vibrationally-assisted,’
a wave-based facilitation that involves a type of localized,
non-linear wave, called a soliton.

Thought Experiment: Waves in the Canal
In order to make this argument, we first will convey a nonrepresentational perspective of the wave-like or resonancelike activity of the brain. When we picture neural traveling
waves in the brain, we may imagine them actually traveling
like water waves that move down through a canal.
However, a more helpful image reverses the two
components. Imagine the neural activity as a standing wave
that maintains its organization while mediating the passage
of water in the canal. This alternative, but equally valid,
perspective provides a different perspective on neural
waves. We suggest that macroscopic neural waves maintain
their structure or coherence while mediating the patterns of
impinging activity in sensory, motor and other neural areas
– patterns that arise from the organism’s history and ongoing interaction with its environment.
Applying this perspective to the sensory-substitution case,
such as the vOICe system, the movements of the person’s
head and body and the related responses of the sensorysubstitution device, imply a three-dimensional, textured
field that is subsequently made explicit in the individual’s
experience as a ‘visuo-spatial event.’ Practice with the
technology helps to structure the person herself, so that the
waves of her brain (nervous system and body) can organize
the energy, mediating the transitions that arise from her
interaction with the ‘environment.’ It is the perceptionaction invariance, not the sensory modality, which gives rise
to much of the invariance, and hence, accounts for its
similarity, but non-identity, to vision by eye. In this view,
the ‘environment’ depends on, and is not independent of,
the organism. The organism’s experience correlates with the
formation and persistence of neural waves that maintain
their coherence while mediating such transitions.
The Brain as an Excitable Medium Neural activity is a
thermodynamic process. A neuron, for example, is an
excitable medium in which energy is dissipated and then
replenished as the wave of excitation travels its axon. We
argue that the brain is best understood as an excitable
medium as a consequence of the metabolism of glucose and
other essential nutrients. This energy gradient is dissipated
by neural activity that is constrained by the organism’s
structure, including that arising from its history and ongoing activities. Thus, the non-linear neural waves can be
seen as a self-maintaining and self-sustaining dynamic, a
solution to the boundary conditions implicit in the structure
of the organism and the relation between the organism and
its ‘environment.’

Catalysis and Generalizing to the Brain
In this section, we suggest that a ‘high level’ description of
catalysis applies to macro-level phenomena, such as neural
waves. Also, the same general type of wave that describes a
neuron’s action potential also occurs in molecular catalysis.

Figure 1. A pathway representation (on the left) with a
series of co-enzymes as side loops, and as a dynamic system
of enzyme-catalyzed cycles (on the right) for the
fermentation process (from Bechtel, 1998, Figure 3, p. 310).

1082

Soliton Waves A soliton wave in water was first described
in the mid-1800’s by J. Scott Russell when a boat stopped
suddenly in a canal, and a solitary wave formed and moved,
maintaining its structure for over two miles (Remoissenet,
1999). Soliton waves are localized, can be very robust, and
occur in many types of nonlinear media (Filippov, 2000).
Solitons may be relative simple structures, but also may
manifest as complex, multidimensional spatio-temporal
structures. As in the case of action potentials, a soliton-like
wave may be started by an initial impetus above a threshold,
but its duration and form depend on the symmetries
(invariance) of its environment. Soliton-type waves occur in
both quantum and classical regimes; like quantum
phenomena, they exhibit both wave and particle-like
characteristics. Although distinctions among several related
types of waves (solitons, instantons, polarons) are major
research topics in biophysics and mathematics, what is
important for the current proposal is that the wave be a
localized, nonlinear solution to the boundary conditions that
constitute its environment.

forth, interacting with impinging energy. Our experience
manifests the perception-action invariance as a unified event
that is more thermodynamically stable than non-unified
patterns. This point is consistent with perceptual learning
phenomena. When a novice first hears notes from an
unfamiliar instrument in a foreign musical tradition, it is not
experienced as a melody. The experience of a unitized
melody only arises after repeatedly hearing that musical
tradition.
‘Implicit learning’ structures the organism
(Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986). As we described earlier
in the context of sensory substitution, practice gives rise to
coherent neural activity, a soliton-like wave that maintains
its organization, mediating the impinging transitions and
giving rise to the organism’s experience.

Main Theme If the essential theme of catalysis involves
overcoming structural constraints to dissipate energy, the
term ‘catalysis’ may be generalized to other micro-level and
macro-level processes involving soliton-like waves that
facilitate such transitions (Davia, 2006). Examples of such
processes occur throughout physiology, both at the microlevel (such as neuronal action potentials, DNA zipping and
unzipping), as well as in macro-level systems (e.g., the
heart). These can be viewed as examples of this generalized
definition of catalysis. Thus, the catalytic principle is
applicable at many scales, from enzymes, to cells, organs
and entire organisms: A living organism can be understood
as a unitary process of catalysis, mediating its environment.

Motor Activity The motor activity generated by the
locomotion of many species, including snakes and fish, has
been identified as soliton waves (Petroukhov, 1999).
Although waves may be obvious in the motor behavior of
eels, fish, centipedes and insects, even mammals move via
coordinated waves of leg activity. These data make the
‘input-process-output” view of the neural activity somewhat
less compelling (Davia, 2006). The modal model assumes
that the activity of the nervous system is a code that is
needed to translate between ‘input’ (perception) and
‘output’ (action). However, soliton-like waves occur in
motor behavior, as well as in physiology, including neural
action potentials. If the same ‘vocabulary’ occurs in all of
these domains, then there may be no need for translation!
This model has implications for how we understand motor
behavior. We suggest that motor behavior is what an
observer perceives of the organism’s catalytic process.
Thus, a millipede’s solitonic motion as it crosses a sand
dune (to morph Herb Simon’s classic example of the ant) is
an observer’s perspective of the millipede catalyzing an
aspect of its environment. These findings, if generalized,
may point toward a non-reductionist reconciliation of the
observation of waves in physiology and the observation of
waves in behavior; that hypothesis, however, requires
further development.

The Brain Mapping this proposal specifically to the brain,
the metabolic waves of the brain may constitute a unitary
process of catalysis (Davia, 2006). As mentioned earlier, the
brain is maintained in a far-from-equilibrium state through
the metabolism of glucose. The paths by which this energy
may dissipate are determined not by the brain itself, but by
the structural constraints arising from the organism’s history
and interaction with its environment, the perception-action
invariance discussed above. Thus, the perception-action
invariance acts as a set of boundary conditions (symmetries)
that are mediated by the neural activity to dissipate energy.
The brain and body can be understood as the medium of
catalysis. According to this theory, the objects and events of
the environment are not necessarily unified entities in
themselves, in spite of their appearance. Rather, they are
unitized by virtue of the organism’s experience, by neural
standing waves. A rotating cube, for example, does not
constitute a continuous, unified dynamic. However, if we
perceive a rotating cube, the neural waves associated with
that perception-action invariance constitutes a unified
dynamic. It is a solution to the boundary conditions arising
from our eye movements, our head movements, and so

Molecular Catalysis Process

1083

The details of the process of enzyme catalysis may further
clarify the proposed generalization of it to macro-level
processes. Initially during catalysis, the enzyme binds with
the reactants, forming an enzyme-substrate complex.
Enzyme catalysis requires the precise application of energy
along a reaction coordinate, and how this occurs is still a
matter of research. Previously it was believed that the
enzyme facilitated the reactants going to an intermediate
configuration, the transition state, solely via a classical
process that influenced the height of the energy barrier.
However, this common textbook explanation is no longer
accepted as sufficient or complete for catalysis at
physiological temperatures. Recent research suggests that a
vibrational mode of the enzyme-substrate complex
facilitates the transition (Knapp & Klinman, 2002; Sutcliffe

& Scrutton, 2002). It has been proposed that the vibratory
mode involves solitons or soliton-like waves (Sataric,
Zakula, Ivic, & Tuszynski, 1991). The protein chains of the
enzyme may support soliton waves that alter the
conformation of the enzyme-substrate complex, affecting
the width of the energy barrier. The conformational change
lessens the distance between specific parts of the enzyme
and thereby lessens the distance between the molecular
reagents that are bound to it. This shortening increases the
possibility of ‘quantum tunneling’ and increases the reaction
rate. This occurs because quantum mechanics treats a
particle as a probability-wave function. A particle cannot
exist near a barrier without its wave function extending into
the barrier. If the particle is near a barrier, and if the barrier
is narrow enough, the wave function may extend through
the barrier completely. Thus, there is a chance that the
particle will disappear from one side of the barrier and
appear on the other side, which is quantum tunneling.
Classical and quantum solitons have similar properties,
which may assist any transitions between quantum and
classical processes. Pragmatically, this observation helps us
to circumvent the debate about how widespread quantum
processes are in neural and biological systems (Tegmark,
2000).

Discussion
The Fractal Catalytic theory suggests that an organism is
intimately related to its environment; life is a process of the
environment, not in the environment. Life’s robustness may
depend on this relation. If the environment changes so
drastically that it cannot be mediated, then the life process
becomes incoherent and the entity dies. For example, if a
bacterium is removed from its environment, it dies. This
implication may be less obvious for humans. Unlike most
organisms, which depend on a specific type of environment,
humans are extraordinarily adaptive and able to mediate a
variety of environments. Nevertheless, the theory proposes
that our experience arises by virtue of the same catalytic
principle as in the case of a cheetah, a bacterium, or a single
cell.
Related Approaches The Fractal Catalytic theory builds on
insights from Dynamic Systems Theories (DST) and
connectionist models, particularly their focus on timevarying, massively parallel, correlated processes. Both
express the nonlinear, non-stationary nature of living
systems, and the ability of such systems to self-organize and
manifest emergent properties. Also like some DSTs,
Autopoiesis, and Gibson’s Ecological Psychology tradition,
the Fractal Catalytic theory suggests that our field move
away from the assumption that an organism is representing
an independent environment. A more fruitful theoretical
construct may be the invariance of an organism’s
perception-action relations. This suggests a partial reconstrual of the connectionist agenda; at least we need to reevaluate the common conception of ‘representation’
(Bechtel, 1998). A greater conceptual leap is the emphasis

of the present approach on ‘experience’ and its proposed
role of making explicit what may be otherwise implicit. The
emphasis on experience, rather than behavior, is a change in
focus, and interrelating the two foci, experience and
behavior, stands as a challenge.
The Fractal Catalytic theory may illuminate the
correlation between different experiences and different
patterns of neural activity. Although we have discussed
ordinary sensory experience in terms of awareness of
objects and events, it need not entail a separation of the self
and the environment. When individuals are in a ‘flow’ state,
skillfully performing a task that is at the cusp of their
competence, they may not experience themselves as
separate from the event (Csikszentmihalyi, 1993).
Heidegger argued that everyday cognition is fundamentally
this type of embodied know-how, awareness without
separating oneself out from the activity (Wheeler, 2005).
Catalysis may also illuminate some of the more familiar
correlations between states of awareness and neural
patterns, for example, as measured by the cortical
electroencephalograms (EEGs). For example, similar EEG
parameters are found at multiple spatial and temporal scales
(Freeman, 1999). Self-similar parameters are not an obvious
prediction of the modal model that largely conceives of
neural activity as local responses to functionalist challenges.
Self-similarity seems more consistent with processes that
are coordinated by instantiating the same general principle
at multiple scales: mediation of the entity’s environment.
Functionalism This current approach raises the issue of
how we should understand ‘functions’ (such as encoding,
memory retrieval, recognition, etc.) that are invoked in most
standard accounts of cognition. Functionalism assumes that
there are abstract functions that can be described separately
from their metabolism. This assumption may be based on a
misleading analogy to computers because a computer’s
function depends on the program’s logic, which is separate
from the circuit boards and so forth that make up its
metabolism. However, for living processes, the concept of
function only makes sense from the perspective of an
observer who is situating the process in a larger context
(Maturana & Varela, 1987); a function is not a description
that is given from the organism’s perspective.
Dualism The current proposal challenges the dualism that
is reflected in the usual concepts of ‘mind’ and ‘brain,’ a
Cartesian split that underlies the modal model. It is typically
assumed that an entity, its energy, and any conscious state
associated with it, are all different things. The current
proposal is that the distinctions break down in situations
where structure and energy come together. Einstein’s
famous equation, E = MC2, showed that energy and mass
are the same thing at the quantum level. But such unified
states of matter and energy do not make up much of the
classical world. A cardboard box is comprised of many
discontinuous particles that may be unified individually, but
which do not add-up to a unified state of energy and form at

1084

the macroscopic scale of the box. But enabling unified states
at macroscopic scales may be what life does in the classical
world. The wide-spread, complex oscillatory patterns
observed in the nervous system of animals constitute largescale, unified states. These states may be understood as
generalizations of enzyme catalysis, a process that removes
the discontinuity between energy and biological structure.

Acknowledgements
We thank Drs. W. Freeman, J. Goguen, H. Koshina, D.
Kravitz, B. MacWhinney, and A. Prior-Unger for their
comments on a draft of a related paper.

References
Bach-y-Rita, P., Tyler, M.E., & Kaczmarek, K.A. (2003).
Seeing with the brain. International Journal of HumanComputer Interaction, 15, 285-295.
Bechtel, W. (1998). Representations and cognitive
explanations: Assessing the dynamicist’s challenge in
cognitive science. Cognitive Science, 22(3), 295-318.
Brooks, R. (1987). Intelligence without representation.
MIT Artificial Intelligence Report.
Carello, C. & Turvey, M. T. (2000). Rotational invariants
and dynamic touch. (pp. 27-66). In M. Heller (Ed.) Touch,
representation and blindness. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Crick, F. & Koch, C. (2003).
A framework for
consciousness. Nature Neuroscience, 6(2), 119-126.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1993). The evolving self: A
psychology for the third millennium. New York: Harper
Perennial.
Davia, C. J. (2006). Life, catalysis and excitable media: A
dynamic systems approach to metabolism and cognition.
In J. Tuszynski (Ed.). The emerging physics of
consciousness. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Edelman, G. (2003). Naturalizing consciousness: A
theoretical framework. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 100(9), 5520-5524.
Fletcher, P. “Seeing with sound: A journey into sight.”
Paper presented at the Tucson 2002 conference “Toward a
Science of Consciousness.” April 8, 2002. Tucson, AZ.
Filippov, A. T. (2000) The versatile soliton. Boston, MA:
Birkhauser c/o Springer-Verlag.
Freeman, W. J. (1999). Consciousness, intentionality and
causality. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6, 143-172.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
Perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Grossberg, S., & Grunewald, A. (1997).
Cortical
synchronization and perceptual framing. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 117-132.
Kelso, J. A. Scott. (1995). Dynamic patterns: The selforganization of brain and behavior. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Knapp, M., & Klinman, J. (2002). Environmentally coupled
hydrogen tunneling: Linking catalysis to dynamics.
European Journal of Biochemistry, 269, 3113-3121.
Lehar, S. (2004). Gestalt isomorphism and the primacy of
subjective conscious experience: A Gestalt Bubble
Model. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 26 (4): 375-444.

Llinas, R. R. (2001) i of the vortex. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and
cognition: The realization of the living (Boston Studies in
the Philosophy of Science). Springer.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1987). The tree of
knowledge: The biological roots of human understanding.
Boston, MA: Shambhala Publications, Inc
Meijer, P.B.L. (2002) “Seeing with sound for the blind: Is it
vision?” Paper presented at the Tucson, AZ, Conference
“Toward a Science of Consciousness.” April 8, 2002.
O'Regan, J. K. and Noe, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account
of vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences. 24(5), 939-1011.
Petoukhov, S. (1999). Biosolitons - One secret of living
matter: The bases of solitonic biology. Mechanical
Engineering Research Institute, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Malii Haritonievskii pereulok, Moscow, Centre,
101830, Russia.
Remoissenet, M. (1999). Waves called solitons: Concepts
and experiments. Third edition. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Rumelhart, D.E., McClelland, J.L., and the PDP Research
Group (1986). Parallel distributed processing:
Exploration in the microstructure of cognition. Vol. 1:
Foundations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sataric, M.V., Zakula, R. B., Ivic, Z., & Tuszynski, J. A.
(1991). Influence of a solitonic mechanism on the process
of chemical catalysis. Journal of Molecular Electronics 7,
39-46.
Singer, W. (1993). Synchronization of cortical activity and
its putative role in information processing and learning.
Annual Review of Physiology, 55, 349-374.
Shepard, R. N. (1984). Ecological constraints on internal
representation: Resonant kinematics of perceiving,
imagining, thinking and dreaming. Psychological Review,
91, 417-447.
Sutcliffe, M. J., & Scrutton, N. S. (2002). Enzymology takes
a quantum leap forward. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London, 358, 367-386.
Tegmark, M. (2000). The importance of quantum
decoherence in brain processes. Physics Review E, 61,
4194-4206.
Thelen, E. (1993). Self-organization in developmental
processes: Can systems approaches work? In M. Johnson
(Ed.) Brain development and cognition: A reader.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. pp. 555-591.
Thompson, E., & Varela, F. J. (2001). Radical embodiment:
neural dynamics and consciousness. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5(10), 418-425.
Wheeler, M. (2005). Reconstructing the cognitive world:
The next steps. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
White, B. W., Saunders, F. A., Scadden, L., Bach-y-Rita, P.,
& Collins, C. C. (1970). Seeing with the skin. Perception
& Psychophysics, 7, 23-27.
Winograd, T., & Flores, F. (1986). Understanding
computers and cognition: A new foundation for design.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.

1085

