UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Common Mechanism Is Possibly Underlying the Shift in Perceptual and Conceptual
Judgment Produced by Irrelevant Information

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9b64s9g6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Hristova, Penka
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Common Mechanism Is Possibly Underlying the Shift in Perceptual
and Conceptual Judgment Produced by Irrelevant Information
Penka Hristova (phristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria
Abstract
This paper presents two experiments exploring context effects
on human judgment and testing JUDGEMAP’s predictions that
irrelevant information such as the color of the stimulus can
produce a contrast effect with respect to skewed stimuli set to
be judged. The first experiment demonstrates the effect on a
perceptual judgment task (judging the length of lines which are
colored in red and green), while the second experiment
demonstrates exactly the same effect on a conceptual judgment
task (judging the age of a person when the absolute age is
presented by numbers with colored digits – red and green).
These results rule out the “recalibration” of the perceptual
system explanation. The fact that the same effects were
obtained in both cases prompts for a common explanation.
JUDGEMAP provides such an explanation: the color is used in
retrieving past instances in WM based on the spreading
activation mechanism and thus the comparison set becomes
biased. The biased comparison set which is then mapped on the
scale elements produces a shift in the mean ratings.

Introduction
Suppose someone claims that your judgment of her tallness
on a scale may depend on the color of her eyes. Most
probably you would consider this to be a strange statement.
The color of someone’s eyes is certainly not a relevant
dimension in the judgment of tallness. Under certain
circumstances, however, the irrelevant information, like the
color of the eyes, may actually become critical for the
subsequent judgment. This strange statement is to be explored
in the current paper.
This paper focuses on the mechanism that may underlie
such strange prediction, namely: how irrelevant stimulus
dimension may influence judgment. The research aims to
discriminate between two possible explanations of the effect
of the irrelevant stimulus dimension: (1) low level perceptual
recalibration of the sensory system (see Arieh and Marks,
2002 for a review) and (2) contextually sensitive memory
retrieval (Kokinov, Hristova, Petkov, 2004). In fact, the
experimental work presented in the current paper was
inspired by the predictions of the JUDGEMAP Model
(Kokinov, Hristova, Petkov, 2004) for contextually sensitive
retrieval, which may result in systematic shift in judgments
due to the irrelevant information.

Evidence for the effect of irrelevant information

Marks (1988) demonstrates that judgment of loudness may
depend on the irrelevant to the task tone frequencies.
Participants were asked to judge the loudness of a series of
1529

tones between 30 and 85 dB. If relatively low sounds were of
500Hz and relatively high ones, of 2500 Hz, participants
judged the loudness of the same sound differently depending
on its frequency. 500Hz tones were judged to be louder than
the tones of the same sound pressure level but of 2500 Hz
frequency. These loudness shifts were called differential
context effects (DCEs), since loudness judgment depends
differentially on the two contextual (irrelevant) frequencies
(Marks, 1988). Evidence for DCEs is reported also in the
judgments of length of vertical and horizontal lines (Arieh
and Marks, 2002), taste (Rankin and Marks, 1991, 1992),
haptic touch (Marks and Armstrong, 1996), olfaction (Rankin
and Marks, 2000). This line of research demonstrates a
contrast effect in the judgment of a stimulus depending on its
irrelevant dimension, i.e. a stimulus judgment is displaced
away from the context of the stimuli that share the same
irrelevant information.
Arieh and Marks (2002) argue that DCEs originate
relatively early in the perceptual stream and are possibly a
result of the “recalibration of the supra-threshold
responsiveness of the perceptual systems”. It was shown that
DCEs are spatially specific, i.e. were evident only in locations
at which they were induced (Arieh and Marks, 2002; Marks,
1996). For example, visual length perception appeared to be
specific to the eye and to the retinal region in which the
context was induced (Arieh and Marks, 2002). Thus,
according to Arieh and Marks (2002) DCEs reflect a
relatively early and local change in perceptual sensitivity.
Goldstone (1995, 1998) also assumes that irrelevant
information influences the judgment process relatively early
in the information processing and discusses the possibility for
context effects to result from perceptually grounded on-line
categorization of the stimuli to be judged, i.e.
learning/forming categories of stimuli produce a change in
the perception of these stimuli. Goldstone (1995) reports a
shift in color perception toward the color of similar figures
although the shape of figures was an irrelevant-to-the-task
characteristic. In general, the effect found in these studies was
opposite in direction to the one found by Marks and his
colleagues and is essentially an assimilation towards the
prototype of the category of stimuli sharing the same
irrelevant characteristics. Goldstone (1995, 1998) addresses
the possibility that this effect might be a form of perceptual
learning.
In sum, both contrast and assimilation effects were
demonstrated due to the irrelevant-to-the-task dimension.
Marks and colleges (Marks, 1988, 1992, 1994, Marks and
Warner, 1991, Arieh and Marks, 2002) always report a

contrast effect from context induced by the irrelevant
dimension, while Goldstone (1995) reports an assimilation
effect of a similar experimental design. Thus, it could be
assumed that the influence of the irrelevant dimension is a
still quite controversial issue in the field of judgment. It is
entirely possible, indeed quite probable that the DCEs
(Marks, 1988) and the on-line perceptually grounded
assimilation found by Goldstone (1995) interact and even
cancel each other out in judgment process.
Moreover, it seems that the effect of irrelevant dimension is
quite restricted in scope, in the sense that it has been
demonstrated mainly with simple stimuli and has been
explained mainly by low level mechanisms. It is still quite
doubtful whether this effect could be demonstrated with more
complex or even abstract stimuli.
In addition, it is argued that the effect of irrelevant
dimension results from an early low level contextually
sensitive process (Arieh and Marks, 2002; Goldstone, 1995),
i.e. irrelevant information influences the judgment by
changing the perceptual input, rather than the later stages of
information processing.
In contrast, the JUDGEMAP (judgment as mapping) model
(Kokinov, Hristova, Petkov, 2004) predicts that the effect of
irrelevant information is produced by the contextually
sensitive retrieval of similar information. The model predicts
that because of the spreading activation mechanism
underlying retrieval, the irrelevant-to-the-task stimulus
dimension may matter. Suppose that we have to rate the
tallness of a particular person. Other persons that are similar
to that one will tend to be retrieved in the working memory
(WM) and form the so called comparison set. This means that
if the person is a lady, predominantly images of other women
will be retrieved and thus, the “tallness” of ladies will be
computed based on a comparison set different from that of
men. This sounds very intuitive. It has, however, further
implications: if the lady is blond, predominantly blond ladies
will be retrieved, if the person is a teacher, predominantly
teachers will be retrieved, etc. Therefore, even irrelevant to
the judgment features like the color of the eyes may take part
and influence the tallness judgment based on their
contribution to the content of WM.
The most important aspect of the JUDGEMAP model with
respect to the current discussion is that the model does not
pose any restrictions on the type of stimuli (simple, complex
or abstract). Thus JUDGEMAP predicts that the irrelevant
characteristics may influence judgment since judgment of any
particular stimulus is made within a set of other stimuli that
include the most recently judged ones, the most familiar
exemplars of the target category and the most similar to the
target stimuli both in terms of relevant and irrelevant-to-thetask dimension(s). The mechanism underlying this process is
the spreading activation mechanism.
JUDGEMAP, however, describes judgment on a discrete
scale only. Thus we should bear in mind that the predictions
of the model describe only judgment on a predefined discrete
scale. Since JUDGEMAP does not give an account of
judgment on a continuous scale, the model could not generate
any specific prediction on the contextual influence of
irrelevant information on the continuous judgment task. That

is why whenever we refer to judgment in this paper we mean
judgment on a discrete scale.

1530

JUDGEMAP MODEL
JUDGEMAP (Kokinov et al, 2004; Petkov, 2005) is a
computational model based on the cognitive architecture
DUAL (Kokinov, 1994b, 1994c). It uses mechanisms basic
for analogy-making, like mapping and memory retrieval in
modeling of the contextual sensitive judgment. In this respect,
JUDGEMAP is integrated with the AMBR model (Kokinov,
1994a, Kokinov & Petrov, 2001), which is also based on
DUAL cognitive architecture. The main assumptions behind
the JUDGEMAP model are that: 1) analogy-making is a
fundamental human capability and may be considered,
therefore, as a basic mechanism that underlie different
cognitive phenomena, like reasoning, decision- making,
judgment etc. and 2) the same processes may account for both
perceptual and conceptual judgment (“how tall is this person”
vs. “how expensive is this good”).
JUDGEMAP treats the process of judgment as an
analogical mapping between a set of stimuli and a set of
ratings (i.e. a mapping that will keep the ordering relations of
the sets – better stimuli should receive higher ratings). The set
of stimuli (called comparison set) includes the target stimulus
and possibly some recently judged stimuli, some familiar
exemplars of the judged category and some similar to the
target, previously encountered stimuli. The set of ratings
represents the scale defined by the particular task. As a rule,
the stimuli in the first set can dynamically vary with time –
some receive additional activation and enter the set, others, on
the contrary, lose activation and fade away. Usually all (or
most) of the stimuli in the comparison set receive ratings but,
as long as the task is to judge the target one, only its rating is
reported. The set of ratings is constant (judgment on a
particular scale), however, some of the ratings can be more
active than others (favorite numbers or ratings recently used
in previous judgments). The mapping between the set of
stimuli and the scale values could be partial but there is a
pressure preserving the ordering relations between objects
and ratings.

Prediction of the JUDGEMAP Model

The effect of the irrelevant dimension is among the specific
predictions generated by the JUDGEMAP Model. According
to the model, each stimulus that has to be judged elicits in
WM a set of exemplars that are similar to the target in both
their relevant and irrelevant characteristics. Let us consider,
once again, the starting example about the judgment of
tallness. If the task is to judge how tall a particular person is
on a scale from 1 (he/she is not tall at all) to 7 (he/she is very
tall), the model predicts that the activation would spread to
exemplars in the long-term memory (LTM) that are similar to
the target person. For example, if the person is a man,
predominantly men would be elicited in the WM, although
the task does not require the judgment of men’s tallness.
Moreover, even such negligible and indisputably irrelevant
characteristics like the color of the person eyes may matter
and guide the retrieval of exemplars with similar color of the
eyes.

The simplest case would be to study what will happen, if
two-dimensional objects are rated along one of their
dimensions, while the second irrelevant one is manipulated.
Let us assume that the task is to rate the length of line
segments that vary in color. In this case it is quite clear that
the length is the relevant dimension, while the color is
irrelevant.
Let the target stimulus be a red line of certain length. In this
case, according to the JUDGEMAP model, we may expect
that there will be more red lines in the comparison set – they
will be activated through the RED concept, which is shared
with the target. On the other hand, if the target stimulus is a
green line of the same length, more green lines will become
part of the comparison set. Now, if it happens that the known
red lines are longer than the known green lines, then the two
target stimuli (differing only in color) will be included in
different comparison sets and hence judged differently, i.e.,
the green target would be judged to be longer than the red
target of the same length, i.e. a contrast effect will be
expected.

the same effects were obtained in conceptual judgment, then
they could not be due to perceptual processes, and this would
be considered as a strong support for the JUDGEMAP’s
explanation related to the retrieval mechanisms in the
formation of the comparison set.
Besides, both experiments explore an additional variable –
time, i.e. whether the effect of the irrelevant dimension
increases, decreases or is rather independent of the number of
trials?1 In order to test this, in all experiments participants had
to judge several times the same skewed stimuli set.

This prediction was tested and confirmed by a simulation
and a psychological experiment (Kokinov et al, 2004). Both
of them manipulate the skew of the distribution of line
lengths depending on their color: short lines were presented
predominantly in green color, while long lines – in red color,
thus forming a positively skewed set of green lines and a
negatively skewed set of red lines. The two sets of lines of
different color were mixed and randomly presented for
judgment on a 7-point scale to the model and human
participants. Both the simulation and psychological
experiments demonstrated a small though significant effect of
the irrelevant-to-the-task color of the lines. The observed
difference in ratings of positively and negatively skewed lines
was 0.053 for the simulation and 0.046 for the psychological
experiment on a 7-point scale. In accordance with the
JUDGEMAP’s prediction, positively skewed lines were
judged higher than negatively skewed ones even though they
were equal in length (Kokinov et al, 2004).

Method

Aims of the present research

Although the prediction of the JUDGEMAP model for the
influence of the irrelevant-to-the-task stimulus dimension was
experimentally confirmed, the found small though significant
effect of color upon judgment of the line’s lengths may leave
some doubt that the effect of the irrelevant dimension was an
accidental one. The present experiments replicate the
previous study using similar design and the same
experimental question. Since the effect of the irrelevant-tothe-task color of the lines was negligible in size, experiment 1
aims to replicate it and to increase it, if possible. Experiment
2 tries to shed light on the possible mechanisms that may
underlie the shift in judgments due to the irrelevant-to-thetask information, namely: whether the effect of the irrelevant
dimension is due to contextually sensitive retrieval of similar
to the target stimulus exemplars (Kokinov et al, 2004) or is
rather due to some early low-level perceptual changes in the
stimulus representation with respect to the stimulus irrelevant
characteristics (Arieh and Marks, 2002; Goldstone, 1995). To
resolve this issue Experiment 2 uses more abstract stimuli and
tests the same predictions about the conceptual judgment. If

Experiment 1: Judgment of line length
Participants were asked to judge the length of lines that
appear always horizontally, but in random positions on the
screen. Each line was projected for a very short time on the
computer screen - for only 100ms. The subsequent answer did
not require a prompt, rather the computer "waited" for the
participants’ answers. Participants were instructed to press the
button when they were sure what rating the target line they
wanted to enter.
Design
The within subject independent variables were color
(varying at 2 levels) of the lines and time (first, second, and
third presentations of the 112 stimulus set). The experimental
design was counterbalanced so that the positively and the
negatively skewed stimuli to be presented were either in
green or in red. In the first experimental group the green lines
were positively skewed, while red lines form negatively
skewed distribution. In the second experimental group, red
lines were positively skewed, while green lines were
negatively skewed. The dependent variable was the mean
rating of line lengths on a 7-point-scale.
Stimuli
14 color lines that vary from 180 pixels to 505 pixels with
an increment of 25 pixels were presented 8 times each
forming a basic set of 112 trials. Participants rated 3 times the
same set of randomly presented 112 trials. Thus, the
experiment comprised 336 trials (112 trials for a block x 3).
Each line was presented either in red or in green. The
frequency distribution of green lines in the first experimental
group was positively skewed, while of the red lines –
negatively skewed. In the second experimental group the
presentation of lines was just on the opposite, i.e., red lines
formed a positively skewed distribution (include relatively
short lines) and green lines formed a negatively skewed one

1531

1

If the effect of the irrelevant dimension is considered as a noise, it
seems highly probable that the effect will disappear with
increasing the number of trials. Moreover, the assimilation effect
of the on-line contextually sensitive categorization that Goldstone
(1995) reports, may also decrease the contrast effect of the
irrelevant dimension in the course of time, since the assimilation
toward perceptually similar objects works against the expected
contrast effect in the presented experiments. It could, however, be
that the influence of the irrelevant information would increase with
time, if participants enriched the range and frequency information
about the stimuli set with the number of trials. Then, it is more
likely for the judges to become more sensitive to the irrelevant
stimulus dimension with the number of trials.

and the mean judgment of negatively skewed lines (4.92) was
0.09. Positively skewed middle-length lines were rated higher
than negatively skewed middle-length lines despite the fact
that they were equal in length (Figure 1).
The Repeated Measurement Analysis did not show a
significant main effect of color and of number of trials on the
mean ratings of all 14 lines (color: F (1, 30) =0.070, p=0.793;
number of trials: F (2,30) = 1.354, p= 0.266). The effect of
the skewed distribution with respect to lines’ color appeared
not strong enough to transfer from the middle-sized lines
toward all other target lines. This differential effect is
coherent with an estimation of the predicted size of the effect
based on Parducci’s Range-Frequency theory (Parducci,
1965, 1974).

(include relatively long lines). The frequency of the positively
and negatively skewed lines is presented in Table 1.
Procedure
Each line was presented horizontally on a gray background
in a random position on the screen for 100 ms. The
participants were instructed to press a button from 1 to 7 on
the keyboard whenever they were sure of their rating. When a
participant pressed the button corresponding to his/her
answer, the next line appeared on the screen. The lines were
presented within three blocks with the same range and
frequency distribution like the one presented at Table 1.
Table 1. Frequency and color of the lines for a block of 112
trials, where lines with colorP were positively skewed and
lines with colorN were negatively skewed.
Lines

1;2
3;4
5;6
7;8
9;10
11;12
13;14

Length
in pixels

180;205
230;255
280;305
330;355
380;405
430;455
480;505

Number of
the lines with
color P
(Positively
skewed
distribution)
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Number of
the lines with
color N
(Negatively
skewed
distribution)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

5.02
5.00
4.98
4.96
ColorP

4.94
4.92

ColorN

4.90
4.88
4.86

The participants were instructed to judge the length of each
line presented on the screen on a 7-point scale: where 1-“it is
not long at all” and 7-“it is very long”.
The experiment was conducted in sound-proved booths and
lasted around 15 minutes for each participant.

ColorP

ColorN

Figure 1. Mean ratings of the middle line lengths (line7&8) for
each color. The black bar stands for ratings of the positively
skewed lines with respect to their color, while gray-textured
bar – for negatively skewed lines with respect to their color.

Participants
31 students (17 female and 14 male) from New Bulgarian
University participated in the experiment. Participants’ age
varied between 19 and 31 years. They participated in order to
satisfy a course requirement. There were 16 students in group
1 and 15 students in group 2.

The difference between the ratings of the red and green
colored lines is roughly the same as in the previous
experiment (Kokinov et al, 2004) – it slightly increased from
0.046 to 0.09 in the current experiment. Thus, although the
effect was replicated, it did not increase significantly under
time pressure. The replication means that the previously
obtained data could not be incidental. At the same time the
mechanism responsible for that effect can still be two-fold:
perceptual recalibration or memory retrieval.

Experiment 2: Judgment of Age

Results and Discussion

The data was averaged by item (14 lengths). Each
participant had 28 mean judgments (14 lines*2 colors). The
color and number of trials were analyzed as a within-subject
factor, while the group was a between-subject factor. The
Repeated Measurement Analyses showed a non-significant
main effect of the group: F (1, 30) = 0.215, p=0.646 which
means that it does not matter whether the red or the green
color is positively skewed. Thus, the results from the two
groups were accumulated and we use color P to indicate a
positively skewed distribution and color N to indicate a
negatively skewed distribution in all further analyses.
The main effect of the irrelevant dimension (color P vs.
color N) on rating of the middle lines was significant, as
estimated with the Repeated Measurement Analysis: F (1, 30)
=4.400, p=0.045, the effect size (ES) = 0.132. The difference
between the mean judgment of positively skewed lines (5.01)

1532

The goal of this experiment was to differentiate the source
of the effect, i.e. whether the effect of the irrelevant-to-thetask dimension is comparable to the effect of sensory
adaptation (Arieh and Marks, 2002) or memory retrieval as
postulated by JUDGEMAP. The stimuli used in this
experiment are rather abstract – they are numbers – and the
task is of conceptual judgment (how old is someone of 35
years of age) rather than perceptual judgment (how old is the
person on this photograph). Thus, if there is an effect of the
color in which the digits are presented, it cannot be attributed
to the calibration process of the perceptual system as in other
experiments on judgment of lines’ length, loudness of tones,
taste or touching (Arieh and Marks, 2002). It is difficult to
argue that judgment of men’s age based on digits, which
stand for their absolute age in years may “induce the
perceptual system to recalibrate their relative supra-threshold

responsiveness” (Arieh and Marks, 2002, p.478). Thus, if the
same contrast effect of color was obtained, this would be
considered an argument in favor of the JUDGEMAP’s
explanation: namely, the red-colored digits retrieve more
numbers represented with red-colored digits based on the
spreading activation mechanism and hence form a biased set
of comparison in the WM.

Method
Design
As in the previous experiment, color (i.e., green and red)
and number of trials (first and second block of 112
presentations) were within–subject variables in this study.
The group counterbalanced age and color: group 1 judged the
age of small positively skewed red numbers and high
negatively skewed green numbers. The dependent variable
was the participant’s mean rating for each age depending on
the digit’s color.
Stimuli
A set of 14 ages was designed. The lowest age was 10
years, the highest age was 75 years, and the increment was 5
years. As in the previous experiment, the ages were presented
with uneven frequency depending on the digit’s color. The
frequency of the stimulus distribution depending on stimulus
color is presented in Table 2.
Table 2. Frequency of stimulus distribution depending on the
irrelevant-to-the-task color of the digits.
Age
category
1;2
3;4
5;6
7;8
9;10
11;12
13;14

The digits
representin
g the target

age
10;15
20;25
30;35
40;45
50;55
60;65
70;75

Frequency
distribution
of the ages
with color P
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Frequency
distribution
of the ages
with color N
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Results and discussion

The data was averaged for each age. The between-subject
factor group showed no effect: F (1,39)=1.390, p=0.246.
Thus, as in experiment1, the original colors (red and green)
were recoded into colorP for the positively skewed stimuli
and colorN for the negatively skewed ones. The positively
skewed middle ages were ranked higher than the negatively
skewed ones with respect to the recoded color (color P and
color N). The effect of color on judgments of ages 40 and 45
years is significant when tested with the Repeated
Measurement Statistics: F (1,39)=5,269, p=0.027. The
difference between the ratings with different color of the
number is 0.06 and is presented at Figure 2. The effect size is
ES=0.119. The main effect of the within-subject factor
number of trials was non-significant for the middle-range of
the stimulus ages (F (1,39)=0.411, p=0.525), i.e. the effect
stayed stable with time – neither decreased, nor increased.
Just like in the previous experiment the main effect of color
and number of trials was non-significant for the whole range
of ages (10years-75 years) (color: F (1,39)=2.990, p=0.092;
number of trials: F (1,39)=1.568, p=0.218), i.e. the contrast
effect is observed only in the middle of the scale as predicted
by Parducci’ Range-Frequency theory (Parducci, 1965,
1974).
4,10
4,08
4,06

ColorP

4,04

ColorN

4,02
4,00
ColorP

ColorN

Figure 2. Mean ratings of the middle ages for each color. The
black bar stands for the positively skewed lines. The gray
textured bar represents the negatively skewed lines.

Procedure
The stimuli were presented for judgment one by one at the
center of the computer screen. The background was gray.
Stimuli were randomly presented within 2 blocks with the
same stimulus range and frequency. The participants rated
twice the set of the randomly presented 112 trials described in
Table 2.
Judgments were required on a 7-point scale. Each age
stayed on a screen until the participant judged it. Then the
experimenter registers the respondents’ rating and changes
the slide manually. The duration of the experiment was 15
minutes.
Participants
41 students (29 female and 12 male) at age between 19 and
29 years took part in the experiment for credits. 21 students
participated in group 1 and 20 in group 2.

1533

The results from experiment 2 are consistent with the results
obtained from the experiment 1. The effect is similar in
direction (contrast), scope (middle magnitudes) and size. The
results replicate the previous ones obtained with simple visual
stimuli, i.e. lines that differ in color. Moreover, the behavior
of the effect seems quite predictable, i.e. the same contextual
shift mainly within the middle-sized stimuli at comparable
intensity. The most important observation of this experiment
is that the effect of the irrelevant dimension was demonstrated
within the conceptual judgment task with abstract stimuli.
Therefore, it seems difficult, if possible at all, to account for
the influence of the irrelevant-to-the-task dimension by
referring to the low-level mechanisms like “recalibration” of
the perceptual system sensitivity (Marks, 1988, 1992, 1994,
Marks and Warner, 1991, Arieh and Marks, 2002). It is quite
possible, however, for context to influence judgment at
several different levels of information processing. It could be
the case that contextually sensitive processes are running in

parallel and give raise to different shifts in human judgments
(some of which being congruent and others canceling each
other out – like the contrast effect obtained in this experiment
and the assimilation effect obtained by Goldstone (1995,
1998)).

Conclusion

The two experiments demonstrated a similar in direction,
scope and size effect of irrelevant-to-the-task dimension on
human perceptual and conceptual judgment. Since the
contrast effect of irrelevant information was demonstrated in
both cases and with concrete visual and abstract stimuli, it is
quite probable that the same mechanism is responsible for
these effects. One good candidate is the mechanism of
spreading activation postulated by JUDGEMAP as the means
for memory retrieval and formation of the comparison set in
the WM. The explanation proposed by Marks and collegues
(Marks, 1988, 1992, 1994, Marks and Warner, 1991, Arieh
and Marks, 2002) that “early local changes in receptive
sensitivity” produce this contrast effect seems improbable at
least for the conceptual judgment case. Similarly, the
perceptual learning mechanisms (Goldstone, 1995, 1998) can
not provide an explanation of this conceptual judgment case
(in addition, the predicted effect is opposite – JUDGEMAP
predicts contrast while the perceptual learning mechanisms
predict assimilation). However, it is quite possible for the two
mechanisms to work together and in parallel and cancel each
other out and that might be the reason why both effects are
small. Thus, it is possible to have a contextual effect both at
the early and the late stages of information processing
(perceptual and memory processes).
These experiments aimed to differentiate between the
impact of the retrieval mechanism vs. the impact of the
perceptual recalibration mechanism on judgment on a scale.
Several issues require further explorations. First, it seems
interesting to find out whether irrelevant characteristics can
shift the judgment on a continuous scale as well. Second, it is
really important to find out the role of categories in our
experiments. Although participants in our experiments do not
enter the judgment task with preexisting categories like the
categories of “green lines” and “red lines” and they are not
asked to rate the length of lines within the corresponding
category (moreover, the lines are presented in random order
and at the end the participants claim they have considered the
color of the lines irrelevant and have not used it in the
judgment task), it still possible that they construct such
categories during the experiment and use them unconsciously.

References
Arieh and Marks, L., (2002) Context effects in visual length
perception. Role of ocular, retinal, and spatial location.
Perception & Psychophysics, vol. 64 (3), pp. 478-492
Goldstone, R. (1995) Effects of Categorization on Color
Perception. Psychological Science, vol. 6 (5), pp. 298-304
Goldstone, R. (1998).Perceptual Learning. Annual Review of
Psychology, 49, 585-612.
Kokinov, B. (1994a). A hybrid model of reasoning by
analogy. In K. Holyoak & J. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in

connectionist and neural computation theory: Vol. 2.
Analogical connections. Norwood, NJ: Ablex
Kokinov, B. (1994b). The DUAL cognitive architecture: A
hybrid multi-agent approach. Proceedings of the Eleventh
European Conference of Artificial Intelligence. London:
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Kokinov, B. (1994c). The context-sensitive cognitive architecture DUAL. Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kokinov, B., Hristova, P., Petkov, G. (2004) Does Irrelevant
Information Play a Role in Judgment? In: Proceedings of
the 26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 2004. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Marks, L. (1988) Magnitude estimation and sensory
matching. Perception and Psychophysics, vol. 43, pp. 511525
Marks, L. (1992), The slippery context effect in
psychophysics: Intensive, extensive, and qualitative
continua. Perception and Psychophysics, 51, 187-198.
Marks, L., (1994), “Recalibrating” the auditory system: The
perception of loudness, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 382396.
Marks, L., and Armstrong (1996), Visual and haptic
representations of space. In Inui and McClelland (Eds.),
Attention and Performance XVI: Information Integration in
perception and communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Marks, L., and Warner (1991), Slippery context effect and
critical bands, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 17, 986-996
Petkov, G. (2005) Judgment as Mapping (JUDGEMAP-2) In:
Proceedings of the Doctoral Consortium at the Fifth
International and Interdisciplinary Conference on
Modelling and Using Context. Technical Report LIP
2005/2006 of the Laboratoire d'Informatique de Paris 6,
URL http://www.lip6.fr
Parducci, A. (1965), Category Judgment: A Range-Frequency
model, Psychological Review, 72(6), 407-418.
Parducci, A. (1974), Contextual Effects: A Range-Frequency
Analysis, Handbook of Perception, vol.2, NY:Academic
Press.
Rankin and Marks, L., (1991), Differential context effects in
taste perception. Chemical Senses, 16, 617-629.
Rankin and Marks, L., (1992), Effects of context on sweet
and bitter tastes: Unrelated to sensitivity to PROP (6-npropylthiouracil), Perception and Psychophysics, 52, 479486.
Rankin and Marks, L., (2000), Differential context effects in
chemosensation: Role of perceptual similarity and neural
communality. Chemical Senses, 25, 747-759.

1534

