UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Microgenetic Study of the Conceptual Development of Inversion on Multiplication/Division
Inversion Problems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2k75x2kg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Robinson, Katherine M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Microgenetic Study of the Conceptual Development of Inversion on
Multiplication/Division Inversion Problems
Katherine M. Robinson (katherine.robinson@uregina.ca)
Department of Psychology,
Campion College, University of Regina
3737 W ascana Parkway
Regina, SK S4S 0A2
Abstract
The purpose of this study was to conduct a microgenetic
study of the development of the concept of inversion as it
applies to multiplication and division inversion problems.
The study was modelled on Siegler and Stern’s (1998) study
in which Grade 2 participants solved addition and subtraction
inversion problems (a + b - b) for 6 weekly sessions. In
session 7, modified inversion problems (b + a - b) as well as
lure problems (b - a + b) were also included. In the current
study, Grade 6 participants solved multiplication and division
inversion problems (d x e ÷ e) during 6 weekly sessions.
Previous research has shown that this latter type of inversion
problems is more difficult than the former type. The present
results indicate that there are differences in how frequently
participants discover and apply the inversion concept
compared to Siegler and Stern’s (1998) work. The findings
add to the recent body of knowledge indicating that the
concept of inversion as it applies to multiplication and
division is significantly more difficult than it is for addition
and subtraction.
Keyw ords: arithmetic; inversion; conceptual knowledge;
microgenetic.

Introduction
In the domain of mathematical cognition, it has been
historically difficult to assess conceptual knowledge, and in
particular the development of conceptual knowledge (Bisanz
& LeFevre, 1990). Conceptual knowledge is the
understanding of the underlying structures of mathematics
(Bisanz & LeFevre, 1990). Recently, there has been an
increasing interest in the development of conceptual
knowledge (e.g., Rittle-Johnson, Siegler, & Alibali, 2001)
and yet it is often difficult to directly assess children’s
understanding of the underlying structures of mathematics.
One type of task that has been successfully used in the past,
however, is the inversion problem (Starkey & Gelman,
1982). These problems are of the form a + b - b and can be
used to assess whether participants understand the inversion
concept. Because addition and subtraction are inverse
operations, no calculations are required to solve an inversion
problem as the answer to the problem is simply the first
number, a. This solution approach is called the inversionbased shortcut.
There are a number of advantages to using the inversion
problem to assess conceptual knowledge or understanding.

First, for participants who do not yet know a written
numerical system (e.g., preschoolers), inversion problems can
be demonstrated using manipulatives (Klein & Bisanz,
2000). Second, unlike many tasks that assess conceptual
understanding, participants do not have to have the verbal
abilities to explain their understanding but can instead
demonstrate their understanding through problem solving.
Finally, supporting evidence that participants are indeed
using the inversion concept, as demonstrated via stating that
the answer is the first number, can be obtained by using
standard problems. If a participant is simply stating that the
answer is the first number, a, then the answer will be
incorrect on standard problems of the form a + b - c.
Using inversion and standard problems, researchers have
found that children, even preschoolers, can make use of the
inversion concept to solve the inversion problems without
any calculation and that inversion shortcut use increases
across age (Bisanz & LeFevre, 1990; Bryant, Christie, &
Rendu, 1999; Rasmussen, Ho, & Bisanz, 2003; Stern, 1992;
Vilette, 2002). Siegler and Stern (1998) further extended the
research on inversion shortcut use by examining the implicit
and explicit components of conceptual understanding. They
used a microgenetic design and found that by the end of the
study Grade 2 participants were using the inversion shortcut
over 90% of the time to solve inversion problems and all of
the participants discovered the shortcut during the course of
the study.
In more recent research, a new type of inversion problem
has been investigated (Robinson & Ninowski, 2003;
Robinson, Ninowski, & Gray, in press). T his type of
inversion problem makes use of the inverse relationship
between multiplication and division and takes the form of d
x e ÷ e. The same inversion-based shortcut can be used.
Robinson and Ninowski (2003) compared adult performance
on both types of inversion problems: Addition/Subtraction
inversion problems and Multiplication/Division inversion
problems. Adults used the inversion shortcut on both types of
inversion problems but more frequently on the
Addition/Subtraction problems (94% vs 85% for
Addition/Subtraction and M ultiplication/Division problems,
respectively). In a following study, performance of Grade 6
and 8 students on both types of inversion problems was
examined (Robinson, et al., in press). Once again, inversion
shortcut use was much higher on Addition/Subtraction
problems than on Multiplication/Division problems (44% vs.
19% in Grade 6 and 60% and 39% in Grade 8). Overall, the
2032

concept that multiplication and division are inverse
operations appears to be more difficult for both adults and
children than the concept that addition and subtraction are
inverse operations.
The next step in the investigation of the concept of
inversion as it applies to the operations of multiplication and
division is to study in more detail how the concept is
discovered and applied and to determine how discovery and
application of the inversion shortcut compares to previous
work on addition and subtraction inversion problems.

In the final session, session 7, participants were asked to
solve three types of three-term problems. First, participants
solved four “original” inversion problems of the same format
that they had seen in the previous sessions. Second, eight
“modified” inversion problems were presented for which the
inversion strategy would still be applicable (e.g., 8 x 6 ÷ 8,
21 x 7 ÷ 7) to see if generalization would occur. Third,
twelve “lure” problems were solved to determine whether
overgeneralization would occur (e.g., 4 x 2 x 2, 32 ÷ 4 ÷ 4,
30 ÷ 6 x 30). Thus, the inversion shortcut strategy was
applicable on half of the 24 problems.

Present Study
In the current study, the development of the
Multiplication/Division inversion concept was further
investigated by using a microgenetic method. The same
number of sessions and problem formats was used as in the
Siegler and Stern (1998) study. The microgenetic design
permits a more in-depth examination of the changes in
performance across a relatively short period of time (Siegler
& Crowley, 1991). In the present study, the focus was on the
strategies that children used as measured by verbal report
data. Verbal report data have been successfully used in
previous research on arithmetic and, in particular, in
inversion studies, and have been shown to be veridical
(Robinson, 2001, Robinson & Ninowski, 2003, Robinson et
al., in press). Verbal report data are very useful in a
microgenetic design as children’s discoveries, and in
particular the verbalization of their discoveries, can be
examined (Siegler & Crowley, 1991) .

Method

Procedure
Participants were individually tested once per week for eight
consecutive weeks (from pretest to Session 7). Participants
were presented with one problem at a time and asked to state
their answer and how they had achieved that answer.
Accuracy, solution latencies, and verbal report data was
collected. All sessions were videotaped.

Results
The results reported here are based on performance on the
inversion problems only and all significant differences are at
least at an alpha level of .05.
Overall, reported inversion shortcut use increased from
sessions 1 through 6, F(5, 195) = 12.42, MSE = 509.06.
Though the trend was for the blocked group to have higher
means for inversion use than the mixed group, the difference
was not significant (see Figure 1). Both groups showed a
steady and gradual increase but reported shortcut use
remained well under 50% in both groups.

Participants
Forty-one Grade 6 students (mean age = 11 years, 6 months)
were included in this study. Participants were drawn from a
large Canadian city and were predominantly W hite and
middle-class. To participate in the study, students were
given a pretest in which they were presented with
Multiplication/Division inversion (e.g., 9 x 6 ÷ 6) and
standard (e.g., 9 x 8 ÷ 4) problems. If they did not report
using the inversion-based shortcut to solve the inversion
problems during the pretest, they participated in the study.
Participants were randomly divided into two groups:
blocked (n = 21) and mixed (n = 20). The study took place
in the first half of the school year.

Materials
Both groups of participants completed seven sessions after
the pretest. In the first six sessions, participants were asked
to solve either 16 Multiplication/Division inversion
problems only or 8 inversion and 8 standard problems.
Participants in the mixed group solved both inversion and
standard problems in all sessions. The blocked group
received inversion problems only in Sessions 1, 2, 3, and 5
and both inversion and standard problems in Sessions 4 and
6.

Figure 1: Inversion use across session for both conditions.

2033

Accuracy and solution latencies improved across session,
F(1, 39) = 36.52, MSE = 74.93 and F(1, 39) = 27.68, MSE
= 9.22, respectively. The percentage of accurate responses
grew from 91.3% to 99.4% over the course of the sessions
while solution latencies decreased from 5.5s to 3.0s. If
participants are using the inversion shortcut, there should be
fewer errors and shorter solution times as the inversion
shortcut, compared to a computational approach, is fast and
usually error free (Robinson & Ninowski, 2003; Robinson
et al., in press). The increased accuracy and shorter solution
latency pattern found in this study is consistent with an
increased use of the inversion shortcut but could also simply
reflect an increased proficiency in the task. As with the
percentage of reported inversion shortcut use, no group
differences were found, although once again the trends were
for performance to be better for the blocked group. Thus, the
pattern is consistent with the tendency for inversion shortcut
use to be higher in the blocked group.
Further analysis of the accuracy and solution latencies was
conducted to provide corroborating evidence that the
participants’ verbal reports were veridical. If participants are
using the inversion shortcut rather than a computational
approach (e.g., 4 x 9 ÷ 9: calculate 4 x 9 then divide the
product, 36, by 9), fewer errors should occur and solution
latencies should be shorter. In the first and sixth sessions, for
all inversion problems that both the mixed and blocked
groups were given (n=8), the accuracy and solution latencies
were calculated for inversion shortcut use and the use of
computation. Analyses compared each session separately as
different problems were used in each session. In both
sessions, no differences in accuracy were found which is not
surprising given the overall high accuracy and that no errors
were made on the inversion shortcut trials. The trends were
in the expected direction, however with the means for
inversion shortcut higher than those for computation (see top
of Figure 2). The expected pattern was found with the
solution latencies, t(8) = -3.84, SE = .69 and t(8) = -7.86, SE
= .37, for sessions 1 and 6, respectively. Inversion shortcut
use was significantly faster than computation in both
sessions (see bottom of Figure 2). These analyses provide
evidence that participants were indeed using the problem
solving solutions that they reported.
As a small number of students may have accounted for
most of the reported inversion use, the percentage of
students who reported using the shortcut at least once in a
session is provided. As can be seen in Figure 3, the trend is
for the number of participants using the shortcut to only
gradually increase and then remain relatively stable across
the final three sessions.

Figure 2. Accuracy and solution latencies for inversion use
and computation.
Finally, as can be seen in Figure 4, the trend was for the
blocked group to discover the inversion shortcut earlier than
the mixed group. Based on Siegler and Stern’s (1998) study,
it was expected that by the end of the study at least 90% of
the participants would have discovered the inversion
shortcut. However, a significantly higher number of
participants than predicted did not discover the inversion
shortcut by the end of the sixth session, P2(1, 41)= 9.85. No
differences were found between groups but the trend was for
the blocked group (71%) to be more likely to discover the
inversion shortcut than the mixed group (60%).

2034

Table 1: Verbal reports of inversion shortcut discovery.
Example 1: Pp 616, Session 5, 5 x 4 ÷ 4
Experimenter (E): How did you get 5 so quickly?
Participant (P): (casual tone) aw... I just reversed them... got
the same one... thing... and not even do the question
(laughs).
Example 2: Pp 623, Session 3, 6 x 9 ÷ 9
E: How did you get that answer?
P: Um... I just knew it (sounds surprised).
E: Just right away?
P: (nods).
E: Is there anything that tipped you off that you just knew
that it was 6?
P: Um... It has to be 6 ‘cause multiplication is the opposite
of division.

Figure 3: Students using shortcut at least once per session.

Example 3: Pp 681, Session 4, 9 x 12 ÷ 12
E: How did you get the answer?
P: Um...
E: Did you know 9 x 12 or...?
P: No, I just reversed it.
E: Okay, so you just kind of...
P: W ell, I didn’t really know what 9 x 12 was so I just kind
of thought 9.
Example 4: Pp 686, Session 4, 9 x 12 ÷ 12
E: How did you get 9?
P: Um... I looked at the first part and thought it would be
backwards from the second part.
E: Oh, okay.
P: I was trying to figure out 9 x 12 and then thought “oh,
that’s too hard!”

Figure 4: Session in which inversion was first used.
Verbal reports of the trial on which participants first
reported using the inversion shortcut fit with Siegler and
Crowley’s (1991) assertion that strategy discoveries include
a wide range of insight, awareness, and affect. In Table 1 a
representative sample of participants’ verbal reports on the
trial in which they first reported using the inversion shortcut
is included.

In the final session, participants were asked to solve
original and modified inversion problems as well as lure
problems. On the original problems, inversion shortcut use
was expected to be comparable to that of the previous
sessions. On the modified problems, generalization of the
inversion shortcut should lead to reported inversion shortcut
use. On the lure problems, overgeneralization of the
inversion shortcut would lead to reported shortcut use. As
can be seen in Figure 5, there was a significant difference in
problem format, F(2, 78) = 13.30, MSE = 281.68, with
reported inversion use highest on the original inversion
problems compared to inversion use on modified and lure
problems that did not differ from each other. Although the
difference between the blocked and mixed group was not

2035

significant, the trend was for original inversion use,
generalized inversion use on the modified inversion
problems, and overgeneralization of the inversion shortcut
on the lure problems to be greater for the blocked group.

Figure 5: Inversion use on original, modified, and lure
problems.

Discussion
Grade 6 students’ reported use of the inversion-based
shortcut increased during this microgenetic study, with the
trend for more frequent shortcut use in the blocked
condition. The expectation was that inversion use would be
higher for the blocked group as they were exposed to only
inversion problems rather than inversion and standard
problems for four of the six sessions. This should have
made the inversion concept and its associated shortcut
clearer to the blocked group. Though the means were in the
expected direction, this difference was not found as it was by
Siegler and Stern (1998).
The inversion shortcut also never became the predominant
problem solving strategy of choice as average reported use
across all sessions was under 40%. In addition, many of the
participants never discovered the inversion shortcut (34%
total). These results are in sharp contrast to those of Siegler
and Stern (1998) who found that shortcut use increased
dramatically across their study. By the end of their
microgenetic study, inversion shortcut use by Grade 2
students on Addition/Subtraction inversion problems
exceeded 90%. Thus, in comparing the results from this
study and that of Siegler and Stern it is clear that the concept
of inversion is more difficult as it applies to multiplication
and division than as it applies to addition and subtraction.
Further examination of the data in the first six sessions is
needed to determine whether there is a marked difference in
implicit (as demonstrated by faster solution times) and
explicit (stating that the shortcut was used) understanding of

understanding as was found by Siegler and Stern (1998) on
inversion problems involving the operations of addition and
subtraction. In this study, by examining the accuracy and
solution latencies for the inversion shortcut compared to the
computational approach, it was clear that, overall,
participants were using the problem solving solution that
they verbally report. Nevertheless, a more detailed
examination may show the same pattern found by Siegler
and Stern. In their study, reaction times in the inversion trials
preceding the discovery of the inversion shortcut strategy
seemed to indicate that often students had discovered the
shortcut (as measured by their reaction times) before they
were able to verbalize it. To offset this conclusion, however,
it was clear from a number of the participants’ verbal reports
(e.g., Example 2 from Table 1) that participants were clearly
surprised at their sudden discovery and immediately
verbalized their newfound understanding of the inversion
concept.
Finally, in the last session students had the opportunity to
generalize and overgeneralize the inversion shortcut. Siegler
and Stern (1998) posited that ideal performance would have
been to use the inversion shortcut when appropriate and
avoid it when inappropriate. If the inversion concept is well
understood then the shortcut should be properly applied.
However, Siegler and Stern found that correct generalization
occurred infrequently in both the blocked and the mixed
groups. More specifically, they found that although the
blocked group used the inversion shortcut more often on
inversion problems, the blocked group also used the
inversion shortcut more often when inappropriate to do so.
Thus, the blocked group transferred the concept or shortcut
“wholesale.”
In the present study, parallel results were found. Correct
transfer or generalization was infrequent (15.5% across both
groups) suggesting further evidence that the inversion
concept as it applies to the inverse relationship between
multiplication and division is poorly understood. No group
differences were found in overall inversion use but the trend
was for inversion use to be higher on both the original and
modified inversion problems as well as the lure problems
for the blocked group, not just on the original and modified
inversion problems. Thus, the blocked group seemed to
generalize and overgeneralize the inversion concept as a
whole whether it was appropriate to do so or not. Taken with
Siegler and Stern’s (1998) results, this indicates that
complete understanding of the inversion concept on both
Addition/Subtraction and M ultiplication/Division inversion
problems may take further time to develop to allow for
appropriate generalization or transfer. As Geary (1994)
points out, if a concept is well understood then appropriate
generalization should occur.
The current results, taken in conjunction with previous
research on M ultiplication/Division inversion problems,
highlight the general difficulty that participants have with the
concept of multiplication and division as inverse operations.
Up until very recently, researchers investigating the concept

2036

of inversion with addition and subtraction inversion
problems have concluded that the concept of inversion is one
that is grasped even before exposure to formal arithmetic
(e.g., Klein & Bisanz, 2000; Rasmussen et al., 2003). W hat
is now becoming clear is that when considering the concept
of inversion as it applies to the operations of multiplication
and division, further research needs to be performed to
examine why the same concept on a different pair of
operations is less developed.
There may be a number of reasons why this inversion
concept, as applied to multiplication and division, is so much
more difficult for both adults and children. First,
multiplication and division are learned relatively late and
thus may be less practiced or well-learned than the
operations of addition and subtraction. Second, division is
the most difficult operation for students to learn and this
difficulty may further hinder conceptual understanding
involving division. Third, the operations of multiplication
and division are themselves more conceptually complex
compared to their addition and subtraction counterparts and
thus the relationship between multiplication and division
must be correspondingly more complex. O verall, the
examination of multiplication and division inversion
problems has significant potential for furthering our
understanding of the development of children’s conceptual
knowledge in arithmetic.

Acknowledgments
This research project was supported by a Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council discovery grant.

References
Bisanz, J., & LeFevre, J.- A. (1990). Strategic and
nonstrategic processing in the development of
mathematical cognition. In D. F. Bjorklund (Ed.),
Children’s strategies: Contemporary views of cognitive
development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bryant, P., Christie, C., & Rendu, A. (1999). Children’s
understanding of the relation between addition and
subtraction: Inversion, identity, and decomposition.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 74, 194-212.
Geary, D. C. (1994) Children’s mathematical development:
Research and practical applications. W ashington, DC:
American Psychological Association.

Klein, J. S., & Bisanz, J. (2000). Preschoolers doing
arithmetic: The concepts are willing but the working
memory is weak. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54, 105-115.
Rasmussen, C., Ho, E., & Bisanz, J. (2003). Use of the
mathematical principle of inversion in young children.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 85, 89-102.
Rittle-Johnson, B., Siegler, R. S., & Alibali, M. W . (2001).
Developing conceptual understanding and procedural skill
in mathematics: An iterative process. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 93, 346-362.
Robinson, K. M. (2001). T he validity of verbal reports in
children’s subtraction. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 93, 211-222.
Robinson, K. M., & Ninowski, J. E. (2003). Adults’
understanding of inversion concepts: How does
performance on addition and subtraction inversion
problems compare to performance on multiplication and
division inversion problems? Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 57, 321-330.
Robinson, K. M., Ninowski, J. E., & Gray, M. L. (in press).
Children’s understanding of the arithmetic concepts of
inversion and associativity. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology.
Siegler, R. S., & Crowley, K. (1991). The microgenetic
method: A direct means for studying cognitive
development. American Psychologist, 46, 606-620.
Siegler, R. S., & Stern, E. (1998). Conscious and
unconscious strategy discoveries: A microgenetic analysis.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 127, 377397.
Starkey, P., & Gelman, R. (1982). The development of
addition and subtraction abilities prior to formal schooling
in arithmetic. In T.P. Carpenter, J. M. Moser, & T. A.
Romberg (Eds.), Addition and subtraction: A cognitive
perspective. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stern, E. (1992). Spontaneous use of conceptual
mathematical knowledge in elementary school children.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 17, 266-277.
Vilette, B. (2002). Do young children grasp the inverse
relationship between addition and subtraction? Evidence
against early arithmetic. Cognitive Development, 17,
1365-1383.

2037

