UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Accessibility of Depicted Events Influences Their Priority in Spoken Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6bh0509w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Crocker, Matthew W.
Knoeferle, Pia

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Accessibility of Depicted Events Influences their Priority in Spoken
Comprehension
Pia Knoeferle (knoeferle@coli.uni-sb.de)
Department of Computational Linguistics; FR 4.7, Building C71
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany

Matthew W. Crocker (crocker@coli.uni-sb.de)
Department of Computational Linguistics; FR 4.7, Building C71
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany

(‘jinx’) identified the pilot as the patient of a jinxingaction. The scene does not depict a jinxing action, but
based on the verb ‘jinx’, we find a typical jinxing-agent
(wizard) in the scene. In contrast, when we hear ‘The
pilot (object) serves food to ...’, verb-based knowledge of
stereotypical agents (e.g., a cook) cannot guide comprehension, as the scene affords no cook. However, the scene
does afford a depicted food-serving event performed by
the detective. Based on findings by Kamide et al. (2003)
and Knoeferle et al. (2005), people should exploit either stereotypical knowledge of likely agents (‘jinx’) or
depicted events (serving-food) for incremental thematic
interpretation at the verb, and anticipate the appropriate agent.

Abstract
Studies that monitor attention in depicted event scenes
during utterance comprehension show that people prefer
to rely on depicted events rather than their stereotypical
knowledge. However, the presence of depicted events in
the scene may have exaggerated their importance. Two
eye-tracking experiments examined this issue by varying
the accessibility of scene information. When we varied
the visual presence of the scene (the scene disappeared
before the utterance was heard), findings confirmed a
greater relative priority of depicted events (Experiment
1). In contrast, when we altered the temporal extension of scene events (scene presentation emulated that
they had been completed), people neither had a preference to rely on depicted events nor on their stereotypical
knowledge (Experiment 2). These findings suggest that
the visual presence of scene events cannot account for
the preference to rely on depicted events. We discuss
our findings in the context of research on the accessibility of events in discourse comprehension (e.g., Zwaan,
Maaden, & Whitten, 2000).

The priority of depicted events
Prior research has revealed important insights into how
we incrementally understand utterances that relate to a
concurrently presented scene. In particular, the monitoring of eye movements in a scene while people listen
to a concurrently presented and related utterance has
shown that distinct types of information - linguistic and
world knowledge as well as depicted events - are rapidly
used for incremental thematic role assignment. This
was revealed through the anticipation of relevant role
fillers in the scene based on either linguistic and world
knowledge (Kamide, Scheepers, & Altmann, 2003) or depicted agent-action-patient events (Knoeferle, Crocker,
Scheepers, & Pickering, 2005) (see Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995, on the use of a
visual referential context).
To further compare the relative importance of verbmediated world knowledge about likely role-fillers with
that of verb-mediated depicted events, Knoeferle and
Crocker (accepted) carried out a study that directly compared the importance of these two informational sources.
Participants in their study heard German object-verbsubject (OVS) sentences such as ‘The pilot (object)
jinxes the wizard (subject)’ while inspecting the scene in
Fig. 1. The noun phrase ‘the pilot’ established reference
to the pilot in the scene. Object case marking on the
determiner of the noun phrase together with the verb

Figure 1: Example image for sentences in Table 1

In a further condition pair, people heard ‘The pilot
(object) spies-on ...’. In this case, the scene affords both
a stereotypical agent (the detective), and an immediately depicted agent of a spying event (the wizard) as
relevant agents given the verb (see Fig 1). When people
hear ‘spies-on’, word meaning, stereotypical knowledge
of spy-on, and scene affordances allow them to anticipate
either a depicted spying-event and its agent (the wizard), or a different, stereotypical agent (the detective).
The comprehension system has to choose between two
available, yet conflicting, types of information in online
thematic role-assignment.
Gaze pattern confirmed prior findings that people rely
on either stereotypical knowledge (Kamide et al., 2003)
or depicted events (Knoeferle et al., 2005) when the
verb (‘jinx’, ‘serves-food-to’) uniquely identified a rel-

1623

ational context that accounts for the findings by Knoeferle and Crocker (accepted). To address this question,
we conducted two eye-tracking experiments that varied
the presence of scene information during comprehension.

evant typical agent or the agent of a depicted (nonstereotypical) action. When the verb (‘spy-on’) identified, in contrast, two agents as relevant, there was a
higher proportion of anticipatory eye movements to the
agent depicted as performing the verb action (the wizard) in comparison with the agent that was stereotypical for the verb (the detective) shortly after the verb.
This suggests a clear preference of the comprehension
system to rapidly rely on depicted events over stored
thematic knowledge for incremental thematic role assignment when both of these informational sources are
available and identified as relevant by the utterance.

Prior scene context

The origins of the preference?

There have been first steps towards exploring how people access information about objects when those objects
are not immediately present in the scene. In Spivey and
Geng (2001, Exp. 2), scenes contained four differently
coloured shapes that were either tilted leftward or rightwards. After participants had inspected the objects, one
of them disappeared. When answering a question about
either colour or tilt of the disappeared object, participants re-fixated its previous location on half of the trials. It has been proposed that people use pointers to the
external world to store object properties (Richardson &
Spivey, 2000; Spivey & Geng, 2001).
Altmann (2004) extended their approach to the investigation of utterance comprehension. People inspected
an image with a man, a woman, a cake, and a newspaper, and then the screen went blank (“blank-screen”
paradigm). Two seconds later, people heard a sentence
that described part of the previously-inspected scene
(e.g., The man will eat the cake). Having heard the
verb, people rapidly looked at the location where previously there had been a cake. These data suggest that
even when a prior scene context is no longer immediately available, the mental representations that listeners
retrieved from it may still inform a listener’s expectations about objects that are likely to be mentioned next.
While these findings make it clear that information
about previously inspected objects informs utterance
comprehension, the extent to which scene information
is available for comprehension when it is not immediately visually present is unclear. It is further unclear
whether findings by Altmann (2004) extend to more
complex scenes that contain agent-action-patient events
in addition to objects and characters.
Experiment 1 was designed see whether findings by
Altmann (2004) extend to richer scenes, and to test
the visual account of the preference to rely on depicted
events. People inspected a scene (Fig. 1), and then the
entire scene disappeared prior to utterance presentation.
If the visual account were most appropriate, we would
not expect to replicate the greater relative priority of
depicted events in this setting.

Knoeferle and Crocker (accepted) suggest that the preference to rely on verb-mediated depicted events over
verb-based stereotypical role knowledge has developmental origins. This position receives support from developmental research. Gillette, Gleitman, Gleitman, and
Lederer (1999), while emphasizing the importance of
linguistic knowledge for child language acquisition, propose that the presence of objects and events is fundamental for the acquisition of concrete nouns and verbs,
thus highlighting the importance of the immediate scene:
“[...] word-to-world pairing [...] must be the rock-bottom
foundation for vocabulary acquisition” (Gillette et al.,
1999, p. 169). Snow (1977) suggests that early language
is largely about objects and events in the immediate environment of a child, thus corroborating this proposal
(see, e.g., Yu, Ballard, & Aslin, 2005; Roy & Pentland,
2002, for relevant modeling research).
While such a developmental basis motivates the preference to rely on depicted events in adult comprehension,
there are more subtle issues still to be resolved. On one
account, the visual co-presence of a scene during comprehension may be the essential factor in the preference to
rely on scene events over non-depicted stereotypical role
relations between characters (“visual account”). The simultaneous presentation of a scene and a related utterance may have exaggerated the importance of depicted
events. This is particularly true since - unlike child language acquisition - language in adult life often does not
relate to an immediate scene.
Alternatively, what influences the preference to rely
on depicted events may be the discourse presence of an
event. In studies on discourse comprehension by Zwaan
et al. (2000), participants read narrative texts that detailed a sequence of events. They had to decide whether
or not an action word had occurred in either of two preceding sentences. Response latencies were longer when
the prior discourse context indicated that an event had
been completed, than when it was still ongoing. These
results suggest that the temporal extension of an event
(ongoing, terminated) influences its availability from the
discourse context. In analogy, a scene event that has
taken place, and is completed might be less available
from the situation context (“temporal account”).
The present paper examines whether it is the immediate visual presence of relevant depicted events, or
the fact that they are depicted as ongoing in the situ-

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Thirty-two native speakers of German
with normal or corrected-to-normal vision received five
euro each for participating in the experiment.

1624

Materials and Design The materials were the same
as in Knoeferle and Crocker (accepted). There were 24
items and four experimental conditions (Table 1, (a1),
(a2), (b1), (b2), and Fig. 1). We describe the four experimental conditions, and then the counter-balancing.

An example image showed two agents (e.g., a wizard, and a detective), each performing an action upon
a patient (e.g., the pilot, Fig. 1). The depicted events
provided information about role relations (e.g., wizardspying-on-pilot and detective-serving-food-to-pilot, see
Fig. 1). In addition, each agent provided stereotypical
thematic role knowledge (e.g., a detective is a stereotypical agent of a spying, and a wizard a stereotypical agent
of a jinxing action).
All sentences were unambiguous OVS sentences. They
always started with an unambiguously accusative casemarked noun phrase referring to a patient role-filler (Fig.
1, the pilot). While the OVS structure is non-canonical
in German, this was a constant across conditions.
Image

Cond. Sentences

Fig.1

(a1) Den Piloten verköstigt gleich der Detektiv.
The pilot (PAT.) serves-food-to soon the detective.
The detective will soon serve food to the pilot.

Fig.1

(a2) Den Piloten verzaubert gleich der Zauberer.
The pilot (PAT.) jinxes soon the wizard.
The wizard will soon jinx the pilot.

Fig.1

(b1) Den Piloten bespitzelt gleich der Zauberer.
The pilot (PAT.) spies-on soon the wizard.
The wizard will soon spy on the pilot.

Fig.1

potential agent through verb-mediated depicted actions
and through stereotypical verb-based knowledge. Each
agent was once uniquely identified as relevant by the utterance, and once identification of the relevant agent was
ambiguous. Conditions were matched for length (number of spoken syllables), and frequency of lemmas within
an item (t-test, p = 1) (Baayen, Pipenbrock, & Gulikers, 1995). Off-line plausibility ratings ensured that the
character which was the stereotypical agent for a verb
(detective, spy-on) was a more plausible agent for that
verb than the other character (wizard, Fig. 1).
There were 48 filler items, balanced for the number of
stereotypical versus depicted actions and agents. Twelve
trials showed an agent performing a stereotypical action to avoid that participants pay less attention to their
stored linguistic and world knowledge than to the (implausible) depicted events. To ensure that the majority
of sentences a participant heard were canonical, forty
filler utterances were subject-initial sentences. There
were eight experiment lists. Consecutive experiment trials were separated by at least one filler trial. Each of
the 32 participants saw only one of the four conditions
of an item, and the order of appearance of items was
randomized individually for every participant.

(b2) Den Piloten bespitzelt gleich der Detektiv.
The pilot (PAT.) spies-on soon the detective.
The detective will soon spy on the pilot.

Procedure An SMI Eye-Link head-mounted eyetracker monitored participants eye-movements at a frequency of 250 Hz. Images were presented on a 21-inch
multi-scan color monitor at a resolution of 1024 x 768
pixel. Before the experiment, participants received written instructions. They were asked to inspect the images
attentively, and informed that the study examined what
happened when people listen to sentences that describe
events that either are depicted on a previously viewed
scene, or that could take place. For each trial, the image
was presented first, and participants inspected it for a
fixed duration of 7000 ms. The image then disappeared,
and the screen went blank. After 1500 ms, the utterance
was presented (see Altmann, 2004, for similar instructions and a similar delay). The entire experiment lasted
approximately 30 min.

Table 1: Example item sentence set for Fig. 1
Manipulation of the verb created four conditions,
crossing the factors target type (depicted, stereotypical)
with identification (unique, ambiguous). ‘Identification’
refers to whether the verb uniquely identifies a target
agent based on either depicted events or stored thematic
knowledge ((a1) and (a2) respectively), or whether it
identifies both relevant available agents (a stereotypical agent and the (different) agent of a depicted action)
as relevant ((b1) and (b2)) (‘ambiguous identification’).
‘Target type’ refers to which target agent type (depicted,
stereotypical) the second noun phrase identifies as the
appropriate agent. In conditions (a1) and (b1) the target type is depicted and in conditions (a2) and (b2) the
target type is stereotypical. Note the difference between
‘target type’ and ‘identification’: ‘Identification’ characterizes which informational source is identified as relevant by the verb, whereas ‘target type’ refers to the target agent that is identified as relevant by the second noun
phrase. When referring to the target agent identified by
the second noun phrase we will use the expression ‘target
type’. When we refer to the scene entities, we will use
‘target agent’ (depicted agent and stereotypical agent).
Materials were designed so that plausibility biases introduced by the verb or noun phrases, depiction biases
introduced by characters, or position biases (whether
an agent was to the left or right of the patient) were
counter-balanced. Balancing further ensured that each
target agent (wizard, detective) was once identified as a
1625

Analysis For the analyses we chose a time region for
which participants had heard most of the verb, but not
the second noun that identified a depicted or stereotypical target agent. This region extended from 250 ms
before the offset of the verb to the offset of the adverb
(ADV) for each item trial (see Knoeferle & Crocker, accepted). The X-Y coordinates of participants fixations
were assigned to regions that corresponded to entities
and scene background of the previously inspected scene.
For Fig. 1 the wizard was coded as stereotypical agent,
and the detective as depicted agent for the unique conditions ((a1) and (a2) respectively), and vice versa for
the ambiguous conditions ((b1) and (b2), see Table 1).
Consecutive fixations within an object region (i.e., before a saccade to another region) were added together
as one inspection. For the inferential analysis we used
hierarchical log-linear models (see Howell, 2002; Knoeferle et al., 2005). Inspection counts for the ADV region
in the unique (Table 1, (a1), (a2)) and ambiguous con-

1.0

Figs 2 and 3 show the proportion of inspections to the
target characters (depicted agent, stereotypical agent)
during the ADV region. Fig. 2 shows inspection percentages to the entities for the unique ((a1), (a2), Table
1), and Fig. 3 for the ambiguous conditions ((b1), (b2)).
For the unique conditions a significant interaction of
target type (depicted, stereotypical target) and target
character (depicted agent, stereotypical agent) revealed
that people can rely on either depicted events (a1, Table 1) or stereotypical knowledge (a2) in anticipating a
relevant agent (ps < 0.001). There was a higher percentage of inspections to the stereotypical agent in the
stereotypical (a2) than in the depicted target condition
(a1), and more inspections to the depicted agent in the
depicted target (a1) than in the stereotypical target condition (a2) (Fig. 2, Table 1).

0.0

0.2

Inspection Proportions

0.8

ambiguous identification − depicted target
ambiguous identification − stereotypical target

0.6

Results and discussion

agent, stereotypical agent), identification (unique, ambiguous), and target type (stereotypical, depicted) confirmed that the difference between the main effect in the
ambiguous an the interaction in the unique conditions
was significant (p < 0.05 by part., p < 0.01 by items).

0.4

ditions (Table 1, (b1), (b2)) were subjected to analyses
with the factors target character (stereotypical agent, depicted agent), target type (depicted, stereotypical), and
either participants (N = 32) or items (N = 24).

stereotyp.

depicted
Entities

1.0

Figure 3: Gaze proportions during ADV for the ambiguous conditions in Experiment 1
ambiguous identification − depicted target
ambiguous identification − stereotypical target

0.6
0.4
0.2

Inspection Proportions

0.8

The above analyses confirmed findings of a greater relative importance of (non-stereotypical) depicted events
over stereotypical knowledge of (non-depicted) events
during online comprehension (see Knoeferle & Crocker,
accepted). This suggests that the immediate visual presence of the scene is not a necessary pre-requisite for the
greater relative importance of depicted events.

0.0

Experiment 2
stereotyp.

depicted

Experiment 2 tested the alternative, temporal account.
Scene presentation was modified so as to emulate that
the depicted events had been completed, hence making
them less available in the situation context. For Experiment 2, people inspected a scene like Fig. 1 but
without the actions. Then we briefly depicted the actions, removed them, and only the characters (and their
stereotypical affordances) remained on the display during utterance presentation. In this manner, we emulated
that an event had taken place and was completed. If
people still prefer to rely on depicted events this would
be evidence against both a visual and temporal account.
Finding, in contrast, that the priority of depicted events
is diminished in this setting, would suggest that the perceived temporal extension of a scene event in the context
(ongoing, completed) influences its accessibility and - in
our study - priority for spoken comprehension.

Entities

Figure 2: Gaze proportions during ADV for the unique
conditions in Experiment 1

For the ambiguous conditions (Table 1 (b1), (b2)), we
found - as expected - no interaction for the ADV region
since sentences were identical prior to the second noun.
Rather, we replicated the main effect of significantly
more inspections to the depicted than to the stereotypical agent for both (b1) and (b2) (Fig. 3). These looks occurred after people had heard ‘The pilot (object/patient)
spies-on ...’ and before they heard the respective second
noun phrase, which then disambiguated towards the depicted or stereotypical target type. Log-linear analyses
showed that the main effect of depicted agent was significant (p < 0.001 by part., p = 0.08 by items) in the
absence of a significant interaction (ps > 0.4).
The main effect for the ambiguous conditions (b1 and
b2) is only meaningful in comparison with the significant
interaction found in the unique conditions (a1 and a2). A
three-way interaction between target character (depicted

Method
Participants Thirty-two further participants from the
same population as in Experiment 1 were paid five euro
for taking part in the experiment.

1626

Materials, Design, and Procedure Materials and
design were identical to Experiment 1. The only dif-

0.8

for the depicted (a2) than the stereotypical target condition (a1) (Fig. 5).

0.4
0.2

Inspection Proportions

0.6

ambiguous identification − depicted target
ambiguous identification − stereotypical target

0.0

ference between Experiments 1 and 2 concerned image
presentation. In Experiment 1 the entire scene disappeared after an inspection time of 7000 ms. In Experiment 2, scene presentation consisted of four steps. First,
participants inspected the scene in Fig. 4a. The scene
characters were identical to the ones on the image for Experiment 1 (Fig. 1); however, unlike Fig. 1, the initial
scene in Experiment 2 did not show depicted actions. After 1500 ms, one action appeared (wizard, spying with a
telescope, Fig. 4b). After another 1500 ms, the action of
the other agent (detective, serving food on a plate, Fig.
4c) was presented. Finally, both actions disappeared together, and only the characters remained in the scene
during utterance presentation (Fig. 4d).

stereotyp.

depicted
Entities

(a)

(c)

Figure 5: Gaze proportions during the ADV for the
unique conditions

(b)

In the ambiguous conditions ((b1), (b2)), unlike for
Experiment 1, we find no main effect of target agent
(ps > 0.14). There was no reliable interaction between
target type (depicted, stereotypial) and target agent (depicted agent, stereotypical agent) (ps > 0.2) (Fig. 6).

(d)

0.8

Figure 4: Sequence of four scenes in Experiment 2
ambiguous identification − depicted target
ambiguous identification − stereotypical target

0.4
0.0

0.2

Inspection Proportions

0.6

For the first three scenes (Figs 4a-c) no speech input
was presented. To balance directionality effects, the action appeared first for the rightmost agent, and subsequently for the leftmost agent for one half of the items;
for the other half, the action appeared first for the agent
to the left, and then for the agent to the right of the patient. The filler images and sentences were the same as
for Experiment 1. Presentation was, however, changed
to resemble that of the experimental images. Thus, for
each filler trial, participants saw a sequence of four related scenes on which objects and characters appeared,
moved, or disappeared. For analyses we used the same
ADV region as for Experiment 1.

stereotyp.

depicted
Entities

Figure 6: Gaze proportions during the ADV for the ambiguous conditions

Results and discussion
Figs 5 and 6 show the proportion of inspections to the
target characters (depicted agent, stereotypical agent)
during the ADV region. Fig. 5 shows inspection percentages for the unique ((a1), (a2), Table 1), and Fig. 6
for the ambiguous conditions ((b1), (b2)).
For the unique conditions, log-linear analyses revealed
a significant interaction of target type (depicted, stereotypical target) and target character (depicted agent,
stereotypical agent) ((a1) and (a2), Table 1) (ps < 0.05).
The interaction resulted from a higher percentage of inspections to the stereotypical agent for the stereotypical
(a2) than the depicted target condition (a1), and an increased proportion of inspections to the depicted agent

The analyses support the view that when scene presentation emulated that depicted events had been completed, the preference to rely on depicted events for thematic interpretation in the ambiguous conditions was reduced. This provides evidence for the temporal account.

General Discussion

1627

Our findings support the view that it is the accessibility
of an event in the situational context (i.e., whether it is
depicted as ongoing or presented as completed) that is

at the origin of the preferred reliance on verb-mediated
depicted events over verb-based stereotypical knowledge
of events.
Experiment 1 found that the visual presence of the
scene is not a pre-requisite for the preferred reliance on
depicted events. People anticipated either the agent of a
non-depicted, stereotypical action (‘jinx’, wizard) or the
agent of a depicted action (‘serves-food-to’, detective)
when the verb uniquely identified an agent as relevant.
In contrast, when the verb (‘spies-on’) identified two different agents as relevant, people anticipated the agent of
the depicted action (wizard) more often than the stereotypical agent (detective). Gaze pattern showed that the
findings by Knoeferle and Crocker (accepted) extend to
the blank-screen paradigm (see Altmann, 2004).
Findings from Experiment 2 provide more detailed insights into the use of depicted events. When events depicted were presented in a manner that emulated events
taking place and then being completed, and characters
(and their stereotypical affordances) remained present
during utterance presentation, people were still able to
use verb-based stereotypical thematic knowledge or depicted events when the verb uniquely identified either a
stereotypical agent or the agent of a depicted action as
relevant for thematic interpretation. However, when the
verb (‘spies-on’) identified two different agents as relevant, we found no preferential anticipation of either a
stereotypical or a depicted agent (see Fig. 1).
Together, gaze patterns from Experiments 1 and 2 suggest that visual availability cannot account for findings
by Knoeferle and Crocker (accepted). If a visual account
was correct, we should not have replicated the existing
findings in Experiment 1, and we would have expected to
find a preferred reliance on the more immediately available stereotypical role fillers in the ambiguous conditions
of Experiment 2. Rather, the findings are compatible
with a temporal account that relies on whether a scene
event is ongoing or completed in the situation context.
Parallels to discourse contexts Our research on using a prior scene context for utterance comprehension
builds on existing work that has examined how people
use information about objects and events from prior discourse. Findings by Zwaan et al. (2000) suggest that the
temporal extension of an event (ongoing, terminated) influences its degree of availability from the discourse context (see also, e.g., Magliano & Schleich, 2000). This
insight is relevant for our findings since scene presentation in Experiment 2 (Fig. 4) was manipulated to
create an impression of events being completed. This
completed status may have diminished the accessibility
of the events, in particular also since the verb and adverb in our sentences referred to a future action (e.g.,
‘spies-on soon’). Future studies will vary verb tense to
explore this possibility.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by a PhD scholarship to PK,
and by SFB 378 ALPHA to MWC, both awarded by the
German Research Foundation.

References
Altmann, G. T. M. (2004). Language-mediated eyemovements in the absence of a visual world: the
‘blank screen paradigm’. Cognition, 93, B79–B87.
Baayen, R. H., Pipenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995).
The celex lexical database (cd-rom). University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., & Lederer, A.
(1999). Human simulations of vocabulary learning.
Cognition, 73, 135–176.
Howell, D. C. (2002). Statistical methods for psychology
(5th ed.). Pacific Grove: Duxbury.
Kamide, Y., Scheepers, C., & Altmann, G. T. M. (2003).
Integration of syntactic and semantic information in
predictive processing: cross-linguistic evidence from
German and English. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 32, 37–55.
Knoeferle, P., & Crocker, M. W. (accepted). The coordinated interplay of scene, utterance, and world knowledge: evidence from eye tracking. Cognitive Science.
Knoeferle, P., Crocker, M. W., Scheepers, C., & Pickering, M. J. (2005). The influence of the immediate visual context on incremental thematic roleassignment: Evidence from eye-movements in depicted events. Cognition, 95, 95–127.
Magliano, J. P., & Schleich, M. C. (2000). Verb aspect
and situation models. Discourse Processes, 29, 83–
112.
Richardson, D. C., & Spivey, M. J. (2000). Representation, space and hollywood squares: Looking at things
that arent there anymore. Cognition, 76, 269–295.
Roy, D., & Pentland, A. (2002). Learning words from
sights and sounds: A computational model. Cognitive
Science, 26, 113–146.
Snow, C. (1977). Mothers’ speech research: from input
to interaction. In C. Snow & C. A. Ferguson (Eds.),
Talking to children: language input and acquisition.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Spivey, M. J., & Geng, J. J. (2001). Oculomotor mechanisms activated by imagery and memory: eye movements to absent objects. Psychological Research, 65,
235–241.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard,
K., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension. Science, 268, 632–634.
Yu, C., Ballard, D. H., & Aslin, R. N. (2005). The
role of embodied intention in early lexical acquisition.
Cognitive Science, 29, 961–1005.
Zwaan, R. A., Maaden, C., & Whitten, S. N. (2000).
The presence of an event in the narrated situation
affects its availability to the comprehender. Memory
and Cognition, 28, 1022–1028.

1628

