UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ambiguity and the Representation Problem

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9h81b3zt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Saka, Paul

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ambiguity and the Representation Problem
Paul Saka (psaka@uh.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of Houston
513 Agnes Arnold Hall, Houston, TX 77204 USA

Abstract
I canvass eight possible approaches to representing
ambiguity within truth-conditional semantics, and I
argue that all are unsatisfactory. For example, it would
be a mistake to hold that "x is a bank" is true iff x is a
financial institution while "x is a bank" is true iff x is a
slope, for then x would be a financial institution iff x is
a slope. It would also be a mistake to hold that some
tokens of "x is a bank" are true iff x is a financial
institution while other tokens are true iff x is a slope,
given the existence of punning and equivocation. My
work may be taken either as a call for research on a
neglected topic in truth-conditional semantics, or as a
call for abandoning truth-conditional semantics.

1. Introduction
Ambiguity can be found in language: in affixes, words,
sentences, extended discourse, and silence; it can be found in
art and images (Atlas, 1989: ch 1); it can be found in live
actions and states of affairs (Schick, 2003: ch 1); and it can be
found in clues and evidence. In every case, so it seems,
ambiguity involves multiple interpretations or multiple
meanings. Such multiplicity, in turn, is naturally understood in
terms of either conjunction or disjunction. If an expression Φ
is ambiguous, colloquial formulations of that fact include (i)
"Φ might mean P and might mean Q (and maybe R…)", (ii)
"Φ does mean P and does mean Q", (iii) "Φ might mean P or
Q", (iv) "Φ does mean P or Q". Now my question is this: how
are such claims to be represented in truth-conditional
semantics? This is what I call ambiguity's representation
problem. It is distinct from what I call the resolution problem.1
My concern is with the representation problem. I shall argue
that, of all the representational formats that suggest
themselves, and of all those suggested in the literature, none is
adequate. I begin by considering disjunctive truth-conditions
and then turn to conjunctive truth-conditions: simple, tokenrelative, propositional, disquotational, and subscripted.2

2. Disjunctive Truth-Conditions
Pretend, for the sake of simplicity, that "x is a bank" is twoways ambiguous. Assuming an extensional truth-conditional
format, there are two obvious candidates for representing
ambiguity by means of disjunction:
(1)
WIDE-SCOPE DISJUNCTION
1

The vast bulk of the literature on ambiguity comes from
computer science and is devoted to the resolution problem. See
Gorfein 1989 & 2002, Hirst 1992, Schutze 1997, Stevenson 2002,
van Deemters & Peters 1996.
2
Throughout, I shall focus on just declarative sentential ambiguity,
although much of what I say is intended to ramify more generally.
2077

x is a bank ≡ x is a [certain kind of] financial institution
or x is a bank ≡ x is a [certain kind of] slope.
(2)
NARROW- SCOPE DISJUNCTION
x is a bank ≡
(x is a financial institution or x is a slope).
Disjunction (1) would be true even if "bank" univocally meant
just 'financial institution', and it would be true even if "bank"
univocally meant 'slope'. Asserting (1) implicates that we as
analysts don't know which meaning uniquely belongs to
"bank", which is different from saying that "bank" has two
different meanings. Therefore wide-scope disjunction is not
the correct format for representing ambiguity.
The problem with (2) is that it does not really claim that the
word "bank" is ambiguous; it shows only that "bank" is
general, that it labels a single concept whose denotation
ranges over two different kinds of object, just as the definition
below makes no claim about ambiguity:
(3)
x is a parent (of y) ≡ x is a mother or father (of y).
This disjunction view of generality is rejected by Atlas, who
correctly observes that "game" does not mean 'chess or
baseball or pick-up-sticks...' (1989: §2.3). But the fact that
generality is generally not due to disjunction fails to establish
that generality never involves disjunction. What I would like
to do is to argue that generality can involve disjunction, and
that therefore, if narrow-scope disjunctive truth-conditions are
to be used, they must be reserved for representing some cases
of generality rather than ambiguity.
First, it accords best with the facts of developmental
psychology to take 'mother' and 'father' as primitives and to
define "parent" disjunctively as 'mother or father' (Wierzbicka,
1972). In other words, since children acquire the words
"mother" and "father" before the word "parent", it is plausible
to suppose that their concept 'parent' is more complex than the
concepts 'mother' and 'father', a complexity that can be
naturally captured in terms of disjunction. In reply one might
observe that the juvenile concept behind "parent" differs from
the mature concept, and that the juvenile concept, being
disjunctive, is not general but rather ambiguous. But if this
were the case then children would interpret "Where are your
parents?" as meaning either 'Where are your fathers?' or
'Where are your mothers?' Instead they rightfully understand
the question as meaning 'Where are your x's, where x is a
mother or father?'
Second, consider technical terms like Chomsky's
"governing category":
(5)
x is a governing category of y ≡ (x is a governor of y,
and x is a minimal NP or S that contains y).
The disjunction "NP or S" might very well one day receive a
unified characterization, but in contemporary theories of
syntax it remains a disjunction. Of course, independent of our
ability to characterize something, speakers surely devise

covert, ineffable categorizations; that is, perhaps expert
syntacticians possess an atomic concept "NP-or-S" in the
language of thought which underpins the disjunctive concept
"NP or S" in natural language. However, such a supposition is
utterly implausible for novice syntacticians; and semantic
theory must be able to represent the speech of neophytes as
well as of experts.

3. Conjunctive Truth-Conditions:
Simple and Token-Relative
The idea that "x is a bank" means that x is a certain kind of
financial institution and it means that x is a certain kind of
slope, needless to say, cannot be rendered by narrow-scope
conjunctive truth-conditions. Can it, however, be rendered by
WIDE-SCOPE CONJUNCTION, or equivalently a listing of Tsentences?3
(7)
x is a bank ≡ x is a financial institution. […and…]
(8)
x is a bank ≡ x is a slope.
The problem, as first emphasized by Kathryn Parsons in 1973,
is that T-sentences (7) and (8) mistakenly entail (9).
(9)
x is a slope ≡ x is a financial institution.
Defenders of wide-scope conjunction might insist that the
left-hand side of (7) says something about banks in the
financial sense, and it occurs in a true biconditional, while the
left-hand side of (8) says something about banks in the
topographical sense, and it occurs in a true biconditional.
Because they contain distinct tokens, they are able to have
different meanings, the consequence being that the
conjunction of (7) and (8) together says all that needs to be
said about the meaning of "x is a bank". According to this
TOKEN version of the conjunction theory, it would be more
perspicuous to formulate simple (7) and (8) as existential
quantifications:
(10) Some tokens of "x is a bank" are true ≡
x is a financial institution.
(11) Some tokens of "x is a bank" are true ≡ x is a slope.
This move fails to work, however, for in some cases of
ambiguity two readings of one token are equally in effect at
the same time. As one example, consider the pun in the old
slogan for Morton salt:
(12) When it rains, it pours.
According to token conjunctive truth-conditionalism:
(13) Token (12) is true ≡ when it rains, it rains hard.
(14) Token (12) is true ≡ when it rains [and is humid],
Morton's salt dispenses easily.
Together these entail that:
(15) When it rains, it rains hard ≡
when it rains, Morton's salt dispenses easily.
However, the proverbial left-hand side, whether or not
construed metaphorically, is a false exaggeration, while the
right-hand side is presumably true.
It may be said that although the Morton company played on
meaning (13), it seriously intended only (14). As a result,
despite lurking in the consciousness of the audience, (13) is
not asserted and is unavailable for the inference to (15).
3

Examples (7) and (8) are T-sentences because they are
abbreviations for:
(a)
"x is a bank" is true ≡ x is a financial institution.
(b)
"x is a bank" is true ≡ x is a slope.
2078

However, sometimes punning genuinely invokes multiple
meanings. Regarding my article "Quotation Matters", does the
title mean to refer to issues relating to quotation, or refer to the
kinds of material that get quoted, or assert that quotation is
relevant…? I meant all simultaneously, without privileging
one.
There is also simultaneous meaning in some commissions
of the fallacy of equivocation. Suppose that we have an
argument with premises A, B, and conclusion C, and suppose
that its formal validity hinges on recurring term t. We could
say (i) that t means one thing in A, switches meaning in B, and
reverts back in C. Alternatively we could say (ii) that t holds
constant meaning, but that premise B is obviously false.
Which would the proponent of such an argument say?
Adherents of (i) would never regard the argument valid;
adherents of (ii) would never regard the argument sound.
Because sincere proponents of equivocal arguments regard
their arguments as valid and sound, explanations (i) and (ii)
ought to be dropped in favor of (iii): that a single token of t
possesses two meanings, one that licenses the acceptability of
B and one that licenses inference in the given argument. I
conclude that token conjunctive truth-conditionalism is
untenable.

4. Conjunctive Truth-Conditions:
Propositions and Disquotations
The appeal to tokens might be harnassed to formulate a
PROPOSITIONALIST conjunction theory. The first step links
tokens to propositions:
(16) Some tokens of "x is a bank" express the proposition
that x is a financial institution.
(17) Some tokens of "x is a bank" express the proposition
that x is a slope.
The second step links propositions to truth-conditions:
(18) The proposition that x is a financial institution is true ≡
x is a financial institution.
(19) The proposition that x is a slope is true ≡ x is a slope.
This two-step structure keeps tokens from correlating directly
with truth-conditions, thus enabling a single token to have two
incompatible meanings without rendering self-contradictory
the theory that describes it.
There is a problem, however, in explaining just what this
theory amounts to. What does it mean "to express"? I have
never seen any account. What is a proposition? A proposition
is not identical to a set of truth-conditions, else (18) and (19)
would be superfluous solecisms. A proposition cannot be a
platonic object on pain of violating naturalism. A proposition
cannot be construed as a sentence in a computational language
of thought, at least in the context of truth-conditional
semantics (to be discussed in §5).
Reference to propositions is avoided by Davidson's
disquotational theory of meaning, according to which
semantic axioms yield homophonic T-sentences. According to
DISQUOTATIONAL CONJUNCTIONISM, the theory of meaning
must separately generate (20) and (21) in order to treat both
financial and topographical meanings.
(20) "x is a bank" is true ≡ x is a bank.
(21) "x is a bank" is true ≡ x is a bank.

But which is which? Does (20) give us the financial sense, or
the topographical? Notice that it does no good to trace their
derivations: while (20) derives from axiom (20'), and (21)
from separate axiom (21'), the fundamental axioms
themselves do nothing to distinguish the two senses at issue.
(20') "bank" denotes banks.
(21') "bank" denotes banks.
Disquotatonalism moreover fails because it brings ambiguity
from the object of inquiry into the inquiry itself, thereby
violating a fundamental condition on adequacy for any theory
whatsoever. Theories should be free from serious
misunderstanding, hence free from any ambiguity that is
unresolvable in its context. We can't evaluate any truth-theory
entailing (20) and (21) because we have no way of knowing
whether the following is being entailed instead:
(22) "x is a bank", in the 'financial' sense, is true ≡
x is a bank in the 'slope' sense.
Another point against disquotational semantics is that the
meta-language should work for any language (except possibly
itself, given the liar paradox), yet ambiguous expressions in
other languages generally do not translate into ambiguous
expressions of English.

5. Conjunctive Truth-Conditions: Subscripts
We have been considering ways to express a tenable widescope conjunctionism The simple case (7 & 8) falls to the
absurd "slope = financial institution" deduction, token
conjunctionism falls to puns and equivocations, disquotational
conjunctionism does not actually give truth-conditions, and
propositional conjunctionism is obscure.
One way to overcome the absurdity of simple
conjunctionism, and to explicate a kind of propositionalism, is
urged by Brendan Gillon. Gillon, who arguably repeats
Davidson and Harman, points out that Davidsonian Tsentences do not, strictly speaking, use quotation names of
sentences, they use structural descriptions or SDs. For Gillon,
SDs specify lexical elements by spelling or pronunciation,
with subscripts added where necessary to distinguish
homonyms, and SDs also specify syntactic structure by means
of labeled tree diagrams. Thus, sentence (23) has two SDs:
(23) Enraged cow injures man with ax.
(23a) [S [NP Enraged cow] [VP injures [NP man [PP with ax]]]]
(23b) [S [NP Enraged cow] [VP injures [NP man] [PP with ax]]]
This structural difference allows us to formulate a separate Tsentence for each reading: the sentence specified by (a) is true
iff the man with an ax was injured by the cow, and the
sentence specified by (b) is true iff the cow injured, with an ax,
the man.
Unfortunately Gillon's use of SDs runs up against several
problems. First, it falls to the same pun objection levied
against token conjunctionism. Second, it overlooks ambiguity
that is neither structural nor lexical (§6). Third, even in the
case of lexical ambiguity it fails to individuate readings, as I
shall now explain.
Subscripts cannot be taken too literally; if little numbers
actually appeared on words there would be no such thing as
lexical ambiguity. No, Gillon presumably means for us to
construe subscripts as distinguishing marks that we as analysts
impose for our own convenience. The problem is that there is

2079

a difference between representing lexical ambiguity by means
of subscripts and representing structural ambiguity by means
of brackets. Brackets depict or specify differences in structure - a bare modicum of syntactic training, if even that, suffices
for revealing which structure goes with which reading.
Subscripts, in contrast, do not really specify words; were
subscripts reversed, no one would be the wiser. In other
words, Gillon's alleged structural descriptions do not describe.
Subscripts merely signal that lexical differences are at hand.
But this is not sufficient, for otherwise mere subscripts would
take care of structural ambiguity as well. Why bother figuring
out the correct bracketing in (23) when we could equally as
well say (24)?
(24a) [Enraged cow injures man with ax]1
(24b) [Enraged cow injures man with ax]2
Just as subscripts neither describe nor genuinely distinguish
the multiple readings due to structural ambiguity, so too they
fail to do the job for lexical ambiguity. The use of subscripts
only labels or defers or disguises the problem and does
nothing to solve it.
To be sure, subscripts have been used in the literature as
stand-ins for something substantive -- namely to signify
processing paths, individuated either computationally
(Field, 1994: §10) or physically. But if meaning can be
reduced in this way, it would be hard to see what purpose
the truth-theory served. We could just as well skip the Tsentences and go directly to correlating linguistic
expressions with the computational or physical state of the
language users.
Even if subscripts did individuate lexemes, there would still
be a representation problem for truth-theoretic semanticists.
The reason is that much ambiguity is neither structural nor
lexical. There is polysemy, speech-act ambiguity, the
referential indeterminacy of demonstratives, vagueness, and
much else (Saka, forthcoming, b). Establishing that these
phenomena count as ambiguity is the burden of my next
section.

6. An Ambiguity Test
Gillon (2004) surveys a variety of ambiguity tests and
concludes that ultimately the only good one is the
contradictory test. It essentially goes like this:
If there is some state of affairs according to which
statement token P would both seem true and seem false,
then it is reasonable to treat P as ambiguous.
This contradictory test follows from any truth-conditional
semantics. Here is my argument.
(a) If P has multiple truth-values under a single condition,
then P has distinctive sets of truth-conditions.
(b) If P has distinctive sets of truth-conditions
then P has multiple meanings.
(c) If P has multiple meanings then P is ambiguous.
(d) If P has multiple truth-values under one condition,
then P is ambiguous.
Premise (a) follows from the concept of truth-condition, (b)
from the assumption of truth-conditional semantics, (c) by
definition, and (d) as a logical consequence of (a-c).
It follows that some indexicals are ambiguous. Mind you, I
do not mean that "me" is ambiguous because some tokens of it

refer to me while others refer to you. I mean that even when
we focus on a particular token of "it" or "this", and take full
account of context, there will sometimes be ambiguity in the
mind of the audience.
Nor does the speaker's intention decide matter, of course.
First, the speaker's intention is not always authoritative. Just as
a speaker can be mistaken in thinking that "the man with the
martini" denotes Dean, one can be unreasonable in thinking
that "this" denotes something prominent in one's own mind
that is in fact obscure to everyone else. Second, if speaker's
intention blocks ambiguity in the case of "this", it would do so
in other cases. Ambiguity would hardly exist at all!
It may be objected that the objective context of utterance
fixes the semantic values of indexicals; that if you and I
disagree about the denotation of "this" then one of us is wrong;
and that the contradictory test can be revised to reflect as
much. I disagree, but I won't argue the point. Instead I observe
that appeals to context cannot serve as a general response to
my argument -- my argument against using SDs as an
adequate representation of ambiguity in general -- because
they do not apply to cases of vagueness:
(25) Parachuting is dangerous.
One and the same person in one and the same situation may
respond to "Is it (25) true?" with "Well, it is and it isn't".
Therefore, from the truth-conditional point of view, cases of
vagueness are cases of ambiguity.
I do not mean to suggest that vagueness and indexicality
have entirely the same nature as homonymy and structural
ambiguity, only that they do have this in common, that they
lend variable contributions to truth-conditions. If we assume
truth-conditional semantics then linguistic ambiguity would
include much that cannot be treated by lexically individuated
phrase structures.

7. Conclusion
I have canvassed eight possible approaches to representing
ambiguity within truth-conditional semantics, and I have
argued that all are unsatisfactory. This may be taken as either a
call for new research in truth-conditional semantics or a call
for abandoning truth-conditional semantics, take your pick.
Even if I am mistaken, however, I hope that I have convinced
you that the problem of representing ambiguity is not trivial.
There is no warrant for the current widespread practice in the
literature of acknowledging the phenomenon of ambiguity
only to airily dismiss it.

8. Addenda
My readers have raised questions and objections that I shall
now try to answer. (1) What do I mean by generality (section
2)? A term is general when it labels a single concept whose
denotation ranges over two different kinds of object. (2) Do I
fail to distinguish among lexico-syntactic ambiguity,
polysemy, and vagueness? On the one hand, I do recognize
differences; on the other hand, there is an argument for
regarding them as falling under one genus (section 6). This
argument cannot be refuted simply by insisting that I fail to
recognize a traditional distinction. (3) In response to the claim
that no one takes ambiguity as a trivial issue, I cite examples
of prominent books in semantics, ostensibly exhaustive or at
2080

least far-ranging in coverage, that do not index ambiguity:
textbooks such as Simon Blackburn's Spreading the Word and
Alexander Miller's Philosophy of Language, monographs such
as Robert Brandom's Articulating Reasons and Michael
Devitt's Coming to Our Senses, and collections such as
Michael Dummett's Seas of Language. Even works that index
ambiguity typically spend only a page or two on the topic, e.g.
Alex Barber's Epistemology of Language. (4) If I reject truthconditional semantics, what then would I propose instead? I
advocate a psychologized semantics whose details do not fit
here; see Saka (forthcoming, b). (5) How does my work count
as cognitive science? Because the term is vague, ambiguous,
and open to contention, and again because of space limits, I
will say only this: being on meaning, my work relates to the
mind; being falsifiable, it is scientific; and citing both linguists
and philosophers, it is interdisciplinary, which distinguishes
cognitive science from the special fields that it brings together.

References
Atlas, J. (1989). Philosophy without Ambiguity. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Davidson, D. (1967). Truth and meaning. In Inquiries into
Truth and Interpretation, 1984. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Davis, S. & B. Gillon, editors. (2004). Semantics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gillon, B. (1990a). Truth theoretical semantics and ambiguity.
Analysis 50: 178-82.
----. (1990b). Ambiguity, generality, and indeterminacy.
Synthese 85: 391-416.
----. (2004). Ambiguity, indeterminacy, deixis, and vagueness.
In Davis & Gillon (2004).
Gorfein, D., ed. (1989). Resolving Semantic Ambiguity.
Dordrecht: Springer.
----, ed. (2002). On the Consequences of Meaning Selection.
American Psychological Association.
Hirst, G. (1992). Semantic Interpretation and the Resolution
of Ambiguity. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Lycan, W. (1984). Logical Form in Natural Language.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Parsons, K. (1973). Ambiguity and the truth definition. Nous
7: 379-94.
Saka, P. (forthcoming, a). Quotation matters, or, the
demonstrative and identity theories of quotation. Journal of
Philosophy.
---- (forthcoming, b). How to Think about Meaning.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Schick, F. (2003). Ambiguity and Logic. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Schutze, H. (1997). Ambiguity Resolution in Language
Learning. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Stevenson, M. (2002). Word Sense Disambiguation.
Stanford, CA: CSLI.
van Deemter, K. & S. Peters. (1996). Semantic Ambiguity
and Underspecification. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Wierzbicka, A. (1972). Semantic Primitives. Frankfurt:
Athenaeum.

