UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Emergentist Account of Collective Cognition in Collaborative Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/94c119bq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Black, John B.
Kapur, Manu
Kinzer, Charles K.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Emergentist Account of Collective Cognition in Collaborative Problem Solving
John Voiklis (jv37@columbia.edu)
Cognitive Studies in Education
Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, NY10027

Manu Kapur (manu_kapur@hotmail.com)
Communication, Computing, and Technology in Education
Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, NY10027

Charles Kinzer (kinzer@tc.columbia.edu)
Communication, Computing, and Technology in Education
Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, NY10027

John Black (black@exchange.tc.columbia.edu)
Cognitive Studies in Education
Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, NY10027

unexplored. Some groups manage to generate and sustain
sufficient tension between the intersubjective convergence
necessary for concerted action and the divergence necessary
for cognitive flexibility; other groups lurch towards one
extreme or another. How do groups tune the levels of their
collective cognition; why and when do some groups succeed
and others fail?

Abstract
As a first step toward an emergentist theory of collective
cognition in collaborative problem solving, we present a
proto-theoretical account of how one might conceive and
model the intersubjective processes that organize collective
cognition into one or another—convergent, divergent, or
tensive—cognitive regime. To explore the sufficiency of our
emergentist proposal we instantiate a minimalist model of
intersubjective convergence and simulate the tuning of
collective cognition using data from an empirical study of
small-group, collaborative problem solving. Using the results
of this empirical simulation, we test a number of preliminary
hypotheses with regard to patterns of interaction, how those
patterns affect a cognitive regime, and how that cognitive
regime affects the efficacy of a problem-solving group.

Collective Cognition: Supervenient, Yet Distinct
One word, emergence, provides an easy answer. Collective
cognition—whether convergent, divergent, or at some
tension point between the two—emerges from the
intersubjective interactions—discussion, negotiation, and
speculation—among collaborating agents; each interaction,
in relation to every other interaction, tunes collective
cognition both in time and over time. Invoking emergence
only begs the question: how, when, and why does collective
cognition emerge? Among cognitive scientists, interest in
collective cognition and its emergence is a recent
phenomenon (e.g. Goldstone, 2005); existing theories (e.g.
Hutchins, 1995) detail how collective cognition propagates
once structured and institutionalized, but a theory of its
emergence remains forthcoming (Schwartz, 1995). The need
for a theory stems from the cumulative effect of empirical
research indicating that intersubjective processes yield
cognitions—e.g opinions (Isenberg, 1986), knowledge
representations (Schwartz, 1995), decisions (Bornstein &
Yaniv, 1998), among others—that differ, both in complexity
and kind, from those produced by any collaborating agent or
those expected from the central tendency among
collaborators (Vallacher & Nowak, in press). Moreover,
these group-level cognitions emerge spontaneously, without
forethought or awareness among collaborating agents
(Goldstone, 2005). Apparently, the interactions among
collaborators generate a mind—supervenient, yet distinct
from any constituent mind—requiring cognitive inquiry in
its own right.

Introduction
Collaborative problem solving presents a coordination
challenge (Lewis, 1969): the timing and efficacy of topdown processes—the means-ends operations—whereby a
group wends its way through the problem space, depend on
the timing and efficacy of bottom-up processes, whereby
heterogeneous agents evolve and propagate shared
intentions, goals, beliefs, and conceptions (Clark &
Brennan, 1991). Absent this intersubjective convergence (cf.
Roschelle, 1992), collaborators cannot define (perhaps not
even recognize) the problem at hand nor select among the
possible solutions, much less take action (Katz &
Lazarsfeld, 1955). Luckily, collaborators tend, over time,
toward psychological homogeneity (for review see Arrow,
McGrath, & Berdal, 2000). In fact, human beings appear
hard-wired for sharing psychological states (Tomasello et.
al, 2005); the urge to converge has adaptive value—i.e.
survival of the groupiest (e.g. Axelrod, 1984). That said, the
efficiency gains afforded by complete and uncritical
consensus—groupthink—come with adaptability costs, as
well (Janis, 1982); collaborators proceed with cognitive
myopia, leaving much of the problem and solution spaces
858

simulation (cf. Nowak, 2004): one need only model the
minimal information—e.g. utility function, decision rule, or
heuristic—contained in a local interaction; through repeated
updating of aggregated local interactions, the simulation
generates the phenomenon—in all its informational
complexity—from the bottom up (ibid.). Employing a
minimalist, bottom-up approach to derivation by simulation,
an emergentist theory of collective cognition need not
sacrifice explanatory depth and richness for parsimony
(ibid.); Ockam can put away his razor.

Emergence: Unpacking the Paradox
Despite newfound enthusiasm, the road to an emergentist
theory of collective cognition remains littered with
obstacles. Foremost, emergence presents a definitional
paradox: on one level, emergent phenomena depend on
underlying variables and processes; on another level,
emergent phenomena remain autonomous from underlying
variables and processes (Bedau, 2003). This paradox
complicates the ontological, causal, and explanatory
derivation of emergent phenomena. First, the ontological
derivation of an emergent phenomenon is informationally
complex (ibid.). This means that one could reduce collective
cognition to its constituent psychological variables (as
manifest by intersubjective interactions), however, one
could not derive collective cognition without full
information on how those variables aggregate and interact.
Second, the causal derivation of an emergent phenomenon
is informationally complex (ibid.). One could reduce
collective cognition to its current configuration of
psychological variables, but one could not derive collective
cognition without full information on the history of
intersubjective interactions that led to that configuration.
Third, no particular ontological or causal derivation can
explain an emergent phenomenon (ibid.). Over the duration
of the problem-solving process, collective cognition may
organize into a variant of three—convergent, divergent, or
tensive—attractors or change-resistant cognitive regimes.
Apparently similar configurational histories may organize
very different cognitive regimes, while apparently different
configurational histories may organize similar cognitive
regimes. Fourth, an emergent phenomenon propagates the
ontological and causal conditions from which it derives
(ibid.). Intersubjective interactions may organize collective
cognition into a particular regime, but the regime
downwardly constrains the intersubjective interactions by
which collective cognition propagates. All in all, an
emergent phenomenon, itself, offers the shortest
description—ontological, causal, and explanatory—of its
own emergence (ibid.); collective cognition is
algorithmically irreducible.

Computational Models: Life-Like Is Like Life
Computational models of collective behavior and collective
psychology exemplify the minimalist, bottom-up approach
to derivation by simulation. (for reviews see Goldstone,
2005 and Vallacher & Nowak, in press). For instance, the
dynamical implementation of Social Impact Theory
(Nowak, Szamrej, & Latané, 1990) simulates how polarized
clusters emerge in public opinion. In the theory and in the
simulation, social influence operates via two interlocking
mechanisms: the group influences each person, and each
person influences the group. The intensity of that influence,
both group-on-person and person-on-group, derives from a
function of three variables: group size, personal
persuasiveness, and personal position in physical (or social)
space. During the course of discussion—i.e. the iterative
application of the social influence function to each groupon-person and person-on-group interaction—the simulation
evolves from an initial random distribution of opinions to a
distribution of opinions not unlike that in the real world:
islands of minority opinion in a sea of majority opinion.
One finds similarly plausible patterns of collective behavior
and thought in simulations that model higher-dimensional
cognitive structures, yet lower-dimensional mechanisms of
social influence; global systems of cultural knowledge
(Kennedy’s, 1998) and meaning (Barr, 2004) can emerge—
with surprising efficiency—from local, person-to-person
exchanges of partial knowledge. Verisimilitude—the
plausibility of behavior and thought patterns—lends
explanatory power to computational models. If simple
mechanisms operating on minimal variables produce
realistic phenomena in a simulated world, perhaps the same
simple mechanisms operating on the same minimal
variables produce real phenomena in the real world (Nowak,
2004).

Deriving the Irreducible: A Minimalist Approach
The algorithmic irreducibility of emergent phenomena
precludes any short cut derivation of collective cognition:
one must recapitulate the full ontological and causal history
from which collective cognition emerged—i.e. derivation by
simulation (ibid.). At first glance, derivation by simulation
appears tedious, perhaps intractable: for one, the full
ontological and causal history of collective cognition
involves multi-level causal dynamics operating on multiple,
permuting variables; further, as argued above, no particular
ontological or causal derivation can explain collective
cognition. Algorithmic irreducibility, one might suspect,
also precludes a parsimonious theory of collective
cognition. Then again, the ontological and causal history of
collective cognition entails, at each point in time, a finite set
of local intersubjective interactions; each local interaction
entails only local dynamics operating on local variables.
This enables a minimalist approach to derivation by

Two Routes to Theory Building
Computational models, thus, offer one way to understand
how, when, and why a collaborative, problem-solving group
succeeds or fails in tuning the levels of its collective
cognition. One could implement any number of minimalist,
hypothetical models and validate the results against
empirical data (Goldstone, 2005). The model whose
aggregate iteration produces the most plausible patterns of
collective behavior and thought likely underlies the process
by which real-world collective cognition emerges and
propagates (Nowak, 2004). Thus, verisimilitude proves
essential to the theory-building efforts of those trying to
understand collective behavior and collective psychology.

859

reconfigures both intersubjective and instrumental variables
in such a way that may, in relation to the reconfigurations of
previous interactions, increase or decrease the need for
further discussion, negotiation, and speculation: i.e. each
successive interaction impacts the level of convergence
among collaborating agents and, thereby, the efficiency of
the ensuing problem-solving process. Given the
coordinative interdependence between instrumental and
intersubjective levels of convergence, one can expect
interactions that generate convergence/divergence on one
level to follow on interactions that generate
convergence/divergence on the other level. Thus, each
interaction may constrain the valence—convergent,
divergent, or neutral—of the succeeding interaction,
creating clusters of interactions with a similar impact on
both convergence levels and efficiency. These clusters or
tiny attractors (cf. Kauffman, 1993), in turn, constrain the
overall trajectory of the problem-solving process: recurring
tiny attractors push the discussion, more and more, in one
direction, organizing a cognitive regime—i.e. a major
attractor. With the regime in place, similarly valenced
interactions—both singly and in clusters—increase in
likelihood; while one might observe convergent interactions
in a divergent regime or divergent interactions in a
convergent regime, these perturbations have little impact on
the direction of the discussion. A group whose cognitive
regime tends towards divergence remains mired in
disagreement and indecision: collaborating agents cannot
find a mutually satisfactory solution. A mutually
satisfactory solution comes easily for collaborating agents
whose cognitive regime tends towards convergence, but that
solution reflects the monolithic tendencies of the group. A
multidimensional solution requires multidimensional
intersubjective processes; one can expect such a solution
from a group whose collective cognition tends toward a
tensive cognitive regime.

That said, a reliance on verisimilitude may strain one’s
evidentiary standards (Goldstone, 2005); for instance, while
one might rely on the verisimilitude of Shakespeare’s King
Lear to make sense of observed familial dysfunction, one
might hesitate to claim that the contrived vicissitudes of a
fictional family—no matter how plausible—can explain the
observed vicissitudes of an actual family. In response to this
wariness, one could follow an empirical route to derivation
by simulation: beginning, again, with a minimalist,
hypothetical model of a local intersubjective interaction, one
could use empirical (as opposed to computer-generated)
data to update the aggregated local interactions at each
iteration of the simulation. The empirical route, though,
comes with its own limitations. For one, life rarely
maintains a time-ordered log of intersubjective interactions;
one must rely on data from laboratory experiments, where
sample size, time scale, and transparency rarely match the
levels available in computational experiments. Further, the
intersubjective interactions of human collaborators involve a
panoply of discursive instruments—analogies, jokes, lies, as
well as propositions; before proceeding with simulation, one
must translate these discursive instruments—via some
theory-based process—into simple mechanisms operating
on minimal variables. Despite these limitations, empirical
simulations avoid validation by verisimilitude; the simulated
patterns of behavior and thought are not simply life-like,
they are life. One can expect empirical validation to
supplement, if not supplant, verisimilitude in building an
emergentist theory of collective cognition in collaborative
problem solving.

Collective Cognition: An Emergentist Proposal
Before one can proceed—whether via computational or
empirical simulation—with building a emergentist theory of
collective cognition in collaborative problem solving, one
needs a proto-theoretical account of the phenomenon to
guide how one might conceive and model the
intersubjective interactions whose aggregate iteration
organize collective cognition into one or another—
convergent, divergent, or tensive—cognitive regime. While
speculative, such an account would allow one to generate a
number of preliminary, yet testable, hypotheses with regard
to patterns of intersubjective interaction, the effect of those
patterns on the stability of a cognitive regime, and the effect
of a cognitive regime on the problem-solving efficacy of a
collaborative group. To that end, we offer the following
emergentist proposal:
How, when, and why does a collaborative, problemsolving group succeed or fail in tuning the levels of its
collective cognition and, thereby, tuning the levels of its
problem-solving efficacy? As indicated earlier, a
collaborative, problem-solving group must coordinate the
bottom-up manipulation of intersubjective variables—
intentions, goals, beliefs, and conceptions—with the topdown manipulation of problem-related or instrumental
variables. Both manipulations operate via the same
mechanism, intersubjective interaction—the discussion,
negotiation, and speculation through which collaborating
agents generate and enact a shared representation of the
problem and its solution. Each successive interaction

Purpose
In what follows, we explore, via empirical simulation, the
sufficiency of our emergentist proposal of how, when, and
why a collaborative, problem-solving group succeeds or
fails in tuning the levels of its collective cognition and,
thereby, tuning the levels of its problem-solving efficacy.
Specifically, we instantiate one minimalist model of
intersubjective convergence and simulate the tuning of
collective cognition using data from an empirical study of
small-group, collaborative problem solving. Finally, we
present a sequence of explorations, each of which tests,
using the results of the empirical simulation, one or two
preliminary hypotheses.

Method
Research Context and Data Collection
The data for this empirical simulation come from a study of
collaborative triads solving problems in an online,
synchronous chat environment. That study looked at the
effects of problem structure—e.g. well- structured or illstructured problems—on the nature and efficacy of
860

computer-mediated collaboration; problem structure
functions as a control variable in our explorations.
Participants included sixty 11th grade students (46 male, 14
female; 16-17 years old) from the science stream of a coeducational, English-medium secondary school in
Ghaziabad, India. They were randomized into twenty triads,
each of which had to collaborate in solving a well-structured
or ill-structured problem scenario. Both problems asked
groups to determine liability in an automobile accident;
solutions required the application of Newtonian kinematics.
The study took place in the school’s computer laboratory,
where collaborators communicated with one another
entirely through synchronous, text-only chat. The chat
server archived a time-ordered transcript of each group’s
discussion. These twenty transcripts serve as the data
driving both the simulation and subsequent analyses.

generated a notional time series representing the evolution
of each group’s collective cognition.

Operationalizing Problem-Solving Efficacy
Throughout our explorations, a group’s ultimate, problemsolving efficacy—the accuracy and quality of its solution—
serves as either a criterion or predictor. As argued earlier,
multidimensional solutions indicate an efficacious problemsolving process: i.e. an efficacious group will produce not
only a correct solution, but a solution with a variety of
quantitative and qualitative arguments. Two doctoral
students independently assessed the accuracy and quality of
each solution based on a nine-point rubric (Krippendorff’s
alpha = .97).

Results and Discussion

Operationalizing Intersubjective Convergence

Exploration 1: Interpreting the Fitness Curve

As a conceptual domain, Newtonian kinematics is
ontologically direct: known problems have a small set of
known solutions. In solving kinematics problems, a group’s
intersubjective processes must converge on this small set of
normative concepts, strategies, and solutions: i.e. the
instrumental and intersubjective dimensions of the problemsolving processes collapse to one dimension. Consequently,
one can think of the problem-solving process as a walk
along a straight path: success and failure await at either end.
With each intersubjective interaction, a group may step
forward (convergent valence), step backward (divergent
valence), or stand still (neutral valence). The mean distance
traveled along this path represents a group’s overall
convergence—their proximity to the small set of normative
concepts, strategies, and solutions. Operationally, then, one
can model both the problem-solving process and the
resulting overall convergence as a Markov walk (Ross,
1996).
For the purposes of empirical simulation, two trained
doctoral students independently segmented the twenty
transcripts into semantically-defined, interaction units: i.e.
each utterance was divided into each constituent phrase—
variable identification, strategy suggestion, solution
evaluation, et al.—that could impact the group’s level of
convergence and problem-solving efficiency. Following
segmentation, the coders assigned an impact value of 1, -1,
or 0 to each interaction unit (Krippendorff’s alpha = .93)
depending upon whether, in relation to previous
interactions, the interaction represented a step forward
(impact = 1), a step backward (impact = -1), or no step at all
(impact = 0). In this way, each discussion, with its panoply
of discursive instruments, was reduced to a temporal string
of 1s, -1s, and 0s. At any point in the problem-solving
process, a group’s overall convergence derives from a
function of those of 1s, -1s, and 0s. More formally, at any
point in the problem-solving process, let n1, n-1, and n0
denote the number of interaction units assigned an impact
value of 1, -1, and 0, respectively. Then, up to that point, the
convergence value would equal, C = (n1 – n-1)/(n1 + n-1).
To run the simulation, we calculated a convergence value
after each utterance; for each of the 20 discussions, this

1

Fitness

0.5

0

-0.5

-1
Notional Time

High/Well
High/Ill
Low/Well
Low/Ill

Figure 1: Four illustrative fitness curves.
Plotting the convergence value on the vertical axis and time
(defined notionally, with each utterance a tick on an
evolutionary clock) on the horizontal axis, one can visualize
the evolution of each group’s collective cognition (Figure
1). Three aspects—end point, length, and shape—of this
visualization or fitness curve appear informative. The end
point of each curve indicates the final level of convergence,
from which one can deduce each group’s proximity to the
small set of normative concepts, strategies, and solutions.
The length of each curve indicates the duration of each
problem-solving process: i.e. the efficiency with which each
group reached its final solution, however proximal to the
normative set.
The shape of each fitness curve appears the most
informative aspect of all. For instance, the early portion of
each curve indicates whether apparently similar initial
processes lead to different trajectories, while apparently
different initial processes lead to similar trajectories. In
Figure 1, both of the low-efficacy groups—whether solving
a well- or ill-structured problem—tuned their collective
cognition to similarly low levels of convergence; yet, each
arrived at those final levels via different paths. After some
initial positive steps, the convergence level among
collaborators in the Low/Well group declined sharply then
plateaued. The Low/Ill group, on the other hand, appeared to
recover from their initial missteps, before they too plateaued
in divergent terrain. These fitness plateaus—evident both
among the high-efficacy and low efficacy groups—offer

861

preliminary evidence for the existence of cognitive regime
and its effects on a group’s problem-solving efficacy: a
convergent regime among groups with high-efficacy
outcomes, a divergent regime among groups with lowefficacy outcomes. One should note that no group plateaued
at one extreme or another: as one would expect from
interacting human beings, low-efficacy groups generated
some minimal level of convergence; more importantly,
high-efficacy groups appear to have sustained enough
divergence to explore a wide swath of the problem and
solution spaces.
Given this visual evidence for an early-emerging
cognitive regime and its correspondingly early effects on
problem-solving efficacy, we now explore this relationship
through statistical means.

Exploration 3: Tiny Attractors
Earlier, we defined tiny attractors as sustained sequences or
clusters of interactions with the same valence. Lag
Sequential Analysis (LSA) detects various non-random
patterns in a given sequence of interactions; specifically, we
looked for statistically significant autocorrelations
(Bakeman & Gottman, 1986)—instances where an
interaction with a particular impact value followed on an
interaction with the same impact value. From these
statistically significant autocorrelations, one might induce
that similarly-valenced interactions were sustained, with
greater likelihood, in stochastic clusters (tiny attractors)
rather than spread randomly throughout the discussion. As
expected, high-efficacy groups were 133% more likely to
sustain convergent interactions, while low-efficacy groups
were 120% more likely to sustain divergent interactions. In
each case, recurring tiny attractors pulled the discussion into
one or another cognitive regime with the expected efficacy
outcomes.
At this point, one might wonder whether this emergentist
account of collective cognition and its derivation by
empirical simulation add anything, over and above previous
research, to one’s understanding of collaborative problem
solving? To answer this question, one would need to
instantiate and test the minimalist model of intersubjective
convergence in a number of other problem-solving contexts.
That said, we provide a preliminary answer by comparing
the predictive power of our convergence model with that of
other commonly used predictors.

Exploration 2: The Cognitive Regime
One way to verify the existence and effect of a cognitive
regime involves testing how early and how consistently one
could predict (with p-values ≤ 0.05) a group’s eventual
problem-solving efficacy from the level of convergence. For
the purposes of this test, we segmented the twenty
discussions into ten equal parts; then, at each tenth, we
calculated the convergence value up to that point. This
resulted in ten sets of twenty convergence values: the first
set (C1) corresponding to convergence after 10% of the
discussion, the second set (C2) after 20% of the discussion,
and so on until the tenth set (C10), corresponding to the
final convergence value. To simulate the temporal effects of
cognitive regime we regressed problem-solving efficacy on
C1, then C2, and so on through C10, controlling for
problem structure each time.

Previous research suggests several ways to model the
problem-solving process as a function of convergent and
divergent interactions. These models rarely account for the
full ontological and causal history from which collective
cognition emerged. One model might account for the
number of convergent interactions (Frequency = n1).
Another model might account for the relative number of
convergent interactions (Relative Frequency = n1/[n1 + n0 +
n-1]), i.e. convergent interactions as a proportion of all
interactions. Yet another model might account for the
difference between the number of convergent and divergent
interactions (Position = n1 - n-1). Using multiple regression,
we simultaneously compared the significance of all four
models—frequency, relative frequency, position, and
convergence—in predicting problem-solving efficacy
(controlling for problem structure).

0.
93

1

Exploration 4: Convergence vs. Other Predictors

0.9
0.8
0.6
0.5

0.
46

0.4

C1

C2

C3

C4

C5

C6

C7

C8

C9

0.
00

0.
00

0

0.
00

0.
02

0.1

0.
00

0.2

0.
02

0.
18

0.3

0.
04

p-value

0.7

C10

Proportion of Discussion

Figure 2: Simulating the predictive power of convergence.
To visualize the simulation we plotted the p-value that
corresponded to the statistical significance of each
regression (Figure 2). The data suggest that, beginning at
some point between 30% and 40% into the problem-solving
process (between C3 and C4) through to its end, the level of
convergence can, on average, predict (with p-values ≤ 0.05)
the eventual problem-solving efficacy. The simulation
confirms not only that interacting agents do, in fact,
organize their collective cognition into a cognitive regime,
but that they do so early and with consistent consequences.
Having verified the early emergence and predictive power
of a cognitive regime or main attractor, we next identified
and assessed the tiny attractors that organize the regime and
maintain its immunity to perturbations.

Table 1: Regression Parameter Estimates.

(Constant)
P. Structure
Convergence
Frequency
Position
Rel. Freq.

862

B
-3.000
0.213
7.578
0.019
-0.040
1.885

SE
1.382
0.236
1.891
0.018
0.022
2.198

F
4.716
0.811
16.059
1.109
2.505
0.735

p
0.048
0.383
0.001
0.310
0.136
0.406

Axelrod, R. (1984). The evolution of cooperation. New
York: Basic Books.
Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J.M. (1986). Observing
interaction: An introduction to sequential analysis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barr,
D.
J.
(2004).
Establishing
conventional
communication systems: Is common knowledge
necessary? Cognitive Science, 28: 937-962.
Bedau, M. A. (2003). Downward causation and autonomy in
weak emergence. Principia 6: 5-50.
Bornstein, G. & Yaniv, I (1998). Individual and group
behavior in the ultimatum game: Are groups more
"rational" players? Experimental Economics, 1: 101-108.
Clark, H. H. & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D.
Teasley (Eds.). Perspectives on socially shared cognition
(pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: APA Books.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Isenberg, D. (1986). Group polarization: A critical review
and meta-analysis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 50: 1141-1151.
Janis, I.L. (1982). Groupthink: Psychological Studies of
Policy Decisions and Fiascoes. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Katz, E., & Lazarsfeld, P. (1955). Personal Influence. New
York: The Free Press.
Kauffman, S. (1993). The Origins of Order: SelfOrganization and Selection in Evolution. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kennedy, J. (1998). Thinking is social. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 42: 56-76.
Lewis, D. K. (1969). Convention. Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Nowak, A. (2004). Dynamical Minimalism: Why Less is
More in Psychology. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 8 (2): 183-192.
Nowak, A., Szamrej, J. & Latané, B. (1990). From private
attitude to public opinion: A dynamic theory of social
impact. Psychological Review, 97: 362-376.
Roschelle, J. (1996). Learning by collaborating: Convergent
conceptual change. In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL:
Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm (pp. 209248). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ross, S. M. (1996). Stochastic processes. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Schwartz, D.L. (1995). The emergence of abstract dyad
representations in dyad problem solving. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 4 (3): 321-354.
Tomasello, M. ,Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll,
H. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The
origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 28: 675–735.
Vallacher, R. R. & Nowak, A. (in press). Dynamical social
psychology: Toward coherence in human experience and
scientific theory. In A. W. Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins
(Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles.
New York: Guilford Publications.

Among the four predictors, only convergence
recapitulates enough of the ontological and causal history to
significantly predict problem-solving efficacy (F = 16.059,
p =.001): the data support our earlier contention that
collective cognition is algorithmically irreducible. This
result hints at the further insights to be gained from
investing effort and resources in an emergentist theory and
methodology.

Implications
Our explorations reveal a number of preliminary, yet
compelling, insights into the nature and dynamics of
collective cognition in collaborative problem solving. As
proposed, collective cognition emerges from the
intersubjective interactions among collaborating agents.
Each interaction both tunes the level of intersubjective
convergence and constrains each subsequent interaction:
e.g. convergent
interactions promote convergent
interactions. These tiny attractors organize a major attractor:
a cognitive regime that constrains all subsequent
interactions and, thereby, the outcome of collaborative
efforts. This self-organizing process takes hold early in the
collaboration. Consequently, one can predict, early on,
whether a problem-solving group will succeed or fail. These
insights have epistemological, methodological, and practical
implications. At the epistemological level, our findings
challenge an epiphenomenal view of collective cognition:
while supervenient on the intersubjective interaction among
collaborating agents, collective cognition has very real
consequences. Concomitantly, our findings support a shift
away from the individual as the locus of all cognitive
activity: collective cognition derives neither from any
collaborating agent nor from the central tendency among
collaborators. Because collective cognition exists only in the
interactions among agents, its derivation requires a
theoretical and methodological shift from short-cut causal
models to process-oriented, emergentist models—i.e.
derivation by simulation. We took a minimalist approach to
designing our model of intersubjective convergence,
abstracting the problem-solving process to the simplest
mechanism operating on the minimal number of variables.
One can model almost any goal-directed activity, in any
number of dimensions, using a Markov Walk; hence, our
model provides a platform for further research and, through
that research, for the development of a more sophisticated
model. All in all, our emergentist proposal and its empirical
simulation could serve as the first among many steps that
may lead to a fully-developed emergentist theory of the
collective cognition in collaborative problem solving and,
further on, to a theory applicable to collective action of all
kinds.

References
Arrow, H., McGrath, J. E., & Berdahl, J. L. (2000). Small
groups as complex systems: Formation, coordination,
development, and adaptation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.

863

