UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Investigation of Combinational Productivity for Abstract and Concrete Nouns

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4fv0j34n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Maguire, Phil
Storms, Gert
Wisniewski, Edward J.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Investigation of Combinational Productivity for
Abstract and Concrete Nouns
Phil Maguire (phil.maguire@ucd.ie)
School of Computer Science and Informatics,
University College Dublin, Ireland

Edward J. Wisniewski (edw@uncg.edu)
Department of Psychology,
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, USA

Gert Storms (gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology,
University of Leuven, Belgium
intelligence. This phenomenon has the potential to reveal
much about conceptual representation as well as language
production and comprehension in general.
In English, a language in which compounding is
particularly productive, the simplest combinations consist
of a modifier followed by a head noun. Usually, the head
noun denotes the main category while the modifier
implies a relevant subcategory or a modification of that
set’s typical members. In this way, a cereal box is
interpreted as a particular type of box, and more precisely
as one that contains cereal as opposed to other types of
boxes. While existing theories of conceptual combination
have dealt primarily with the interpretation process, little
focus has been directed towards understanding the
circumstances in which combinations are used. As a
result, existing theories do not make explicit predictions
about which types of nouns are more likely to be used in
combination or whether particular nouns will exhibit a
preference for either the modifier or head position.
Relation-based theories such as the Competition
Among Relations In Nominals (CARIN) theory (Gagné &
Shoben, 1997) assert that interpretation occurs when a
relation linking the constituent nouns is selected.
According to CARIN, the difficulty associated with this
selection process is determined by how modifiers have
been used in previously encountered combinations.
However, the theory makes no predictions about
combinational productivity as it is concerned solely with
ease of interpretation and makes no reference to why
combinations are used. On the other hand, slot-filling
theories such as the dual-process theory (Wisniewski,
1997) and the concept specialization model (Murphy,
1988) relate combination function to conceptual content.
These theories assume that during combination, the
modifier concept fills a ‘slot’ in the head concept, thereby
modifying or ‘specializing’ that concept. Thus, in the case
of coffee bowl, the coffee concept fills the <CONTAINS>
slot in bowl and describes the purpose of the bowl.
Although slot-filling theories do not make explicit
predictions about how nouns will be used in combination,

Abstract
Although various theories of conceptual combination have
been proposed in the past, these models have addressed
interpretation issues rather than addressing the
circumstances in which combinations are used. As a result,
existing theories make no explicit predictions about what
kind of nouns will be used more often in combination and
why this might be the case. In this study we address the
issue of combination use and investigate whether
differences in productivity exist for two very different types
of noun, namely abstract and concrete nouns. The slotfilling view of conceptual combination (e.g. Wisniewski,
1997) motivated our hypothesis that differences in
combinational preference for both the modifier and head
role would be observed between these two types of noun.
We extracted combinations involving a sample of abstract
and concrete nouns from the British National Corpus and
obtained type and token frequencies for how often each
noun occurred in both the modifier and head positions.
Results revealed that abstract nouns were more likely to
occur in the head position while differences for concrete
nouns were only partially supported. We also discovered
that abstract nouns occurring in the BNC were far less
likely to occur in combination than concrete nouns. We
interpret these results in light of what they reveal about the
use of compound phrases and discuss the implications for
existing theories of conceptual combination.
Keywords:
Conceptual
combination;
noun-noun
compounds; abstract concepts; slot-filling theory.

Introduction
Conceptual combination is commonly adopted by
speakers in order to refer to novel concepts and ideas and
as a result, compound phrases are abundant in everyday
conversation (e.g. holiday tension, picnic beer). This
ubiquity is also evidenced by the number of lexicalised
combinations entering the English language (e.g. memory
stick,
laptop
computer).
Recently,
noun-noun
compounding has generated much interest within
cognitive science because of the way it crosscuts such
diverse disciplines as linguistics, psychology and artificial

537

thoughts such as ingratitude, disquiet and chaos. The
most concrete nouns referred to tangible entities like
cigarette, garden and wind.

they suggest that the most productive head concepts will
be those that have many slots. Furthermore, they imply
that the most productive nouns in the modifier position
will be those that can modify slots in a wide variety of
head concepts.

Procedure A corpus analysis was required in order to
determine the combinational productivity of the 748
nouns contained in our sample. For this purpose we
availed of the British National Corpus (BNC), a tagged,
annotated corpus containing over 100 million words. The
BNC is designed to represent a wide cross-section of
modern English and therefore includes a comprehensive
sample of both written and spoken language. Although the
corpus contains part-of-speech tagging, this feature is not
adequate for accurately extracting combinations. Lapata
and Lascarides (2003) estimated that up to 30% of all
noun-noun phrases extracted in this way are not true
conceptual combinations. This is because the BNC
tagging suffers from several weaknesses, most notably the
high rates of error in assigning parts of speech (e.g. “the
mountain rose up before them”), and the inability to
differentiate between legitimate combinations and nounnoun co-occurrences (e.g. “last year houses were
cheaper”). In order to increase our accuracy, we obtained
a version of the BNC that had been parsed using the
Charniak parser1. Tagging simply assigns part-of-speech
by means of statistical frequencies applied over a limited
window of words, with no regard for overt grammatical
rules. In contrast, parsing involves the structural analysis
of each sentence as a whole, with respect to a given
formal grammar. Consequently, the parsed version of the
BNC was better able to distinguish between compound
phrases and other noun-noun co-occurrences, thereby
reducing error rates. All compound noun phrases
consisting of two nouns were extracted from the parsed
output using an algorithm programmed in LISP2.
Some acronyms, misspellings, common nouns and
errors remained and additional filtering was required to
eliminate these. We discarded all combinations containing
proper nouns, plural modifiers and nouns made up of
fewer than three letters. We also removed any nouns
containing hyphens, numerical digits or any form of
punctuation. In order to guarantee that all remaining
combinations consisted of valid nouns, we compared our
set with the database of nouns included in WordNet, the
online lexical reference system. Following this procedure,
much of the remaining error could be attributed to what
we termed ‘noise sponges’, words that, because of their
nature, triggered a disproportionate number of false
positives. Many such sponges were nouns that could
double as adjectives, verbs or adverbs (e.g. “it was a light
snack”, “the children dread school”, “give me my
umbrella back”). In order to eliminate these false
positives, we discarded any combinations involving a
word contained in WordNet’s database of adjectives,
verbs and adverbs.

Abstract versus Concrete Nouns
While concrete concepts represent physical entities
defined by spatial boundaries and perceivable attributes,
abstract concepts are elusive to sensory experience. Such
concepts can include references to personality traits,
emotions, cognitive processes, events or thoughts. Due to
their lack of a perceptual representation, abstract concepts
can exhibit considerable variability of their manifestations
across situations (Galbraith & Underwood, 1973).
Wiemer-Hastings & Xu Xu (2005) found that the
properties of abstract nouns were significantly less
specific than those for concrete nouns and that these
properties were more likely to express subjective
experiences.

Experiment
Because of this distinction in the processing of abstract
and concrete nouns, we predicted that these two types of
noun would show differences in combinational
productivity. Slot-filling theories imply that nouns with
many slots should be productive in the head noun position
while nouns with fewer slots should be less productive.
Abstract concepts exhibit greater variability in
manifestation, therefore we would expect such concepts
to have an abundance of slots and hence to be more
productive in the head role. Presumably, the ambiguity of
abstract nouns should also reduce their effectiveness in
specializing other concepts. In contrast, concrete nouns
are far more specific and should have a smaller set of
associated slots. For example, the concrete noun banana
is relatively specific and hence will not benefit from
specialization to the same extent as an abstract concept
like problem, which is less specific.
In light of this, we investigated differences in
combinational productivity for abstract versus concrete
nouns, with the slot-filling view motivating our
hypothesis that different patterns in combinational
productivity would be observed for these two types of
noun. Our prediction was thus that abstract nouns would
appear significantly more often as heads than as modifiers
and that the opposite pattern would be observed regarding
concrete nouns.

Method
Materials We selected abstract and concrete nouns from
the MRC2 database (Coltheart, 1981), which contains a
large sample of nouns rated by concreteness. We sampled
748 nouns from the extremes of the concreteness ratings,
selecting the 374 least concrete and the 374 most concrete
nouns. The least concrete nouns sampled referred to
situation-embedded instances of events, traits, actions and

1
2

538

We thank Mirella Lapata for providing this
We thank Arthur Cater for his contribution to data filtering

observed, an average of 47.2 modifier types and 36.7 head
types per noun. This difference was statistically
significant, t(338) = 2.67, p < .01.
The difference between the proportions of concrete
head tokens (.53) and concrete modifier tokens (.47) was
not statistically significant, t(338) = 1.69, p = .09. The
difference between the proportions of concrete head types
(.52) and concrete modifier types (.48) also was not
statistically significant, t(338) = 1.04, p = .30. Therefore,
our hypothesis that concrete nouns would appear more
often in the modifier position was only partially
supported. The results are summarized in Tables 1 and 2.

Remaining noise sponges (e.g. “good value meal”,
“fifteenth century houses”, “second hand car”, “low risk
venture”) were identified by manually searching through
the most productive modifiers and heads and checking a
sample of combinations for each. As a result of this
procedure, a further 35 nouns were removed from the list
of legal nouns. The entire filtering process reduced the
total number of combinational types from 320,430 to
252,127, a reduction of 21%. Although some legitimate
combinations are likely to have been removed by
applying these filtering measures, we had no reason to
believe that their elimination was nonrandom.
Of the 748 nouns under consideration, 16 abstract and
24 concrete nouns were among those nouns already
discarded in the filtering process (e.g. fun, risk, tweezers).
We also removed a further 4 nouns because they never
appeared in the BNC (gramercy, inclemency, tush, lye).
Thus, in the end 355 abstract and 349 concrete nouns
remained in our analysis. Using our filtered corpus of
combinations, we obtained type and token frequency
counts for each noun in both the modifier and head
positions.

TOKENS
Abstract
Concrete

Average Number
MOD
HEAD
59.3
88.0
202.8
192.1

Average Proportion
MOD
HEAD
.39
.61*
.47
.53

Table 1. Data analysis by combination tokens (* p < .01)
TYPES
Abstract
Concrete

Results
63 abstract nouns and 10 concrete nouns failed to occur in
any combinations and were consequently excluded from
the analyses comparing modifier and head productivity.
As a result, these were based on the remaining 292
abstract nouns and 339 concrete nouns. All t-tests
reported below are two-tailed.
The abstract nouns occurred as a modifier in 17,330
combinations and as a head in 25,699 combinations, an
average of 59.3 modifier combinations versus 88.0 head
combinations per noun. This difference between modifier
tokens and head tokens was not statistically significant,
t(291) = 1.6, p = .11. There were 4,359 modifier versus
8,287 head types observed, an average of 14.9 modifier
types and 28.4 head types per noun. This difference was
statistically significant, t(291) = 4.16, p < .01
A separate analysis examined the proportions for each
noun of modifier and head tokens and types. The
difference between the proportions of abstract head tokens
(.61) and abstract modifier tokens (.39) was statistically
significant, t(291) = 5.85, p < .01. The difference between
the proportions of abstract head noun types (.63) and
abstract modifier types (.37) was also statistically
significant, t(291) = 7.60, p < .01. Therefore, all
significant differences observed for the abstract nouns
were in line with our hypothesis that these nouns would
occur more frequently as heads than as modifiers.
We carried out the same analyses for the concrete
nouns. For this set of nouns, there were 68,747 modifier
combinations and 65,126 head combinations, an average
of 202.8 modifier combinations versus 192.1 head
combinations per noun. This difference between modifier
tokens and head tokens was not statistically significant, t
< 1. There were 16,001 modifier versus 12,439 head types

Average Number
MOD
HEAD
14.9
28.4*
47.2*
36.7

Average Proportion
MOD
HEAD
.37
.63*
.48
.52

Table 2. Data analysis by combination types (* p < .01)
An additional analysis examined the relative frequency
with which abstract nouns and concrete nouns are used in
combination. This analysis included the 73 nouns that
failed to occur in any combinations. The number of
occurrences of the 355 abstract nouns in the BNC was
836,034 with 43,029 of these occurrences being in
combinations (5.1%). The number of occurrences of the
349 concrete nouns was 1,128,311 with 133,873 of the
occurrences appearing in combinations (11.9%). On
average, an abstract noun occurred as part of a
combination 3.8% of the time, 1.7% as a modifier and
2.1% as a head. This difference between the likelihood of
an abstract noun appearing as a modifier versus as a head
noun was marginally statistically significant, t(354) = 1.84, p = .07. Concrete nouns were far more likely to
appear as part of a combination. On average they occurred
in combinations 11.9% of the time, 6.9% as modifier and
5.1% as a head noun. The difference between the
likelihood of a concrete noun being used as a modifier
versus as a head noun was statistically significant, t(348)
= 13.12, p < .01. We compared the likelihood of an
abstract noun versus a concrete noun being used as part of
a combination. The difference was statistically significant
for modifiers, t(702) = 3.00, p < .01, for heads, t(702) =
3.02, p < .01, and overall, t(702) = 8.47, p < .01. These
results suggest that abstract nouns are far less likely to
appear as part of a combination than are concrete nouns, a
finding that had not been anticipated. These results are
summarized in Table 3.

539

FREQUENCY
Abstract
Concrete

Modifier
1.7%
6.9%

Head
2.1%
5.1%

the number with a preference for the modifier position
(52%). Concrete nouns like shed (100%) or tray (99%)
appeared nearly always as head nouns whereas mahogany
(100%) and silver (97%) appeared nearly always as
modifiers.
As our selection of concrete concepts from the MRC2
database included only the most concrete concepts, we
expected that these concepts would be highly specific and
therefore that they would not benefit from specialization.
However, the variability in the preference of these
concrete nouns challenges this assumption. Investigating
the issue further, we inspected the concrete nouns
contained within our sample. It emerged that although
these concepts had been sampled at the extremes of
concreteness, many were relatively ambiguous and hence
their associated set size was larger than expected. For
example, the sample included concepts such as men,
dweller, performer and retailer, none of which are highly
specific. As a result, these nouns can benefit from
specialization and are thus liable to appear as head nouns
(e.g. a dweller can be a cave dweller, city dweller etc.)
Even a seemingly concrete concept like bowl exhibits a
level of variability which allows for considerable
specialization (e.g. sugar bowl, plastic bowl, coffee bowl).
In light of this, the lack of support for the predicted bias in
productivity regarding concrete nouns does not
necessarily oppose the slot-filling view: the nature of the
concrete nouns contained in our study might explain why
our hypothesis was not more clearly supported. We
speculated that an analysis containing only highly specific
concrete nouns might have been more in line with our
predictions. For example, carrot (19 modifier types, 5
head types), violin (35 modifier types, 4 head types), and
steam (178 modifier types, 11 head types) are among the
more specific nouns in our sample and these appear to
support the hypothesis that concrete nouns prefer the
modifier role.

Total
3.8%
11.9%

Table 3. Combination frequency as a percentage of total

General Discussion
Our results clearly support the view that different types of
noun manifest different behavioral patterns in
combination and hence that noun properties affect how a
noun will be used in combination. In general, findings of
differences in productivity are in line with our hypotheses,
even if the predicted difference for concrete nouns was
not as well supported as that for abstract nouns. These
results are therefore compatible with the slot-filling
approach which motivated our predictions but are not
accounted for by the CARIN theory.

Differences in modifier and head productivity

40
30

Abstract
Concrete

20
10
0
0-1
0
10
-20
20
-30
30
-40
40
-50
50
-60
60
-70
70
-80
80
-90
90
-10
0

Number of Nouns

We hypothesized that abstract nouns would be better
suited to acting as heads because of their ambiguity and
that concrete nouns would be less suited to acting as
heads because of their specificity. Although these trends
were partially supported, the preferences of both types of
noun exhibited a considerable amount of variance.

Percentage of Tokens as Modifier

Frequency of Use in Combination

Figure 1. Number of nouns by level of modifier
preference

Our results have shown that the relative frequency with
which abstract nouns appear in combination is less than
that of the concrete nouns. While slot-filling theories
imply that the properties of a concept affect its
productivity in either the head or modifier position, they
do not make any predictions regarding the relative
frequency with which concepts will be used in
combination. Therefore, the finding that the concrete
nouns in our study were over three times more likely to
appear as part of a combination was unexpected.
In order to investigate this issue and develop a further
understanding of the link between abstractness and
productivity, we computed the ten most productive
modifiers and heads appearing in the BNC. Table 4
presents these nouns by token frequency.

Figure 1 reveals the different levels of modifier
preference for the 163 abstract nouns and 249 concrete
nouns involved in more than 10 combinations. The
different levels correspond to the overall percentage of
times that nouns appeared as modifiers as opposed to as
heads. Although the majority of abstract nouns (68%)
combined more often in the head position, a considerable
proportion still exhibited a preference for the modifier
position. Illustrating the extent of this variability, abstract
terms such as requirement (99%) and behavior (93%)
appeared in combination far more often as head nouns
whereas security (92%) and intelligence (89%) occurred
predominantly as modifiers.
Concrete nouns also exhibited preferences at both
extremes, but in this case, the number of nouns with a
preference for the head position (48%) was very close to

540

MODIFIERS
Family
Government
Business
School
Water
Police
Party
Metal
Market
Group

Freq
983
843
813
773
752
691
674
651
639
595

HEADS
System
Work
Group
Level
Problem
Area
Programme
Type
Unit
Process

Based on these observations we propose an account of
modifier and head productivity which acknowledges the
reasons why combinations are used. According to slotfilling theories, the purpose of compound phrases is to
specify a particular subcategory of a head noun concept.
This function is used in cases where the head noun by
itself would not adequately delineate the intended
referent. The modifier that is selected is chosen because
the required concept is most precisely and diagnostically
distinguished from within its category by the relationship
it has with that modifier. For example, picture book is a
particular type of book, but more specifically it is one
with pictures. Because a suitable one-word expression
which can index the picture book concept does not exist,
its relationship with the concept picture is used to
distinguish it from other members of the book category.
In light of this, we propose that the principal variable
influencing head productivity will be the extent to which
subcategories can be identified within it. Thus, very
specific concepts like turnip will not typically be
specialized: it is difficult for the average person to
imagine different types of turnip that could be identified
as separate subcategories within the general category.
Since turnip refers to a relatively homogenous group of
entities, the addition of a modifier is typically
unnecessary. More unusual specializations, such as
dustbin turnip or fungus turnip, are only required in
highly specific situations that do not arise very often. On
the other hand, concepts with a greater range of
representation will have more potential for supporting
distinct subcategories and will therefore exhibit higher
productivity as a head. Indeed, vegetable is six times more
productive as a head noun than turnip, mainly because
subcategories of vegetable are easily identified (e.g. root
vegetable, leaf vegetable). As shown in Table 4, the most
productive head noun in the BNC is system, no doubt due
to the many different types of system that can be
identified.
We propose that the principal variable influencing
modifier productivity is the extent to which subcategories
can be delineated by virtue of their relationship with that
modifier concept. As a result, concepts that can fill slots
in a wide range of head nouns will be the most productive
as modifiers. In this way, the noun mountain is very
productive since it can fill the <LOCATED> slot of a
wide variety of entities that live on or are located in the
mountains. Metal is productive because of the many
things that can be made out of metal. Similarly, summer is
productive because of its ability to fill the <DURING>
slot of numerous entities that can occur during the
summer. In contrast, a noun like turnip has less potential
for acting as a modifier because of the limited set of
concepts defined by their interaction with turnips.
Possibilities exist perhaps in cooking (turnip stew), in
production (turnip field), or describing the parts of a
turnip (turnip head). As shown in Table 4, the most
productive modifier is family, due to the fact that many

Freq
1353
858
849
839
783
778
675
618
615
610

Table 4. BNC’s 10 most productive modifiers and heads
This selection reveals that the most productive heads in
the BNC are quite abstract. Markman (1999) measures
abstractness by the range of different items that can be
represented by a concept. Clearly, words like type and
unit have a very large possible range of representation.
While it appears that the top modifiers are somewhat less
abstract (water and metal are tangible entities, as can be
family, school and police), the nouns contained in this
selection are nevertheless relatively abstract. This is very
surprising given our finding that our abstract concepts
were much less likely to be used in combinations.
We explain this apparent contradiction by considering
the differences between the abstract concepts listed in
Table 4 and those in our own sample. While the above
nouns are abstract because of their range and ambiguity,
the nouns in our selection were abstract by virtue of their
intangibility. Concepts like type, unit and group
frequently boast physical manifestations, whereas this is
far less likely for concepts such as discipline, competence
or insight.
In light of this, our claim that abstract concepts are less
likely to be involved in combination should be refined:
abstractness related to range of representation actually
increases productivity while abstractness related to
intangibility has the opposite effect. As an example, let us
compare the productivity of a superordinate category with
a member of that same category: the noun sofa has 6
modifier types and 17 head types while furniture has 110
modifier types and 69 head types. This is because
furniture refers to a broader range of perceptually diverse
entities while the category extension of sofa is relatively
small. Thus, furniture can be associated with a variety of
combinational types that are impossible for sofa (e.g.
furniture polish). In contrast, the abstract nouns in our
sample did not involve superordinate categories and hence
this form of abstractness was unrelated to range of
representation or category extension. Instead, they
referred to events, traits, emotions and thoughts (e.g.
ingratitude, disquiet, chaos), concepts which are unlikely
to have physical manifestations or a wide range of
representation.

541

should not be interpreted as a determinant of
combinational productivity, only as a general guide.
Figure 2 provides a breakdown of the number of abstract
and concrete concepts in our study falling into different
levels of combinational productivity.

concepts can have subcategories which relate to families
(e.g. family car, family holiday).
Given the above perspective, how can we explain why
our abstract nouns appeared in combination so
infrequently? For a start, they were sampled at the
extreme of abstractness and thus referred to intangible
entities with no physical manifestation. At this level of
abstractness, the potential for identifying subcategories
(head productivity) and for interacting with other concepts
(modifier productivity) is severely limited. For example, a
concept like ingratitude does not support distinct
variations in the way that a concrete noun like shoe does
(e.g. leather shoe versus gift ingratitude). Ingratitude is a
vaguely defined mental construct that encompasses a
general spectrum of behavior and consequently, distinct
manifestations of this concept are poorly recognized. On
the other hand, concrete concepts exist in two or three
dimensions, and thus can vary in their constituents and
location. Ingratitude enjoys none of these properties and
the lack of a physical manifestation also reduces its
potential for interaction with other concepts, a problem
that concrete concepts like shoe do not have (e.g. shoe
box, shoe shop). Indeed, ingratitude cannot be used for
anything, cannot be used by anything and other concepts
are rarely defined by their relationship with ingratitude.
Consequently, this noun’s level of abstractness severely
constrains its productivity as both a modifier and a head:
of the 55 times ingratitude occurred in the BNC, it never
once occurred as part of a combination.

Conclusion
Previous studies in conceptual combination have focused
primarily on the interpretation process. Although slotfilling theories imply that conceptual content might affect
how nouns are used in combination, this had not been
empirically tested. Addressing this issue, we examined a
representative sample of how nouns occur in combination.
As suggested by slot-filling theories, our results
demonstrated a link between the abstractness of a concept
and its frequency of use in the modifier or head position.
We also found that overall, abstract concepts were far less
likely to be used in combination. This study has provided
strong empirical evidence for the view that concept
properties dictate their use in combination. As a result,
theories of conceptual combination should be extended to
account for this relationship. In particular, our results
suggest that measures of combinational frequency used in
theories such as CARIN might actually be an
epiphenomenon of conceptual content. In order to achieve
a better understanding of conceptual combination, future
study should investigate the factors influencing modifier
and head productivity in more detail.

References
Colheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic
Database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental.
Psychology, 33A, 497-505.
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of
thematic relations on the comprehension of modifiernoun combinations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 7187.
Galbraith, R. C., & Underwood, B. J. (1973). Perceived
frequency of concrete and abstract words. Memory and
Cognition, 1, 56-60.
Lapata, M. & Lascarides, A. (2003). Detecting Novel
Compounds: The role of distributional evidence. In
Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 235-242.
Markman, A. B. (1999). Knowledge Representation.
Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers Mahwah, New Jersey.
Murphy, G. L. (1988). Comprehending complex concepts.
Cognitive Science, 12, 529-562.
Wiemer-Hastings, K., & Xu, X. (2005). Content
differences for abstract and concrete concepts.
Cognitive Science, 29, 719-736.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1997). When concepts combine.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 167-183.

Abstract

150

Concrete

100
50

0
>3

25
-30

20
-25

15
-20

10
-15

5-1
0

0
0-5

Number of Nouns

200

Percentage in Combination

Figure 2. Number of nouns as a function of the percentage
of occurrences in the BNC as part of a combination
Despite the fact that the abstract nouns in our study
appeared in combination far less often than concrete
nouns, there were still a number of exceptions to this rule.
Although concepts like criterion or requirement are
intangible, they can still support subcategories: there are
many different types of criteria and many different types
of requirements. As a result, these nouns exhibited high
head productivity. In contrast, concepts like security and
mystery have much potential for specializing other
concepts: many things can be used for security purposes
and many different situations can constitute a mystery.
Accordingly, these nouns were very productive as
modifiers. In light of this variability, abstractness alone

542

