UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Assessing Preservice Teachers' Conceptual Change in an Internet-Based, Case Instructional
Environment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7g01t3p8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Cammack, Dana W.
Hoffman, Daniel
Kapur, Manu
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Assessing Preservice Teachers' Conceptual Change in an Internet-Based,
Case Instructional Environment
Charles K. Kinzer (Kinzer@tc.columbia.edu)

Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 West 120th St., 322 Thompson Hall (CCTE)
New York, NY 10027 U.S.A.

Manu Kapur (mkapur@nie.edu.sg)
National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

Sarah Lohnes (scl2103@columbia.edu)

Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 West 120th St., 322 Thompson Hall (CCTE)
New York, NY 10027 U.S.A.

Dana W. Cammack (Cammackd@mail.montclair.edu)
Montclair State University, One Norman Ave., University Hall Room 3200
Montclair, NJ 07043 U.S.A.

Stavroula Kontovourki (sk2322@columbia.edu)

Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 West 120th St., 322 Thompson Hall (CCTE)
New York, NY 10027 U.S.A.

Daniel Hoffman (dlh2109@columbia.edu)

Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 West 120th St., 322 Thompson Hall (CCTE)
New York, NY 10027 U.S.A.

Selen Turkay (st2282@columbia.edu)

Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 West 120th St., 322 Thompson Hall (CCTE)
New York, NY 10027 U.S.A.
Abstract
This paper (1) presents an argument that anchored,
multimedia case-based instruction, delivered interactively
over the Internet, has benefits for the conceptual development
of preservice teachers, (2) argues that a commonly-used
measure can be modified to provide insights into conceptual
change, and (3) suggests needed, additional analyses to
examine change in depth/complexity of knowledge. Evidence
and insights from a two-group, large-scale experimental study
of preservice teachers using multimedia, anchored cases in
their preservice literacy methods courses support the
discussion.
Keywords: Case-based Instruction; Teacher Education;
Teacher Cognition; Conceptual Change

CTELL Project Overview
To examine the differences in learning outcomes among
participants in pre-service literacy courses that used
Internet-based multimedia cases and those that relied on
more traditional methods (e.g., lectures, field experiences,
and readings), our research team implemented a pre-posttest
experimental design. Thus, the nature of instruction (case-

based vs. traditional instruction) and the change in learning
outcomes across time (pre-posttests) constituted the
dependent variables included in the design. Case-based
instruction relied on the use of the Case Technologies to
Enhance Literacy Learning (CTELL) project, described
briefly below. A discussion of the instruments, design, and
analysis used to examine learning outcomes by preservice
teachers in CTELL follows the project description.
The CTELL project is an effort to enhance pre-service
teachers’ knowledge and skills relevant to best practices for
literacy instruction. The construction of the CTELL cases
was theoretically grounded in twelve principles of effective
reading instruction. These emerged from an extended
review of research on early literacy instruction and
encompassed teacher knowledge; relevance of instruction to
students’
cultural
backgrounds;
development
of
foundational literacy skills; phonemic awareness, decoding
and comprehension instruction; independent reading;
development of fluency; integration of reading and writing;
incorporation of computer and Internet technology into early
literacy instruction; early assessment; and enthusiasm for
and engagement in reading (Teale, Kinzer, Labbo, & Leu,
2002; Shrader et al., 2003). These principles guided

1611

decisions regarding the CTELL curriculum, the collection of
video, audio, and visual information incorporated in the
cases, and the coding of data during the analysis process.
The principles were not embodied in the cases as isolated
items, but rather combined in ways that allowed learners to
examine their interplay in classroom events over time. The
principles also formed the basis for later analysis of
conceptual change. We argue that if the multimedia
instructional cases embody the principles of effective
instruction, then learners who use these materials should
reflect greater knowledge of effective reading instruction
than learners receiving de-contextualized instruction, which
constitutes the norm in traditional preservice methods
courses and relies on lectures and readings that are not
placed in an anchored, situated instructional context.
The CTELL cases were designed to form an online,
multimedia, interactive environment, wherein pre-service
teachers developed content knowledge while being exposed
to the complexity of classroom instruction. Drawing on
notions of situated cognition and anchored instruction
(CTGV, 1990) and case-based design and methodology
(Merseth, 1991; Kaste, 2004), a 20-minute anchor video that
illustrated the overall orientation and literacy activities in a
primary-grade classroom was central to this design. This
anchor video provided the common basis for instructors and
learners to construct knowledge through discussion and
critical analysis of theory, research, and practice.
To scaffold pre-service teachers’ understanding of the
complexities of classroom instruction, the CTELL cases
addressed factors that influenced instruction and exist both
within and beyond the physical boundaries of classrooms. In
addition to the anchor video, each of the cases included
short video clips that focused on various principles as
implemented in that classroom, student profiles consisting
of data from running records, writing samples, results from
standardized tests, parent-teacher conferences, interviews
with students, teachers and principals, as well as school and
classroom demographic statistics.
While participants in the control group implemented their
regular instructional strategies (e.g., assignment of readings,
in-class presentations, discussions, field experiences), the
CTELL instructors (experimental group) participated in
training sessions leading to integration of the cases in their
classroom instruction (Kinzer et al., 2004). CTELL
instructors were encouraged to view and discuss the anchor
video with their students in their first class session, and then
pose questions to guide learners’ interactions with the cases
and help them make explicit connections between the cases
and other course content. However, it was made clear that
the cases were a flexible teaching tool, to be used in ways
best suited to the context defined by the instructor's teaching
style, the students, and his/her course (Teale et al., 2002).
Case use by particular instructors was influenced by
multiple factors, including their beliefs about the cases'
usefulness, the availability of technology in and out of their
classrooms (Sanny, 2005), and the overall organization of
their courses (e.g., their approach to literacy learning,

organization of topics, etc.). These factors contributed to the
variance of CTELL case use in particular classrooms. This
variance is similar to that found in non-CTELL classrooms.

Theoretical Background of Concept Mapping
as an Assessment Tool
To examine the impact of the CTELL environment on
preservice teachers' learning and conceptual change, data
were collected through concept maps, a Likert-scale
confidence measure of students' beliefs about their ability to
teach reading effectively, journal entries from professors,
student interviews, and professor interviews. The analysis of
concept web data constitutes the focus of this paper.
As a measurement tool concerned with addressing
students’ conceptual understanding for a given topic,
concept webs appear to be better suited to assess inquiry or
project-based learning than more traditional assessments
such as multiple-choice tests (Stoddart et al., 2000; Novak
& Gowan, 1984; Markham, Mintzes, & Jones, 1994). As
described below, concept webs can reveal students’
conceptual understanding, here defined as the learning
process that includes weak and/or strong revisions of prior
knowledge upon acquisition of new information (Tyson et
al., 1997). Furthermore, a concept map contains both visual
(the structure and hierarchy of the map) and verbal
information (the concepts), thus offering opportunities for
both quantitative and qualitative analysis (Zele et al., 2004).
In a concept-mapping task, students are asked to visually
represent the structure and organization of their conceptual
knowledge by creating a series of interlinked circles or
nodes, with each node representing a concept. This task may
take a number of forms. Stoddart et al. (2000) identify three:
constrained tasks, where students are given a map structure
and a list of words to use; open-ended tasks, which provide
an initial prompt but leave the construction of the web to the
student; and intermediate tasks, which draw on elements of
the first two (p. 1224). The CTELL concept web task was
open-ended; students were presented with a central node,
"effective reading instruction," and asked to construct a web
around it. Initial examples and discussion about what
constituted a concept web and how it should represent
knowledge were provided prior to the webbing task.
The process of creating a concept map requires students
to engage in knowledge construction. Thus, each map is
unique, as it represents a student's mental model of a topic at
the time of its construction (Kinchin et al., 2000). Research
has also shown that concepts maps can be effective for
measuring the change in students’ conceptual understanding
over time (e.g., see Morine-Dershimer, 1993), implying that
changes across concept maps represent a progression in the
differentiation of students’ knowledge (Kinchin et al., 2000;
Trent et al., 1998; Zele et al., 2004).

Data Analysis

1612

The concept web assessment was administered to 365
students (n=199 experimental, using CTELL cases; n=166
control, receiving traditional instruction) at the beginning

(pre) and the end (post) of a semester. These students were
enrolled in pre-service literacy instruction courses at
universities and colleges across the United States, both
public and private. After discussing sample concept webs,
they were asked to draw a central node labeled "effective
reading/literacy instruction," and were given ten minutes to
draw a concept web around that node.
Treating the concept map as the data unit, two commonly
used measures for conceptual change were examined: the
degree of differentiation (total number of discrete nodes)
and the degree of hierarchical organization (maximum
number of subordinate levels) (Beyerbach, 1988; Jensen &
Winitzky, 2002; Morine-Dershimer, 1993). In this paper, we
refer to the former as intensity and the latter as depth.
Beyerbach (1988) argued that change in intensity and depth
corresponds to conceptual change. More formally, counting
the central node as level 0, if there were n1 nodes at level 1,

n 2 nodes at level 2, and so on up to nl nodes at level l,
then intensity, I = n1 + n 2 + ... + nl and depth, D = l.
Figure 1 illustrates levels within a prototypical web.

Additionally, each category was assigned a centrality
number based on the depth of the first node encountered
under that category. The centrality of each category was
determined by looking across all nodes on the web for a
given category. Two raters independently scored all concept
webs (with a reliability of 85% for category assignment
across 100 randomly-selected webs). Discrepancies between
the two raters were resolved by discussion. Coding the
nodes on the web by content, as well as by total number and
number of levels, allowed us to begin to understand shifts in
specific areas of literacy knowledge.
Our analysis of the concept webs also involved a third
measure of conceptual change, dealing with the number and
character of cross-links present in a web. A cross-link refers
to a link between two nodes that crosses clusters of
concepts. While a simple concept web without cross-links
reveals the concepts present in a student’s knowledge, the
presence of cross-links in a web suggests that the student is
integrating and synthesizing concepts (Hanrahan & Tate,
2001). Furthermore, Kitchin et al. (2000) suggest that a
cross-linked web reveals more flexibility in a student’s
understanding, given that concepts can be accessed in a
number of ways, not just in relationship to the central node
on the web. In short, a concept web that contains cross-links
reveals a more complex and integrated conceptual
understanding of the subject under study.

Discussion of the Intensity and Depth Analysis

Figure 1: Levels on a Prototypical Web

Our initial analysis examined change in conceptual growth
as a function of intensity and depth. Treating gain in
intensity and depth as the two dependent variables, a
MANOVA did not reveal any significant difference between
the control and experimental groups (F = 1.275, p = .281).
Univariate analysis also did not reveal any differences on
gains in intensity (F = .469, p = .494) or depth (F = 1.235, p
= .267). Thus, one may conclude that on these two measures
of conceptual change—total number of nodes and maximum
depth—there was no significant difference in the conceptual
change of students who were taught with vs. without
CTELL cases.
However, a limitation of this analysis is that it considers
intensity and depth as separate measures of conceptual
change. It is reasonable to argue that a more powerful
measure of conceptual change would combine the
differentiation and hierarchical organization characteristics
of a concept web. Insofar as we are aware, such measures do
not exist. Thus, using the mathematical principle of
rearrangements, two adjusted measures were developed.
In a traditional analysis, the number of times a principle is
mentioned (its intensity) and its distance from the central
node (or hierarchy) are analyzed separately. For example, a
principle that is mentioned 3 times in a concept web would
contribute 3 nodes to the total number of nodes (or total
intensity) regardless of how far each node is from the
central node. The principle of rearrangements allows us to
adjust for the intensity of a node vis-à-vis its hierarchy from
the central node. The idea being: nodes that are closer to the

In the scoring process, a web was assigned an overall
intensity number (equal to the number of nodes), and an
overall depth number (equal to the number of levels within
the web). Each node on a web was then evaluated for
content and assigned to one of thirteen categories,
corresponding to the 12 principles of effective literacy
instruction noted earlier, plus a category called "Other." A
node was assigned to a category based on its content, and on
the cluster of nodes to which it was attached. For example,
if attached to a level 1 node “comprehension,” level 2 node
“student-centered” would be coded as Comprehension; if
the same level 2 node was attached to the level 1 node
“teaching styles,” it would be coded as Teacher Knowledge.
Nodes of a very general nature and/or nodes unconnected to
other nodes or to one of the 12 principles were coded into
the category "Other." The coding continued until all the
nodes on a web were assigned to a category.

1613

central node (higher up in the hierarchy) have greater
centrality in the conceptual schema (as captured in the
concept web) than those that are further away. Thus, they
should contribute more to the overall intensity. Gain/loss on
this measure better captures an overall movement up or
down a concept map’s hierarchy, providing evidence for
cognitive reorganization (Jones & Vesilind, 1996).
The intensity of a node was adjusted for its hierarchy.
Recall that counting the central node as level 0, if there were
n1 nodes at level 1, n 2 nodes at level 2, and so on up to nl
nodes at level l, then intensity, I = n1 + n 2 + ... + nl and
depth, D = l. For a node that occurs l levels away from the
central node (the center node being level l = 0), its
hierarchical leverage is 1/l, i.e., the further it is away from
the center node, the lower its leverage. Thus, by multiplying
the number of nodes at a particular level with their
hierarchical leverage, we obtained an adjusted measure of

n
n n
'
intensity, I = 1 + 2 + ... + l .
l
1
2
What does this adjusted measure of intensity capture? In
answer, consider an ordered set of l positive integers
m1 , m2 ,..., ml such that m1 > m2 > ... > ml . On one
extreme is the concept web with m1 nodes at level 1, m2
nodes at level 2, and so on up to ml nodes at level l. Such a
concept web will have an adjusted intensity of

I max =

m
m1 m2
+
+ ... + l with the most nodes in level 1,
1
2
l

fewer in level 2, even fewer in level 3 and so on. In other
words, such a concept web will display more breadth than
depth. On the other extreme, is the concept web
corresponding
to
an
adjusted
intensity
of

I min =

ml ml −1
m
+
+ ... + 1 with the least number of nodes
l
1
2

in level 1, greater numbers in level 2, even more in level 3,
and so on. In other words, such a concept web will display
more depth than breadth. By the principle of rearrangement,
all other combinations will necessarily lie between these
two extreme cases.
Why this occurs can be illustrated with a "layperson's"
example that captures the principle's essence. Suppose we
want to pick 10, 7, and 5 bills from piles of $100, $20, and
$10 bills. How could we choose the most (or least) money?
Intuitively, the choice that makes the most money is 10
$100 bills, 7 $20 bills, and 5 $10 bills, while choosing 10
$10 bills, 7 $20 bills, and 5 $100 bills captures the least
money. Any other choice would fall between these two
extremes. The principle of rearrangements establishes the
above intuitive notion mathematically. Thus, one extreme is
established by assigning the largest number (10) to bills
with the maximum value ($100), the next largest to the next
bill value, and finally the smallest number to the bill with
the least value. Similarly, assigning the largest number to
bills with the least value, the next largest to the next bill
value, and finally the smallest number to the bill with the

largest value, results in the other extreme. All other
rearrangements lie between these two extremes. The same
principle applies to the adjusted measure of intensity as
operationalized earlier.
Thus, any change in the value of adjusted intensity
corresponds to a change in the balance between breadth and
depth in a concept web. As one adjusts this balance from
one extreme to the other, the entire continuum of possible
concept webs is considered, and gain/loss on this measure
arguably captures and provides evidence for conceptual
reorganization.
Finally, to get a more accurate measure of hierarchical
organization, the depth of a concept web was normalized by
its un-adjusted intensity to give adjusted depth,

D1 =

l
. It is easy to see that a given
n1 + n 2 + ... + nl

number of nodes distributed over fewer levels imply lower
depth in the concept web whereas the same number of nodes
distributed over many levels implies greater depth.
When the previous statistical analysis was repeated with
the adjusted measures of intensity and depth, results
suggested a significant multivariate difference between the
control and experimental groups (F = 6.799, p = .001).
Univariate analysis revealed that experimental groups (M =
2.31, SD = 4.39) had significantly (F = 6.540, p = .011)
greater adjusted intensities than control groups (M = 1.08,
SD = 4.79). Furthermore, experimental groups (M = -.043,
SD = .11) had significantly (F = 11.696, p = .001) lower
depth in their concept maps than the control groups (M = .0063, SD = .09). These results—using both unadjusted and
adjusted measures—provided confirmatory evidence for an
exploratory analysis (unreported here due to space
constraints) of experimental data from the previous year (n
= 166 control, n = 201 experimental). Thus, by using these
measures of intensity and depth in place of the more
commonly-used measures noted earlier, one can find
previously undiscovered differences in conceptual changes.
The results of this analysis indicate that the literacy
principles became more central to preservice teachers'
conceptual understanding, implying that the CTELL cases
prove a potential vehicle to broaden their understanding.
While there were no differences in the number of discrete
nodes, nodes were closer, in terms of ordination, to the
central node in the concept webs of experimental groups.
This provides evidence of cognitive reorganization in terms
of movement up the hierarchy of the concept map. Because
there was also no difference in the maximum number of
sub-ordinate levels, this implies that the upward movement
was accompanied with a spreading across the levels. Our
results using the reconceptualized measures to analyze
concept webs imply that CTELL cases are effective in
providing an understanding of the centrality of concepts
related to the principles of effective reading instruction.

1614

change of students who were taught with vs. without
CTELL cases.
Somewhat surprisingly, the cross-link analysis in and of
itself was unable to pick up differences in conceptual
change between control and experimental groups. This
result meant that there was no weighted linear combination
of cross-links and distance scores that significantly
separated the control from the experimental groups. Seen
this way, a possible explanation could be that these two
measures by themselves do not capture sufficient
information contained in the concept web over and above
what is captured by the adjusted measures of intensity and
depth reported earlier in this paper.
Consequently, a reasonable step was to investigate if there
was a linear combination of the four measures of conceptual
change—adjusted intensity, adjusted depth, gain in number
of cross-links, and distance scores—that maximally
separated the control from the experimental groups. In
treating these four measures as the dependent variables, a
MANOVA was significant (F = 3.826, p = .005) thereby
confirming that such a linear combination indeed existed.
Consistent with the results reported earlier, univariate
analysis revealed that experimental groups had significantly
greater adjusted intensities (F = 4.581, p = .033) as well as
lower depth (F = 10.518, p = .001) in their concept maps
than the control groups. However, there were no statistically
significant gains in the number of cross-links (F = .444, p =
.506) and distance scores (F = 1.715, p = .191).
This confirms the explanation that while the typical
measures of number of cross-links and their corresponding
distance scores add to the overall effect, by themselves they
carry insufficient weight in measuring conceptual change.
This is a significant finding for measuring conceptual
change through the use of concept webs. An obvious and
important implication and way forward, as with the adjusted
measures for the initial node analysis, is the need to rethink
the way that we measure cross-links in concept webs.

Discussion of the Cross-Links Analysis
As noted earlier, our concept web analysis involved a third
measure of conceptual change: the number and character of
cross-links present in a web. That is, while the previous
analysis indicated that CTELL case-based learners better
understood the centrality of concepts related to effective
reading instruction, it did not assess the complexity or
integration of conceptual knowledge. In making our
decision to include this additional analysis, we noted that
Novak and Gowin (1984) gave points for cross-linked
nodes; we also noted arguments that only "valid" cross-links
should be counted for analysis (e.g., Dorough and Rye,
1997), while others suggested that all links on a web are
valid, given that "invalid" links highlight misconceptions in
a student’s understanding (Kitchin et al., 2000). We found
Kitchin et al.'s (2000) arguments compelling, and thus all
links on a web were counted in the present analysis. Crosslinks were given a distance score based on the shortest path
between the two linked nodes, determined as follows.
All links between nodes (both cross-links and regular
links) were initially counted. As webs were complex and
lent themselves to the possibility of counting errors, each
link was highlighted with a marker as it was counted,
ensuring that all links were counted, but not more than once.
Subtracting the total number of links from the number of
nodes (not counting the given, center node in the node
count), logically yields the number of cross-links. That is, if
each node had a single link between it and another node, the
number of links would equal the number of nodes, minus
one (the originating or central node). However, if a web
contained a cross-link (more than one link going from a
given node), the difference between total number of nodes
and total number of links would yield the number of crosslinks (i.e., multiple links between nodes).
Once cross-linked nodes were identified, each pair present
on the web was given a distance score. This was
accomplished by choosing one of the cross-linked nodes,
and tracing the shortest route to the other linked node in
terms of the number of links traversed via a superordinate
node. Assigning a distance score in this way takes into
account the fact that nodes may be cross-linked across
levels, thus accounting for the depth of the web.
The distance score between two cross-linked nodes was
seen as a measure of the strength of the cross-link; the
greater the distance, the greater the strength, and the deeper
the conceptual understanding. Thus, for the cross-links
analysis, each web had a total number of links, and a
distance score for each cross-link.
Treating gains in the number of cross-links and the
corresponding distance scores as the two dependent
variables, a MANOVA did not reveal a significant
difference between control and experimental groups (F =
1.256, p = .286). Univariate analysis also did not reveal
differences on gains in number of cross-links (F = .937, p =
.334) or distance scores (F = 1.995, p = .159). Thus, one
may conclude that on these two measures of conceptual
change, there was no significant difference in the conceptual

Implications

1615

The practices employed in this project—throughout the
delivery of instruction in pre-service literacy methods
courses and the data analysis process—lead to
methodological and theoretical implications. The process of
data analysis indicates that using concept webs as
measurement tools is valuable, but needs to be expanded to
overcome the limitations of normally-employed analyses.
Specifically, previous work on concept-mapping (e.g.,
Beyerbach, 1988; Jensen & Winitzky, 2002; MorineDershimer, 1993) proved useful at the initial stages of the
analysis, as it led us to measure both the intensity and the
depth of students’ concept webs. However, our analysis
moved further to consider learners’ conceptual development
as evident through the interplay of different measures (i.e.,
the combination of intensity and depth measures as well as
the combination of cross-link measures with the former).
This is indicative of the complexity of the research process
when concept webs are involved, and points to the pursuit

of adjusted measures that were fruitful in our analysis of
intensity and depth for future analyses.
Recent research in using concept webs as an assessment
tool has moved to address the complexity inherent in
capturing pre-service teachers’ conceptual change through
qualitative measures for scoring webs (e.g., Kinchin et al.,
2000; Van Zele et al., 2004). A mixed-method approach, as
employed here, that takes into account the various levels of
complexity may be another avenue for future research to
reveal students’ conceptual understanding through concept
webs. To further understand the nature of learners’
conceptual development and the ways this development is
influenced by the learning environment, future analyses by
the CTELL project will focus on combining the results
obtained through concept mapping with other measures.
The fact that preservice teachers became more aware of
the centrality of concepts related to principles of effective
reading instruction suggests that case-based, anchored
instruction through CTELL cases effectively scaffolded
learners’ conceptual and professional development. This
resonates with arguments that case-based instruction can
provide models of how to think professionally about
problems, thereby facilitating reasoning and decisionmaking in teaching (e.g., Hewitt et al., 2003; Kinzer et al.,
2006; Kurz et al., 2005; Lundeberg, 1999). We argue that
the adjusted measures for concept web analysis described
herein were not only fruitful in the analysis of our data, but
point to a need for measures and analyses that capture the
complex nature of preservice teachers’ conceptual change.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation
(Grant No. 0089221). The opinions, findings, conclusions
and recommendations expressed are the authors' and may
not reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

References
CTGV (Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt)
(1990). Anchored instruction and its relationship to
situated cognition. Educational Researcher, 19(6), 2-10.
Hewitt, J., Pedretti, E., Bencze, L., Vaillancourt, B. D., &
Yoon, S. (2003). New Applications for Multimedia Cases:
Promoting Reflective Practice in Preservice Teacher
Education. Journal of Technology and Teacher
Education, 11(4), 483-500.
Jones, G. M., & Vesilind, E. M. (1996). Putting practice into
theory: Changes in the organization of preservice
teachers’ pedagogical knowledge. American Educational
Research Journal, 33(1), 91-117.
Kaste, J. A. (2004). Scaffolding through cases: Diverse
constructivist teaching in the literacy methods course.
Teaching and Teacher Education, 20(1), 31-45.
Kinzer, C. K., Cammack, D. W., Labbo, L. D., Teale, W.
H., & Sanny, R. (2006). Using technology to
(re)conceptualize pre-service literacy teacher education:
Considerations of design, pedagogy and research. In M.
C. McKenna, L. D. Labbo, R. E Keiffer, & D. Reinking

(Eds.), International handbook of literacy and technology
(Vol. 2, pp. 212-233). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kinzer, C. K., Labbo, L., Leu, D. J., Teale, W., &
Cammack, D. W. (April, 2004). Case technologies to
enhance literacy learning: An overview and description of
CTELL cases and project implementation. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA.
Kurz, T. M., Llama, G., & Savenye, W. (2005). Issues and
challenges of creating video cases to be used with
preservice teachers. TechTrends, 49(4), 67-73.
Lundeberg, M. (1999). Discovering teaching and learning
through cases. In M. Lundeberg, B. Levin & H.
Harrington (Eds.), Who learns what from cases and why?
(pp. 3-23), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Markham, K., Mintzes, J., & Jones, M. (1994). The concept
map as a research and evaluation tool: Further evidence of
validity. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31(1),
91-101.
Merseth, K. (1991). The case for cases in teacher education.
Washington, DC: American Association of Colleges for
Teacher Education.
Morine-Dershimer, G. (1993). Tracing conceptual change in
preservice teachers. Teaching and Teacher Education,
9(1), 15-26.
Novak, J., & Gowan, D.B. (1984). Learning how to learn.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sanny, R. (2005). Exploring web-based case use in literacy
teacher preparation: Realities, complexities, possibilities.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 66(05), 1622. (UMI
No. 3174211).
Schrader, P. G., Leu, D. J., Kinzer, C. K., Ataya, R., Labbo,
L. D., Teale, W. H., & Cammack, D. W. (2003). Using
Internet delivered video cases, to support pre-service
teachers’ understanding of effective early literacy
instruction: An exploratory study. Instructional Science,
31, 317–340.
Stoddart, T., Abrams, R., Gasper, E., & Canaday, D. (2000).
Concept maps as assessment in science inquiry learning-a report of methodology. International Journal of Science
Education, 22(12), 1221-1246.
Trent, S., Pernell, E., Mungal, A., & Chimedza, R. (1998).
Using concept maps to measure conceptual change in
preservice teachers enrolled in a multicultural
education/special education course. Remedial and Special
Education, 19(1), 16-31.
Teale, W. H., Kinzer, C. K, Labbo, L. D., & Leu, D. J., Jr.
(2002). Beginning reading instruction. Athens, GA:
University of Georgia.
Tyson, L. M., Venville, G. J., Harrison, A. G., & Treagust,
D. F. (1997). A multidimensional framework for
interpreting conceptual change events in the classroom.
Science Education, 81, 387-404.
Van Zele, E., Lenaerts, J., & Wieme, W. (2004). Improving
the usefulness of concept maps as a research tool for
science education. International Journal of Science
Education, 26(9), 1043-1064.

1616

