UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Asymmetrical Analogical Transfer in Insight Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4f74w2rk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Chronicle, Edward P.
MacGregor, James N.
Ormerod, Thomas C.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Asymmetrical Analogical Transfer in Insight Problem Solving
Thomas C. Ormerod (t.ormerod@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, LA1 4YF, UK

Edward P. Chronicle (chronicl@hawaii.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2340 Campus Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA

James N. MacGregor (jmacgreg@hsd.uvic.ca)
School of Public Administration, University of Victoria
PO Box 1700 STN CSC, Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2, Canada
Abstract
We report three experiments that examine transfer between
structurally and superficially similar insight problems.
Experiment 1 showed spontaneous positive transfer from a
difficult insight problem to an easier one, but not vice versa.
Experiment 2 replicated this asymmetry when participants
were given an explicit hint as to the relatedness of the
problems. Experiment 3 introduced physical props to reduce
problem difficulty, but failed to promote transfer from easier
to more difficult problems. This transfer asymmetry is
consistent with the proposal that the same processes are used
to solve insight and non-insight problems, and offers a new
focus for modeling in theories of analogical transfer.

Introduction
Most people have had the “aha” experience, when they
suddenly see the solution to a problem that, until then, has
eluded them. Psychologists study this phenomenon as
“insight problem solving”, typically from one or the other of
two broad theoretical perspectives. One approach, the
“nothing special” position (e.g., Newell, Shaw, and Simon,
1964), considers that insight problem solving taps into the
same processes as problem solving more generally, and
involves no emergent properties. The other, the “special
process” view (e.g., Davidson, 1996), considers that insight
is qualitatively different from other forms of problem
solving.
A common finding in general problem solving research is
that practice on one problem may have a positive or
negative effect on performance on another problem. It has
frequently been observed that facilitative “transfer” is
greater when the practice problem is the more difficult of
the two than when it is the simpler (Cook, 1937; Kotovsky,
Hayes & Simon, 1985; Reed, Ernest & Banerji, 1974).
Asymmetric transfer effects have been observed many times
in standard problem solving (Bassok, 1990; Bassok &
Holyoak, 1989; Reed & Evans, 1987). Explanations for the
effect typically invoke the concept of searching the problem
space: positive transfer may arise from difficult to easier
problems because solving the more difficult problem first
forces a deeper search and greater consequent understanding
of the problem space. At the same time, transfer may fail

from more simple problems because the problem space of a
difficult target problem may be too complex to allow
mappings to be made from the easier source problem (Reed,
Dempster & Ettinger, 1985).
However, it is less clear if asymmetric transfer also occurs
in insight problem solving. If insight problem solving
involves “nothing special” and functions through the same
set of processes as conventional problem solving, then it
would be reasonable to expect asymmetrical transfer effects
to occur, under appropriate conditions. If it turned out that
they did not, then the result would be inconsistent with the
“nothing special” view. If, on the other hand, insight
involves different processes, asymmetrical transfer may not
be characteristic of them. In fact, in one special process
view of insight, we would expect asymmetrical transfer not
to occur. This is the representational change position,
which holds that, once representational change has taken
place, it should persist and transfer to subsequent problems
that require the same insight (Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider &
Rhenius, 1999).
One area of research where transfer of insight-type
problem solving has been studied is that of analogical
transfer, when knowledge of one problem is used to solve a
similar one (Gick & Holyoak, 1980). However, the results
do not clearly answer whether asymmetrical transfer occurs.
Indeed, this does not appear to be a question addressed by
current theories of analogical transfer (e.g., Gentner, 1983;
Keane, Ledgeway & Duff, 1994; Hummel & Holyoak,
1997; Hofstadter, 2001), presumably since the finding has
not been clearly established. One limiting factor is that
analogical transfer rarely occurs spontaneously in the
absence of hints, directions, or other cues (Bassok &
Holyoak, 1989; Needham & Begg, 1991).
Another
limitation is that people frequently respond to irrelevant
surface similarities of problems more than to structural
similarities relevant to the solution (Bassok & Holyoak,
1989; Novick, 1988). Spontaneous positive analogical
transfer appears to be facilitated when source and target
problems share both surface and structural features.
The purpose of the present research was to seek a clear
answer to the issue of whether asymmetrical transfer occurs
in insight problem solving.
To test for this, two

1899

Percentage solving

requirements had to be met. First, we had to identify two
insight problems with sufficient surface and structural
similarities to meet the boundary conditions for transfer.
Second, the problems had to be of clearly different levels of
difficulty.
We initially selected for study the Four-Tree problem
(Metcalfe & Wiebe, 1987), and the Four-Coin problem
(Ormerod et al., 2002). The Four-Tree problem asks how a
gardener can plant four trees so that the trees are equidistant.
A correct answer is to plant three trees round the base of a
mound with the fourth tree on top. The Four-Coin problem
asks how four identical coins can be arranged so that each
one touches each of the other three. A correct answer is to
lay 3 of the coins flat with their edges touching and to stack
the fourth on top. The problems are superficially similar in
that they each involve arranging four objects to be in
relative positions that meet similar constraints. The
problems also have deeper structural similarities, in that
they involve placing three objects in a triangular
arrangement and locating the fourth above them. Thus the
two problems appear to meet the first requirement, above, of
surface and structural similarity.
The second requirement was that the two problems should
differ in difficulty. Unpublished data from 40 participants
given 10 minutes to attempt a solution indicated that the
Four-coin problem was of moderate difficulty, with
approximately 80% solving within the time limit (see Figure
1). Although we have been unable to find comparable
results for the Four-Tree problem, what empirical evidence
there is indicates that it is likely to be more difficult than
this (Metcalfe & Wiebe, 1987).

receiving the coin problem first should have no, or lesser,
effect on subsequent tree performance.

Method
Participants. The participants were 18 student volunteers.
Participants were randomly assigned to either the tree-coin
condition or the coin-tree condition, with 9 in each.
Materials and Procedure. Testing was conducted in a group
setting. Participants received a booklet containing the two
problems on separate pages, in the order prescribed by
experimental condition, separated by a sheet containing the
answer to the first problem followed by two sheets
containing filler items (two versions of an unrelated
Traveling Salesperson problem in which participants were
required to draw minimal tours around sets of nodes – see
Chronicle, MacGregor & Ormerod, in press). Participants
were instructed that as soon as they thought they had found
a solution, to note down the time from the digital timer that
was prominently displayed, followed by a written or
diagrammatic description of their solution. They were then
to raise their hand so that the solution could be checked for
accuracy by an experimenter. If incorrect, they continued, if
correct, they were asked to wait for further instructions
before turning the page. Five minutes were allowed for
each problem, separated by a gap of one minute in which
the solution to the first problem was read by participant,
followed by a further six minutes for completion of the filler
items.

Results and discussion

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Overall, 15 of the 18 participants (83%) solved the coin
problem and 0 (0%) the tree problem. The difference was
significant, by the Wilcoxon matched-pairs test, confirming
that the latter problem was the more difficult of the two
(Z=3.87, p<.001). Six of the 9 participants who received the
coin problem prior to the tree problem solved (67%),
whereas all 9 who received it after the tree problem were
successful (100%).
For the coin problem, mean time to solution was 208s for
those receiving it first and 95s for those receiving it second.
For the tree problem, mean solution times were 300s in both
order conditions (participants failing to solve were assigned
the maximum time of 300s). Analysis of solution time data
was conducted using a mixed analysis of variance, with
Problem Type as a Within factor and order of presentation
as the Between factor. The results indicated significant
effects of Problem Type (Four-Coin or Four-Tree), Order
(coin first or tree first) and their interaction. For the effect
of Problem Type, F(1,16)=39.34, Mse=5045, p<.001, and of
Order, F(1,16)=5.74, Mse=5045, p<.05. For the interaction
effect, F(1,115)=5.74, Mse=5045, p<.05.
The results were useful in a number of respects. First,
they confirmed that the two problems were similar enough
for transfer to occur. Second, they indicated that the FourTree problem was the more difficult of the two, by a
substantial margin. Third, they provided initial support for
the hypothesis of asymmetrical insight transfer based on

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Elapsed time (mins.)

Figure 1: Cumulative percentage of 40 participants solving
the Four-Coin problem in successive one minute blocks.

Experiment 1
The purpose of the first experiment was to provide an initial
test for the presence of asymmetrical transfer with insight
problems. If there is such an effect, then receiving the more
difficult tree problem (and solution) first should facilitate
performance on the subsequent coin problem, whereas

1900

differences in problem difficulty. At the same time, the
experiment had several limitations. One was the small
number of participants. Another was that participants were
not made explicitly aware of the relatedness of the two
problems. Thus, failure to transfer from the Four-Trees to
the Four-Coins problem may have arisen because
participants may not have detected similarities between the
two problems. Experiment 2 was conducted to address these
limitations.

Experiment 2
The second experiment repeated the first, but with a much
larger pool of participants. Also, in an attempt to facilitate
solutions to the tree problem, participants were explicitly
instructed to use the solution to the first problem as a clue to
solving the second.

Method
Participants. The participants were 127 volunteers visiting
Lancaster University. Participants were randomly assigned
to either the tree-coin condition or the coin-tree condition,
with 60 in the former and 67 in the latter.
Materials and Procedure. Testing was conducted in a
group setting. Participants received a booklet containing the
two problems on separate pages, in the order prescribed by
experimental condition, separated by a sheet containing the
answer to the first problem and filler items as in Experiment
1. The statement of the second problem included a hint, that
the solution to the first problem may provide a useful clue to
finding the solution to the second. Participants were
instructed that, as soon as they thought they had found a
solution, to note down the time from the digital timer that
was prominently displayed, followed by a description of
their solution. They were then to raise their hand so that the
solution could be checked for accuracy by an experimenter.
If incorrect, they continued, if correct, they were asked to
wait for further instructions before turning the page. Three
minutes were allowed for each problem.

For the Four-Coin problem, the percentages solving (and
the mean times to solution) were 30% (160s) when first and
57% (102s) when second. For the Four-Tree problem,
percent solving and mean solution times were 4% (176s)
when first and 3% (177s) when second (participants failing
to solve were assigned the maximum time of 180s).
Analysis of solution time data was conducted using a mixed
analysis of variance, with Problem Type as a Within factor
and order of presentation as the Between factor. The results
indicated significant effects of Problem Type (coin or tree),
Order (coin first or tree first) and their interaction. For the
effect of Problem Type, F(1,115)=74.53, Mse=1629,
p<.001, and of Order, F(1,115)=23.48, Mse=2150, p<.001.
For the interaction effect, F(1,115)=29.19, Mse=1629,
p<.001.
The results were similar to those of the first experiment in
showing a strongly asymmetric transfer effect, with positive
transfer from the Four-Tree to Four-Coin problem, but not
from Four-Coin to Four-Tree. It appears that the hint to use
the solution to the first problem as an aid in solving the
second had little or no effect. The ineffectiveness of an
explicit hint to analogize is surprising in the light of the
results of Gick & Holyoak (1980) and others, where
typically rates of positive transfer increase by up to a factor
of five in the presence of such a hint.
However,
performance on the tree problem remained virtually at floor
in both order conditions. It would be desirable to have a
higher number of solutions, to identify with more certainty
that no transfer was taking place with the tree problem.
Therefore, we conducted a third experiment to try to
increase the solution rate.

Experiment 3

Results and discussion

The strategy of the third experiment was to generate more
solutions to the tree problem. To do so, we introduced
several procedural changes. The previous experiments were
conducted in a group setting, with the strong possibility that
the distracting presence of other participants may have
influenced attention and performance. While there is no
reason why this would have differentially affected the two
experimental conditions, it could have resulted in generally
depressed performance levels. Experiment 3 tested
participants individually in a controlled laboratory setting.
In addition, instead of a paper-and-pencil approach, it
allowed participants to manipulate physical objects. In the
coin condition, these were four hexagonal metal tiles placed
on a table. In the tree condition we supplied bamboo rods as
the “trees”, and provided a sandbox and miniature shovel
for “planting”. It seemed possible that these might act as a
hint to construct the mound required for solution. Previous
research has shown that providing physical props can
enhance insight (Murray, 2004), and generally it has been
shown that providing devices to enable the externalization
of problem constraints aids problem-solving performance
(Zhang, 1997).

Ten protocols were excluded from analysis because no time
data were recorded or the solution provided was ambiguous.
This left 61 participants in the coin-tree condition and 56 in
the tree-coin. Overall, 50 (43%) of participants solved the
Four-Coin problem, 4 (3%) the Four-Tree problem. The
difference was significant by the Wilcoxon matched-pairs
test, confirming that the latter problem was the more
difficult of the two (Z=6.64,p<.001). Solution rates for the
Four-Coin problem were lower than those of Experiment 1.
This difference was unexpected since the effect of a hint
would normally be to raise solution rates to the second
problem (Gick & Holyoak, 1980). However, the poorer
performance in Experiment 2 is likely to have arisen
because, due to constraints on the length of the testing
session, participants were only allowed three minutes to
solve each problem compared with five minutes in
Experiment 1.
1901

Method
Participants. The participants were 41 student volunteers
randomly assigned to either the tree-coin condition or the
coin-tree condition, resulting in 21 in the former and 20 in
the latter condition.
Materials and Procedure. Testing was conducted
individually as part of a larger study on insight problem
solving. Following the first problem and its solution,
participants worked on a variety of verbal problems for
approximately 20 minutes before receiving the second
problem. The instructions and procedure for the coin
problem were the same as in the previous experiments,
except that participants were given four metal hexagonal
tiles to work with. For the tree problem, participants were
provided with 4 short bamboo rods to represent the trees,
and a small sandbox and a miniature spade for “planting”
them.
Five minutes were allowed for each problem.
Participants were instructed that a correct solution did not
require that the 4 rods be exactly the same distances apart,
only that the solution should be correct in principle.

Results and discussion
Success rates for the coin problem were 100% in both
conditions. For the tree problem, 11 of the 41 participants
solved it overall (27%). The difference was significant, by
the Wilcoxon matched-pairs test, confirming the latter
problem to be the more difficult of the two, Z=5.48, p<
.001. For the tree problem, solution rates were similar
whether presented before the coin problem (29%), or after
(25%).
For the coin problem, the mean times to solution were
48.50 s when first and 41.76 when second. For the tree
problem, the corresponding mean solution times were
278.43 s when first and 274.40 when second (participants
failing to solve were assigned the maximum time of 300 s).
Analysis of solution time data was conducted using a mixed
analysis of variance, with Problem Type as a Within factor
and order of presentation as the Between factor. The results
indicated a significant effect of Problem Type only,
F(1,39)=469.42, Mse=2334.65, p<.001.
The experiment succeeded in increasing tree problem
performance above floor levels, to a success rate of 27%
overall. However, even with a success rate where transfer
effects should be discernible, none were observed here,
suggesting that the failure to find positive transfer effects in
Experiment 1, from the Four-Tree to the Four-Coin
problem, was not an artifact of floor level performance. The
result increases confidence in the conclusion that the
asymmetric transfer effect of Experiment 1 was the result of
differences in problem difficulty.

General Discussion
If the “nothing special” view of insight is correct, then we
would expect to observe asymmetric transfer effects
between insight problems as well as between non-insight
problems. We conducted three experiments, and the first

revealed such an effect under the conditions where it has
been found with non-insight problems. The second
experiment replicated the effect, and showed that it arises
even when participants are given an explicit hint as to the
relatedness of the problems. The third experiment helped to
rule out that the asymmetry of transfer stemmed from a
floor effect in the more difficult of the two insight problems.
Previously, we have reported results with a variety
of insight and non-insight problems, indicating that solution
processes in both are characterized by goal-directed search
and the application of a criterion for monitoring progress,
which operates to select among alternative moves those that
are evaluated as making satisfactory progress towards the
goal (Chronicle, MacGregor & Ormerod, 2004; MacGregor,
Ormerod & Chronicle, 2001; Ormerod, MacGregor &
Chronicle, 2002). The present results are consistent with
these processes, in demonstrating that insight problems can
exhibit a similar asymmetric transfer effect previously
observed with non-insight problems, where transfer is more
successful going from the more difficult to the simpler
problem than vice versa.
The result does not appear to be consistent with
Representational Change Theory, which holds that once a
representational change has taken place in the solution of an
insight problem, then it should transfer to all similar
problems (Knoblich et al, 1999). It could be argued that for
a representational change to transfer, the person has to
generate the initial solution, rather than simply being shown
it. A similar argument has been advanced for the notable
difficulty that people have in reproducing the solution to the
nine-dot problem (Dominowski &Dallob, 1996). On the
other hand, there is evidence that generating an insight
solution is not critical to retention. We have found that,
when shown the stacking solution to a variant of the present
coin problem, people are able to reproduce the solution, in
some cases after a considerable time lapse (Ormerod et al,
2002).
Spontaneous analogical transfer has been difficult to
observe, and most cases of successful transfer has required
intervention in the form of instructions or hints (Needham &
Begg, 1991). The results of Experiment 1 are rare in this
respect, by showing spontaneous analogical transfer from
the tree problem to the coin problem. Previous research has
suggested that failure of spontaneous analogical transfer
results from failure to recall the analog experience, rather
than failure to see its relevance (Perfetto, Bransford &
Franks, 1983). Analogs that involve insight experiences
may have an advantage in this respect, in that the solution
principles of simple insight problems appear to be highly
memorable (Dominowski & Dallob, 1996; Knoblich,
Ohlsson, Haider & Rhenius, 1999; Ormerod, MacGregor &
Chronicle, 2002). In addition, several studies have reported
that solution cues which create a momentary puzzlement or
“aha” are more effective in prompting solutions than
declarative cues with the same informational content
(Auble, Franks & Soraci, 1979; Lockhart, Lamon & Gick,
1988).

1902

We suggest that differences in the size of problem space
between the Four-Trees and Four-Coins problems underlie
both differences in difficulty and also the observed
asymmetry in transfer. The Four-Trees problem is more
difficult than the Four-Coins problem because it has a
contextually richer description. This in turn creates a larger
space of move alternatives that must be searched.
Moreover, some readily accessible moves (e.g., planting
trees at the corners of a square layout) appear to make
considerable progress towards the goal state: they come
close, though not close enough. In contrast, the Four-Coins
problem is knowledge-lean and allows few move
alternatives that make apparent progress. As a consequence,
participants experience criterion failure earlier with this
problem, that is, a failure to find any moves that make
sufficient progress towards the goal to warrant further
consideration. As a consequence, participants widen the
problem space, that is, they seek move alternatives that are
not explicitly available within the initial problem
representation. This allows the discovery of new types of
move (e.g., using three dimensions).
In the present case, successful transfer may have occurred
because the solution to the previous tree problem was
readily available to be accessed while our participants
worked on the coin problem. Our theoretical position
suggests that, on experiencing criterion failure in the coin
problem, the problem solver would expand or restructure
the initial problem space.
This restructuring could
implicitly or explicitly be guided by the readily accessible
experience with the tree problem.
At the same time, if insight solutions are memorable, then
why does the same facilitation not occur in the reverse
direction?
The same theoretical position offers an
explanation. The tree problem is more complex than the
coin problem and, we propose, has a larger initial problem
space, within which the solver can search for longer while
maintaining a sense of satisfactory progress. Thus, while
the coin solution should potentially be just as accessible to
the participants working on the tree solution as the reverse,
they are not similarly prompted to access it. We have
previously shown that individuals are more likely to make
use of solution-relevant hints (e.g., a stacked pair of coins in
an eight-coin variant of the Four-Coin problem) once they
have experienced criterion failure, a position also consistent
with the opportunistic-assimilation hypothesis of Seifert,
Meyer, Davidson, Patalano & Yaniv (1995). The same
principle may explain why participants did not transfer from
Four-Coin to Four-Tree problems even when given an
explicit hint to do so: unless and until they experience
criterion failure with the Four-Tree problem (i.e., they run
out of things to try that seem to make progress), a hint to
make use of a previous problem’s solution might seem to be
irrelevant or erroneous advice.
Finally, and as a speculation, the asymmetry presents a
potentially interesting test case for theories and
computational models of analogical problem-solving.
Mapping components across analogical problems may

involve matching superficial similarities (e.g., Ross, 1989)
structural alignments (Gentner, 1983) or elements of both
(Hummel & Holyoak, 1997). None of these theories dictate
preferential access to attributes and relations in one problem
rather than another during mapping. Whatever the substrate
of the mapping process, given the observed asymmetry it
seems likely that features of analogs are not accessed with
equal ease in all cases. Some analogs may be more
analogous than others.

References
Auble, P. M., Franks, J. J. & Soraci, S. A. (1979). Effort
toward comprehension: Elaboration of ‘aha’? Memory and
Cognition, 7, 426-434.

Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K.J. (1989). Interdomain transfer
between isomorphic topics in algebra and physics.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
& Cognition, 15,153-166.
Chronicle, E. P., MacGregor, J. N., & Ormerod, T. C.
(2004). What makes an insight problem? The roles of
problem-solving heuristic, goal conception and solution
recoding. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory & Cognition.
Chronicle, E.P.,Ormerod, T.C. and MacGregor, J.N. (2001).
When insight just won't come: The failure of visual cues
in the nine-dot problem.
Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 54A, 903-919.
Cook, T.W. (1937). Amount of material and difficulty of
problem solving. II. The disc transfer problem. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 20, 288-296.
Davidson, J.E. (1996). The suddenness of insight. In R. J.
Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight.
(Paperback ed., pp. 125-155). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Dominowski, R.L., & Dallob, P. (1996). Insight and
problem solving. In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Davidson
(Eds.), The nature of insight. (Paperback ed., pp. 33-62).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gick, M.L. & Holyoak, K.J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355,
Hofstadter, D. R. (2001). Analogy as the core of cognition.
In K. J. Holyoak & B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The analogical
mind: Perspectives from cognitive science. Cambridge
MA: MIT Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: a theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Keane, M. T., Ledgeway, T., & Duff, S. (1994). Constraints
on analogical mapping: A comparison of three models.
Cognitive Science, 18, 387-438.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in
insight problem solving.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 25, 15341555.

1903

Kotovsky, K., Hayes, J.R., & Simon, H.A. (1985). Why are
some problems hard: Evidence from Tower of Hanoi.
Cognitive Psychology, 17, 248-294.
Lockhart, R.S., Lamon, M. & Gick, M.L. (1988).
Conceptual transfer in simple insight problems. Memory
& Cognition, 16, 36-44.
MacGregor, J.N., Ormerod, T.C., & Chronicle, E.P. (2001).
Information-processing and insight: A process model of
performance on the nine-dot and related problems.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
& Cognition, 27, 176-201
Metcalfe, J., & Weibe, D. (1987). Intuition in insight and
non-insight problem-solving. Memory & Cognition, 15,
238-246.
Murray, A. (2004). Unpublished PhD thesis, Trinity
College, Dublin.
Needham, D.R., & Begg, I.M. (1991). Problem-oriented
training promotes spontaneous analogical transfer:
Memory-oriented training promotes memory for training.
Memory & Cognition, 19, 543-557.
Newell, A., Shaw, J. C., & Simon, H. A. (1964). The
process of creative thinking. In H. Gruber, G. Terrell, &
M. Wertheimer, (Eds.), Contemporary approaches to
creative thinking.
Novick, L.R. (1988).
Analogical transfer, problem
similarity and expertise.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 14, 510520.
Ohlsson, S. (1984). Restructuring revisited. II An
information processing theory of restructuring and

insight. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 25, 117129.
Ormerod, T. C., MacGregor, J. N., and Chronicle, E. P.
(2002). Dynamics and constraints in insight problem
solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28, 791-799.
Perfetto, G.A., Bransford, J.D. & Franks, J.J. (1983).
Constraints on access in a problem solving context.
Memory & Cognition, 11, 24-31.
Reed, S.K., Dempster, A. & Ettinger, M. (1985). Usefulness
of analogous solutions for solving algebra word problems.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 11, 106-125.
Reed, S.K., Ernst, G.W., & Banerji, R. (1974). The role of
analogy in transfer between similar problem states.
Cognitive Psychology, 6, 436-450.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing different types of
superficial similarities: Different effects on the access and
use of earlier problems. Journal of Experimental
psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 15, 456468.
Seifert, C.M., Meyer, D.E., Davidson, N., Patalano, A.L. &
Yaniv, I. (1995). Demystification of cognitive insight:
Opportunistic assimilation and the prepared-mind
perspective. R. J. Sternberg. & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The
nature of insight. Bradford Books/MIT Press, Bradford
Books/MIT Press.
Zhang, J. (1997). The nature of external representations in
problem-solving. Cognitive Science, 21: 179-218.

1904

