UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Auditory Overshadowing and Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4m71x1nb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Robinson, Christopher W.
Timbrook, Calvin M.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Auditory Overshadowing and Categorization:
When Decreased Visual Processing Facilitates Categorization
Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Calvin M. Timbrook (timbrook.8@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
207D Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

labels serve as proxies for these categories (Gelman
& Markman, 1986). While effects of labels change
considerably across development (see Waxman, 2003
for a review), it has been argued that even young
infants are “equipped with a broad, universally
shared expectation, linking words to commonalities
among objects” (Waxman, 2003, p. 220). Thus,
labels facilitate categorization because they direct
children’s attention to the commonalities of the to-becategorized entities. Labels not only facilitate
categorization early in development, but linguistic
input may also help children individuate object kinds.
For example, it has been argued that labels may serve
as “essence placeholders”, and infants who hear two
labels expect two object kinds (Xu, 2002; Xu, Cote,
& Baker, 2005). In sum, according to the languagespecific position, hearing common labels and
different labels facilitate categorization and
individuation
by
increasing
attention
to
commonalities and differences, respectively, and
these effects are specifically tied to linguistic input.
While effects of labels on cognitive tasks are well
documented, it is also known that auditory input
(including words) often overshadows visual input
(Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004; Robinson, Howard, &
Sloutsky, 2005; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004a; 2004b;
Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003). In these studies, infants
and young children are more likely to encode a visual
stimulus when it is presented in isolation than when it
is paired with an auditory stimulus.
Auditory overshadowing may not only explain why
children often pay less attention to appearance
information when appearance is pitted against a label

Abstract
The role of labels in categorization is well documented: when
different entities are associated with the same label, young
children are more likely to group these entities together. The
current research tests the hypothesis that labels affect
categorization by attenuating the discrimination of labeled
entities. The results not only indicate that labels can facilitate
categorization by decreasing the discriminability of labeled
entities but also that these effects (a) persist beyond the
labeling episode and (b) stem from decreased attention to the
differences between compared entities, as opposed to
increased attention to the common features.
Keywords: Cognitive Development, Attention, Language
Acquisition, Psychology, Human Experimentation.

Introduction
Labels play an important role in cognitive development.
When different entities are referred to by the same label,
children are more likely to perceive these entities as being
more similar to each other (Sloutsky & Lo, 1999), more
likely to group these entities together (Balaban &
Waxman, 1997; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; Sloutsky, Lo, &
Fisher, 2001), and more likely to make inferences from
one entity to the other (Gelman & Markman, 1986;
Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004; Welder & Graham, 2001).
Furthermore, when different entities are referred to by
different labels, young children are more likely to
individuate these entities (Xu, 2002; Xu, Cote, & Baker,
2005). Why do labels affect performance on similarity,
categorization, induction, and individuation tasks?
According to the language-specific explanation, young
children understand that entities belong to categories and

2042

(e.g., Gelman & Markman, 1986; Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004), but overshadowing may also underlie some of the
facilitative effects of labels on categorization. In
particular, it has recently been demonstrated that labels
may facilitate category responding by overshadowing the
differences between compared entities, thus, decreasing
the discriminability of compared entities (Sloutsky,
Robinson, & Timbrook, 2005). In Sloutsky et al’s (2005)
study, children were trained on different entities that were
either accompanied by the same label, the same vowel
stream (e.g., “[ā] [ōō] [a]”), or the entities were presented
without an auditory stimulus (no auditory condition).
After training, discrimination of the trained entities was
tested and children heard no auditory input at test.
Discrimination of the trained pair dropped for those
children who heard the same label or the same vowel
stream during training, compared to children who did not
hear auditory input during the training phase.
Furthermore, these effects persisted beyond the labeling
episode and stemmed from decreased attention to
differences, as opposed to increased attention to
commonalities: discrimination of novel entities that
shared the same set of commonalities as the trained set
did not significantly decrease.
The goal of the current research was to further examine
how labels affect the discrimination of entities. In the
current task, children were trained on two different
entities and the entities were either paired with a common
label or presented in isolation (no auditory condition).
After training, children were simultaneously presented
with two visual stimuli and the task was to determine if
the two visual stimuli were exactly the same or different.
No auditory input was provided at test. It was
hypothesized that linguistic labels would attenuate visual
processing and decrease the discriminability of the
labeled entities (compared to the no auditory condition).
Furthermore, it was expected that this decrease in
discrimination would stem from decreased attention to
differences, as opposed to increased attention to the
common features.

Stimuli Visual stimuli were constructed so that all of
the images shared the same set of commonalties (see
Figure 1), whereas, there was only one feature that
distinguished V1 from V2 (e.g., tan band around the
neck) and a different feature that distinguished V1
from V3 (e.g., tan wing tip). Each visual stimulus
was approximately 8 cm x 13 cm and was presented
on a Dell Inspiron laptop computer with Presentation
software. The auditory stimulus consisted of a
nonsense label that was presented by an experimenter
in child-directed speech (i.e., “This is a gatu.”). The
label was presented for approximately 1500 ms.
Figure 1. Visual Stimuli used in Experiments 1
and 2.

V1

V2

V3

Procedure The procedure consisted of two phases: a
training phase and a testing phase. Approximately
half of the children were trained on one set of visual
stimuli (e.g., V1 and V2), and the remaining half of
the children were trained on another set (e.g., V1 and
V3). Prior to training, children were explicitly told
they were going to see different animals, and these
animals were going to be similar to each other so
they had to pay close attention because they were
going to be asked about them later. During training,
each image was presented individually six times
(1500 ms stimulus duration) for a total of 12
presentations, and the order of stimulus presentation
was randomized. Forty-two children were trained in
the common label condition (i.e., both trained stimuli
were referred to by same label) and 39 children did
not hear any auditory input during training.
After the training phase, children were presented
with 24 test trials. The testing phase was identical for
both the common label and no auditory conditions:
no labels were provided at test. During testing,
children had to determine if two simultaneously
presented images looked exactly the same or if they
looked different. Stimulus pairs were presented until
children made a response. The experimenter then

Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment 1 was to replicate Sloutsky,
Robinson, and Timbrook (2005) using different stimuli to
ensure that their findings were not stimulus-specific, and
to further examine how labels affect the discrimination of
corresponding visual input.

Method
Participants Eighty-one four-year olds (40 girls and 41
boys, M = 4.45 years, SD = .29 years) participated in this
experiment. Children were recruited through local daycare centers located in middle- and upper-middle-class
suburbs of Columbus, Ohio. The majority of children
were Caucasian.

2043

recorded children’s responses by pressing 1 of 2 buttons
on the computer. Twelve of the testing trials were same
trials in which children were presented with two identical
stimuli (e.g., V1-V1 trials). The remaining 12 trials were
different trials: Six of the different trials consisted of
simultaneously presenting the two trained stimuli (e.g.,
V1-V2 for children trained on V1-V2) and the other six
different trials consisted of pairing one of the trained
images with an untrained image (e.g., V1-V3 for children
trained on V1-V2). Recall that the untrained stimuli
shared the same set of commonalities as the trained set.
The order of test trials was randomized.
An additional six catcher trials were randomly
presented with the test trials. No children were excluded
for missing the catcher trials in the current experiment.

Figure 2. Children’s discrimination across
Condition and Trial Type in Experiment 1
No Auditory
Common Label

0.9

Hits-False Alarms

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Trained

Results and Discussion

Untrained
Trial Type

Accuracy (i.e., hits minus false alarms) on the trained and
untrained sets was calculated separately for the common
label and no auditory conditions. In the current
experiment and all following experiments, outliers (i.e.,
±2 SD of the mean) were excluded from the analyses. One
child was excluded from the current experiment. A 2
(Condition: Common Label vs. No Auditory) x 2 (Trail
Type: Trained vs. Untrained) ANOVA revealed a
significant Condition x Trial Type interaction, F (1, 79) =
10.44, p < .005, which suggests that labels had different
effects on the trained and untrained stimuli. As can be
seen in Figure 2, discriminating the trained items dropped
significantly in the label condition compared to the no
auditory condition, t (79) = 3.52, p < .001, whereas, the
effect was less pronounced for untrained stimuli (i.e.,
stimuli that shared the same set of commonalities), t (79)
= 1.76, p = .082.
The findings of Experiment 1 replicated previous
research using different stimuli (Sloutsky, Robinson, and
Timbrook, 2005), which suggests that the effects are not
stimulus-specific and are reliable across different stimulus
sets. In particular, compared to the no auditory condition,
hearing the same label associated with different entities
decreased the discriminability of these entities.
Furthermore, discrimination of entities that shared the
same set of commonalities was less likely to decrease,
which suggests that some of the effects of labels stemmed
from labels helping children overlook the differences
between the trained entities, as opposed to directing
children’s attention to the common features.
Although the current study did not assess categorization
per se, Experiment 1 demonstrates that labels may affect
performance on a variety of tasks by decreasing the
discriminability of compared entities (due to
overshadowing effects), and consequently increasing
similarity of these entities. This increased similarity, in
turn, increases the likelihood of grouping these entities
together as well as making inferences from one entity to
another.

Note: Error bars represent Standard Errors.

Experiment 2
Given previous research demonstrating that hearing a
single label associated with different entities has
vastly different effects on categorization and
individuation tasks than hearing different labels (e.g.,
Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Xu, 2002), we deemed it
necessary to manipulate the labeling context in
Experiment 2. Can the previously reported
overshadowing effects be generalized to a labeling
episode where multiple labels are presented or are the
effects more likely to occur in the presence of a
single word or single, speech-like sound (e.g.,
Sloutsky, Robinson, & Timbrook, 2005)?

Method
Participants Thirty-four four-year olds (18 girls and
16 boys, M = 4.6 years, SD = .31 years) participated
in this experiment. Three children were tested but not
included in the following analyses: Two children
missed more than two catcher trials and one child’s
data was an outlier.
Stimuli and Procedure The procedure was identical
to Experiment 1, except for one important change.
During training, the two visual stimuli that were
associated with the same label in Experiment 1, were
now associated with two different labels (e.g., V1
was referred to as “gatu” on six different occasions
and V2 was referred to as “vika” on six different
occasions).

Results and Discussion
To determine if hearing different labels associated
with different objects during the training phase

2044

affected discrimination at test, children’s accuracy on the
trained and untrained sets in the current experiment was
compared to the no auditory condition of Experiment 1
(see Figure 3). In contrast to Experiment 1, a 2
(Condition: Different Label vs. No Auditory) x 2 (Trail
Type: Trained vs. Untrained) ANOVA revealed no
significant effects or interactions, Fs < 2.18, ps > .15.
Thus, hearing different labels associated with different
entities did not significantly increase or decrease
discrimination compared to the no auditory condition.
While nonsignificant effects could stem from a variety of
factors, Experiment 2 demonstrates that not all labeling
episodes have lasting effects on a visual discrimination
task.

labels directing attention to the commonalities in the
to-be-categorized objects.
The current study provides an alternative account
that does not make the assumption the children
understand the conceptual importance of labels:
common labels may overshadow differences between
compared entities, thus, making the entities more
perceptually similar and increasing the likelihood of
grouping these entities together.
How does hearing the same label associated with
different entities affect discrimination and why do
these effects persist beyond the labeling episode? We
believe that the effects of labels in the current study
originate from two necessary conditions (a) partial
auditory overshadowing and (b) learned inattention
(e.g., Kruschke & Blair, 2000; Mackintosh, 1975;
Mackintosh & Turner, 1971). While strong
overshadowing effects would completely eliminate
visual processing, partial overshadowing effects
would allow some aspects of the visual stimuli to be
processed. Second, it is likely that the features that
are overshadowed are those features that are less
frequent in the input. Given that the distinguishing
features in the current study (e.g., colored wing tip)
were less frequent in the input, it is not surprising that
the distinguishing features were overshadowed first.
While future research will need to determine whether
effects of labeling continue to affect children’s
attention across longer delays, the current findings
suggest that the immediate effects of labeling impact
the way children perceive and discriminate objects.

Figure 3. Children’s discrimination compared to the
baseline condition from Experiment 1
No Auditory: Exp. 1
Diff erent Label: Exp. 2
1
0.9

Hits-False Alarms

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Trained

Trial Type

Acknowledgments

Untrained

This research has been supported by grants from the
National Science Foundation (REC # 0208103 and
BCS # 0078945) to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

Note: Error bars represent Standard Errors.

General Discussion

References

The results of the study point to several important
findings. First, hearing the same label associated with
different entities decreased the discriminability of these
entities. Second, these effects stemmed from labels
overshadowing the differences between the trained
entities, as opposed to increasing children’s attention to
the common features: recall that discrimination of
untrained entities that shared the same set of
commonalities did not decrease. Third, the effects of
labeling persisted beyond the labeling episode.
These findings have important implications for
understanding the mechanisms underlying the effects of
labels on categorization. Many studies have shown that
children are more likely to group two objects together if
they share the same label (e.g., Balaban & Waxman,
1997; Waxman & Booth, 2003). According to the
language-specific view, these effects stem from common

Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old
infants? Journal
of Experimental
Child
Psychology, 64, 3-26.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories
and induction in young children. Cognition, 23,
183-209.
Kruschke, J. K., & Blair, N. J. (2000). Blocking and
backward blocking involve learned inattention.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 636–645.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1975). A theory of attention:
Variations in the associability of stimuli with
reinforcement. Psychological Review, 82, 276–298.
Mackintosh, N. J. & Turner, C. (1971). Blocking as a
function of novelty of CS and predictability of
UCS. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 23, 359–366.

2045

Sloutsky, V. M., & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a
picture worth a thousand words? Preference for
auditory modality in young children. Child
Development, 74, 822-833.
Sloutsky, V. M., Robinson, C. W., & Timbrook, C.
M. (2005). Overshadowing as a mechanism
underlying the effect of labels on categorization. In
B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXVII Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, 2033-2037.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Waxman, S. R. (2003).
Links between object
categorization and naming: Origins and emergence
in human infants. In D. H. Rakison & L. M. Oakes
(Eds.), Early category and concept development:
Making sense of the blooming, buzzing confusion
(pp. 213-241). London, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Waxman, S. R., & Booth, A. E. (2003). The origins
and evolution of links between word learning and
conceptual organization: New evidence from 11month-olds. Developmental Science, 6, 130-137.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The
influences of shape similarity and shared labels on
infants’ inductive inferences about nonobvious
object properties. Child Development, 72, 16531673.
Xu, F. (2002). The role of language in acquiring object
kind concepts in infancy. Cognition, 85, 223-250.
Xu, F., Cote, M., & Baker, A. (2005). Labeling guides
object individuation in 12-month-old infants.
Psychological
Science,
16,
372-377.

Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a Picture
Worth a Thousand Words? The Flexible Nature of
Modality Dominance in Young Children. Child
Development, 75, 1850-1870.
Robinson, C. W., Howard, E. M., & Sloutsky, V. M.
(2005). Mechanisms underlying the effects of labels on
cognitive development. In B.G. Bara, L. Barsalou, &
M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the XXVII Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 18781882. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004a). Auditory
dominance and its change in the course of
development. Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Robinson, C, W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004b). The effect
of stimulus familiarity on modality dominance. In K.
Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of
the XXVI Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 1167-1172. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Lo, Y. (1999). How much does a
shared name make things similar? Part 1: Linguistic
labels and the development of similarity judgment.
Developmental Psychology, 6, 1478-1492.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar?
Linguistic labels, similarity, and the development of
inductive inference. Child Development, 72, 16951709.

2046

