UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Automatic Classification of Transitivity Alternations in Child-Directed Speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9c71t5jz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Fisher, Cynthia
Scott, Rose M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Automatic Classification of Transitivity Alternations in Child-Directed Speech
Rose M. Scott (rmscott2@uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Cynthia Fisher (clfishe@uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Abstract
Children can use the characteristic entailment patterns of verb
classes to learn new verbs (Naigles, 1996), but how do they acquire verb classes? One possibility is that surface features that
reflect argument structure can separate verb classes (Merlo &
Stevenson, 2001). We tested this hypothesis by running clustering analyses on surface features of 29 verbs extracted from a
large corpus of child-directed speech. Results suggest that animacy plays an important role in verb classification.

Introduction
The syntactic bootstrapping hypothesis (Gleitman, 1990;
Landau & Gleitman, 1985) holds that children use syntax to
guide verb learning. For a given utterance of a verb, the referential scene offers a plethora of potential meanings. Given
principled relationships between clause syntax and verb
meaning (e.g., Grimshaw, 1990; Jackendoff, 1990; Levin &
Rappaport-Hovav, 2005), the syntactic structure, or frame, in
which a verb occurs can act as a kind of linguistic “zoom
lens” that constrains those interpretations. This hypothesis has
been supported by many studies showing that children as
young as 21 months old assign different meanings to verbs
presented in different sentence structures.
For example, if children hear a new verb in a transitive sentence, they interpret the verb as referring to the action of one
participant on another; if the verb is intransitive, they interpret
it as referring to an event requiring only one participant (e.g.,
Fisher, 2002; Naigles, 1990; Yuan & Fisher, in press). Furthermore, each advance in learning the syntactic and morphological features of the native language yields new constraints
on verb learning. For example, English-learning infants as
young as 21 months old use word order in a transitive sentence to guide interpretation of a new verb (Gertner, Fisher, &
Eisengart, in press).
A single sentence frame, however, is a limited guide to
verb meaning.
First, it provides only highly abstract semantic information.
The transitive frame occurs with such disparate meanings as
He became a doctor and He shot a doctor. The verbs that
appear in this frame share, not the specifics of the events they
describe, but similar formal structure: becoming and shooting
both require two core arguments (though only one person in
the case of become). A sentence frame yields information
mainly about the number and type of arguments associated

2129

with the verb–what Grimshaw (1994) has termed its semantic
structure–rather than its semantic content. Observation of
events must provide the semantic content (see Fisher, 2000,
for a review). Experimental results suggest that 2-year-olds
are appropriately open-minded about the possible meanings
of transitive verbs: when children are presented with a novel
verb in a transitive sentence, they can interpret it as referring
to a caused-motion event (e.g., pushing) or to a simple contact
event (e.g., patting; Naigles & Kako, 1993).
Second, a single frame yields information only about the
semantic structure of the verb when used in that frame. Most
verbs occur in more than one frame, each of which results in a
different semantic structure, as in (1).
(1) a. She explained that he left.
b. She explained the problem to me.
Gleitman and colleagues have proposed that children can
gain further constraint on verb learning by appealing to the set
of subcategorization frames in which a verb appears (Gleitman et al., 2005). For example, explain occurs with sentence
complements (1a); this frame implies that one of the verb's
arguments has propositional content. Explain also occurs with
both direct and indirect objects (1b), a frame consistent with
transfer, or motion toward a goal. The combination of these
frames considerably narrows the possible meanings of explain: it is a verb describing transfer of propositional content.
But even a set of subcategorization frames can be ambiguous. Take for instance the verbs break (2) and dust (3):
(2) a. Anna broke the lamp.
b. The lamp broke.
(3) a. Anna dusted the lamp.
b. Anna dusted.
Both can be transitive and intransitive. Given only their occurrence in these two frames, a learner would have to treat
both verbs as members of a single syntactically defined class
and use world observation to infer the semantic content of
each verb in the class. The learner who does this, however,
would be missing a very useful distinction between verbs like
break and verbs like dust, which can be seen if the entailment
relations across the transitive and intransitive sentences in
each pair are taken into account.
The transitive sentence (2a) describes an event with two
parts: the application of force to the lamp and the ensuing
breaking sub-event. This sentence necessarily entails the subevent (that the lamp broke), expressed in the intransitive sentence (2b). In contrast, sentence (3a) does not describe a

complex event and entails nothing much about the lamp. Instead, it entails that the agent performed the dusting activity,
expressed in the intransitive sentence in (3b).
The argument-structure alternation shown in (2) is known
as the causal alternation; verbs participating in this alternation
have the complex internal structure of a causal event with a
result sub-event (e.g., Levin, 1993; Pinker, 1989). The alternation in (3) is the unspecified-object alternation; verbs participating in this alternation include many activity verbs (e.g.,
Levin, 1993).
Experimental evidence suggests that by 28 months of age,
children can use the characteristic entailment patterns of these
two verb classes to help identify the referent of a novel verb
(Naigles, 1996; Scott & Fisher, in progress). Given that the
two syntactic frames involved in these two alternations are
the same, how do children learn that these are two classes of
verbs?
Merlo and Stevenson (2001, henceforth M&S) proposed
that surface properties of the input could be used to classify
verbs as occurring in either the causal or unspecified-object
alternation1. Using text from the Wall Street Journal (WSJ),
they found that the two classes of verbs could be identified
with reasonable accuracy (>69%) based primarily on three
features: frequency of occurrence in the transitive frame
(transitivity), subject noun phrase animacy, and lexical overlap between the subject and object positions (causativity).
Note in examples (2-3) that two of these features in particular (animacy & causativity) should directly reflect the underlying argument structure of these verbs: Unspecified-object
verbs (3) assign the same thematic role (agent) to their subjects regardless of transitivity. Causal verbs (2), assign the
same role (theme) to the object of the transitive and to the
subject of the intransitive. The causativity measure was designed to estimate this thematic-role overlap. Similarly, the
agent subjects of unspecified-object verbs should tend to be
animate; causal verbs, in contrast, with theme subjects in intransitive uses, should have more inanimate subjects. M&S’s
results suggest that these features could play an important role
in identifying verbs that occur in the unspecified-object and
causal alternations, thus automatically dividing verbs into
usefully narrow semantic sets.
The WSJ corpus on which these results were based, however, differs greatly from casual speech to children. Comparisons of newspaper text and adult-directed conversational
speech yield different estimates of the same verbs' subcategorization probabilities, in part because verbs tend to be used in
different senses in different discourse styles (e.g., Roland &
Jurafsky, 1998). Speech to children also differs in many ways
from conversation among adults: Child-directed speech is
characterized by short sentences, repetitiveness, and simplified vocabulary, for example (e.g., Bard & Anderson, 1994;
Newport, Gleitman & Gleitman, 1977).
Could children use transitivity, animacy, and causativity to
classify verbs? To find out, we examined the distribution of

these and related features in a corpus of child-directed speech
(CDS), and used an unsupervised clustering algorithm to determine whether these distributions differentiated causal and
unspecified-object verbs in CDS.

Methods
Materials
First, we searched the CHILDES database of transcribed conversations with children (MacWhinney, 2000) for part-ofspeech tagged corpora containing parental utterances to target
children less than 30 months of age. The following 10 corpora were selected based on these criteria: Bloom 1970,
Brown, Clark, Demetras Working, Higginson, Kuczaj, New
England, Post, Suppes, and Warren-Leubecker. These corpora
contained 112,000 parental utterances. Next, we identified the
subset of these utterances that contained verbs, using CLAN
tools for searching CHILDES transcripts and relying on the
existing part-of-speech tagging as of 2/5/05. Finally, we selected the verbs that occurred more than 30 times in total and
that appeared in more than 5 different corpora. Among the
resulting set of frequent verbs, we identified 15 unspecifiedobject verbs and 14 causal verbs; these are listed in Table 1
(classification based primarily on Levin, 1993). The 12,521
utterances containing these verbs were coded using the procedures described below.
Table 1: Verbs used in the clustering experiments
Verb class
UnderstoodObject
Causal

Selected verbs
bite, draw, drink, eat, hit, play, pull, push,
read, see, throw, tickle, try, wash, write
bounce, break, change, close, fold, move,
open, pop, roll, shut, slide, spill, tear, turn

Coding
The coding was first done using the CLAN program and the
existing part-of-speech tagging. General search heuristics
were used to identify potential subjects and objects. These
heuristics also limit our assumptions about children’s ability
to track arguments across long, complex utterances. To ensure accuracy, all coded utterances were later hand checked
by the first author.
Transitivity An utterance was coded as transitive if the verb
was followed by a noun, pronoun, determiner, or any of a
set of quantifiers (some, any, all, much, more). An utterance
was coded as intransitive if the verb was followed by a
punctuation mark, a conjunction, a preposition2, a locative
phrase, another verb, or a filler (e.g., uh-oh, huh). This heuristic coding assumed that children did not yet understand
the function of “wh” words, thus coding sentences such as
“What did you break?” as intransitive utterances. In a small
proportion of the utterances the verb was followed by a part
of speech other than those mentioned above (e.g., adjectives/adverbs). These were not coded, as pilot analyses

1

M&S’s study also included a third class, induced-action verbs
that take a form of the causal alternation in which both arguments
are animate (e.g., He jumped the horse over the fence).
2130

2
Utterances containing phrasal verbs (i.e “tore up the paper”) were
hand corrected to be transitive rather than intransitive.

showed they did not reliably fall into either the transitive or
intransitive category. The final data set, after transitivity
coding, consisted of 11,780 utterances.
Animacy Each utterance was coded for subject animacy. In
addition to the overall subject animacy measure used by
M&S, we calculated separate animacy scores for transitive
and intransitive subjects. We also coded direct-object animacy. This addition was intended to approximate the causativity measure used by M&S. We reasoned that if causal alternation verbs exhibit both lower overall subject animacy
and greater subject/object lexical overlap than unspecifiedobject verbs, as M&S found, then causal verbs should have
fewer animate direct objects than unspecified-object verbs.
For these initial analyses, we used pronouns as an automatically extractable approximation of animacy (see M&S
for a similar procedure). Other analyses make clear that pronoun arguments are very common in child-directed speech;
moreover, the distribution in sentences of particular pronouns
can be used to sort verbs into different semantic classes (Laakso & Smith, 2004), and also plays an important role in defining distributional 'frequent frames' that can be used to distinguish verbs from nouns (Mintz, 2003). Pronoun arguments
that signal an animacy contrast between subject and object
also make it easier for children to parse transitive sentences,
and to generalize the transitive structure across new verbs in a
training study (Childers & Tomasello, 2001). Given all this, it
seems reasonable to assume that children know the meanings
of many pronouns from an early age.
An utterance was coded as having an animate subject if the
verb was preceded by (permitting one intervening auxiliary)
he, she, we, I, you, let’s or who. Verb-initial utterances (i.e.
imperatives) were also coded as having animate subjects.
Inanimate subjects were it, that, this, that one, this one, or
what. An utterance was coded as having an animate object if
the verb was followed by him, her, us, me, you, or who(m). If
the verb was followed by it, that, this, that one, this one, or
what, this indicated an inanimate object. These heuristics
captured 75% of the subjects and 43% of the objects in the
coded sentences.

Analyses
Each verb was assigned a relative frequency score on each
variable: Transitivity was calculated by dividing the number
of transitive utterances for each verb by the total number of
coded utterances for that verb. Overall animacy was calculated as the number of animate subjects divided by the total
number of coded subjects. Intransitive subject animacy was
the ratio of animate subjects in the intransitive frame to the
total number of coded intransitive subjects. Transitive subject
animacy was not analyzed separately because transitive subjects were almost uniformly animate. Object animacy was the
ratio of animate objects to total coded objects.
Classification In their classification studies, M&S’s machinelearning algorithm learned to classify the verbs via explicit
feedback as to the proper classification of a training subset of

2131

verbs. Supervised learning procedures of this type are generally considered a poor model for ordinary language acquisition, as children receive no direct feedback about the proper
classification of verbs they have learned. To approximate this
feature of language acquisition, we chose to classify the verbs
using k-means clustering, an algorithm that does not receive
direct feedback about correct classification. The k-means
algorithm takes as its input scores on p variables (i.e. transitivity, etc.) for n objects (i.e. verbs) and attempts to assign the
objects to k clusters. Each object is treated as a point in a pdimensional space with its location determined by its scores
on each variable. Initial divisions of this space into clusters
are iteratively reorganized to minimize the sum, over all clusters, of the within-cluster distance between each point and its
cluster center. Since k-means clustering is sensitive to the
initial partitioning of the data, for each analysis reported below the clustering procedure was repeated 100 times with
random initial clusterings and the solution with the lowest
final within-cluster distance was used. Separate k-means
analyses were conducted for each variable, as well as one
analysis combining all variables.
The k-means procedure requires that the number of clusters
be specified in advance. In the analyses reported below, the
algorithm always divided the verbs into 2 clusters. Pilot
analyses using 3 clusters produced poor results. Obviously,
children do not have a priori knowledge of the number of
classes into which they should group these verbs. How children go about discovering the correct number of classes over
diverse sets of verbs remains to be investigated in future
analyses.
Cluster evaluation Two measures were used to evaluate the
resulting clusters. For each clustering solution, an accuracy
score (Acc) was calculated by first assigning to each cluster
the class label of the majority of its members. A verb was
considered correctly classified if its actual class matched the
class label of the cluster in which it was placed. Acc was calculated as the number of verbs correctly classified divided by
the total number of verbs.
Acc scores can be relatively high for a clustering solution if
one cluster is fairly uniform, even if the other cluster is very
poor. The second evaluation metric, the adjusted Rand index
(Radj), measures the overall quality of the clustering solution
(Hubert & Arabie, 1985). This index measures the similarity
between the clustering solution and the true classification by
examining all pairwise verb comparisons and classifying
them as either agreements or disagreements. For example,
placing two unspecified-object verbs in the same cluster
would be considered an agreement, while placing them in
different clusters would be a disagreement. The adjusted
Rand index is scaled such that 1 indicates perfect agreement
between the true classification and the clustering solution,
while a value near 0 represents a random grouping (negative
values can occur for extremely poor clustering solutions).
To provide a baseline for Acc and Radj, we performed kmeans analyses on 5,000 random permutations of the data.
Acc and Radj were averaged across the 5,000 permutations to
yield a mean baseline for each score. Since different subsets
of variables might yield different baselines, this procedure

was repeated for all subsets used in the experimental analyses. Across all data sets, the mean Acc was .57 and the mean
Radj was 0.00. To assess whether a given clustering solution
represented a significant departure from baseline, we used the
set of scores resulting from the random permutations as a
reference distribution. The p-values shown in Table 3 are the
proportion of randomly generated Radj scores that were as
extreme as or more extreme than each obtained score.

Results
Table 2 shows the relative frequency scores for each variable,
separately by verb class. Causal verbs were less likely to have
animate subjects than were unspecified-object verbs
(t(27)=3.53, p<.005), as reported by M&S. The two classes of
verbs also differed strikingly in the animacy of intransitive
subjects: over half of the intransitive utterances containing
causal verbs had inanimate subjects, while those containing
unspecified-object verbs almost always had animate subjects
(t(27)=7.15, p<.001). The two classes differed only marginally in object animacy (t(27)=1.91, p=.07). In contrast to
M&S’s findings, causal and unspecified-object verbs did not
differ in transitivity in this sample.
Results of the experimental cluster analyses appear in Table
3. The clustering solution based on all 4 variables yielded a
remarkably accurate classification, grouping 26 of the 29
verbs correctly. Its Radj of .62 represents a significant improvement over baseline.
Individual feature analyses were conducted to assess the
importance of each variable to the classification. As expected
from the frequency scores, transitivity contributed little to the
classification, yielding an essentially random grouping of the
verbs. Classifications based on either overall subject animacy
or object animacy resulted in Acc scores of only .62. While
this is a 5% improvement over baseline, the p-values for the
Radj scores indicate that this improvement is not significant.
The clustering based on intransitive subject animacy performed much better, correctly classifying 25 of the 29 verbs,
just one verb fewer than the full analysis.
Table 2: Mean (SD) relative frequency scores by verb class
UnspecifiedCausal Verbs
Object Verbs
Transitivity
.70 (.20)
.67 (.21)
Subject Animacy
.86 (.12)
.98 (.05)
Intransitive Subject Animacy
.44 (.25)
.96 (.09)
Object Animacy
.15 (.20)
.34 (.32)
Table 3: Clustering results
Data set
Acc
Radj p-value
Transitivity
.55
-.02
.71
Animacy
.62
.04
.18
Intransitive
Animacy
.86
.51
.0002
Object
Animacy
.62
.03
.21
All variables
.90
.62
.0000
2132

With the exception of the full analysis, no other possible
combination of the variables yielded a result better than the
intransitive subject animacy classification.

Discussion
The results of this study demonstrate that surface features can
be used to distinguish causal from unspecified-object verbs in
child-directed speech with high accuracy. In addition, the
individual feature analyses, while they deviated in their details from those reported by M&S, revealed an important underlying similarity in the nature of the surface features that
were informative in very different corpora.
The differences first: M&S predicted and found that transitivity was useful in the classification of unspecified-object
and causal verbs. Causal verbs occurred less often in the transitive frame. M&S predicted this outcome on markedness
grounds: Since causal alternation verbs encode in their transitive frame complex events consisting of action and result subevents, while unspecified-object verbs do not, they argued
that the causal verbs should be used transitively less often.
We found no such tendency in our data. In our corpora, both
causal and unspecified-object verbs demonstrated equally
high rates of transitive use. As a result, transitivity was not
useful in classifying the verbs in our data set.
This disparity likely results from differences between the
WSJ and our CHILDES corpora. As mentioned previously,
Roland and Jurafsky (1998) have found that subcategorization differences across corpora can be partially attributed to
differences in the distribution of verb senses within those
corpora. For instance, in our data the verb fold was used primarily in the context of doing laundry (e.g. “Let’s fold it [the
towel] nice and neat.”) and therefore the uses of this verb
were predominantly transitive (69%). M&S reported that fold
was used transitively only 23% of the time in their WSJ data.
It is unlikely that the WSJ contains the sense of fold that pertains to laundry. Instead, in the WSJ fold is probably used to
refer to things like the collapse of a corporation (e.g. “After
serious financial trouble, the company folded.”). Although we
did not code for verb sense, it seems likely that differences in
discourse context and style between the two corpora led to
many sense differences like those seen with fold and that
these different senses gave rise to the different transitivity
patterns.
M&S also found that the animacy of the subject noun
phrase aided in classifying the two groups of verbs. Due to
inherent differences in argument structure (see above), the
causal verbs displayed lower subject animacy than the unspecified-object verbs. Although this difference was also present in our data, it was not sufficiently large to classify the
verbs properly. The high rate of transitivity in our data likely
contributed to this difference between our findings and
M&S’s. While there is a principled reason for these verbs to
differ in the animacy of their intransitive subjects, the same is
not true of the transitive subjects: Both groups assign an agent
to the subject of the transitive, so transitive subjects should be
largely animate, regardless of verb class. This prediction was
borne out in our data. Since there was a higher percentage of

transitive utterances in our data set than in M&S’s, any difference between the groups was obscured by the uniformly
animate transitive subjects.
Once the transitive subjects were removed, the difference
between the two groups became apparent. Intransitive subject
animacy classified most of the verbs correctly, performing
much better than overall subject animacy did. Thus, animacy
information proves to be a robust indicator of verb class,
holding up across two very different sets of corpora. While
our analysis required a more sensitive measure, intransitive
subject animacy, the conclusion remains as Merlo and Stevenson predicted: Surface patterns of animacy reflect the underlying argument structure of these verb classes.

Implications for verb learning
Our results suggest that animacy information could provide
children with a highly informative cue about a verb’s class.
Can children track animacy information of this type? Many
researchers have documented that subjects are preferentially
animate (e.g. Bock, Loebell, & Morey, 1992) and that children are sensitive to this tendency from very early in life.
Two- and 4-year-olds more easily comprehend transitive sentences with animate than with inanimate subjects (Corrigan,
1988). A similar bias is seen in production, where animate
subjects facilitate children’s use of the passive construction
(Lempert, 1984). These studies demonstrate that children are
sensitive to animacy information present in the input and they
expect that subjects should be animate. Given this expectation, the occurrence of an inanimate entity in subject position
might be particularly salient.
Recent work also shows that children store semanticallyladen combinatorial information for individual verbs, and
retrieve that information when they identify a verb in the input. When children hear a semantically restrictive verb (e.g.
eat), they quickly locate a potential direct object of that verb
(Chang & Fernald, 2003). Similarly, 2- and 2.5-year-olds
used knowledge of the semantic restrictions of a verb to learn
a novel noun (Goodman, McDonough, & Brown, 1998).
When presented with an array of objects and the sentence
“Mommy feeds the ferret,” children correctly assumed that
ferret referred to the only animate entity present. Taken together with the evidence discussed above, these findings suggest that children can track animacy information, and more
specific semantic restrictions, about particular arguments of
individual verbs.
The problem of verb sense Grimshaw (1994) points out that
although there is a principled relation between a particular
verb sense and the set of frames associated with that sense,
there is no clear relationship between a verb stem (combining
all its senses) and its full set of subcategorization frames. As a
result, subcategorization information provides useful cues to
verb meaning only if it is tracked separately for each sense of
a verb. Grimshaw therefore predicts that learning that depends on subcategorization information will be highly errorful.
Our results suggest that this is not necessarily the case,
given the statistics of child-directed speech. The coding pro2133

cedures conflated all senses of the verb into a single representation. On Grimshaw’s account, collapsing across senses in
this fashion should have produced very poor learning, yet our
analysis successfully classified a large majority of the verbs.
Further inspection of the data reveals that for many verbs, one
sense was very frequent, dominating all other senses (e.g.,
fold, see above). For other verbs, such as change, several
senses of the verb occurred throughout the corpora (e.g. “It
[the picture] changes when you move it.” vs. “Shall I change
your diaper?”), but the subcategorization profiles across
senses were complementary rather than contradictory (i.e. one
sense occurred primarily in the intransitive, while the other
occurred in the transitive). Both of these patterns resulted in a
successful classification.
The three verbs that were never correctly classified (move,
slide, turn) appeared to have different senses that behaved
differently. One such verb, turn, was frequently used in an
activity sense (e.g. “You’re turning!” meaning “turning yourself”). Since this intransitive use occurred with an animate
subject, turn was classified with the unspecified-object verbs
rather than the causal verbs in all analyses. Though this
analysis correctly grouped these activity uses of turn with
other activity verbs in the unspecified-object class, it failed to
reflect the fact that turn also has a causal sense. The fact that
this only posed a problem for 3 of the 29 verbs, however,
suggests that children could use subcategorization information to learn the meanings of many common verbs without
requiring prior knowledge of verb sense.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH grant HD044458, and by
the Research Board of the University of Illinois.

References
Bard, E. G., & Anderson, A. H. (1994). The unintelligibility
of speech to children: Effects of referent availability. Journal of Child Language, 21, 623-648.
Bloom, L., Hood, L., & Lightbown, P. (1974). Imitation in
language development: If, when and why. Cognitive Psychology, 6, 380–420.
Bloom, L., Lightbown, P., & Hood, L. (1975). Structure and
variation in child language. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, 40, (Serial No. 160).
Bock, J. K., Loebell, H., & Morey, R. (1992). From conceptual roles to structural relations: Bridging the syntactic
cleft. Psychological Review, 99, 150-171.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: The early stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chang, E. & Fernald, A. (2003). Use of semantic knowledge
in speech processing by 26-month-olds. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 68.
Childers, J. B., & Tomasello, M. (2001). The role of pronouns in young children’s acquisition of the English transitive construction. Developmental Psychology, 37, 739-748.
Clark, E. V. (1982). The young word maker: A case study of
innovation in the child’s lexicon. In E. Wanner & L. R.
Gleitman (Eds.), Language acquisition: The state of the

art. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Corrigan, R. (1988). Children’s identification of actors and
patients in prototypical and nonprototypical sentence types.
Cognitive Development, 3, 285-297.
Demetras, M. (1989). Working parents’ conversational responses to their two-year-old sons. University of Arizona.
Fisher, C. (2000). From form to meaning: A role for structural
analogy in the acquisition of language. In H. W. Reese
(Ed.), Advances in child development and behavior. New
York: Academic Press.
Fisher, C. (2002). Structural limits on verb mapping: the role
of abstract structure in 2.5-year-olds’ interpretations of
novel verbs. Developmental Science, 5, 56-65.
Gertner, Y., Fisher, C., & Eisengart, J. (in press) Learning
words and rules: Abstract knowledge of word order in early
sentence comprehension. Psychological Science.
Gleitman, L. R. (1990). The structural sources of verb meanings. Language Acquisition, 1, 3-55.
Gleitman, L. R., Cassidy, K., Nappa, R., Papafraqou, A., &
Trueswell, J. C. (2005). Hard Words. Language Learning
and Development, 1, 23-64.
Goodman, J. C., McDonough, L., & Brown, N. B. (1998).
The role of semantic context and memory in the acquisition
of novel nouns. Child Development, 69, 1330-1344.
Grimshaw, J. (1990). Argument structure. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Grimshaw, J. (1994). Lexical reconciliation. Lingua, 92, 411430.
Higginson, R. P. (1985). Fixing-assimilation in language
acquisition. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Washington
State University.
Hubert, L., & Arabie, P. (1985). Comparing partitions. Journal of Classification, 2, 193-218.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Kuczaj, S. A. (1986). General developmental patterns and
individual differences in the acquisition of copula and auxiliary be forms. First Language, 6, 111–117.
Laakso, A., & Smith, L. (2004). Pronouns predict verb meanings in child-directed speech. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner &
T. Regier (eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Landau, B., & Gleitman, L. R. (1985). Language and experience: Evidence from the blind child. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lempert, H. (1984). Topic as a starting point for syntax.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 49.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations: A

2134

preliminary investigation. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Levin, B., & Rappaport-Hovav, M. (2005). Argument realization. New York: Cambridge University Press.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Merlo, P. & Stevenson, S. (2001). Automatic verb classification based on statistical distributions of argument structure.
Computational Linguistics, 27, 373-408.
Mintz, T. H. (2003). Frequent frames as a cue for grammatical categories in child-directed speech. Cognition, 90,91117.
Naigles, L. (1990). Children use syntax to learn verb meanings. Journal of Child Language, 17, 357-374.
Naigles, L. R. (1996). The use of multiple frames in verb
learning via syntactic bootstrapping. Cognition, 58, 221251.
Naigles, L. & Kako, E. (1993). First contact in verb acquisition: Defining a role for syntax. Child Development, 64,
1665-1687.
Newport, E. L., Gleitman, H., & Gleitman, L. R. (1977).
Mother, I'd rather do it myself: Some effects and noneffects
of maternal speech style. In C. E. Snow, & C. A. Ferguson,
Talking to children: language input and acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ninio, A., Snow, C., Pan, B., & Rollins, P. (1994). Classifying communicative acts in children’s interactions. Journal
of Communications Disorders, 27, 157-188.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and cognition. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Post, K. (1994). Negative evidence. In J. Sokolov & C. Snow
(Eds.), Handbook of Research in Language Development
Using CHILDES. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Roland, D., & Jurafsky, D. (1998). Computing verbal valence
frequencies: corpora versus norming studies. Poster session presented at the CUNY sentence processing conference, Santa Monica, CA.
Suppes, P. (1974). The semantics of children’s language.
American Psychologist, 29, 103– 114.
Warren-Leubecker, A. (1982). Sex differences in speech to
children. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Georgia Institute of Technology.
Yuan, S., & Fisher, C. (in press). "Really, he blicked the
cat?": 2-year-olds learn distributional facts about verbs in
the absence of a referential context. Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development. Boston, MA: Cascadilla Press.

