UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Awareness Yet Underestimation of Distractors in Feature Searches

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1mr7v0tj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Cassenti, Daniel N.
Ghirardelli, Thomas G.
Kelley, Troy D.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Awareness yet Underestimation of Distractors in Feature Searches
Daniel N. Cassenti (dcassenti@arl.army.mil)
U.S. Army Research Laboratory, AMSRD-ARL-HR-SE
Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21005 USA

Troy D. Kelley (tkelley@arl.army.mil)
U.S. Army Research Laboratory, AMSRD-ARL-HR-SE
Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21005 USA

Thomas G. Ghirardelli (tghirard@goucher.edu)
Goucher College, HS 117
Baltimore, MD 21204 USA
McCarly, 2001; Shore & Klein, 2000). In these studies,
the dependent measure was the number of distractors
revisited during a visual search task. In all of these
studies, researchers have found that participants do revisit
distractors during a search task, but this has been
interpreted differently depending on the theoretical stance
of the researcher. While Peterson et al. (2001) noted that
“the pattern of revisitation did not fit the predictions of
the memoryless search model,” Horowitz and Wolfe
(2003) have claimed that revisitation provides evidence
for the claim that, “visual search has no memory.”
Theoretical viewpoint notwithstanding, it does seem
doubtful that participants would not notice distractors at
all, even in a feature search. We questioned the
connection between no difference in response time with
additional distractors and a supposed lack of awareness
for distractors. We presented participants with feature
searches and occasionally asked follow-up questions
about the display to probe the nature of memory for
distractors. Most important of these questions was asking
for an estimate of the number of the distractor items.
Assuming that participants would say there were
more than zero distractors, these estimates of quantity
were tested for whether or not participants simply guessed
or whether they drew their estimates from a particular sort
of representation. If participants tended to guess the
number of distractors then this suggests that they had
virtually no awareness of the distractors. We predicted
that participants would not guess the number of
distractors.
The numerosity question was designed to provide a
good measure of the degree of awareness for the
distractors and according to Weber’s Law (see Falmagne,
1985), people’s estimates of quantity or time should
approximate a normal distribution centered around zero
and therefore will be equally likely to respond with
underestimates as overestimates. If participants tend to
lean toward underestimation or overestimation then they
would violate Weber’s Law and additional factors would
be necessary to explain the inequity in under and
overestimates.

Abstract
Feature search studies typically address the speed and
accuracy of identifying a target item while dismissing
attention focused on distractors. In the studies presented
here, the level of attention focused on distractors is
measured in a feature search task by occasionally asking
participants how many items appeared in the search
display. Results show some awareness for number of
distractors; however, participants tended to underestimate
the number of items. Results from two of the studies
suggest that individuating distractors from one another and
not viewing the entire display contribute to the
underestimation effect.
Keywords: Perception; Visual Search; Attention; Memory;
Psychology.

Visual Search Studies
A large body of research addressing visual search (see
Wolfe, 1998, for a review) has established an impressive
catalog of data on target searching and target finding.
When people engage in a feature search, they do not need
to check every distractor and have equally fast response
times regardless of number of distractors. Treisman and
Gelade (1980) refer to this phenomenon as the pop-out
effect because the results imply that the target “pops-out”
of the display and is immediately found. Alternatively,
conjunctive searches (i.e., trying to discover a target that
has two properties common to the distractors) are
typically slower and are slowed further by an increase in
the number of distractors. Researchers (e.g., Treisman &
Gelade, 1980) attribute this slowed processing to
checking each distractor until the target is found. Each
check on a distractor is fast, but as more checks
accumulate, the overall response time increases.
Using the visual search paradigm, Wolfe and colleagues
(1999) have developed the “inattentional amnesia
hypothesis,” which purports that “unattended visual
stimuli may be seen, but will be instantly forgotten.” In
contrast, other researchers have found support for the
conclusion that there is memory during a visual search.
(Kristjansson, 2000; Peterson, Kramer, Wang, Irwin, &
1086

target-absent) was initially selected randomly with the
condition that each type represented half of all trials (and
when a question referred to a target, it was also a targetpresent condition). The order of trials was randomized
and then remained the same for each participant.
Question responses were in multiple choice format. For
the number question, the five options were 1-10, 11-20,
21-30, 31-40, and 41-50. The search screens before the
quantity question had 5, 15, 25, 35, or 45 total distractors
and had fifteen trials each.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 tested the hypothesis that distractors in a
feature search receive no attention. Experiment 1 also
checked the type of error made when judging item
quantity.

Method
Twenty participants engaged in a series of feature (color)
searches with between 3 and 50 items in each condition.
Figure 1 displays the feature search screenshot from
Experiment 1. The target differed from the distractors in
two dimensions – color (blue target and red distractors)
and shape (X in the center of targets and circle in center
of distractors). Though only color was emphasized, two
dimensional differences is traditional for feature searches
to ensure that the target and distractors are distinct from
one another.
Pretests confirmed that these targetdistractor differences produced the traditional pop-out
search effects.
Participants viewed the computer screen with 14.5 inch
width and 11 inch height from a chin rest which was 16.5
inches from the screen. Targets and distractors could
appear in any position on the screen and the screen
subtended an 18.4o angle from the chin rest.
The participants were instructed to fix their eyes on a
cross in the center of the screen. After the fixation, a
display of Army symbols was presented and the
participants were instructed to press the “1” button if the
target was present and the “5” button if the target was
absent. They used an E-Prime Serial Response Box to
input all responses. They were also instructed that a
question about the display may or may not appear after
this task.
There were a total of 1200 trials per participant and the
entire experiment was divided into four sessions with 300
trials per participant. Overall, there were 300 trials in
which a question was displayed and 900 trials with no
question.
Every trial began with a black Courier New font 18
point plus sign on a white background as a fixation point.
The fixation point was displayed for 2000 milliseconds
(ms) and was replaced by a scatter of three to forty-nine
non-overlapping red Army symbols, in a frame with a
width and height of 27 pixels (though the height of each
item was somewhat smaller than the frame). They were
also instructed to make their visual search response both
quickly and accurately. If responses took more than 2000
ms, participants were told to work more quickly on future
trials. Accuracy and response time feedback immediately
followed the response and was displayed for 100 ms.
Participants were instructed to answer the questions as
accurately as possible, but were given no specific
response time instructions and were given no feedback on
their responses to questions.
All participants received thirty practice trials in their
first session and one practice trial for each of the
remaining three sessions. Type of trial (target-present or

Figure 1. A typical visual search display in Experiment 1.
Arrow points to target that was a different color and
internal shape than the distractors.

Results
After removing all practice trials, all inaccurate visual
search responses (1.9% of trials), and responses that took
longer than 2000 ms (1.0% of trials, used because feature
searches are typically much faster than two seconds),
97.2% of all trials remained. The data showed the typical
pop-out effect. The average search response time was
642 ms which did not increase with more distractors (a
characteristic property of feature searches).
After determining that participants were indeed
performing a true feature search, the first test was to
determine if participants were merely guessing the
number of distractors. In order to make a guess, the
participants could choose any one of five options. The
midpoint of each option was used to compute the absolute
value of the difference from correct (e.g., selecting “11 to
20,” when the number of items is 5 would be 10 away
from correct). A probability value was derived for each
difference value given the number of items that actually
appeared. The probability of answering correctly was
multiplied by its corresponding difference score and
resulted in an average guess difference of 16. A onesample t-test of average difference from correct (mean of
10.44) found a significant difference from 16, t(19) =
10.05, p < .001, indicating that participants did not merely
guess the number of items in the display.
Chi-square tests were run to check whether participants
showed a tendancy to under or overestimate the number
1087

of distractors. In all but the 5 and 45 distractor
conditions, there were chances to both underestimate and
overestimate when making an error. When there were 15
distractors, there was one option that would result in
underestimation and three options that would result in
overestimation, leaving the probability to underestimate at
0.25 and overestimate at 0.75. The reverse was true for
35 distractors and with 25 distractors; the chance for
either error was 0.50. More frequent underestimating
than expected was found with 15, 25, and 35 distractors
with a p-value of 0.001: χ2(1) = 105.6, χ2(1) = 138.6, and
χ2(1) = 71.5, respectively. These tests provided evidence
that participants tend to underestimate the number of
distractors during a feature search.

the distractors. In order to individuate items, the
background space may be a better indicator of quantity.
Therefore, smaller items may show less underestimation
and larger items may show more because the small
distractors are more readily distinguished, or individuated,
from each other that the large distractors. Figure 2 shows
the relative differences in background color between the
smallest and largest sizes.

Method
Twenty participants participated in a visual search
much like in Experiment 1. In Experiment 2, the number
or trials was reduced to 400 and there was an added size
variable with three levels. Small items were 14 pixels
(long and wide), medium items were 27 pixels, and large
items were 40 pixels. There were 75 total trials which
asked for an estimate of item quanity, including 25 trials
for each level of size and among sizes, 5 trials for each of
5, 15, 25, 35, and 45 distractor conditions. Figure 2
displays a small and large search display (medium is
represented in Figure 1).

Discussion
The results indicate that, as a by-product of feature
search, some attention is devoted to distractors. However,
participants tended to underestimate the number of
distractors in the feature search. We pursued three
possible causes of the underestimation effect. First,
perhaps participants judge the quantity of distractors
based on how much colored area is created by the
distractors compared to the white space background.
Second, perhaps participants judge the quantity of items
based on how much background color separates the items.
Evidence for this hypothesis materialized in Experiment 1
- when the display became more crowded with distractors,
underestimates increased. Third, the target’s pop-out
effect caused the fovea to take the shortest path from
fixation to target (Findlay, 1997), thereby allowing
attention to focus on only a small portion of the screen. 1

Experiment 2
Experiments 2 and 3 were devoted to understanding the
underestimation effect from Experiment 1. Weber’s law
(see Falmagne, 1985) suggests that when estimating
frequencies, people and animals approximate with errors
that reflect an equal distribution of underestimations and
overestimations.
One explanation for the underestimation in Experiment
1 is that the estimation is based on the amount of colored
area from the distractors versus the amount of white
spaced background color. If the distractors are bigger
than in Experiment 1 and therefore cover more of the
screen, perhaps participants would estimate that there
were more distractors; this would result in less
underestimation or possibly overestimation. According to
this hypothesis, overestimation would increase when the
size of the distractors decreased from Experiment 1.
The reverse situation may also be true. Participants
may rely more on the amount of whitespace background
area between items than the amount of color-filled area of

Figure 2. Example displays with the same number of
distractors for small items (top) and large items (bottom).
The arrows point to the target in each example.

Results
1

A fourth possible explanation is that because search time was
high for small items, more search time reduced underestimates.
However, an experiment not reported here opposes this theory.

All practice trials were excluded from all analyses.
Also, all trials in which the search task took longer than
1088

entire display (e.g., more time to view the display may
allow perception of more distractors).
In a feature search, the participant’s task is to determine
whether the target item is or is not in the display.
Participants find the target in a feature search so quickly
that they may press the button before allowing enough
time for the visual system to see the entire display. If the
participant views only a portion of the display, then they
will also not include the unviewed distractors as part of
their number estimate and will tend to underestimate.
This hypothesis was the basis of Experiment 3. If
participants move their eyes directly from fixation to
target as suggested by Findlay (1997), then people should
view less of the display when the target is closer to the
starting fixation point and the eye traverses over a smaller
portion of the screen. We therefore manipulated the
radius of the position of the target in Experiment 3 to
include near, middle, and far distances.

2000 ms were removed from all analyses. These trials
comprised 0.8% of all trials. All incorrect search trials
were also removed from all further analyses, which was
an additional 2.4% of trials.
Just as in Experiment 1, response time did not change
with the number of distractors. However, a one-way
ANOVA showed a significant difference among the size
conditions, F(2, 38) = 41.38, MSE = 272.7, p < 0.001.
Follow-up t-tests showed that small (720 ms) was slower
than both medium (690 ms), t(19) = 6.63, SEM = 4.58, p <
0.001, and large, t(19) = 8.01, SEM = 5.85, p < 0.001, and
that medium was slower than large (673 ms), t(19) = 3.19,
SEM = 5.16, p = 0.005.
Signed error was used to determine varying degrees of
underestimation among the levels of the size variable.
Signed error was calculated by subtracting the correct
answer from the participant’s response (e.g., estimating
25 distractors when there are 45 distractors presented is a
-20 signed error). The ANOVA for signed error revealed
a significant difference in size, F(2, 38) = 29.51, MSE =
3.52, p < 0.001. Follow-up t-tests revealed differences
between small (-3.22) and medium (-5.46) and between
medium and large (-7.78). Chi-square tests also revealed
that the medium and large sizes tended towards more
underestimates than overestimates (identical procedure to
the chi-square test of Experiment 1), in all but the 15
distractor case of the medium distractors at a minimum of
p < 0.05 (χ2(1) = 3.51, χ2(1) = 7.69, and χ2(1) = 18.30, for
15, 25, and 35 distractors of the medium size, respectively
and χ2(1) = 19.20, χ2(1) = 53.93, and χ2(1) = 24.73 for 15,
25, and 35 distractors of the large size, respectively. The
small size did not pass the critical chi-square value of
3.84 with any of the interpretable number conditions,
χ2(1) = 0.027, χ2(1) = 0.087, and χ2(1) = 2.48 for 15, 25,
and 35 distractors, respectively.

Method
Nineteen participants participated in Experiment 3,
which was a variation of Experiment 2. Instead of
multiple sizes, all items were the medium size of
Experiment 2, but there were three distances of the target
from fixation. Targets in the near condition were 0 to 30
pixels away from the position that a fixation point was in
prior to presentation of the search display. Targets in the
middle condition were 90 to 105 pixels from fixation and
in the far condition they were 180 to 195 pixels from
fixation.

Results
First, all practice trials were excluded from all analyses.
Also, all trials in which the search task took longer than
2000 ms were removed from all analyses and comprised
3.2% of all trials. Inaccurate search trials were also
removed from all trials and comprised 5.4% of trials.
As in Experiments 1 and 2, there was no trend for
slowing of response time with more distractors. Unlike
the size variable in Experiment 2, search response time
did not alter due to distance condition.
The ANOVA for signed error revealed a significant
difference in distance, F(2, 34) = 4.20, MSE = 1.75, p =
0.023. Follow-up t-tests revealed differences between
near (-4.79) and far (-3.70) and between middle (-4.83)
and far. Chi-square tests also revealed that all three
distances with 25 and 35 distractors showed significantly
more underestimations than expected (though not in any
distance condition for 15 distractors).

Discussion
Results of Experiment 2 showed a greater response time
when items were small and fewer underestimates when
items were small. Together these results point to two
explanations of the underestimation effect. One is that
smaller items are more readily individuated based on the
amount of whitespace background area separating items
from one another and the second is that higher search
response times for smaller items allow more time for
viewing more of the display and hence perception of more
items that can later be included in an estimate of
numerosity.

Experiment 3

Discussion

Experiment 2 showed that the size of the items is a factor
in the underestimation effect: The larger the distractors
and the less blank space, the less well initial distractors
can be individuated, which leads to less accurate
estimations and greater underestimation. Experiment 3
goes on to address the question of whether
underestimation might also be caused by not viewing the

Results of Experiment 3 showed no difference in
search accuracy or response time. However, a greater
underestimation effect when the target is close to
fixation suggest that when search can be completed
without scanning the entire display, underestimation

1089

underestimate quantity when the target was further from
initial fixation, thus allowing participants to view more of
the screen and include more distractors in their estimate
of quantity.
Together, the three experiments establish the
phenomena of not guessing distractor number in feature
searches, but still underestimating the quantity. The two
explanations of underestimation with evidence were that
participants have difficulty individuating items and that
they may not have viewed the entire display (because of
target distance or too little time). However, these two
hypotheses essentially reduce to one: underestimation is
reduced to the extent that individuals have the opportunity
and do view separate distractors. If the perceptual system
naturally groups proximal items together, then the
individual does not view separate distractors. If the target
is found without scanning the entire display, then some of
the items are not viewed and will not be included in an
estimate of quantity.
We view the feature search process as being heavily
influenced by the goals of the search, and that attention
can be distributed across a wide area depending on the
task. We also agree with Most, Scholl, Clifford, and
Simons (2005) that results from previous pop out searches
are “insufficient to infer automatic attention capture.”
Most et al. (2005) go on to note that “because the
observer is actively looking for the target, his or her
attention is presumably broadly and purposefully
distributed throughout the display.”
Our research
supports this assertion.
Perhaps the terms unattended and inattention are
misleading. Indeed, even the definition of attention has
sometimes been an area of debate (see Fernandez-Duque
& Johnson, 1999).
Furthermore, the definition of
inattention has also been a matter of debate and,
“establishing an operationally defined domain of
‘unattended’ would be liberating” (Moore Grosjean, &
Lleras, 2003). Our research indicates that any operational
definition of attention should include the postulate that
attention is not an absolute binary value, but rather
attention is a diffuse construct that can be distributed
across a wide area of stimuli. Wolfe’s original Visual
Search model, included aspects of parallel processing in
visual search (Wolfe, 1989) and if one accepts the idea of
limited attention during parallel processing, then Wolfe’s
Visual Search model would accommodate our data.
However, in later versions of the Visual Search model
(Wolfe, 1999), Wolfe replaced “parallel and series” terms
describing the search with “efficient and inefficient”; and
it is unclear whether an “inefficient” search can still
include limited attention. Our data indicates that an
inefficient search can still include limited attention.
The tendency to underestimate also presents a challenge
to Weber’s Law (Falmagne, 1985) which suggests that
when estimating quantity, people and animals are equally
likely to under and overestimate. However, this challenge
is short-lived when one considers that the variables that

results from not perceiving or not focusing on the entire
display.

General Discussion
Traditional accounts of feature search, in which people
attempt to find an object within an array of objects that do
not share the target’s one critical property (though the
targets and distractors differed in both color and shape in
these experiments, participants were only told to look for
a different color) suggest that distractors are not attended
and thus fall into the dubious category of “unattended”
items. The preceding experiments show that participants
do attend to distractors in a feature search with enough
attention to estimate the number of distractors. Of interest,
the estimates of distractors do not follow Weber’s Law,
instead of a normal distribution around a mean as
Weber’s Law would predict, participants estimates are
skewed toward underestimation.
Experiment 1 revealed that participants were not
guessing the number of distractors and the numerosity
aspect of the distractors was attended to in some fashion
and contributed to a memory representation. Further, it
also revealed that participants tended to underestimate the
number of distractors. Three hypotheses emerged to
explain this underestimation effect. First, participants
might judge the relative proportion of background to item
color and judge there to be fewer items because of the
greater proportion of background color. Second, the
amount of background may conversely help participants
by more definitively individuating distractors from one
another. Third, participants may view only a portion of
the screen and therefore do not include all distractors in
their estimate of quantity. Feature searches are typically
quick, allowing minimal time to view the entire screen
and Findlay (1997) found that participants’ eyes move
directly from the fixation point to the target.
Experiment 2 tested the first two hypotheses. Targets
and distractors appeared in three different sizes: small,
medium, and large. If frequency of underestimates was
higher for small items this would have favored the
hypothesis that people judge quantity based on the
relative proportion of foreground to background (the first
hypothesis, above). The results favored the second
hypothesis: The frequency of underestimates increased
when the items were large suggesting that judgments of
quantity were based on the ability to individuate items
because there is less background between larger items.
Experiment 3 shifted the focus to the third hypothesis:
participants might underestimate because they do not
view the entire display. Feature searches are typically
quick and accurate giving the illusion that targets pop-out
at viewers. This suggests that feature searches may be
over too quickly and do not allow viewing of the entire
display. If participants do not view the entire display,
then they would also not include unviewed distractors in
memories through which they judge item quantity.
Experiment 3 showed that participants were less likely to
1090

Findlay, J. M. (1997). Saccade target selection during
visual search. Vision Research, 37, 617-631.
Horowitz, T. S. & Wolfe, J. M. (2003). Memory for
rejected distractors in visual search. Visual Cognition
10, 257-298.
Kristjansson, A. (2000). In search of remembrance:
evidence for memory in visual search. Psychological
Science, 11, 328-332.
Most, S. B, Scholl, B. J., Clifford, E. R., & Simons, D. J.
(2005). What you see is what you set: Sustained
inattentional blindness and the capture of awareness.
Psychological Review, 112, 217-242.
Moore, C. M., Grosjean, M. & Lleras, A. (2003). Using
inattentional blindness as an operational definition of
unattended: The case of surface completion. Visual
Cognition, 10, 299-318.
Peterson, M. S., Kramer, A. F., Wang, W. X. F., Irwin, D.
E., & McCarley, J. S.(2001). Visual search has
memory. Psychological Science, 12, 287-292.
Shore, D., & Klein, R. M. (2000). The effects of scene
inversion on change blindness. Journal of General
Psychology, 127, 27-43.
Treisman, A.M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A featureintegration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology,
12, 97-136.
Wolfe, J.M. (1998). Visual Search. In H. Pashler (Ed.),
Attention. Hove, England: Erlbaum.
Wolfe, J.M. (1999). Inattentional amnesia. In V. Coltheart
(Ed.) Fleeting Memories (pp. 71-94). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Wolfe, J.M. (1989). Guided Search: An alternative to the
Feature Integration Model for Visual Search. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Performance and
Perception, 15, 419-433.

affected the frequency of underestimates did not generally
affect accuracy. If participants individuated or perceived
more distractors, they may have shifted their responses
closer to the correct quantity, but they did not reduce the
variability in their estimates that determined the number
of errors, they simply shifted the mean of the number of
distractors to a lower criterion.

Conclusions
The study was originally designed to test whether a
degree of awareness exists for distractors in the context of
a feature search. This test confirmed out suspicions of the
misuse of inattention, but a tendency to underestimate
quantity was also discovered. Further experimentation
showed that participants judged quantity based on their
ability to individuate items from one another and the
opportunity to view the entire display. As a whole, these
results could bring research focus back to a previously
established hypothesis that distractors in a feature search
receive no attention.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Jean Breitenbach, Mike
Byrne, Todd Horowitz, and Dallas Johnson for their
contributions to this research.

References
Falmagne, J-C. (1985). Elements of psychophysical
theory. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fernandez-Duque, D., & Johnson, M.L. (1999). Attention
metaphors: How metaphors guide the cognitive
psychology of attention. Cognitive Science: A
Multidisciplinary Journal, 23, 83-116.

1091

