UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cartesian 'Ideas' and the First Cognitive Revolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2mw4f2r9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Slezak, Peter

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cartesian ‘Ideas’ and the First (C17th) Cognitive Revolution
Peter Slezak (p.slezak@unsw.edu.au)
Program in Cognitive Science,
School of History & Philosophy of Science
University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052 AUSTRALIA
of mental representation. Noting that it has received very little
attention, Yolton characterizes this significatory relation as a
“curious” and “somewhat obscure” doctrine which turns the
conventional account on its head (1996, 73). Yolton writes:

Abstract
Jerry Fodor (2003) sees Hume’s Treatise as the foundational
document of cognitive science, though he concedes that
“Descartes got there first.” However, Hume’s “Cartesianism” is
an ambiguous inheritance since Hume’s representational
account (and Fodor’s) is closer to Malebranche’s version than
Descartes’ own. Descartes shared the ‘pragmatism’ and ‘direct
realism’ of Arnauld and later Reid – the doctrine that Fodor
sees as “the defining catastrophe” in recent philosophy of mind.
Since Putnam (1999) and others defend this Arnauld-Reid view
today, there has been less progress since the 17th Century than
Fodor suggests. I defend Descartes’ conception of
representation against misunderstandings that illuminate issues
still at the forefront of debate in cognitive science today. For
example, despite the wide currency of Dennett’s term,
Descartes was not guilty of the ‘Cartesian Theater’ fallacy and,
indeed, in his Dioptrics explicitly argued against a conception
of representation that would require the notorious homunculus
– in the Malebranchean Theater.

Descartes’s account of physical motions as signs is such a
startling notion that one wonders about its antecedents.
Philosophers before Descartes talked of signs, but I am not
aware of any who reversed the normal sign relation. (1996, 190)

In his chapter on ‘The Semantic Relation,’ Yolton reports
Descartes’ account of perception in Le Monde, taken to
illustrate this “second interactive relation, the semantic or
significatory relation.” Yolton distinguished this from the
more familiar representative relation between an idea and its
object, that is, the standard conception of intentionality
associated with the sense and reference of symbols. In
explaining the novel conception, Yolton cites Descartes’
comparison of this new natural reverse-sign relation with the
way in which tears and smiles convey sadness and joy, the
point being that in both cases the signs perform their function
despite failing to resemble that which they signify. Yolton
says of Descartes suggestion:

Not Much of a Revolution?
Jerry Fodor (2003, 2) notes that a shift in philosophical
fashions has permitted appreciating Hume more as a
psychologist than as a philosopher in the traditional sense
concerned with ‘conceptual analysis.’ However, Hume is
neither alone, nor the most aggrieved victim of such ‘whig’
history. Notably, Descartes’ work is best seen “as the output
of a practicing scientist who, somewhat unfortunately wrote a
few short and relatively unimportant philosophical essays”
(Clark 1982, 2). This can’t be said of Hume. Aside from his
physics, Descartes’ neuroscience in Optics and Treatise of
Man were of staggering originality, right in their
fundamentals, and still a corrective to widely held theories
such as pictorial accounts of imagery. It is in this light that we
may appreciate Chomsky’s doubts concerning the radical
novelty of the ‘cognitive revolution’ and his remark “it wasn’t
all that much of a revolution in my opinion” (1966, 1). He
notes that the same convergence of disciplinary interests had
taken place in the seventeenth century in what he calls the
“first cognitive revolution, perhaps the only real one.”
Chomsky adds:

… it is a reversal of what we might expect. The expectation from
what Descartes has been saying is that ideas or sensations are
going to be signs; thus, the sensations of light would be a sign of
specific motions in the object and air. His problem would
accordingly be to explain how we can get information about the
world from our ideas and sensations. But the sign relation here
suggested is the other way around: the physical motion is the
sign of or for the sensation. (1996, 186)

Yolton explains that, on this view, “The physical stimulus
signifies the idea” (1996, 186) instead of the other way
around as we should expect. Yolton follows Alquié,
suggesting that “it is clear” that for Descartes “the physical
action of light signifies to us the sensation that we feel” and,
therefore, in Alquié’s words, “that which we habitually
consider as the signified (the physical action) becomes here
that which signifies” (Yolton 1996, 186). This is, then, the
reverse sign relation which Yolton takes Descartes to be
offering as a radically novel account of mental representation.
However, the very features which make this such a
“startling” view are, at the same time, grounds for being
cautious about attributing it to Descartes. That is, what makes
the doctrine startling is ipso facto what makes it implausible
as an account of the phenomenon and also, consequently, as
an account of Descartes’ intentions. Textual support for
Yolton’s reverse-sign interpretation is hardly compelling.
Using the term ‘sign’ exclusively for Descartes’ novel

… the second cognitive revolution has rediscovered,
reformulated, and to some extent addressed some of the most
venerable themes of our cultural tradition, back to its early
origins. (1966, 11)

Descartes’ Startling Reverse Sign
In Yolton’s (1996) view, Descartes is to be credited with
having introduced an entirely novel and remarkable doctrine
798

read that such an image or stroke in matter … signifies such
an object?” since

conception, Yolton explains the point of the reverse-sign
relation by saying that this new significatory relation
“replaces the causal relation between physical motion and
ideas, but the representing relation goes, as it were, outward
from awareness” (1996, 190). In this sense, then, “ideas are
not signs of things: they are the interpretations of physical
motion (of things)” (1996, 190). Thus Yolton says that the
cognitive, interpretative function of ideas and sensations is
representation, presumably in the more familiar sense, and
not signification, which is reserved for the reverse-sign
relation.
I believe that this entire scheme is unnecessarily
confusing in ways which may be overcome when we
recognize Descartes as striving to resolve perplexities which
still bedevil debate on representation. I will suggest that
Yolton has perhaps not gone far enough in the direction
which his own analysis dictates. Ironically, Yolton’s analyses
of the history of the ‘idea’ idea show the way to clarification
of the obscurities attending his own account of the reversesign relation. Specifically, I will suggest that Yolton relies on
a notoriously vexed tripartite notion of representation as a
relation between referent, representation and agent (Slezak
2002), but, at the same time, recognizes its problems and
elucidates important alternatives to it. In other words, the very
notion of a “reverse-sign” relation preserves a certain
problematic conception of representation whereas, arguably,
Descartes’ intention is precisely to articulate an alternative.
Yolton himself clearly indicates this crucial insight where he
explains that “knowing (perceiving) is not reading off from
our sensory or perceptual experiences properties of the world,
Perceptual knowing is the having of these experiences”
(1996, 190).
I believe that this is the key to the puzzles of
representation from Descartes’ time to our own. It is the
Arnauldian direct realist view of perception as a cognitive
process rather than as involving access to intermediate
objects. Yolton appears sympathetic to this view, but seems
reluctant to embrace it fully for reasons that have motivated
philosophers from Malebranche to Fodor. The purely causal
mechanical sensory processes on their own seem unable to
explain the semantic, intentional aspects of meaningful
experience.

… without “some unknown way of learning by them [the
motions of the filaments of nerves] the quality of the Objects,”
the soul would be like an infant who hears sounds or sees lips
move but has no understanding of what the sounds of
movements signify, or like an illiterate person sees letters but
“knows not what they mean.” (1996, 191)

Yolton argues that Descartes offers his reverse-sign relation
as a non-causal alternative to the usual semantic connection
between ideas and their referents in the world:
The stress on meaning in perception, especially the suggestion of
motion being a natural sign for the mind, enables Descartes to
replace the causal connection between felt experience and
physical motion: motion in body does not cause but it signifies
our sensations. Is there more to this distinction than just the
convenience of a substitute relation for causation? Is there … an
explication of natural signification? (1996, 187)

Yolton takes Descartes to be substituting the reverse
signification relation in place of the causal connection
between motion and sensation. However, this appears to be a
strained reading of the texts that would not independently
suggest such a construal. It seems that Yolton shares the
widespread discomfort with purely causal processes and
seeks to supplement these with some additional mechanism.
However, the texts cited by Yolton as evidence for a noncausal reading of the sign relation are most naturally
interpreted as straightforwardly causal. Certainly Descartes’s
use of the word ‘sign’ to capture his notion is insufficient
warrant for positing a semantic rather than a causal process.
The connotations of the term are presumably wide enough to
permit a purely mechanical, non-intentional conception.
Indeed, in support of his account Yolton cites passages from
the Sixth Meditation and The Passions of the Soul which both
explicitly refer to causation (1996, 187). Another passage
cited from Le Monde is also taken by Yolton, following
Alquié, to support a reverse-sign interpretation, but here
Descartes speaks of the way in which words “make us
conceive of things” which is more plausibly taken as a causal
claim than as a denial of it. Moreover, later in his chapter on
the semantic relation, Yolton amply acknowledges that
“Descartes does frequently use the language of causation
(produce, excite) when talking about some sensory
awareness” (1996, 202), and he enumerates several examples
from Descartes’s texts. On Yolton’s own evidence, then, it
seems difficult to sustain his substitutional, non-causal
attribution to Descartes. Indeed, Yolton can only support his
account by ascribing a certain degree of inconsistency to
Descartes (1996, 203), but the need for such uncharitability in
addition to the strained reading of the texts is perhaps a
symptom of missing Descartes’s point.
Moreover, these purely textual infelicities are likely to be
a reflection of what is, on independent philosophical grounds,
an unsatisfactory account of Descartes’s intentions. Yolton’s
characterization of Descartes’s doctrine as an uprecedented
and “startling” one is perhaps another way of saying that it is

“Dumb Signs Made in the Brain”
Yolton cites 17th Century Joseph Glanvill among the very few
writers who explicitly use the same notion of a reverse-sign
relation to answer the question “how the pure mind can
receive information from that, which is not in the least like
itself” (1996, 191). Glanvill’s characterization of the problem
is striking to modern readers through its precise anticipation
of the notorious ‘Chinese Room’ conundrum of John Searle
(1980). For Searle, the purely syntactic, causal processes of
computational mechanisms are insufficient to explain
meaningful
properties
of
mental
representations.
Computational symbols are like the meaningless squiggles of
Chinese characters to an English speaker. Thus, in the 17th
Century, Cudworth, too, was concerned precisely to explain
how ideas arise from “dumb Signs made in the Brain” (1996,
192). Yolton reports Glanvill’s question which echoes
Searle’s worry: “But how is it, and by what Art doth the soul
799

“There are two reactions operating in perception: the causal,
physiological reaction and the signification reaction” (1996,
74):

intrinsically implausible as a solution to the problems in
question. Ceteris paribus, we should prefer a less
extraordinary account.

The “obscure” and “curious” doctrine

What is important about this doctrine is the indication it gives of
Descartes’s effort to preserve an interaction between body and
mind which is not causal, or which is more than causal. The two
languages that he employs reinforce this suggestion: he
recognized the causal relation between physical objects and the
body, but he also recognized that that causal relation is
inadequate for cognition. For the latter, a different, noncausal but
still interactive relation is needed. (1996, 73,4)

Yolton (1996, 187) suggests that a particular passage in the
Sixth Meditation is one “where Descartes uses ‘sign’ in this
way” - namely in a reversal of the usual case, so that here
“The physical stimulus signifies the idea”. Yolton says that
Descartes’s suggestion of motion as a natural sign “enables
Descartes to replace the causal connection between felt
experience and physical motion: motion in body does not
cause but it signifies our sensations”. It is conceivable that,
taken on its own out of context, Descartes’s use of the term
“signal” (1985 ii, 60) might be construed to mean a sign in
Yolton’s reversed semantic sense, but the overall discussion
in which this occurrence is found leaves little doubt about
Descartes’s meaning as ordinary causation. In the selected
passage quoted by Yolton (1996, 187), Descartes is speaking
of the mechanisms by which the nerves convey information
about pain from the limbs such as the foot:

On the contrary, however, it seems that Descartes can be
understood as suggesting that the causal relation is adequate
for cognition and constituted by it. Yolton explains further
that “The reaction to these signs is cognitive, not
physiological, but it does work in tandem with the physical
and physiological reactions” (1996, 73). Thus, we see Yolton
attempt to explicate what he concedes to be a “curious” and
“somewhat obscure” doctrine and one to which very little
attention has been paid. Furthermore, Yolton, says “I suspect
it must be present in other writers as well, but so far I have
not discovered other occurrences ot it” (1996, 73). Of course,
these facts permit a different interpretation: the obscurity of
the doctrine may be less due to Descartes than to Yolton.
Relatedly, its absence in other writers and lack of scholarly
attention may not be a failure to notice something, but rather
due to its non-existence.
In support of his reverse-sign account, Yolton makes a
further appeal to a passage from The Passions of the Soul, but
this hardly supports Yolton’s case any better than the texts we
have seen, since it is also concerned with the mechanical
workings of the nerves through spirits and pores. The very
sentence quoted by Yolton is more naturally construed as
offering a causal sequence in which, he says, the animal
spirits enter certain pores in the brain and there excite “a
particular movement in this gland which is instituted by
nature in order to cause the soul to be sensible of this passion”
(1996, 187).
Other crucial texts cited by Yolton include the Dioptrics
and the Traité de l’homme, but these do not appear to support
the reverse-sign interpretation on their own without
contrivance. In the Traité, Descartes’s model is perhaps most
notable precisely for the rigour with which it attempts to
explain mental phenomena in terms of mechanical processes.
Of course, his need to resort ultimately to a rational soul
makes sense from an explanatory point of view because of the
limitations on such mechanisms to account for those special
features of mind such as language and knowledge which
rightly appeared to Descartes to transcend purely mechanical
means, as this was understood in the 17th Century. However,
the joining of a rational soul to this machine does not appear
to bear directly on the supposed reverse-sign relation which
concerns only the ontological realm of res extensa prior to the
final effects of the filaments and pores on the res cogitans. In
the Traité, then, we see an unproblematic causal sequence
closely related to the other example cited by Yolton and
famously illustrated by the boy whose foot touches a fire.

... when the nerves in the foot are set in motion in a violent and
unusual manner, this motion, by way of the spinal cord, reaches
the inner parts of the brain, and there gives the mind its signal for
having a certain sensation, namely the sensation of a pain as
occurring in the foot. (Descartes 1985 ii, 60)

This passage comes towards the end of an extended
discussion of the manner in which the nerves conduct pain by
movement exactly the same way that a piece of string can be
pulled at one end to effect movement at the other. Just as in
the case of a piece of string, movement of intermediate parts
if pulled will have the same effect on the extremity. These
passages preceding the one quoted by Yolton leave no doubt
that Descartes is concerned with strict causes and effects in a
perfectly ordinary sense:
In a similar fashion, when I feel a pain in my foot, physiology
tells me that this happens by means of nerves distributed
throughout the foot, and that these nerves are like cords which
go from the foot right up to the brain. When the nerves are
pulled in the foot, they in turn pull on inner parts of the brain to
which they are attached, and produce a certain motion in them;
and nature has laid it down that this motion should produce in
the mind a sensation of pain, as occurring in the foot. (Descartes
1985 ii, 60)

It is important to notice here that Descartes is concerned
precisely with the doctrine of natural signs of interest to
Yolton. The analogy of motion in the nerves with pulling on
cords makes it clear that Descartes sees the signal in question
as a cause whose effects are the sensations in question. The
idea that when nerves are pulled “they in turn pull on inner
parts of the brain” is evidently a causal sequence of events
and, accordingly, the “signal” in the passage quoted by
Yolton means the causal effect of motions in the nerves. Of
course, Yolton acknowledges Descartes’s commitment to the
causal sequence of events, but argues that Descartes’s was
also proposing an additional kind of relation. Thus, he says
800

Here Descartes explains in precisely the same terms we have
seen in the Sixth Meditation:

In this way, Yolton tries to have it both ways, that is, to have
a semantic, significatory relation while, at the same time,
denying the agent or interpreter for whom the sign serves to
refer. This seems unsatisfactory on philosophical and
exegetical grounds which are both satisfied by dropping the
attribution of non-causal, reverse-sign semantic relation in
addition to the usual representational one. That is, Descartes
is not searching for an alternative to a causal relation as
Yolton suggests but, rather, he identifies the representational
abilities of the mind with causal relations which are supposed
to “understand themselves”.
Descartes may be understood as proposing an account
precisely of the kind Dennett suggests is needed. This reading
of Descartes is strongly supported by the fact that his account
of visual images in the Dioptrics is exactly of this sort: in this
case, the images, so to speak, see themselves. It is in this
sense that we are to understand Descartes’s argument against
resemblance: Visual representations are not to be conceived
on the model of our external pictures which resemble their
referent, since this would require that they be seen by
someone. Instead, it is sufficient if the images encode the
relevant information about the physical objects. My
suggestion is that it is such a notion of encoding which best
captures Descartes’s concept of the sign relation. There are
ample texts including especially the Traité de l’homme and
Dioptrics in which it is clear that Descartes’s account of
visual perception involves the transmission of such signals
along the nerves from the retina to the brain in what is
essentially a correct account of the encoding of information in
the modern sense1. Descartes’s speculations are not only
correct but an insightful solution to the problem of imagery
which precisely anticipates Pylyshyn’s (2003) responses to
pictorial theories of visual images (see Slezak, 1995). Of
course, Descartes’ sense of encoding is one in which the
symbols are intrinsically meaningless, hence, giving rise to
the philosophical anxieties which have preoccupied
philosophers from Descartes’s time to our own, as Yolton has
shown. The dilemma is that, if the representations are
meaningful, then they appear to intervene between the mind
and the world precluding a direct realism, whereas if they are
meaningless they appear unable to do the job. Since Yolton
takes Descartes to be seeking a direct realism, it makes sense
that Descartes should avoid the triadic schema which entails
meaningful intermediary entities, just as Yolton’s Arnauldian
account itself suggests.
To help clarify Descartes’s surprising and puzzling
conception, Yolton (1996, 186) suggests that Descartes
appears to distinguish signifying from representing, but a few
pages later, Yolton (1996, 190) avers that “Perhaps the
distinction between signifying and representing is not entirely
clear” and may perhaps be best understood in terms of the
two directions in which the relation between object and its
symbol may be connected:

Thus, if fire A is near foot B, the particles of this fire (which
move very quickly, as you know) have force enough to displace
the area of skin that they touch; and thus pulling the little thread
cc, which you see to be attached there, they simultaneously open
the entrance to the pore [or conduit] de where this thread
terminates [in the brain]: just as, pulling on one end of a cord,
one simultaneously rings a bell which hangs at the opposite end.
(T.S. Hall, transl.1972, 34)

Hume’s Problem: Representations to
Understand Themselves
There can be little doubt about the straightforwardly causal
nature of the sequence which Descartes is postulating. The
need to superimpose any additional significatory features
appears to arise from extraneous theoretical preconceptions
rather than from anything evident in Descartes’s text.
Specifically, it seems likely that the usual intentional
connotations of the term ‘sign’ may induce us to read some
representational meaning into Descartes’s account, whereas I
believe his concern is quite different. Undeniably, to speak of
a sign may convey a notion of symbolic representation, but I
believe that this is precisely the notion which is the source of
the perennial difficulty which Yolton elsewhere actually does
so much to clarify and dispel. The point is perhaps made most
clearly by Dennett (1978) in his review of Fodor’s (1975)
Language of Thought. Dennett refers to it as Hume’s Problem
which arises because “nothing is intrinsically a representation
of anything; something is a representation only for or to
someone”. In attempting to understand Yolton’s analysis, it is
revealing that he expresses his notion of signification in
exactly these terms, saying of his reverse-sign relation “A
sign stands for something else. It requires an interpreter; that
is, a sign is a sign of something for someone” (1996, 208).
However, Dennett explains:
Hume wisely shunned the notion of an inner self that would
intelligently manipulate the ideas and impressions, but this left
him with the necessity of getting the ideas to “think for
themselves” ... Fodor’s analogous problem is to get the internal
representations to “understand themselves”. (1978, 101)

Now, Yolton clearly acknowledges that physical motions in
the brain do not have an interpreter in the usual sense, and
recognizes Descartes’s appreciation of this point, saying “I
think it incorrect to say that Descartes turned the mind into a
quasi person or second perceiver” (1996, 209). However,
notwithstanding this acknowledgement, Yolton still maintains
the appropriateness of such a significatory relation to explain
Descartes’s view, saying:
Nevertheless, in these passages, Descartes is trying to assimilate
physiological notions to natural signs, even though the
signification relation in this case is not one of which we are
aware. He is searching for an alternative to a causal relation.
(1996, 209)

1

It is difficult to see why A. W. MacKenzie (generously praised by
Yolton) should write disparagingly of Descartes’s speculations
about the mechanisms of sensory perception as “often quite
uncontrolled” and “Particularly uncontrolled are his speculations
about neuromechanics” (1989, 136).

801

This latter role is far from clear, and its intelligibility is in doubt,
but its importance lies in its suggestion of two interacting
relations between perceivers and external objects. (1996, 198)

If there is a difference, perhaps we can say that the signifying
relation replaces the causal relation between physical motion and
ideas, but the representing relation goes, as it were, outward
from awareness. (1996, 190)

Yolton cites Gaukroger’s (1996) analysis of Descartes’s
doctrine of signs in support of his own account, drawing
attention to Gaukroger’s emphasis on the distinction between
causal and semantic aspects of Descartes’s doctrine. Yolton
does record Gaukroger’s concern to “resist saying that there
are two processes” but nevertheless emphasizes his analysis
of Le Monde and the differences between this and the Regulae
account of causes. To be sure, in Le Monde Descartes does
not explicitly speak of sequential causal mechanisms as he
does elsewhere when describing the effects of bodily
movements through the fibres etc. However, it does not
follow from this absence that Descartes is making a contrast
with the causal account. The absence of any causal
explanation may be explained in an obvious way - namely,
that Descartes is concerned with a significantly different point
- explaining why resemblance is neither necessary nor
sufficient for representation.
In the end, ironically, it seems that Yolton embraces a
dual process account precisely because he wishes to avoid the
implication of an intelligent or conscious “code reader” which
he takes to be a consequence of brain motions giving rise to
perceptual recognition.

Yolton’s analysis here is illuminating, though inevitably
retaining an air of paradox, as he concedes in occasional
obiter dicta. Thus, as we have seen, he says that the
distinction between signifying and representing remains
unclear and that “This significatory relation is somewhat
obscure in Descartes’s brief use of it.” (1996, 73). These
remarks suggest that on Yolton’s own account Descartes’s
doctrine remains somewhat puzzling.

Non-Mechanistic, Non-Naturalistic Relation?
There is room for considerable uncertainty about Descartes’s
intentions in what Yolton describes as “those cryptic sign
passages” (1996, 199). Nevertheless, there is a danger of
overstating the extent to which Descartes is concerned with
two different, though related, processes. Thus, in suggesting a
“second, nonmechanistic, interaction between brain and mind
“(1996, 198), Yolton appeals to writers who take a somewhat
extreme and implausible non-naturalistic, metaphysical
position according to which Yolton says “What science
cannot do is to ‘explain how bodily states and processes
become experiences’ ” (1996, 200, 218 fn). Yolton appears to
endorse the view of these authors who suggest that we must
take “semantic presence as a basic category, just as existence
is a basic category” (1996, 200). Yolton invokes the ideas of
J.S. Kelly and E.M. Adams “not because they speak directly
to issues in Descartes, but because they make use of concepts
very similar to those employed by Descartes” (1996, 199).
Yolton acknowledges that the views in question take the
semantic relation to be “nonnatural” and transcending what is
scientifically explicable. However, in view of Descartes’s
thoroughgoing, strenuous naturalism, this seems to be a
desperate move, and the doctrines are unlikely to be “very
similar to those employed by Descartes”. It must be
acknowledged that the issues at stake are profoundly difficult
and recalcitrant - still the subject of considerable perplexity2.
However, the persistent intractability of the problem is not
favourable to a reconstruction of Descartes in terms of such
occult notions as “semantic presence as a basic category,”
though it must be admitted that Fodor’s (1994, 2003)
metaphysical mind-world semantic relation is no less obscure.
Thus, Yolton rejects identifying the mechanical-causal
processes with the significatory relation in favour of two
independent functions:

Certainly, our normal use of signs is in the context of conscious
interpretation of the signs, but it does not seem to me that that is
what Descartes was suggesting. Therein, of course, lies the
difficulty of making sense of Descartes’s notion of the mind
reacting to brain motions as signs. To read the signs or codes
presented by the brain would seem to require the mind to scan
the motions in the brain ... (1996, 198)

Yolton’s position here appears paradoxical for he seems to
reject a conception of “the brain presenting certain motions
for the mind’s attention” because of the implication of a codereading homunculus. However, he avoids this notorious
difficulty by resorting to the dual process account rather than
the obvious alternative - namely, a unitary, formal, causalmechanical one. That is, Yolton appears to think that his
semantic account does not fall victim to the familiar
explanatory regress despite admittedly invoking precisely the
kind of semantic relation which leads to the problem. He says
“I do not find it obvious that the few passages suggesting that
the mind reacts to brain motions as signs is the same as the
brain presenting certain motions for the mind’s attention”
(1996, 198). That is, Yolton clearly recognizes the need to
avoid the interpreting homunculus but, at the same time,
embraces a semantic relation which invites it. As we have
noted, Yolton concedes that his resolution of this tension by
positing dual roles for brain motions is unsatisfactory. Of
course, the question is whether these doubts about the clarity
and intelligibility of the doctrine are to be blamed on
Descartes’s doctrine as such or on the reverse-sign
reconstruction of it.
The puzzle of meaning for mental representations is
undeniably a real one and, indeed, remains notoriously
unclear to this day. However, the interest and importance of

I have been suggesting that brain motions play two roles, one
responding to physical motions coming from the environment,
the other triggering conscious reactions in perceivers. (1996,
198)

Significantly, however, Yolton concedes the obscurity of the
analysis, admitting that his account leaves Descartes doctrine
somewhat opaque:
2
Fodor says “of the semanticity of mental representations we have,
as things now stand, no adequate account” (1985, 28).

802

Descartes’s writing on the subject is to be seen in its offering
a solution to the vexed question which is as relevant today as
in his own time. Descartes is evidently to be classed among
those who advocate a syntactic, mechanical and purely formal
account of mental representation akin to today’s ‘conceptual
role’ and ‘narrow content’ semantics. The point of the oftquoted passages from Le Monde and Dioptrics is to argue that
once resemblance is abandoned as the basis for
representation, anything which functions to convey the
appropriate information about the physical world suffices to
constitute the semantic relation between ideas and their
referents. Given such a functional conception, there is no
need to suppose Descartes to have substituted a secondary,
novel semantic relation for the causal link between brain
motions and ideas since the brain motions are supposed to
constitute the ordinary representational relation via their
abstract encoding of information. Thus, despite offering the
most important clarifications of these questions, Yolton
himself seems to be to some extent under the influence of
certain problematic assumptions. If it were not for these, there
would appear to be little incentive to read Descartes as
offering anything other than a straightforward causal story
about the origins of sensation in the bodily movements of
filaments, pores and animal spirits. That these are not thought
to suffice as explanations of conscious experience is a
reflection of the deep-seated difficulty which continues to
plague the subject.

References
Arnauld, A. (1683/1990). On True and False Ideas,
Translated with Introductory Essay by Stephen Gaukroger,
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Brook, A. (1994). Kant and the Mind, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1966). Cartesian Linguistics, New York:
Harper & Row.
Clarke, D. (1982). Descartes’ Philosophy of Science,
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Dennett, D.C. (1978). Artificial Intelligence as Philosophy
and as Psychology, in Brainstorms, Montgomery,
Vermont: Bradford Books, 109-126.
Descartes, R. (1972). Treatise of Man, Transl. T.S. Hall,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Descartes, R. (1985). The Philosophical Writings of
Descartes, in 2 Volumes, translated by J. Cottingham, R.
Stoothoff & D. Murdoch, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Fodor, J.A. (1975). The Language of Thought, New York:
Crowell.
Fodor, J.A. (1985). Presentation, in B.H. Partee, S. Peters and
R. Thomason eds., Report of Workshop on Information and
Representation, Washington, D.C.: NSF System
Development Foundation, 106-117.
Fodor, J.A. (1994). Concepts, Cognition 50, 95-113.
Fodor, J.A. (2003). Hume Variations, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gaukroger, S. (1996). Descartes: An Intellectual Biography,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
MacKenzie, A.W. (1989). Descartes on Life and Sense,
Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 19, 2, 163-192.
Putnam, H. (1999). The Threefold Cord, New York:
Columbia University Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. (2003). Seeing and Visualizing, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Searle, J. (1980). Minds, Brains and Programs, Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 3, 417-424.
Slezak, P. (1995). The ‘Philosophical’ Case Against Visual
Imagery, in P. Slezak, T. Caelli R. Clark eds., Perspectives
on Cognitive Science, Norwood: Ablex, 237-271.
Slezak, P. (2002). The Tripartite Model of Representation,
Philosophical Psychology, Vol. 13, No. 3, 2002, 239-270.
Yolton, J.W. (1996). Perception and Reality: A History from
Descartes to Kant, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Where Philosophy Goes When It Dies
Stephen Gaukroger (1996) has described as a “pointless
exercise” the efforts to show the extent to which Descartes,
for example, was a precursor of modern cognitive science.
However, noting anticipations of current theories is likely to
be revealing in both directions: Like Brook’s (1994)
exemplary work Kant and the Mind, study of precursors of
cognitive science provide an independent, extensive source of
insight into contemporary problems and, conversely, are
themselves illuminated in novel ways unavailable to
traditional scholarship. In a different context, Jerry Fodor has
noted a tendency of modern psychology to revive notorious
classical doctrines. In a characteristically acerbic quip he says
“Cognitive science is where philosophy goes when it dies”
(1994, 110). In this regard, Arnauld was evidently correct in
remarking that “they stray furthest who move the fastest”
(1683).

803

