UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categorization, Label Extension, and Inductive Reasoning in Chinese and German
Preschoolers: Influence of a Classifier System and Universal Cognitive Constraints

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0p35p56h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Imai, Mutsumi
Saalbach, Henrik

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categorization, Label Extension, and Inductive Reasoning in Chinese and German
Preschoolers: Influence of a Classifier System and Universal Cognitive Constraints
Henrik Saalbach (saalbach@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Mutsumi Imai (imai@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Keio University at Shonan-Fujisawa, 5322 Endo, Kanagawa, Japan
Abstract
This paper explores the effect of classifiers on young children’s conceptual structures. For this purpose we studied
Mandarin Chinese- and German-speaking three- and fiveyear-olds and adults on no-word classification, novel-noun
label extension and inductive inference of novel properties.
Some effect of the classifier system was found in Chinese
children, but this effect was observed only in a no-word categorization task. In the label extension and property generalization tasks, children of the two language groups show strikingly similar behavior, but their performance was markedly
different across the two task contexts. The implications of the
results for theories of language and thought as well as cognitive development are discussed.
Keywords: Linguistic Relativity, Categorization, Word
Learning, Inductive Reasoning, Classifiers, Cognitive Development

Introduction
The classifier grammar system categorizes nouns into grammatical categories, just as the count-mass grammar system
does. There are two major functions of classifiers. First, like
quantifiers or measuring terms in languages with count-mass
grammar, classifiers provide a unit of quantification, although
unlike measure terms that are used only for quantifying mass
nouns (e.g. a glass of water), classifiers are applied to all
nouns when quantifying them, including clearly individuated
objects such as cars, computers, animals and humans. Second,
classifiers classify a noun inherently. In other words, they
designate and specify semantic features inherent to the nominal referent and divide the set of nouns of the classifier language into disjunctive classes (Senft, 2000). Importantly, the
system of classification by classifiers is complementary to the
system of classification by nouns. This may be a matter of
course considering the fact that a major function of classifiers
is to provide semantic information that nouns do not carry.
As a consequence, the categories created by classifiers largely
cross-cut the categories created by nouns. In particular, while
the noun lexicon is structured hierarchically around taxonomic relations, classifier systems are usually organized
around semantic features such as animacy, shape, function,
size, rigidity, or social importance, and do not have hierarchical structures as the noun lexicon does. For example, tiao, a
common Chinese classifier for long and flexible things, includes many things from different taxonomic categories--fish,
dogs, rivers, roads, pants, and more—even crossing the animate-inanimate boundary.

703

An interesting question is whether the classifier system affects the speakers’ concepts in any significant ways. The
acquisition of classifiers has been said to be relatively slow,
especially in production (e.g., Carpenter, 1991); however,
Saalbach et al. (2004) demonstrated that comprehension of
classifier semantics starts as early as four years in Chinese
children. Furthermore, Imai and Gentner (1997) reported that
the absence of a grammatical distinction between count and
mass nouns in a classifier language (Japanese) results in different construals of an ambiguous entity as either an individuated object or non-individuated substance across Japanese and
American preschoolers and adults. Given these previous results and the semantic nature of classifier categories (i.e., the
fact that classifiers classify objects in a way that largely crosscuts taxonomic categories and the fact that shape is universally an important semantic feature across different classifier
languages), it is possible that classifier categories affect children’s concepts in some ways.
But in what ways can we assess young children’s categories and conceptual structures? Three kinds of relations,
taxonomic relations, shape similarity, and thematic relations,
have been described as major organizers of young children’s
concepts. However, different results have been reported and
different conclusions have been drawn concerning the question of which of the three types of relation children rely on the
most. Many factors must be responsible for the differences in
children’s behavior in different studies, including the stimuli
and the children’s ages, to some extent. However, the most
prominent factor affecting children’s classification behavior
seems to be the nature of the task and the instructions used in
the task. For example, it has been often noted that young preschoolers tend to categorize objects based on thematic relations (Smiley & Brown, 1979) but they do not do so in the
context of label extension (e.g., Markman & Hutchinson,
1984).
Furthermore, although researchers agree that young children do not extend labels based on thematic relations, they
disagree as to whether children rely on non-perceptual taxonomic relation or on shape similarity as the basis of label extension. When a taxonomic item that also resembles the
originally labeled object is pitted against thematic items, children reliably select the taxonomic item (e.g., Markman &
Hutchinson, 1984). However, when taxonomic similarity and
shape similarity are separated and pitted against each other,
preschool children tend to extend labels on the basis of shape
similarity rather than taxonomic similarity (e.g., Baldwin,
1992; Imai, Gentner, & Uchida, 1994).

Table 1. Materials of Experiments 1-3
Set Standard Taxonomic Shape

this property.”) However, the language-specific effect disappeared in a property inference task in which the participants
were given a specific property (“carry the same bacteria”)
and asked to judge the likelihood with which this property
would be shared across the two objects.

Thematic

Animal
1
2
3
4

Snake
Eel
Salamander
Beaver
Plant

Turtle
Guppy
Frog
Cat

Jump.rope
Belt
Scarf
Tie

Glass cage

5
6
7
8

Banana
Apple
Carrot
Onion
Artifact

Grape
Cucumber
Tomato
Peppers

Feather
Ball
Match
Candle

Monkey
Knife
Rabbit
Frying pan

9
10
11
12

Hat
CD
Necklace
Comb

Turban
Tape
Ring
Brush

Tent
Pizza
Ribbon
Knife

Head
Stereo
Neck
Hair

Water tank
Pond
Logs

Present research
To examine (1) whether classifier categories affect young
children’s cognitive activities such as category making and
inductive reasoning, and if the answer to the first question is
yes, (2) whether and how this effect interacts with the nature
of the task context, we tested Chinese and German-speakers
in three age groups (3-year-olds, 5-year-olds, adults) on a
match-to-the standard generalization paradigm in three different contexts: no-word classification (Study 1), label extension
(Study 2) and property inference (Study 3). In all three contexts, a child was shown a picture of the standard object (e.g.,
banana), and was asked to choose the one item out of the
three choice items: a taxonomic item (grape), a shape item
(feather) and a thematic item (monkey). In Study 1, the participants were asked to select the item that best matches the
standard object. In Study 2, the participants were asked to
extend a novel label that was given to the standard. In Study
3, a novel non-perceptual property about the standard object
was taught, and the participants were asked to select the item
that would be most likely to have the same property.
If there is an influence of classifier categories, we may
predict that Chinese speakers, especially children, pay more
attention to shape similarity than German speakers, given that
shape is a prominent semantic feature in classifier categories.
Among the three tasks, the no-word classification task seems
to place weakest constraints on the kind of knowledge that
should be accessed, leaving children to determine the basis
for the “best match” freely on their own. We may thus expect
the largest crosslinguistic difference in this context. On the
other hand, given the previous results that preschool children
tend to extend novel labels on the basis of shape, it is interesting to see whether Chinese children show an even stronger
shape bias than German children in this context. It is also
interesting to see whether the system of classifier categories,
which cross-cut taxonomic categories, influences Chinese
children’s inductive reasoning. If this is the case, we may
expect that Chinese children project properties onto taxonomic relations to a smaller degree than German children.

Categorization is not the only way to reveal the nature of
human concepts. One basic function of categories is to promote inferences that enlarge the scope of knowledge and allow predictions about novel items. Importantly, many studies
have demonstrated that young children rely on non-perceptual
taxonomic relations more heavily than on perceptual similarity in generalizing non-perceptual properties to other objects
when taxonomic relations and shape similarity are pitted
against each other (e.g., Gelman & Markman, 1986).
To make the story even more complicated, preschool
children’s classification behavior may vary even within the
same (non-lexical) categorization task when different instructions are used (e.g., “Which goes best with the [target]?” vs.
“Can you find another one?”, Waxman & Namy, 1997).
Given the large difference in the results across different
studies using different tasks and instructions, it has been suggested that the conceptual preference exhibited by children in
a given task may reflect task-specific processes rather than
stable preferences that characterize cognition at a particular
developmental level (Waxman and Namy, 1997).
If different types of behavior across different tasks indeed
reflect children’s flexible and task-specific cognitive processes, the influence of classifier categories on children’s cognitive structure must be tested in multiple tasks rather than in
a single task. It is in fact very important to ask whether the
influence of classifier categories, if there is any, is found
across a range of tasks or only in particular tasks or contexts.
This in turn will reveal how pervasive the influence of classifier categories is, and how it interacts with task-specific cognitive processes. In fact, our previous studies with Chinese
and German adults revealed an effect of classifier categories
in similarity judgment of two objects in which participants
were to determine the criteria for similarity on their own
(Saalbach and Imai, 2005). The language-specific classifier
effect was also found in a property reasoning task, in which
the target property was not specified. (“Suppose Object A has
an important property X. Judge how likely Object B also has

Experiment 1: No-word classification
Method
Participants. A total of 87 native Mandarin-speaking and
native German-speaking pre-school children and adults participated in this study. In the Chinese sample, there were 16
3-year-olds, 16 5-year-olds, and 15 adults from Beijing. In the
German sample, there were 15 3-year-olds, 15 5-year-olds,
and 10 adults from Berlin. The range and mean age of children in each age group were comparable across the two language groups in this as well as other experiments reported in
this paper.

704

Materials. Twelve item sets of four color drawings of familiar objects were prepared. Each set consisted of a standard
item, a taxonomic item, a shape item and a thematic item. Of
the twelve, four sets represented animal categories, four represented plants, and four represented artifacts (see table 1).
Procedure. The participants in both language groups were
individually tested by a trained native speaker of Chinese or
German in a quiet room in their preschool or in a university
laboratory. Both children and adults were shown each set of
the pictures, one set at a time, and were asked to select the
object that “best matches” the standard object. The instruction was given in the participants’ language by a native
speaker.

Results and Discussion
The mean percentage of the shape, taxonomic, and thematic
response is given in Table 2. The distribution of the three
responses looked different as a function of Age and Language.
Chinese children, both 3- and 5-year-olds, made the shape
response most frequently. German 3-year-olds showed no
particular preference across the three items. In contrast,
German 5-year-olds showed clear preference for thematic
relations (62.8%) in this no-word classification. Interestingly,
both Chinese and German adults also made the thematic response most frequently (41.7 % and 51.8%, respectively).
In each Age/Language group, we classified the participants into four categories according to the response dominance (table 3). The participant was considered a Shape
Dominant individual when s/he made Shape response 7 times
or more. The Taxonomic and Thematic Dominant individuals were determined likewise. The participants who did not
make a particular response type 7 times or more were classified as a No Dominance individual. The distribution of individuals across the four dominance categories was submitted
to an asymmetric loglinear model with the Response Dominance as the dependent variable and Age and Language as
independent variables. In the first model, we only contrasted

3-year-olds and 5-year-olds for easier interpretation of the
Age effect. A saturation model revealed that the Age X Language interaction did not make any significant contribution to
the model fit. We thus deleted the interaction and employed
the main effect model. Age and Language both made a significant contribution to the model, χ2 (3) = 10.49 and χ2 (3) =
8.33, respectively, both ps < .05. The pattern of the parameter estimates suggests that the main effect of Age mainly
came from a decrease of Shape Dominance and an increase of
Thematic Dominance with age, and the effect of Language
came from the higher proportion of the Shape Dominance
individuals in the Chinese group than in the German group.
A parallel log-linear model was carried out, to contrast the
5-year-olds and adults. In neither the saturated model nor the
main effect model, was there any significant effect of Age or
Language, both ps>.05.
To summarize, the children’s no-word classification behavior was consistent with the hypothesis that classifier categories affect Chinese-speaking children’s categorization;
however, this effect was not observed in adults. Somewhat
surprisingly, different from the generally shared assumption
that adults exclusively organize their concepts around taxonomic relations, both Chinese and German adults made the
thematic response in a higher proportion than the taxonomic
response. However, this is consistent with a recent proposal
that thematic relations are an important and integral part of
conceptual structure even in educated adults along with taxonomic relations (e.g., Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999).

Experiment 2: Label Extension
Method
Participants. A total of 85 Chinese and German preschool
children and adults participated in this study. In the Chinese
sample, there were 18 3-year-olds, 17 5-year-olds, and 10
undergraduates. They were all from Beijing, and were native
speakers of Mandarin-Chinese. In the German sample, there

Table 2. Mean Frequency in each task, language, and age group.
Chinese
Exp1: No-word
3-Year
5-Year
Adults
Exp2: Label ext.
3-Year
5-Year
Adults
Exp3: Property Ind.
3-Year
5-Year
Adults

German

Taxonomic

Shape

Thematic

Taxonomic

Shape

Thematic

31.8%
15.6%*
26.7%

52.6%*
47.4%
25.0%

16.7%*
37.0%
48.3%

42.8%
19.4%*
43.3%

25.6%
17.8%
5.0%*

33.3%
62.8%*
51.7%*

28.2%
27.9%
57.5%*

63.4%*
61.3%*
30.8%

8.3%*
10.8%*
11.7%*

27.8%
32.2%
78.0%*

57.8%*
56.7%*
16.7%*

14.4%*
11.1%*
5.3%*

41.7%
64.1%*
79.2%*

37.5%
27.6%
14.2%+

20.8%+
8.3%*
6.7%

41.7%
65.0%*
90.8%*

34.4%
18.3%*
8.3%*

23.9%
18.9%*
0.8%*

Note. T-tests have been conducted to test whether the rate of a particular choice is significant different from chance level.
*Denotes significantly different from chance level, p<.05 (based on Bonferroni adjusted probabilities).
+
Denotes marginally different from chance level, p<.1 (based on Bonferroni adjusted probabilities).
705

were 15 3-year-olds, 15 5-year-olds, and 10 undergraduates.
They were living in Berlin and were native speakers of German.
Materials and Procedure. The stimulus materials and the
procedures were the same as those in Experiment 1 except for
the instructions. Preschoolers were told that they were helping
a puppet who was learning new words in Puppet language.
For each set, the experimenter assigned a novel label to the
standard and asked the child to extend it to one of the choice
alternatives. Adults were told to assume that the novel labels
were words in a foreign language they do not know.

Exp1
3-Y.

Results and Discussion

Exp2
3-Y.

Table 3. Frequencies of Response Dominance Type
in each task, language and age.

5-Y.
Adult

CH
GER
CH
GER
CH
GER

In contrast to no-word classification, the pattern revealed
in the label extension task looks surprisingly similar across
the two language groups, although there was a large difference between children and adults. Chinese and German children, both 3- and 5-year-olds, selected the shape alternatives
most frequently, and more often than what would be expected
by chance. Different from children, the adult speakers of Chinese and German both extended labels on the basis of taxonomic relations.
As in Experiment 1, we classified the participants into
four categories of Shape Dominant, Taxonomic Dominant,
Thematic Dominant, and No Dominance individuals (Table
3) and conducted two 2 (Language) X 2 (Age) X 4 (Response Dominance) asymmetric log-linear models with the
Response dominance as the dependent variable, one contrasting three-and 5-year-olds, and the other contrasting children
(3-year-olds and 5-year-olds aggregated) and adults. The first
model revealed no main effects for Age, Language, or the
interaction effect, all ps > .5. The second model contrasting
children and adults revealed a highly significant main effect
for age, χ2 (3) = 23.13, p < .01, reflecting a strong shape-totaxonomic shift from children to adults. Different from Experiment 1, the effect of Language was not significant p > .5.
No Age X Language interaction was detected.
To summarize the results, first, we replicated previous results found in English-speaking children with two new languages, Chinese and German: (1) children show different
categorization behavior across the context of label extension
and no-word classification; (2) children extend a label on the
basis of shape similarity rather than taxonomic relations when
the two are pitted against each other; (3) reliance on shape in
label extension shifts to reliance on taxonomic relations with
development. Second, different from Experiment 1, there was
no cross-linguistic difference between Chinese and German
speaking children, as children dominantly extended labels on
the basis of shape similarity. This suggests that the nature of
the task (i.e., what type of information and/or knowledge is
most relevant for the inference) constrains people’s categorization behavior and that the influence of classifier categories
we observed in the no-word classification context is washed
away by the task-specific constraints. We further pursue this
possibility in Experiment 3, in which we examine which of
the three relations (Shape, Taxonomic, Thematic) Chinese
and German-speaking children and adults rely on in generalizing a novel, non-perceptual property to other objects.

5-Y.
Adult

CH
GER
CH
GER
CH
GER

Exp3
3-Y.
5-Y.
Adult

CH
GER
CH
GER
CH
GER

N

TAX

SHAPE

THEME

NON

16
15
16
15
15
10

1
4
2
1
2
2

6
0
8
2
3
0

2
2
4
9
8
4

7
9
2
3
2
4

18
15
17
15
10
11

1
0
3
2
5
10

11
8
9
9
2
0

0
0
0
0
1
0

6
7
5
4
2
1

16
15
16
15
10
10

5
4
12
11
8
11

5
2
2
2
1
0

2
1
0
0
0
0

4
8
2
2
1
0

Experiment 3: Property Generalization
Method
Participants. In the Chinese sample, there were 16 3-yearolds, 16 5-year-olds, and 10 undergraduates, all of whom
were native speakers of Mandarin-Chinese and living in Beijing. In the German sample, there were 15 3-year-olds, 15 5year-olds, and 10 undergraduates. They were living in Berlin,
and their native language was German.
Materials and Procedure. The same material was used as in
the previous experiments. In each set, the experimenter taught
a novel internal property about the standard object and asked
the children to select the item that also had this property (e.g.,
“Look! This one has IDOFORM inside. Can you tell which
one of them also has IDOFORM inside?”). In testing adults,
we used a blank property, saying that “This object has an important property X inside. Which of these do you think is
more likely to have this property inside?"

Results and Discussion
As in the label extension task, the response pattern is very
similar across the two cultures (see Table 3). However, different from the label-extension case, a dominance of shape
response was not observed even among the 3-year-olds, although 3-year-olds did not select the taxonomic item at above
chance level; the 5-year-olds and adults strongly projected
novel properties based on taxonomic relations. Each participant was again classified into one of the four response dominance categories, and asymmetric log-linear models were
fitted on the 2 (Language) X 2 (Age) X 4 (Response Domi-

706

relation was likely to carry the highest inductive potential, but
also recruited the relevant taxonomic knowledge on their own.
The pattern of results suggests that the classifier system
may indeed affect Chinese children’s formation of categories,
but the effect is limited to a context in which the type of information/knowledge to be processed for the task is left ambiguous. When the task constrains the kind of knowledge to
be accessed, the language-specific effect of classifiers seems
to disappear.
The fact that children relied on different relations across
no-word classification, label extension, and inductive reasoning tasks suggests that children’s behavior in categorization
and inductive reasoning strongly depend on the task at hand
rather than on a particular general conceptual preference, as
suggested by Waxman and Namy (1997). In other words,
even young children are aware of what kind of knowledge
should be recruited for a given task and are able to flexibly
shift the basis for category formation and inference in accord
with task-specific constraints. The difference across the label
extension task and the property generalization task is particularly noteworthy and requires explanation. It is important to
make clear that the reliance on shape in label extension demonstrated in this research does not mean that children cannot
consider non-perceptual information in label extension or can
never extend novel labels on the basis of taxonomic relations
under any circumstances (e.g., Liu et al., 2001). However,
young children constantly encounter new words, and often
need to extend newly heard words even when they do not
have much knowledge about the referent objects. In such
cases, among the features that children have access to without
rich domain knowledge, shape is the best predictor for taxonomic categories, in particular, for basic level categories
(Imai et al., 1994). Given that children first learn basic-level
object names, it is probable that children have extracted this
pattern from their early word learning experience and apply it
even when learning non-basic level words such as superordinate category names (Smith et al., 2002). Furthermore, object
names are often extended to other same-shape objects of different kinds. For example, we may call a bunny-shaped
chocolate “a bunny” even when it is really a piece of chocolate and not a rabbit. This kind of lexical convention may
have enhanced the reliance on shape in label extension.
The situation may be quite different for property inference.
First, occasions in which children must infer internal properties of objects do not probably occur as often as occasions in
which they must infer the extension of a word. Hence, children may not have to have heuristics that can be instantly
applied when not much knowledge about the object is available. Furthermore, not every property of a given object can be
generalized to other objects, and even when a property is generalizable, the scope of generalization depends on the property (e.g., some properties are true for all animals, but other
properties are true only for mammals). In other words, one
needs a fair amount of the domain knowledge about the object and the property in question to be able to make a meaningful inference (c.f., Gelman et al., 1986; Imai, 1995). By
three years of age, young children, regardless of the language
they speak, may have noticed this, and have realized that

nance) contingency table. The first model contrasting 3-yearolds and 5-year-olds revealed a main effect for age, χ2 (3) =
9.34, p < .01. There was no main effect for Language, nor
was there an interaction effect, both ps > .5. The pattern of
parameter estimates suggests that the difference between the
two age groups mainly came from the distribution of the
Taxonomic dominant individuals. The second model contrasting 5-year-olds and adults revealed no effect of Age. No effect for Language nor interaction between Language X Age
was detected, ps>.5.
As in the label extension case, the cross-linguistic similarity between Chinese and German speakers was striking in all
age groups here. This converged with the results of Experiment 2 to suggest that the nature of the task strongly constraints people’s inferences and the resulting behavior, independent of the language they speak, and a language-specific
effect such as our classifier effect disappears in the face of the
strong task-specific constraints.
Both Chinese and German 5-year-olds and adults predominantly generalized a novel property on the basis of taxonomic category membership. This finding confirms a widely
accepted notion that young children, just like adults, assume
that taxonomic categories carry high inductive potential,
while perceptual similarity does not (e.g., Gelman and Markman, 1986). In addition, the results of this study suggest that
speakers of a classifier language do not consider classifier
categories as carrying high inductive potential. The results
are also important in establishing that label extension and
property induction do not reflect exactly the same type of
knowledge or cognitive processes. We will discuss this difference between label extension and property induction in
more detail in the General Discussion.

General Discussion
In this research, we found a complex interaction between the
effect of classifiers and task-specific constraints on category
formation and inductive reasoning in young children. First,
we found that Chinese preschoolers used shape similarity as a
basis for no-word categorization at a higher rate than German
preschoolers, which supports the idea that classifier categories
may affect young children’s categories beyond the context in
which classifiers are invoked. Second, however, this crosslinguistic difference was not observed in the label extension
or property inference tasks. In the former case, not only Chinese but also German-speaking children predominantly extended novel labels on the basis of shape similarity, replicating the results with English-speaking children in previous
similar studies (e.g., Baldwin, 1992; Imai et al., 1994). In the
latter case, children did not rely on shape in generalizing a
novel property to other objects. In fact, both Chinese and
German 5-year-olds generalized the properties on the basis of
taxonomic relations to the same degree as adults did. It is
important to note that, in our task, the children were not
taught that the taxonomic item shared the label with the standard object, unlike the well-known property induction studies
in the literature (e.g., Gelman & Markman, 1986). In other
words, the children in our study not only determined what

707

making an inference about an unfamiliar (internal) property
instantly does not buy them much. Also, from early on, children seem to be aware that objects from different ontological
classes (e.g., animals vs. non-animals) have very different
internal as well as behavioral properties and are governed by
different causal principles (e.g., Mandler & MacDonough,
1996). It is probable that at 3 years of age (or earlier), children are aware of different principles underlying label extension and property inference, and are able to pay attention to
different sources of information to adapt to the cognitive
processes required by the two different cognitive activities.
Lastly, we did not find the classifier effect in any of the
tasks in this research in adults. However, this may be because
the forced-choice-match-to-sample paradigm was not sensitive enough for examining cognitive processes in adults, as
Saalbach and Imai (2005) found a subtle but stable classifier
effect in similarity judgment using rating scales.
To conclude, this research provides important implications for the field of language and thought as well as for the
field of cognitive development. First, it suggests that the
simple Whorfian-vs.-non-Whorfian dichotomy does not
deepen our understanding of the nature of our concepts and
categories very much, as the effect of language-specific categories may be seen in one type of cognitive activity, but not
in others (see also Saalbach & Imai, 2005). What is important,
then, is how, rather than whether, language-specific categories,
be them grammatical or lexical, affect our concepts, categories, and cognitive processes, and how they interact with taskspecific constraints as well as our universal cognitive dispositions. Second, this research demonstrates that children are
extremely flexible and adaptive learners, and a single cognitive task cannot fully reveal the nature of children’s cognitive
structure.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by Japan Society of the Promotion of Science and Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung. We are deeply
indebted to Zhou Xiaolin, Elsbeth Stern, Lennart Schalk, Li
Lianjing, Zou Ling, and Miho Nagumo for help for data collection and discussion.

References
Baldwin, D. A. (1992). Clarifying the role of shape in children's taxonomic assumption. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 54, 392-416.
Carpenter, K. (1991). Later rather than sooner: extralinguistic
categories in the acquisition of Thai classifiers. Journal of
Child Language, 18, 93-113.

708

Gelman, S. A., Collman, P., & Maccoby, E. E. (1986). Inferring properties from categories versus inferring categories
from properties: The case of gender. Child Development,
57, 396-404.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23(3), 183-209.
Imai, M. (1995). Asymmetry in the taxonomic assumption:
Word learning vs. property induction. Paper presented at
the 27th Child Language Research Forum.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic study of
early word meaning: Universal ontology and linguistic influence. Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Imai, M., Gentner, D., & Uchida, N. (1994). Children's theories of word meaning: The role of shape similarity in early
acquisition. Cognitive Development, 9(1), 45-75.
Liu, J., Golinkoff, R. & Sak, K. (2001) One cow does not an
animal make: young children can extend novel words at the
superordinate level. Child Development, 72,1674-1694.
Mandler, J. M., & McDonough, L. (1996). Drinking and driving don't mix: Inductive generalization in infancy. Cognition, 59, 307-335.
Markman, E. M., & Hutchinson, J. E. (1984). Children's sensitivity to constraints on word meaning: Taxonomic versus thematic relations. Cognitive Psychology,16,1-27.
Saalbach, H., & Imai, M. (2005). Do classifier categories
structure our concepts? In Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Saalbach, H., Stern, E., & Zhou, X. (2004). Mental representation and acquisition of Chinese classifiers. Paper presented at the 28th International Congress of Psychology,
Beijing, China.
Senft, G. (2000). What do we really know about nominal
classification systems? In G. Senft (Ed.), Systems of
nominal classification (pp. 11-50). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smiley, S. S., & Brown, A. L. (1979). Conceptual preference
for thematic or taxonomic relations: A nonmonotonic
trend from preschool to old age. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 28, 437-458.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
& Samuelson, L. K. (2002). Object name learning provides on-the-job taining for attention. Psychological Science, 13, 13-19.
Waxman, S. R., & Namy, L. L. (1997). Challenging the notion of a thematic preference in young children. Developmental Psychology, 33, 555-567.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Bassok, M. (1999). What makes a man
similar to a tie? Stimulus compatibility with comparison
and integration. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 208–238.

