UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categorization in Infancy: When Sounds and Labels Hinder Category Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1md7m2f9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Robinson, Christopher W.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categorization in Infancy:
When Sounds and Labels Hinder Category Learning
Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

1997; Xu, 2002; see also Waxman, 2003 for a review). For
example, in Balaban & Waxman’s (1997) study, 9-month-old
infants were familiarized to a category and the to-becategorized entities were associated with the same label, the
same content-filtered speech, or the same nonlinguistic
sound. After familiarization, infants were presented with two
novel entities: one from the familiar category and one from a
novel category. If infants formed a category during
familiarization, then they should perceive a novel entity from
a familiar category as old and show a reliable preference to
look to the novel category. The findings demonstrate that
infants who heard speech (label or content-filtered) were
more likely to look to the novel category than infants who
heard sounds.
However, there are recent findings suggesting that effects
of labels may stem from more general (rather than languagespecific) factors. For example, there is evidence that both
labels and sounds often overshadow (i.e., attenuate
processing of) visual input (Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004;
Robinson, Howard, & Sloutsky, 2005; Robinson & Sloutsky,
2004a; 2004b; Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003). Therefore, it is
possible that both labels and sounds result in less efficient
category learning than a no-sound condition.
If this is the case, how could the overshadowing hypothesis
explain the earlier found effects of labels on categorization
(e.g., Balaban & Waxman, 1997)? One possibility is that the
familiarity of the auditory input can account for the degree
and likelihood of overshadowing effects. It has been shown
that unfamiliar auditory input exerts greater overshadowing
effects than more familiar auditory input (Robinson, Howard,
& Sloutsky, 2005; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004b). Given that
speech sounds of a native language are more familiar than
completely novel sounds, it seems plausible that after
multiple exposures labels would exert weaker overshadowing
effects on visual input than unfamiliar sounds.
The goal of the current study was to further examine
overshadowing effects by examining how auditory input
affects category learning in young infants. Infants in the
current task were familiarized to different members of a

Abstract
Why do linguistic labels facilitate category learning more than
other types of auditory input? From one perspective, it has been
argued that effects of labels stem from young infants having
broad assumptions that labels and categories are linked. From a
different perspective, it is possible that both labels and sounds
deplete attentional resources and hinder category learning, with
sounds attenuating visual processing more than linguistic labels.
The current study investigated effects of auditory input on
categorization in 12-month-old infants, and the findings are
consistent with the latter view: compared to a silent condition,
both linguistic labels and nonlinguistic sounds hindered category
learning in young infants, and differential effects of labels and
sounds stemmed from nonlinguistic sounds interfering with
category learning more than labels. The role of auditory input in a
variety of cognitive tasks is discussed.
Keywords: Cognitive Development, Attention, Language
Acquisition, Psychology, Human Experimentation.

Introduction
The ability to form categories by treating discriminable
entities as members of an equivalence class is an important
component of human cognition (see Murphy, 2002 for a
review). This ability appears very early in development (e.g.,
Oakes, Madole, & Cohen, 1991; Quinn, Eimas, &
Rosenkrantz, 1993; Younger & Furrer, 2003). Furthermore,
exposure to linguistic input seems to facilitate category
learning above and beyond exposure to non-linguistic
auditory input (see Waxman, 2003 for a review).
Why do labels facilitate categorization more than nonlinguistic auditory input? According to the language-specific
view, even prelinguistic infants are “equipped with a broad,
universally shared expectation, linking words to
commonalities among objects,” (Waxman, 2003, p. 220).
Thus, at the onset of word learning, linguistic labels and
nonlinguistic sounds have different effects on cognitive tasks
because infants have some general understanding of the
conceptual importance of labels (e.g., Balaban & Waxman,

2038

category (i.e., cat), and during familiarization each individual
cat was associated with the same auditory stimulus (either
sound or word) or each individual cat was presented without
an auditory stimulus (i.e., silent condition). After
familiarization, infants were simultaneously presented with
two novel stimuli (i.e., novel cat and novel bear). If infants
formed a category during familiarization, then they should
perceive a novel cat as old and look longer to the novel
category (i.e., compared to infants’ initial preference).
Furthermore, if labels facilitate categorization then infants in
the label condition should accumulate more relative looking
to the novel category at test compared to infants in the silent
and sound conditions. However, if auditory input interferes
with category learning, then nonlinguistic sounds and
linguistic labels should hinder categorization compared to the
silent condition. It was hypothesized that both words and
sounds would hinder categorization and effects of labels over
sounds would stem from sounds hindering category learning
more than words.

Stimuli The auditory stimuli consisted of a non-speech
sound (i.e., laser sound) and an infant-directed linguistic
label (i.e., “a cat”), which was produced by a female
experimenter. Both auditory stimuli were dynamic (i.e.,
changing in pitch and amplitude), and they were each
presented at 65-68 dB for 1000 ms. The visual stimuli
consisted of 10 familiarization stimuli (i.e., 10 different cats)
and 4 test stimuli (i.e., 2 novel cats and 2 bears). All visual
stimuli were realistic representations of cats and bears and
were presented at approximately 36 cm x 36 cm in size (see
Figure 1 for examples of visual stimuli).
Figure 1. Examples of Visual Stimuli

Method
Participants Seventy-one 12-month-olds (45 boys and 26
girls, M = 373 days, SD = 13 days) participated in this
experiment. A majority of infants were Caucasian and none
of the infants had auditory or visual deficits, as reported by
parents. Eighteen infants heard no auditory input during
familiarization (i.e., silent condition), 21 infants heard the
same nonlinguistic sound throughout familiarization (i.e.,
sound condition), and 18 infants heard the same linguistic
label throughout familiarization (i.e., label condition). An
additional 14 infants were presented with the same testing
stimuli, however, these infants were not familiarized to a
category prior to testing (i.e., initial preference condition).

Familiarization Stimuli

Testing Stimuli

Procedure The procedure consisted of two phases: a
familiarization phase and a testing phase. During
familiarization, infants were familiarized to 10 different
stimuli within the cat category. Each familiarization trial
consisted of a cat with a white background that appeared for
8000 ms. The auditory stimulus was presented at the onset of
the visual stimulus and lasted for 1000 ms. Infants heard
nothing in the silent condition. After each familiarization
trial, the cat disappeared and the projection screen blackened
for 1000 ms prior to the next familiarization stimulus. After
80 s of familiarization, infants were presented with two test
trials. Each test trial consisted of a novel in-category
exemplar (i.e., novel cat) and a novel out-of-category
exemplar (i.e., novel bear), presented simultaneously. Test
stimuli were presented to the left and right sides of the
projection screen and approximately 64 cm apart from each
other. As with familiarization trials, the duration of each test
trial lasted 8000 ms. No auditory input was presented at test.
The orders of familiarization and of test trials were
randomized and the left-right location of the test stimuli were
counterbalanced within subjects. Fixation durations were
recorded online during familiarization and test trials.

Apparatus Infants sat on parents’ laps 100 cm away from a
152 cm x 127 cm projection screen, which was located
approximately 5 cm above the infant’s eye level. A Sony
DCR-TRV40 camcorder was used to capture infants’
fixations and was projected to a Dell flat panel monitor in the
observation room. An NEC GT2150 LCD projector was
mounted on the ceiling approximately 30 cm behind the
infant. Two Boston Acoustics 380 speakers were 76 cm apart
from each other and mounted in the wall. The speakers and
camcorder were concealed by black felt and located directly
below the projection screen. Two small lights were located
behind the infant to ensure that the room was dimly lit
throughout the entire procedure. In an adjacent room, a Dell
Dimension 8200 computer with Presentation software was
used to present stimuli to the infants, as well as to record the
onset and offset of infants’ visual fixations. Fixations to the
visual stimuli were recorded online by pressing one of two
buttons on a 10-button USB game pad when infants were
looking at the stimuli and releasing the buttons when infants
looked away from the stimuli.

Results and Discussion
Analyses focused on accumulated looking during
familiarization and the percent looking to the novel category
at test. A one-way ANOVA with Stimulus Condition (i.e.,
Sound, Label, and Silent) as a between-subjects factor
revealed a main effect of Stimulus Condition, F (2, 54) =

2039

9.73, p < .001. Across the 80 s familiarization phase, infants
accumulated more looking when the stimuli were
accompanied by the nonlinguistic sound (M = 64.10 s, SE =
2.67 s) and the linguistic label (M = 61.91 s, SE = 2.27 s)
than when the same visual stimuli were presented in the
silent condition (M = 48.61 s, SE = 2.99 s), ts > 3.55, ps <
.001.
Furthermore,
accumulated
looking
during
familiarization did not differ between the label and sound
conditions, t (37) = 0.61, p = .54, which suggests that the
labels and sounds had comparable effects on increasing
infants’ attention.
Additional analyses focused on infants’ relative looking to
the novel category at test. As can be seen in Figure 2, 12month-olds’ looking to the novel category differed across
the Stimulus Conditions (i.e., Initial Preference, Sound,
Label, and Silent), one-way ANOVA with Stimulus
Condition as a between-subjects factor, F (3, 67) = 6.05, p
< .001. In particular, 12-month-olds in the silent condition
(M = 57.89%, SE = 3.41%) increased looking to the novel
category compared to infants’ initial preference (M =
44.08%, SE = 2.51%), t (30) = 3.09, p < .005. In contrast,
infants’ looking to the novel category in the label condition
(M = 48.62%, SE = 3.18%) and sound condition (M =
42.91%, SE = 1.88%) did not differ from infants’ initial
preference, ts < 1.07, ps > .29. In addition, planned
comparisons revealed that 12-month-olds looked longer to
the novel category in the silent condition compared to the
sound condition, t (37) = 4.00, p < .001, and compared to
the label condition, t (34) = 1.99, p = .055. Furthermore,
similar to previous reports (e.g., Balaban & Waxman,
1997), these participants looked longer to the category in
the label condition than in the sound condition, one-tailed p
= .059.

General Discussion
The results of the current study reveal several important
findings. First, introducing sounds and labels during
familiarization increased infants’ overall attention, as
indicated by more accumulated looking to the visual stimuli
in the auditory conditions compared to the no auditory
condition. However, this increase in looking did not
correspond to an increase in categorization performance.
Rather, infants in the current study were more likely to form
a category when visual stimuli were presented in isolation
than when the same stimuli were paired with sounds and
labels.
Recall that we considered two views that may underlie
effects of labels on categorization. The language-specific
view suggests that linguistic input facilitates categorization
because infants at the onset of word learning have broad
assumptions that words and categories are linked (see
Waxman, 2003 for a review). Thus, according to this view
hearing the same label (but not the same sound) associated
with different entities, directs infants’ attention to the
commonalties between these entities, which in turn,
facilitates categorization (e.g., Balaban & Waxman, 1997;
Waxman & Booth, 2003). Alternatively, it is possible that
many of the effects of labels stem from the dynamics of
attention in cross-modal processing (i.e., general auditory
proposal). In particular, auditory input often overshadows
visual input early in development (Napolitano & Sloutsky,
2004; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004a; 2004b; Sloutsky &
Napolitano, 2003). Furthermore, many of the effects of labels
on cognitive tasks may stem from general auditory and
familiarity effects, as opposed to assuming that infants at the
onset of word learning understand the conceptual importance
of labels (but see Xu, Cote, & Baker, 2005).
The results of the current study are consistent with the
general auditory proposal: infants’ increased attention in the
sound and label conditions was primarily directed to the
auditory input, and the auditory input hindered visual
processing and category learning. However, since the current
experiment did not assess encoding of auditory stimuli, it is
also possible that the auditory stimulus simply interfered with
forming categories (e.g., auditory stimulus added complexity
to the task). While both of these explanations are consistent
with the general auditory proposal, it is uncertain how the
language-specific view can account for the current findings:
infants in the label condition accumulated significantly more
looking during familiarization compared to infants in the no
auditory condition, however, these infants were less likely to
form a category than infants in the no auditory condition.
If linguistic input overshadows visual input, how can
linguistic input ever facilitate categorization? One possibility
stems from attentional learning (Jones & Smith, 2002; Smith,
Jones, & Landau, 1996; Smith, 1999; Yoshida & Smith,
2003). As infants start associating words with objects, they
will eventually detect that each word is associated with a
cluster of information (e.g., entities called birds often have

Percent looking to novel category

Figure 2. Effect of Auditory Input on Categorization
65

Initial Preference
Sound

60

Label
Silent

*

55
50
45
40
35

Note: “*” different from initial preference, p < .005. Error
bars reflect Standard Errors of the mean.

2040

natural categories by 3-month-old and 4-month-old
infants. Perception, 22, 463-475.
Robinson, C. W., Howard, E. M., & Sloutsky, V. M.
(2005). Mechanisms underlying the effects of labels on
cognitive development. In B.G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M.
Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the XXVII Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 1878-1882.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004a). Auditory
dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Robinson, C, W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004b). The effect of
stimulus familiarity on modality dominance. In K.
Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of
the XXVI Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 1167-1172. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Napolitano, A.C. (2003). Is a picture
worth a thousand words? Preference for auditory modality
in young children. Child Development, 74, 822-833.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Robinson, C. W. (2005). The role of
words and sounds in visual processing: From
overshadowing to attentional tuning. Manuscript submitted
for publication.
Smith, L. B., (1999). Children’s noun learning: How
general learning processes make specialized learning
mechanisms. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), The emergence of
language (277-303). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism.
Cognition, 60, 143-171.
Waxman, S. R. (2003). Links between object categorization
and naming: Origins and emergence in human infants. In
D. H. Rakison & L. M. Oakes (Eds.), Early category and
concept development: Making sense of the blooming,
buzzing confusion (pp. 213-241). London, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Waxman, S. R., & Booth, A. E. (2003). The origins and
evolution of links between word learning and conceptual
organization: New evidence from 11-month-olds.
Developmental Science, 6, 130-137.
Xu, F. (2002). The role of language in acquiring object kind
concepts in infancy. Cognition, 85, 223-250.
Xu, F., Cote, M., & Baker, A. (2005). Labeling guides object
individuation in 12-month-old infants. Psychological
Science, 16, 372-377.
Younger, B. A., & Furrer, S. D. (2003). A comparison of
visual familiarization and object-examining measures of
categorization in 9-month-old infants. Infancy, 4, 327348.
Yoshida, H., & Smith, L. B., (2003). Known and novel
noun extensions: Attention at two levels of abstraction.
Child Development, 74, 564-577.

feathers and fly). Eventually children not only learn that
specific words are linked to specific clusters, but they also
learn a more abstract regularity: count nouns in general are
linked to categories. Another possibility is that as children
become progressively more familiar with words, or any
auditory stimulus, overshadowing effects should decrease
and possibly even facilitate visual processing.
Finally, it is also possible that effects of labels change in
the course of processing. While the current study found no
facilitative effects of labels on category learning after 80 s of
familiarization, it is possible that labels may play a
significant role later in the course of processing. For
example, when auditory stimuli (e.g., familiar sounds and
human speech) and visual stimuli are presented to children
for short durations, the auditory stimulus often overshadows
the visual stimulus (Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004). In
contrast, when familiar auditory stimuli are paired with visual
stimuli for longer durations, overshadowing effects attenuate
and under some conditions infants are actually more likely to
encode the visual stimulus than when the same stimuli are
presented in a unimodal baseline (Sloutsky & Robinson,
2005). Thus, understanding how infants allocate attention to
cross-modal stimuli at various points in processing will not
only shed light on attention and cross-modal processing, but
will also highlight the component processes underlying word
learning and the effects of labels on cognitive tasks such as
categorization, individuation, and induction.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103 and BCS # 0078945) to
Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old infants?
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3-26.
Jones, S. S., Smith, L. B., (2002). How children know the
relevant properties for generalizing object names.
Developmental Science, 5, 219-232.
Murphy, G. L., (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a Picture
Worth a Thousand Words? The Flexible Nature of
Modality Dominance in Young Children. Child
Development, 75, 1850-1870.
Oakes, L. M., Madole, K. L., & Cohen, L. B. (1991).
Object examining: Habituation and categorization.
Cognitive Development, 6, 377-392.
Quinn, P. C., Eimas, P. D., & Rosenkrantz, S. L. (1993).
Evidence for representations of perceptually similar

2041

