UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Classroom Based Reading Strategy Training: Self-Explanation vs. a Reading Control

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xc9r9vx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
McNamara, Danielle S.
O'Riley, Tenaha
Taylor, Roger S.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Classroom Based Reading Strategy Training:
Self-Explanation vs. a Reading Control
Tenaha O’Reilly (t.oreilly@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Roger S. Taylor (rtaylor@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems
Psychology Department, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
This study examined the effects of a reading intervention called
Self-Explanation Reading Strategy Training, (SERT) on highschool students’ comprehension of science text. Students (n =
465) in 19 classrooms from three high schools were randomly
assigned to either SERT or a Control condition. Science
comprehension was assessed immediately after training with a
science passage about the origin of viruses. The results
indicated that participants who mastered SERT strategies
outperformed control participants. However, further analyses
revealed that the effects of condition depended upon the school
in which the students were tested. Implications for
individualized training are discussed.

Introduction
Today’s high school classrooms have become increasingly
diverse in terms of both culture and student ability level
(Stormont, 2005). Diversity poses some difficult challenges
for educators, as teachers are faced with accommodating a
wide range of student backgrounds and knowledge levels
(Stormont, 2005). Moreover, teachers are expected to teach a
wide range of students in terms of ability, such as reading
skill. As a consequence, many educators teach in a way that
accommodates the average student (Fuchs, Fuchs, Mathes, &
Simmons., 1997). However, the outcome of using this form
of accommodation may do little to help students who are not
performing at the average level - the low or high ability
students.
While extensive research has shown that smaller class sizes
significantly improve learning (Finn, Gerber, Achilles, &
Boyd-Zaharias, 2001), it is often not possible to reduce class
sizes because of limited funding. Thus, in regular classes it is
often difficult for teachers to provide the individualized
instruction students may need.
One approach to help teachers cope with the challenges of
diversity is to teach general leaning strategies. Teaching
learning strategies helps students improve self-efficacy (VanKeer & Verhaeghe, 2005) and autonomy (Rivers, 2001).
More importantly, teaching learning strategies, such as those
directed at improving reading comprehension has been shown
to be effective (Rosenshine & Meister, 1994; Rosenshine,
Meister, & Chapman, 1996).

One such reading intervention that has gained attention in
recent years is self-explanation (Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu, &
LaVancher, 1994). Self-explanation is the process of
explaining the meaning of text to one’s self while reading.
Research has shown that training students to self-explain
improves learning and comprehension (Chi et al., 1994).
More recently, McNamara (2004) has developed a reading
strategy intervention called Self-Explanation Reading
Strategy Training (SERT) based upon the concept of selfexplanation. SERT builds upon previous self-explanation
research by integrating a variety of empirically based reading
strategies to scaffold students’ ability to self-explain. The
training progresses from teaching relatively simple techniques
designed to help local processing such as paraphrasing to
more demanding strategies that require global processing
such as bridging and elaboration. Research has indicated that
SERT helps improve reading comprehension in laboratory
studies with college students (McNamara, 2004) and middle
school students (McNamara, O’Reilly, Best, & Ozuru , in
press), as well as in a small-scale classroom study with high
school students (O’Reilly, Best, & McNamara, 2004).
These results are promising; however, the past studies have
been limited in two ways. First, the majority of them have
been conducted in the laboratory rather than in classrooms,
and research has shown that the effects produced in the lab
may not generalize to real world settings (e.g., Ceci &
Bronfenbrenner, 1985). For example, Ceci and
Bronfenbrenner (1985) found that children’s (10 and 14 year
olds) use of time monitoring strategies differed as a function
of the location of the experiment. Children’s use of time
monitoring strategies was less strategic in the lab than when
the children were tested in a natural setting. Thus, it is
important to assess whether strategy training based on lab
results would be effective in an authentic school setting. For
example, in some of the early lab based research (e.g.,
McNamara, 2004) participants were trained in strategy use on
a “one-on-one” basis. In contrast, in the current study,
participants were trained during their regular class time, and
thus the training was given to the class as a whole. In real
classroom settings, extraneous variables such as disruptions,
peer interactions, teacher attitudes, and attendance may
mitigate the impact of the intervention.
A second limitation of previous research was that the scale
of the studies has been relatively small. Our goal here was to

1887

more broadly examine the impact of strategy training for a
larger number of high school students across diverse settings
and from a variety of socio-cultural backgrounds. This type of
research will help to determine whether the strategy training
can be scaled up to a wide variety of real-world settings.
In the current study, we examined the effect of SERT and a
reading control on high school students’ comprehension of a
science text. The study included a large sample of students (n
= 465) from three different high schools in two states (i.e.,
Virginia and Kentucky). Students were also tested in a variety
of science classes. These factors help to provide a diverse
sample to assess the scalability of the strategies.
We predicted that students in the SERT condition would
outperform students in the control condition because SERT
was designed to help students to utilize their prior knowledge,
which research has shown to be critical to reading
comprehension (Shapiro, 2004).In addition, SERT should
help students to build an integrated text representation that
incorporates both local and global text processing.
SERT requires the student to learn new skills, so they must
first learn the new declarative information, and then gradually
proceduralize this information over time (Anderson &
Lebiere, 1998). Thus one possibility is that the students in the
SERT condition may experience cognitive overload during
the training, which may actually impair the comprehension in
comparison to the control condition. Students in a reading
control condition may use reading techniques with which they
are already familiar and proficient at using. These techniques
are likely to be relatively automatized and, as a result, they
may interfere less with the reading and learning process.
Because SERT is a new and potentially more cognitively
demanding task, there is a possibility that some students may
perform more poorly on the post-training comprehension
measures in comparison to the students in the more
naturalistic control condition.

Method
Nineteen classrooms in three schools were randomly assigned
to the SERT or control conditions. Students in the SERT
classrooms were provided with training on how to selfexplain texts using five reading strategies. Control classrooms
were simply asked to read the same science text as was used
with the SERT training. Comprehension was assessed using a
new science passage taken from a high school science
textbook. Two question formats were used to evaluate the
students’ understanding: multiple choice and open-ended
questions. For each question format, we used both text-based
and bridging-inference questions to assess different levels of
students’ understanding of the science passages.

ethnicity was distributed in the following manner: White
57%, African American 24.5%, Native American 5.6%,
Hispanic 4.7%, Asian 2.6%, 0.2% not specified. The mean
age was 15.3 (SD = 1.17). One high school was located in an
urban region of Norfolk, Virginia, the second in a suburban
region in Williamsburg, Virginia, and the third in a rural
region in Prestonsburg, Kentucky.
Materials
Student abilities were measured with two tests: the GatesMacGinitie Reading Skill Test and a Prior Science
Knowledge Test. The Gates-MacGinitie test is a standardized
reading comprehension test, designed for grades 10-12. The
test consists of 48 multiple-choice questions designed to
assess student comprehension on several short text passages
(Cronbach’s Alpha α=.91). Due to time constraints, the time
limit for the comprehension question section was reduced to
15 minutes. The prior knowledge test consisted of 35
multiple-choice items which tap knowledge of different
science domains including biology, scientific methods,
mathematics, earth science, physics, mathematics, and
chemistry (Cronbach’s Alpha α=.82).
To examine reading comprehension, immediately
following training, we administered a passage on the science
topic of viruses. The text described the structure, and
reproduction of viruses, as well as providing some examples
of viruses and how they relate to disease. The passage was
1,216 words in length with a Flesch Reading Ease of 45.1 and
Flesch-Kincaid Grade level of 10.6. Reading comprehension
was assessed with a set of eight open-ended and eight
multiple-choice questions, half were text-based and half were
bridging-inference questions. The answer to the text-based
questions could be found in a single sentence of the passage.
In contrast, the answers to the bridging-inference questions
required the reader to integrate the information across two or
more sentences in the text. For the purposes of this paper, we
analyzed the overall total proportion correct on the virus
passage.

Participants
The sample consisted of 465 students in grades nine to twelve
from a variety of science classes including biology, earth
science, physical science, and chemistry. There was an
approximately even distribution of males (50.8%) and
females (48.6%) in the sample (0.6% not specified). The

1888

Self-Explanation Reading Training (SERT)
The training was delivered in three main phases:
introduction, demonstration, and practice (see, McNamara,
2004). During the introduction phase, participants were
provided with a description and examples of self-explanation.
The instructor defined and provided examples for five reading
strategies: comprehension monitoring, paraphrasing,
elaboration, logic and common sense, prediction, and making
bridging inferences.
During the demonstration phase, participants watched a
video depicting a student reading and self-explaining a text
about forest fires. Participants could refer to the
accompanying video transcript during viewing. The video
was paused at predetermined points, and participants
identified and discussed the strategies being used by the
student in the video. In the practice phase, the participants
worked in pairs to practice self-explanation while reading a
chapter from their science textbook. The participants took

In short, any effects of condition can not be accounted for
by pre-training differences in reading ability or science
knowledge. However, the results indicated that the schools
varied in terms of reading skill and prior knowledge levels.
This was expected as we had chosen the schools such that
they would provide students with a wide range of skill and
knowledge levels.

turns self-explaining, alternating after each paragraph. At the
end of each paragraph, the partner who was listening (and not
self-explaining) summarized the paragraph.
Participants in the reading control condition were asked to
read the same science text on forest fires that the SERT
participants had self-explained.
Design and Procedure
Each class was randomly assigned to one of two conditions:
SERT or Control. Experimental sessions were conducted by
two experimenters during students’ regular classroom time.
Prior to training, students completed the prior knowledge test
followed by the Gates MacGinitie Reading skill test. A 15minute time limit was given for each test.
SERT training was conducted during two class periods
conducted on consecutive days. Participants were told that the
purpose of the study was to learn strategies that would help
them to better understand and remember what they read. The
control condition required one class period. Students in the
control condition were told that the purpose of the study was
to learn what strategies students use when reading their
textbooks. They read the science texts to which trained
groups were exposed during training.
Immediately after training, participants were given 30
minutes to read a new science text passage and answer the
accompanying comprehension questions. In the SERT
condition, the experimenter briefly reviewed the strategies for
SERT before beginning the comprehension test. The students
did not have the text available when answering the questions.

Overall analysis: Effects of Training Condition
A 2 X 3 ANOVA was conducted on the total proportion
correct on the science text passage (virus) as a function of
training condition (SERT, Control) and school (urban,
suburban, and rural). To control for the effects of individual
differences, we entered science knowledge and reading skill
as covariates.
Neither the effect of condition, F(1, 457) = < 1, school,
F(2, 457) = 2.05, MSE=.021, p = .130, nor the interaction
between condition and school F(2, 457) = 1.91 MSE = .041, p
= .149, were significant.

Results

Criterion-Based Performance
One potential reason for the lack of a training effect is that
some of the students may have acquired an incomplete
understanding of the SERT strategy. That is, there may be
large differences in terms of acquiring strategy proficiency.
Thus, the lack of a clear difference between the control and
SERT conditions may be attributable to inadequate mastery
of the SERT reading strategies by some students. This result
would indicate that SERT was potentially effective, but that
additional training may be required for some students to
master the strategies.
To explore this possibility, we categorized students based
on their level of mastery of the concepts explained in SERT.
During training, SERT participants were given a 12-item
multiple-choice SERT quiz that assessed their knowledge of
the SERT strategies. We set a criterion of mastery relatively
leniently at 66% correct on the SERT test. According to this
criterion, 93 (42%) of the total number of participants trained
to use SERT met this criterion of mastery, whereas 103
students (46%) did not. Twenty-seven of the SERT
participants (12% of the SERT sample) were not included in
the analysis because they did not complete the SERT mastery
test.
Two 2 X 3 between-subjects ANOVA’s with condition
(SERT vs. Control) and school as factors were performed on
the comprehension questions (knowledge and reading skill
were entered as covariates). The first ANOVA included the
SERT participants who did not meet our criterion of mastery.
For non-mastery participants, there was no effect of condition
F(1, 337) < 1, and no significant interaction of condition and
school, F(1, 337) = 1.34, MSE = .027, p = .262.
In contrast, the analysis with mastery students revealed a
significant effect of condition F(1, 337) = 5.41, MSE =.112, p
= .02, Cohen’s d = .24, indicating that SERT participants
scored higher (M = .62, SD = .17) than control participants (M
= .58, SD =.16). However, there was also a significant

Pretest Individual Differences Scores
To examine potential pre-training differences in student
ability scores, we performed analyses on the students’ pretest
reading ability and prior science knowledge as a function of
condition and school. An analysis of the reading skill scores
indicated that there was no significant effect of condition,
F(1, 459) = 1.87 MSE = 66.76, p = .172, a significant effect
of school F(2, 459) = 27.42, MSE = 66.76, p < .001, and no
interaction F(2, 459) < 1.. A post hoc least significant
difference (LSD) test indicated that the students in the rural
school (M = 19.78, SD = 8.23) scored significantly higher
than the students in the urban school (M = 16.88, SD = 8.17),
and students in the suburban school (M = 23.76, SD = 8.17)
scored higher than students in both the urban and rural
schools.
The analysis of the prior knowledge scores revealed no
effect of condition F(1, 459) = 1.05, MSE = .029, p = .736, a
significant effect of school, F(2, 459) = 26.47, MSE = .029, p
< .001, and no interaction F(2, 459) < 1). A post hoc LSD test
revealed that the students in the rural school (M = .56, SD =
.17) scored significantly higher than the students in the urban
school (M = .50, SD = .17), and students in the suburban
school (M = .64, SD = .17) scored higher than students in
both the urban and rural schools.

1889

interaction between condition and school, F(2, 327) = 4.59,
MSE = .021, p = .01.
Follow-up analyses were conducted to analyze this effect.
For students in the rural school, there was a significant
advantage for the SERT group (M = .62, SD = .14) over the
control group (M = .52, SD = .14), F(1, 99) = 6.50, MSE =
.019, p = .01, Cohen’s d = .71. For the urban school, there
was a trend for SERT (M = .57, SD = .15) to score higher
than control (M = .52, SD = .14), but the result was not
significant, F(1, 69) = 1.75, MSE = .021, p = .19, Cohen’s d =
.34. For the suburban school there was no significant
difference between the SERT (M = .62, SD = .15) and the
control (M = .64, SD = .15) conditions, F(1, 155) < 1,
Cohen’s d = .13.
Mastery as a Function of School
In sum, our results revealed that SERT can improve
students’ comprehension of scientific text. However, the
findings also indicated that the effectiveness of the
intervention depended upon the school in which the students
were enrolled. This result begs the question as to why SERT
was effective in one school but not the others.
Of course, as intended, the schools differed quantitatively
in terms of the students’ performance on the prior ability
measures. As such, it is notable that the school with the
highest performance on prior abilities (i.e., suburban) showed
no gains, and the school with the lowest performance (i.e.,
urban) showed only moderate gains. This result thus raises
the possibility that the effectiveness of the training depends
on students’ prior abilities. Quite simply, the students who
needed the training but had enough skills to tackle higher
level reading comprehension strategies (i.e., rural) were the
ones who gained the most from the training.
If prior abilities are responsible for determining who can
benefit from the training, then there should be a difference on
the SERT scores as a function of school. If students in the
suburban school (i.e., higher performing school) did not
benefit from the training because they have already mastered
the strategies, then they should have the highest scores on the
SERT mastery quiz. To test this hypothesis, we performed an
analysis of variance on the students’ SERT quiz scores as a
function of school. Differences among the schools in terms of
the SERT quiz scores (i.e., degree of strategy mastery) may
reflect why students in some schools benefited from the
training while students in the other schools did not.
We conducted an analysis on the SERT quiz scores for the
93 students who met our definition of mastery (scored at least
66% correct on the SERT quiz) as a function of school. An
analysis that included all SERT subjects (both mastery and
non-mastery, n = 196) produced identical results.
A three-way ANOVA with school as the between-subjects
factor (knowledge and reading skill were entered as
covariates) and the SERT quiz score as the dependent
variable revealed a significant effect of school, F(2, 88) =
11.23, MSE = .004, p < .001. Follow up analyses revealed
that suburban school, participants scored significantly higher
(M = .82, SD = .07) on the SERT quiz than students in the

rural (M = .75, SD = .06), F(1, 74) = 16.16, MSE = .004, p <
.001, Cohen’s d = 1.07., and the urban school (M = .76, SD =
.06), F(1, 71) = 8.67, MSE = .04, p = .004, Cohen’s d = .92.
There was no significant difference in the SERT quiz scores
between the rural and urban schools, F(1, 29) < 1.
In sum, our analysis revealed that the effectiveness of the
training depended upon school. However, further analyses
revealed this difference was mediated by the students’ ability
to master the strategies: Students in the suburban schools
were more likely to master the strategies than students in
other schools. One potential explanation for why the students
in the suburban school did not show any effects of training is
because they may have already known the strategies before
training. Moreover, students in the urban school may not have
had a large effect of training because they lacked the
minimum skills required to learn the strategies.

1890

Discussion
The principal aim of this study was to examine whether
SERT could help students better comprehend science text.
The design of the study has some notable strengths. First, the
training took place in actual classrooms. Second, the sample
size was both large and diverse in terms of school locale,
student abilities, course type, gender, and ethnicity - the
combination of which strengthens the ecological validity of
the research.
We predicted that the SERT condition would outperform
the control condition because SERT provides students with a
variety of strategies that can be used to foster the construction
of a more integrated representation of the text. However,
comparing the performance of SERT to a reading control
condition is a challenging contrast.
It can be argued that our reading control condition was not
a strategy-free situation. Students may have used a variety of
strategies that they have used successfully for years. In this
way, our control participants may have used a collection of
strategies, as opposed to using no strategies at all. This
possibility is supported by another reading comprehension
study (O’Reilly, Sinclair, & McNamara, 2004), in which the
researchers asked participants in a control reading condition
what strategies they had used while reading the text. Only
16.5% of the participants indicated that they had not used any
strategies. In fact, control participants reported using a variety
of strategies that included identifying key points 14.7%,
mnemonics 6.4%, imagery 7.4%, and using prior knowledge
7.3%. In short, it is possible that the participants in our
control condition utilized other effective strategies.
Despite this possibility, we were still surprised to find that,
at first glance, the SERT condition was not statistically
different from the control condition. One interpretation of this
finding is that students might not have adequately learned the
SERT strategies. To test this theory, we analyzed the
participants in terms of their scores on a test of SERT strategy
mastery. The analysis revealed that for those students who did
not master SERT, there was no difference in their
performance as compared to those in the control condition. In

contrast, for the participants who did master the strategies,
there was a large advantage of SERT over the control
condition (Cohen’s d = .71 in the rural school).
While these results were encouraging, the impact of the
training depended upon the school in which the strategy was
tested. There was a large and clear effect in the rural school.
However, in the urban school we only found a trend of an
effect, and in the suburban school, there was no effect.
Qualitatively and quantitatively, we can speculate as to why
we did not get a uniform effect in all schools.
Qualitatively, we can say that the schools differed in many
ways such as location, socio-economic status, and ethnic
composition. However, the precise manner in which these
factors affected the outcomes of this experiment is unclear.
Nonetheless, our results show that the impact of strategy
intervention in the context of real classroom situations is a
complex phenomenon. Researchers need to be aware that
because a certain intervention does, or does not work, in one
context, doesn’t necessarily mean that the intervention is
effective in other contexts.
Quantitatively, our results have shown that all the schools
differed on both our measures of ability. Students in the
suburban school had highest reading skill and knowledge
scores followed by the students in the rural and urban schools.
The students in the suburban school also had significantly
higher SERT quiz scores than either the rural or urban school.
As such, one possibility is that the students in the suburban
school may not have benefited from the training because they
already had a good grasp on many of the SERT strategies (or
other effective strategies) before training. In contrast, students
in the rural school and to a lesser extent, students in the urban
school, may have benefited because they were less familiar
with the strategies before training.
These results have important implications for strategy
instruction. First, our results highlight the importance of
testing interventions in ecological and diverse settings.
Simply testing the effectiveness of strategy in a laboratory
setting does not necessary mean that it will scale up for use in
classrooms. Moreover, success in a laboratory, or even a few
classrooms, does not guarantee success in all types of high
schools. Indeed, this research has led to some important
cautions in providing strategy training to high school
students. Second, researchers in the area a reading strategy
instruction must be sensitive to the particular needs of the
student. Students learn at different rates, so it is critical that
instructors try to tailor their training so that students with
diverse backgrounds can benefit. One weakness of the
human-based SERT training used in this study was that not
all of the students benefited from the training - only the
students who mastered the SERT training in certain schools
made significant gains. The effects of training may have been
mitigated by the fact that it was given in a group, rather than
individualized settings. Individual one-on-one training may
produce stronger effects because the training can be adapted
to the student’s individual needs.
Our approach to solving this problem has been to automate
the SERT training within a program called iSTART

(McNamara, Levinstein, & Boonthum, 2004). iSTART is a
computer program that uses automated agents to teach SERT.
The program is adaptive and provides feedback on the quality
of explanations based on the individual performance of the
student. Preliminary results indicate that iSTART helps
improve comprehension (McNamara, O’Reilly, Rowe,
Boonthum, & Levinstein, in press). We speculate that
iSTART is effective, in part, because it focuses on adaptive
instruction that is tailored to students’ needs.
In conclusion, our results provided evidence that, under
certain circumstances, SERT can help students learn more
from expository science text. However, care should be taken
to ensure that students master the strategy before it should be
evaluated. Finally our results underscore the importance of
field testing reading interventions in diverse school settings.

Acknowledgements
We thank the members of the ODU Strategy Lab who helped
to conduct this study. This project was supported by NSF
(REC-0241144) and IES (R305G040046). Any opinions,
findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the NSF or IES.

References

1891

Anderson, J.R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components
of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ceci, S., & Bronfenbrenner, U. (1985). “Don’t forget to take
the cupcakes out of the oven”: Prospective memory,
strategic time-monitoring, and context. Child Development,
56, 152-164.
Chi, M.T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., & LaVancher, C.
(1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding.
Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Finn, J., Gerber, S., Achilles, C., & Boyd-Zaharias J. (2001).
The enduring effects of small class sizes. Peabody Journal
of Education, 67, 75-84.
Fuchs, D., Fuchs, L.S., Mathes, P.G., & Simmons, D.C.
(l997). Peer-assisted learning strategies: Making
classrooms more responsive to diversity. American
Educational Research Journal, 34, 174-206.
McNamara, D.S. (2004). SERT: Self-explanation reading
training. Discourse Processes, 38, 1-30.
McNamara, D. S., Levinstein, I. B., & Boonthum, C. (2004).
iSTART: Interactive strategy trainer for active reading and
thinking. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 36, 222-233.
McNamara, D.S., O’Reilly, T., Best, R., & Ozuru, Y. (in
press).
Improving
adolescent
students’
reading
comprehension with iSTART. Journal of Educational
Computing Research.
McNamara, D. S., O’Reilly, T., Rowe, M., Boonthum, C. &
Levinstein, I. (in press). iSTART: A Web-Based Tutor that
Teaches Self-Explanation and Metacognitive Reading
Strategies In D. S. McNamara (Ed.). Reading

Comprehension Strategies: Theory, Interventions, and
Technologies. Erlbaum: Mahwah, NJ.
O'Reilly, T., Best, R., & McNamara, D.S. (2004). Selfexplanation reading training: Effects for low-knowledge
readers. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, T. Regier (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1053-1058). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
O'Reilly, T., Sinclair, G.P., & McNamara, D.S. (2004).
Reading strategy training: Automated versus live. In K.
Forbus, D. Gentner, T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the
26th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1059-1064). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rivers, W. (2001) Autonomy at all costs: An ethnography of
metacognitive self-assessment and self-management among
experienced language learners. Modern–Language Journal,
85, 279-290.

Rosenshine, B., & Meister, C. (1994). Reciprocal teaching: A
review of the research. Review of Educational Research,
64, 479-530.
Rosenshine, B., Meister, C., & Chapman, S. (1996). Teaching
students to generate questions: A review of the intervention
studies. Review of Educational Research, 66, 181-221.
Shapiro, A.M. (2004). How including prior knowledge as a
subject variable may change outcomes of learning research.
American Educational Research Journal, 41, 159-189.
Stormont, M. (2005). Introduction to the special issue:
Supporting learners with diverse needs in general education
settings. Psychology in the Schools, 42(8), 759.
Van-Keer, H., & Verhaeghe, J. (2005). Effects of Explicit
reading strategies instruction and peer tutoring on second
and fifth graders' reading comprehension and self-efficacy
perceptions. Journal of Experimental Education, 73, 291329.

1892

