UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Neuroendocrinology: Risk Preference Changes Across the Menstrual Cycle

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/37k5j9w2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Burns, Bruce D.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Neuroendocrinolgy: Risk Preference Changes Across the Menstrual Cycle
Bruce D. Burns (bburns@psych.usyd.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Sydney
2006 Sydney, Australia

game a nasal spay of the hormone oxytocin increased the
extent to which participants decided to trust their partners.
Much of the recent work in the growing field of cognitive
neuroscience has focused on what areas of the brain appear
to be involved in different aspects of cognition. This is also
true of the emerging field of neuroeconomnics which is
largely interested in the relationship between the brain and
types of decision making. However by largely ignoring the
role of hormones these fields may be leaving out half the
story. This paper aims to test a hypothesis implying a
hormonal effect on decision making, and as such to
illustrate why taking into account hormones could be
critical. There is no specific name for this field, but it could
be appropriately described as cognitive neuroendocrinology.

Abstract
There is growing evidence that hormones play an important
role in a number of cognitive processes. This challenges the
concept of the brain as a computer in favor of it being thought
of as a gland. However studies of hormones and cognition
have often lacked clear hypotheses. The current study based
its hypothesis on an evolutionary analysis. Previous studies
suggest that women selectively reduce activities increasing
risk of sexual assault when ovulating. Oral contraceptives
blocked this effect, suggesting a hormonal mechanism. This
study tested if there was a general decrease in risky choices
during ovulation. 176 women were classified as menstrual,
postmenstrual, ovulatory or premenstrual, and chose between
a guaranteed ($85) or risky outcome (85% chance of $100).
Phase affected rate of risky choice only for women not taking
contraceptives. The effect was entirely due to risky choices
dropping to 0% for ovulating women not taking
contraceptives. This adds to evidence that understanding
neurochemistry is important for understanding decision
making, and adds to the plausibility of a field of cognitive
neuroendocrinology.

Hormones and Cognition
It is not the case that the role of hormones in cognition has
been totally ignored. Within the literature on stress the role
of hormones on cognitive performance has often been
considered (e.g., Taylor, Klein, Lewis, Gruenewald,
Gurung, & Updegraff, 2000). Studying the cognitive impact
of hormone therapy for postmenopausal women (Drake, et
al., 2000) or those being treated for breast cancer (Shilling,
Jenkins, Fallowfield, & Howell, 2003) has become
important. There is starting to be clear evidence of affects of
hormones on vision (Gupta, Johar, Nagpal, & Vasavada,
2005), working memory (Rosenberg & Park, 2002),
attention (Beaudoin & Marocco, 2005), and navigation
(Driscoll, Hamilton, Yeo, Brooks, & Sutherland, 2005).
Some of these findings may be a consequence of hormonal
effects on hemispherical asymmetry (Hausmann, 2005).
However the results of this research are often unclear and
sometimes contradictory, so the conclusion from
Richardson’s (1992) survey of the then existing literature,
that it is hard to draw clear principles from this work,
appears to still hold.
Much of the work on hormones and cognition has studied
the effects of the menstrual cycle on women. This has many
methodological advantages as the menstrual cycle produces
strong and predictable hormonal changes without any need
to intervene or manipulate a person’s hormones. Despite the
methodological advantages of studying variations across the
menstrual cycle the fact that different studies have focused
on different points in the cycle has added to the difficulty of
drawing clear conclusions across the studies. The literature
has often lacked clear hypotheses because there was little
basis on which to say what the critical points in the cycle
should be for cognition. A possible way to generate
hypotheses is by taking an evolutionary approach.

Keywords: Decision making; risk; hormones; menstrual
cycle, evolutionary psychology.

Introduction
The dominant metaphor for the brain has been the computer
thus the biological basis of cognition has been seen in terms
of circuits and connections (Thagard, 2002). However
recent advances in knowledge about how the brain works
has suggested that more than connections are involved as
the biochemistry of the brain is crucial to its operation. The
most obvious illustration of this is the effectiveness of
psychoactive drugs for treating mental illness, but
unintended psychological effects of drugs do so as well. For
example, a recent study reported cases of patients with
Parkinson Disease who become compulsive gamblers as a
result of taking medication for their condition (Dodd, Klos,
Bower, Geda, Josephs, & Ahlskog, 2005). Perhaps seeing
the brain as a computer is insufficient, instead the brain may
be thought of as a gland (Bergland, 1985).
Neuroscience has started to have an impact on the
understanding of complex cognition, such as decision
making. A good example of this is in the work of Damasio
(1994), who found that brain lesions which impaired
processing of emotion also impaired decision making. A
recent study by Kosfeld, Heinrichs, Zak, Fischbacher, and
Fehr (2005) reported evidence of hormones influencing
decision making. They found that giving players of a trust

125

outcome ($85) or a risky outcome (a 85% chance of $100)
and asking them which they preferred. It was predicted that
for women taking hormonal contraceptives (most of which
should block ovulation) there will be no impact on their
preference as a function of menstrual phase, however
women who were not taking such contraceptives and could
be classified as ovulating should have a lower rate of
selecting the risky choice relative to women classified as
being in other phases of their menstrual cycles.

An Evolutionary Approach: Ovulation and Risk of
Sexual Assault
Evolutionary psychology has been criticized as telling posthoc stories about existing data, but its greatest value may be
when it can be used to generate novel predictions (Cosmides
& Toby, 1999). From an evolutionary viewpoint, the critical
point of the menstrual cycle for decision making should be
ovulation, because that is when pregnancy is most likely to
occur and thus critical choices are made that affect which
male genes will contribute to future generations. One
implication of this is that there may have been evolutionary
pressure for women to develop mechanisms that reduced the
risk of rape during ovulation.
Following this logic, two studies have tested the
prediction that women’s menstrual cycle may affect their
engagement in behavior that may increase their risk of
sexual assault. Chavanne and Gallup (1998) and Bröder and
Hohmann (2003) tested this hypothesis by asking women
about their behavior over the last 24 hours and
differentiating between behaviors that may increase a
woman’s risk of attack (e.g., walking in a dimly lit area) and
those that were considered relatively safe (e.g., watching
TV). Both studies found evidence consistent with the claim
that there was a relative decrease in risky behaviors by
ovulating women, but only if they were not taking a
hormonal contraceptive. Thus these studies concluded that
women change their behavior over the menstrual cycle by
reducing the frequency of engaging in behavior that might
increase the risk of losing control of being able to select the
father of their children, and they do so at the time when the
chance of pregnancy is greatest. Note that the critical point
is loss of control of the decision over which genes may be
passed onto the next generation, so these results do not
contradict evidence that there is an overall increase in sexual
intercourse for women who are ovulating (Wilcox,
Weinberg, & Baird, 1995). The critical issue is choice and
loss of that choice through sexual assault. Consistent with
this is the finding that increases in sexual interest at time of
ovulation are selective rather than uniform (Gangestad,
Thornhill, & Garver-Apgar, 2005).
That hormonal contraceptives can block the effect found
by Chavanne and Gallup (1998) and Bröder and Hohmann
(2003) suggests that the mechanism is hormonal. However,
if such a hormonal mechanism has evolved, then it may well
be more general than specific behaviors such as walking in
dimly lit areas. Instead it may lead to a more general
avoidance of risk. Therefore this paper will test the
hypothesis that ovulation may lead to a general decease in
preference for risk. However, if what the earlier studies
discovered was a mechanism specific to minimizing risk of
sexual assault at ovulation, then there should be no impact
of the menstrual cycle on a test of general risk preference.

Method
Participants
A total of 444 undergraduate students at Michigan State
University participated for partial course credit. There were
no gender restrictions on participation so 133 of these
participants were men. Overall, there was no difference in
the percentage of men (30.0%) choosing the risky option
($85 rather than the 85% chance at $100) and the percentage
of women (30.1%) doing so, X2(1) = .010, p = .92. Of the
women, 271 indicated the first day of last menstruation and
of these 176 indicated that they had a regular menstrual
cycle. All of these women answered the question regarding
whether they were taking a hormonal contraceptive (overall,
only 5 of 311 women did not answer this question). These
remaining 176 women had an average age of 19.9 years, and
were the sample analyzed in this paper.

Procedure
Participants were recruited to do a set of experimental tasks.
As part of this they were presented with the following task:
You just won a prize on a game show. The host gives
you two choices. You can either take a sure prize of $85
or you can spin a wheel for an 85% chance to win $100
(but you’d have a 15% chance of winning nothing).
Which choice would you prefer?
Choose One (circle your choice):
A. The sure prize of $85
B. The 85% chance of winning $100
After completing some more tasks the female participants
were presented with the following questions:
What was the date of the first day of your last
menstruation? ______
If you cannot remember the exact date please make the
best estimate in terms of days: _____________
Are your menstrual cycles irregular, shorter than 23
days, or longer than 33 days? YES
NO

The Current Study: Generalizing the effect

Are you currently using a hormonal contraceptive? (e.g.,
pill, patch, injection, ring) YES
NO

The hypothesis that women who were ovulating would have
a lower general preference for risk was tested by presenting
women with a standard choice between a guaranteed
126

Participants read that we are investigating a possible
relationship between hormones and the decisions people
make and they were told that “We cannot connect you to
your survey. However, you are completely free to not
answer any of these questions if you do not wish to.”
Participants received no payment, only course credit.

completely reliable but it is considered reasonably accurate
and it lacks any systematic bias.
The classification scheme resulted in 34 women being
classified as in the menstrual phase (19 on hormonal
contraceptives, 15 not), 51 as postmenstrual (28 on
hormonal contraceptives, 23 not), 38 as ovulatory (18 on
hormonal contraceptives, 20 not), and 53 as premenstrual
(28 on hormonal contraceptives, 25 not).

Results
Classification

Analysis

After excluding all men, and women who either did not
answer all the questions or who indicated an irregular
menstrual cycle, the remaining 176 women were classified
as in the contraceptive “yes” or “no” groups. They were also
classified into one of four menstrual cycle phase groups on
the basis of how many days into their menstrual phase they
were calculated to be. A participant indicting that today was
the first day of her last menstruation would be assigned as
being in “Day 1” and for all others their day was calculated
by counting back to what they indicated was their first day.
Woman calculated to be in days 1 to 5 were classified as in
the menstrual phase, if in days 6 to 12 as in the
postmenstrual phase, if in days 13 to 17 as in the ovulatory
phase, and if in days 18 to 28 as in the premenstrual phase.
This method of classifications was the same as used by
Chavanne and Gallup (1998). It is acknowledged to not be

Figure 1 shows the proportion of participants who choose
the risky option (85% chance at $100) over the safe option
(sure $85) by whether or not they took hormonal
contraceptives and which phase of their menstrual cycle
they were classified as in. For women taking contraceptives
there was no effect of which phase they were classified as
in, X2(3) = .73, p = .86, but there was for women not taking
contraceptives, X2(3) = 11.0, p = .012. The effect for woman
not taking contraceptives was entirely due to the rate of
choosing the risky option dropping to 0% for those in their
ovulatory phase. This was statistically significantly different
from the rate for women in their menstrual (X2[1] = 7.8, p =
.009), postmenstrual (X2[1] = 11.3, p = .001), and
premenstrual phases (X2[1] = 6.6, p = .010). Although
directly comparing the “yes” and “no” contraception groups

50%

Percenting choosing risky option

45%
40%
35%
30%
yes
no

25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
menstrual

postmenstrual

ovulatory

premenstrual

Menstrual phase
Figure 1: Percentage of women in each menstrual phase choosing the risky option depending on whether they were (“yes”
line) or were not (“no” line) taking hormonal contraceptives.

127

has to be done with caution given that these are selfselecting groups, it is interesting that there is also a
significant difference in the rates of preferring the risky
choice between the contraceptive groups for women
classified as being in the ovulatory phase (X2[1] = 6.4, p =
.011). Therefore the hypothesis was supported, women were
less likely to make a risky choice at the likely time of
maximum likelihood of pregnancy, but this effect was
absent if they were taking hormonal contraceptives.

Montorsi, 2005). As described earlier, Kosfeld, et al. (2005)
reported evidence of oxytocin influencing decision making
in a trust game and there is evidence of intriguing
behavioral effects of oxytocin (see Gimpl & Fahrenholz,
2001, for a review). However, Kosfeld, et al. argued that
their results were not due to a change in risk preference.
They ran another experiment with a game identical in terms
of payoff and risks to the trust game but that did not involve
a human partner. Administering oxytocin under these
conditions had no impact on how the game was played.
Peaks in levels of luteinizing hormone are what trigger
ovulation, so it is a candidate. Yet there are currently no
reported behavioral effects of luteinizing hormone.
Estrogen is the critical component of many forms of
hormonal contraceptive and it is also elevated during
ovulation (Alliende, 2002), so it is an obvious candidate for
explaining the effects of ovulation on risk preference.
However any such explanation would need to reconcile why
there was no evidence of an effect of taking estrogen in the
form of contraceptive pills on risk preferences. Such a
reconciliation may be possible (perhaps it is fluctuations
that are critical), but would require evidence.
Thus the exact nature of the hormonal mechanism
producing fluctuations in riskiness over the menstrual cycle
is unclear at the moment. However this study has provided a
clue as to what to look at.

Discussion
The study supported the speculation that ovulation may
decrease women’s preference for risk. Furthermore, the
finding that this menstrual phase effect was blocked by
hormonal contraceptives argues that hormones play a role in
people’s preferences for risky or safe choices.
Note that it is difficult to argue that these results could be
due to some form of learning or awareness of ovulation.
Most women do not think they have awareness of when they
are ovulating and many of those who do claim some
awareness can be shown to be inaccurate in estimating when
they are ovulating (Sievert & Dubois, 2005). Furthermore,
hunter-gather societies are not aware of the link between
ovulation and pregnancy (Marlowe, 2004) so this effect is
unlikely to be due to some form of cultural learning. Thus
avoiding risk at time of ovulation is unlikely to be some
type of learned behavior as the stimulus is not perceived,
and was not seen as significant until relatively recently.
Although this study only examined the effects of
hormones on women, Kosfeld et al. (2005) focused on men,
therefore there is no reason to think that hormonal
influences on decision making are restricted to women.
Whether the reduction in riskiness during ovulation is
“better” or “worse” decision making overall is hard to say.
Ovulation is the most critical time for determining what
genes get passed onto the next generation; so arguable this
should be the time that women are at their peak cognitively.
Rosenberg and Park (2002) presented evidence that
women’s memory capacity is improved at time of ovulation.
Of course the cognitive effects of hormones may well vary
with gender. Rosenblitt, Soler, Johnson, & Quadagno
(2001) found a relationship between measured cortisol
levels and sensation seeking for men but not for women
(interestingly, testosterone showed no relationship for either
gender).

A Mechanism: The Nucleus Accumbens?
As well as lacking evidence regarding which hormones are
critical for explaining this effect, it is difficult to know what
brain structures may be responsible for it. However there is
fragmentary evidence that could be combined to produce a
speculation that the nucleus accumbens is a critical
structure.
Two relevant finding regarding the nucleus accumbens
have been reported that may connect it to the menstrual
phase effect. First, an fMRI study has found evidence of
greater activation in the nucleus accumbens when a person
is about to make a risky choice as opposed to a nonrisky
choice (Matthews, Simmons, Lane, & Paulus, 2004).
Second, there is evidence that estrogen affects the nucleus
accumbens of the rat (Becker, 1999). Thus this is a brain
structure which is both implicated in risk preference and is
affected by a hormone that is elevated at time of ovulation;
however there is no direct evidence that this is more than
coincidence.
Although the suggestion that the nucleus accumbens may
play a role in the effects this paper reports is very
speculative, this is not the first time it has been proposed
that the nucleus accumbens plays a role in decision making.
Wagar and Thagard (2004) propose a model in which he
nucleus accumbens plays a critical gating role for how
emotional information may influence decision making.
Damasio (1994) proposed that critical for decision making
are somatic markers from the ventromedial prefrontal cortex

Which Hormones?
This study does not provide evidence regarding which
particular hormones may explain the menstrual phase effect
beyond suggesting that the candidates are hormones that are
elevated at time of ovulation.
One such hormone is oxytocin which has been found to
be elevated at time of ovulation but only in women not
taking oral contraceptives (Salonia, Nappi, Pontillo,
Daverio, Smeraldi, Briganti, Fabbri, Zanni, Rigatti, &

128

(VMPFC) and amygdala. Wagar and Thagard propose a
computational model assuming a network of connections
between these areas, the nucleus accumbens and the ventral
tegmenal area in which the nucleus accumbens gates the
access of the somatic markers to the areas of the brain
responsible for higher-order cognition. They give such a
role to the nucleus accumbens because of evidence that the
nucleus accumbens is responsible for mediating basic
locomotive and appetitive behaviors driven by affective
states (Mogenson, Jones, & Yim, 1980), that it receives
afferent connections from the other brain structures that
make up their model (O’Donnell & Grace, 1995), and that
the nucleus accumbens appears to have a gating effect on
facilitation.

complementary to more traditional cognitive neuroscience
that has tended to focus on what areas of the brain are
involved in different aspect of cognition. Knowledge of
what areas of the brain are involved in a cognitive process
together with knowledge of what hormones affect those
areas could suggest hypotheses about hormones.
Conversely, findings regarding what hormones may be
important for a cognitive process could suggest hypotheses
for what structures to examine, given that we know which
structures are particularly affected by different hormones.

Acknowledgments
This study was conducted at Michigan State University. It
benefited from discussions with Erik Altmann, Tony Nuñez,
Chris Larson, and from feedback from presenting this work
at the University of NSW psychology department
colloquium.

Implications: A field of cognitive
neuroendocrinolgy?
These results require replication, in particular one utilizing a
within-subject design and physical confirmation of
ovulation. There is also a need to explore exactly how
general the drop in risk preference is at ovulation. However
statistically the results are strong, the pattern fits exactly to
that predicted, and they are consistent with the apparent
drop in specific risky behaviors at ovulation found by
Chavanne and Gallup (1998) and Bröder and Hohmann
(2003). Thus there is reason to think the results of the single
study reported here will stand up, and if they do then they
have important implications.
Beyond the implications for understanding decision
making in general, finding that hormones may have strong
influences on decision making may have important
implication for medical treatment. Many diseases and their
treatments have strong effects on hormones of patients who
may be asked to make critical decision weighing up the risk
of future treatments. If Parkinson disease medication can
lead to compulsive gambling (Dodd, et al., 2005) then it
could severely effect the way such patients choose between
potential treatment options. The results reported here
suggest that other drugs may also have such implications.
Overall, the findings that hormones influence even
complex cognitive processes, such as decision making, add
to the growing body of evidence that understanding the
neurochemistry of the brain will be critical to understanding
its computational properties. As Thagard (2002) points out,
this has been a largely neglected aspect of cognitive science
and it shifts the view of the brain as a computer more
towards the brain as a gland. This paper suggests ways
around the barriers that have existed to stunt the
development of a “cognitive neuroendocrinology.” Both
evolutionary theory and use of neuroimagery have grown
recently in their influence on psychology. Using these tools
it may be possible to reduce the difficulty of generating
hypotheses about what hormones to examine and when. In
this paper an evolutionary argument was used to justify its
hypotheses and recent findings from imaging studies were
used to speculate about a possible mechanism for the effects
found. Thus a field of cognitive neurendocrinolgy would be

References
Alliende, M. E. (2002). Mean versus individual hormonal
profiles in menstrual cycle. Fertility and Sterility, 78,
90-95.
Beaudoin, J., & Marocco, R. (2005). Attentonal validity
effect across the human menstrual cycle varies with
basal temperature changes. Behavioral Brain Research,
158, 23-29.
Becker, J. B. (1999). Gender differences in dopaminergic
function in straitum and nucleus accumbens.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 64, 803812.
Bergland, R. (1985). The fabric of mind. New York:
Penguin Books.
Bröder, A., & Hohmann, N. (2003). Variations in risk
taking behavior over the menstrual cycle: An improved
replication. Evolution and Human Behavior, 24, 391398.
Chavanne, T. J., & Gallup, G. G. (1998). Variations in risk
taking behavior among female college students as a
function of the menstrual cycle. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 19, 27-32.
Cosmides, L., & Toby, J. (1999). Evolutionary psychology.
In R. A. Wilson & F. C. Keil (Eds.), The MIT
encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences (pp. 295-298).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason,
and the human brain. New York: Penguin.
Dodd, M. L., Klos, K. J., Bower, J. H., Geda, Y. E.,
Josephs, K. A., & Ahlskog, J. E. (2005). Pathological
gambling causes by drugs used to treat Parkinson
disease. Archives of Neurology, 62, 1-5.
Drake, E. B., Henderson, V. W., Stanczyk, F. Z., McCleary,
C. A., Brown, W. S., Smith, C. A., Rizzo, A. A.,
Murdock, G. A., Buckwalter, J. G. (2000). Associations
between circulating sex steroid hormones and cognition
in normal elderly women. Neurology, 54, 599-605.
Driscoll, I., Hamilton, D. A., Yeo, R. A., Brooks, W. M., &
Sutherland, R. J. (2005). Virtual navigation in humans:
129

know? American Journal of Human Biology, 17, 310320.
Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P., Gruenewald, T. L.,
Gurung, R. A. R., & Updegraff, J. A. (2000).
Biobehavioral responses to stress in females: Tend-andbefriend, not flight-or-flight. Psychological Review,
107, 411-429.
Thagard. P. (2002). How molecules matter to mental
computation. Philosophy of Science, 69, 429-446.
Wagar, B. M., & Thagard, P. (2004). Spiking Phineas Gage:
A neurcomputatonal theory of cognitive-affective
integration in decision making. Psychological Review,
111, 67-79.
Wilcox, A. J., Weinberg, C. R., & Baird, B. D. (1995).
Timing of sexual intercourse in relation to ovulation.
New England Journal of Medicine, 333, 1517-1521.

The impact of age, sex, and hormones on place
learning. Hormones and Behavior, 47, 326-335.
Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., & Garver-Apgar, C. E.
(2005). Women’s sexual interest across the ovulatory
cycle depends on primary partner developmental
instability. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 272,
2023-2027.
Gimpl, G., & Fahrenholz, F. (2001). The oxytocin receptor
system:
Structure,
function,
and
regulation.
Physiological Reviews, 81, 629-683.
Gupta, P. D., Johar, K., Nagpal, K., & Vasavada, A. R.
(2005). Hormone receptors in the human eye. Survey of
Ophthalmology, 50, 274-284.
Hausmann, M. (2005). Hemispherical asymmetry in spatial
attention across the menstrual cycle. Neuropsychologia,
43, 1559-1567.
Kosfeld, M. Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., &
Fehr, E. (2005). Oxytocin increases trust in humans.
Nature, 435, 673-676.
Marlowe, F. W. (2004). Is human ovulation concealed?
Evidence from conception beliefs in a hunter-gather
society. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 33, 427-432.
Matthews, S. C., Simmons, A. N., Lane, S. C., & Paulus, M.
P. (2004). Selective activation of the nucleus
accumbens during risk-taking decision making.
Neuroreport, 15, 2123-2127.
Mogenson, G., Jones, D., & Yim, C. (1980). From
motivation to action: Functional interface between the
limbic system and the motor system. Progress in
Neurobiology, 14, 69-97.
O’Donnell, P., & Grace, A. (1995). Synaptic interactions
among excitatory afferents to nucleus accumbens:
Hippocampal gating of prefrontal cortical inputs. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 15, 69-97.
Richardson, J. T. E. (1992). The menstrual cycle, cognition,
and paramenstrual symptomatology. In J. T. E.
Richardson (Ed.), Cognition and the menstrual cycle
(pp. 1-38). New York: Springer-Velag.
Rosenberg, L., & Park, S. (2002). Verbal and spatial
fluctuations across menstrual cycle in healthy young
women, Psychoneuroendocrinology, 27, 835-841.
Rosenblitt, J. C., Soler, H., Johnson, S. E., & Quadagno, D.
M. (2001). Sensation seeking and hormones in men and
women: Exploring the link. Hormones and Behavior,
40, 396-402.
Salonia, A., Nappi, R. E., Pontillo, M., Daverio, R.,
Smeraldi, A., Briganti, A., Fabbri, F., Zanni, G.,
Rigatti, P., & Montorsi, F. (2005). Menstrual cyclerelated changes in plasma oxytocin are relevant to
normal sexual function in healthy women. Hormones
and Behavior, 47, 164-169.
Shilling, V., Jenkins, V., Fallowfield, L., & Howell, T.
(2003). The effects of hormone therapy on cognition in
breast cancer. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry, 86, 405412.
Sievert, L. L., & Dubois, C. A. (2005). Validating signals of
ovulation: Do women who think they know really

130

