UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Collaborative Impression Formation and Recall of Impression-relevant Information

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0cq9v8x7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Ferreira, Mario
Garcia-Marques, Leonel
Garrido, Margarida
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Collaborative Impression Formation and Recall of Impression-relevant Information
Margarida Garrido (margarida.garrido@iscte.pt)
Department of Social and Organizational Psychology, ISCTE,
Av. das Forças Armadas 1649-026, Lisboa, Portugal

Leonel Garcia-Marques (garcia_marques@sapo.pt)
Faculdade de Psicologia e Ciências da Educação, University of Lisbon
Alameda da Universidade, 1649-013, Lisboa, Portugal

David Hamilton (hamilton@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9660

Mário Ferreira (mabf@fpce.ul.pt)
Faculdade de Psicologia e Ciências da Educação, University of Lisbon
Alameda da Universidade, 1649-013, Lisboa, Portugal

process, one of the most interesting issues in the scope of
memory research is precisely the relation between encoding
and retrieval processes, and how retrieval depends on
encoding contexts. This relation as long been recognized by
Tulving and Thompson (1973) who claimed that retrieval
depends on how information was encoded (encoding
specificity principle) and by others (e.g., Morris, Bransford,
& Franks, 1977) that suggested that memory performance is
enhanced when the test entails similar processing as
encoding (transfer of appropriate processing).
The main goal of the present paper is to study memory
encoding and retrieval processes in two different paradigms
(part-set cuing and collaborative recall) where the encoding
and retrieval context mismatch is particularly evident.
Further, we will present a specific principle – the Principle
of Associative Recapitulation (PAR) – which refers to the
degree of match between the associative organization of
information presented at encoding and available at retrieval,
and we will show how it accounts for the results of the four
experiments here reported.

Abstract
The present research examines how the match between
encoding and recall contexts influences recall performance.
Memory research has shown that recall performance can be
impaired when a subset of the studied stimuli is presented at
recall (the part-set cuing effect) or when the recall process is
carried out in a collaborative way (collaborative inhibition
effect). In 4 experiments we manipulated the degree of match
between item organization at encoding and at retrieval, either
by manipulating: the organization of part-set cues (exp. 1); the
organization of the information provided at encoding to
participants of the same collaborative recall sessions (exp. 2);
or the nature of the encoding conditions (collaborative vs.
non-collaborative; exp. 3 and 4). Results stress the parallel
between both effects showing that mismatching encoding
organization cues provided at test (by the experimenter or by
other collaborative group members), impair recall
considerably when compared to no cues or matching encoding
organization cues. We present a theoretical account for the
reported result pattern - the principle of associative
recapitulation.

Part-set cuing and collaborative inhibition

Introduction
Memory research in Social Cognition has emphasized
encoding at the expenses of retrieval processes (Garrido &
Garcia-Marques, 2003). Only recently has retrieval
processes became an explicit object of interest and study.
New research trends in Cognitive Psychology reformulate
classical views of memory (e.g., exemplar, parallel
distributed processing and dual process models) that account
for the diversified nature of recall processes and
experiences. Furthermore, some approaches include the
consideration of memory processes as cognitively
distributed processes questioning the classical view of
memory as a process carried out exclusively by isolated
individuals (Weldon & Bellinger, 1997). Regardless the
emphasis given to one or the other stage of the memory

Several studies have shown that when participants are
presented at test with a subset of studied items, the recall of
non-cued items decreases: the part-set cuing effect (e.g.,
Slamecka, 1968; Anderson & Bjork, 1994). Likewise, the
recall performance of collaborative groups (composed of
interacting individuals) is poorer relative to nominal groups
(composed of an equal number of participants tested
individually): the collaborative inhibition effect (e.g.,
Weldon & Bellinger, 1997; Basden & Basden, 1995). Both
effects have been recently extended to person memory
(Garcia-Marques, Hamilton, & Maddox, 2002).

Theoretical accounts
Inhibition and occlusion based accounts Part-set cuing
effects have stimulated a large set of explanations. One of

1358

the most important accounts put forward for part-set cuing
highlights trace competition. Items that share some similar
retrieval cues compete for retrieval because they cannot be
simultaneously retrieved (Anderson & Spellman, 1995).
According to different (but not necessarily opposing) views,
the conjunction of part-set cues and response competition
can cause either the occlusion of non-retrieved items
(Rundus, 1973), or their inhibition (Anderson & Bjork,
1994).
Shortcomings In the present experiments we extend the
part-set cuing paradigm to an impression formation task.
This extension is theoretically important because part-set
cuing effects are typically obtained under intentional
learning conditions with very simple stimulus materials.
Impression formation, by contrast, is an incidental learning
task that involves richer materials (i.e., traits and behavior
descriptor sentences). Integrative processing, however, may
represent a boundary condition to part-set cuing effects. In
fact, impression formation processes lead to the
development of highly integrated person representations that
typically involve high levels of spontaneous inter-item
associations (e.g., Asch, 1946). In densely interconnected
representations, part-set cues and non-cued items are
strongly associated, and thus non-cued items suffer less
from occlusion and/or are harder to inhibit (Anderson &
McCulloch, 1999). If that is the case, than part-set cuing
effects might fail to emerge in social cognition settings
(Dunn & Spellman, 2003) and as such inhibition / occlusion
cannot account for the extension of part-set cuing effects to
person memory.
Disruption of optimal retrieval strategies Another
account for part-set cuing effects also applies to
collaborative inhibition: the disruption of optimal
idiosyncratic recall strategies (Basden & Basden, 1995;
Sloman, Bower, & Rohrer, 1995). According to this
account, both part-set cues and collaborative recall disrupt
the use of recall strategies developed by participants at
encoding. According to Basden and colleagues (Basden &
Basden, 1995; Basden, Basden, Bryner, & Thomas, 1997;
for a review, see Nickerson, 1984), when participants are
asked to recall a set of studied items, they form a recall plan
that conforms to the way they have structured the items in
memory. When provided with part of the learning set as
cues (by the experimenter or by their fellow collaborative
group members), however, participants deviate from their
initial plan and use whatever recall strategy is suggested by
the cues. The more this new recall plan deviates from the
initial encoding organization, the worse recall performance
is. However, if part-set cuing effects are due to the
disruption of an optimal retrieval strategy, they should
emerge even in densely interconnected representations
because, if anything, sophisticated retrieval strategies are
more likely to be developed in the case of such complex
representations.
Shortcomings Although the account provided by Basden
and colleagues can potentially explain part-set cuing effects,
idiosyncratic strategy explanations assume a deliberate

process at encoding that does not match with incidental
learning contexts as impression formation ones (see Sloman
et al., 1991). Peynircioğlu (1989, 1995) provides some
specific evidence against this strategy disruption account of
the part-set cuing effect, reporting inhibitory effects of the
cues in incidental memory tasks, when subjects have no
reason to expect a memory test during the study phase.

Our Proposal
It seems that the “recall strategy disruption” account could
be easily amended simply by omitting the requirement of a
preplanned retrieval strategy (i.e., a retrieval plan generated
at encoding). Thus a modified “recall disruption” hypothesis
would propose that whenever retrieval fails to recapitulate
the associations formed at encoding, recall performance is
impaired. We will dub this modified recall disruptions
hypothesis as principle of associative recapitulation (PAR) 1
The present studies are directly targeted at providing a
differential test to the different explanations of part-set
cuing and collaborative inhibition effects, and our
associative recapitulation hypothesis may nevertheless
contribute to this ongoing debate. Given the assumption that
most of our recall experiences are socially framed it is easy
to understand that social interaction frequently provides
retrieval cues that often do not recapitulate encoding
idiosyncratic associative organization. Both part-set cuing
and the collaborative recall paradigms provide good
examples of such circumstances.

Experiment 1
To test the PAR we examined how the match between
encoding and retrieval contexts affects recall performance
by manipulating the organization of information at encoding
and available at retrieval in a part-set cuing paradigm. After
inducing different organizations of information at encoding,
we provided at test, as retrieval cues, information organized
in a way that either recapitulated the encoding organization
or presented an alternative organization.
We expected that a) presenting retrieval cues would
inhibit free recall of non-cued behaviors (part-set cuing
inhibition replication); b) when the organization of these
cues does not recapitulate the encoding organization the
magnitude of the impairment would be higher than when it
does. The presentation of part-set cues will induce a
retrieval plan that deviates from the initial encoding
organization, preventing retrieval search to follow the interitem association established at encoding, and thus impairing
recall. Further, when these cues intentionally mismatch the
initial encoding organization the magnitude of this
impairment will increase.
1

Our “associative recapitulation” hypothesis is similar to the
“principle of incongruency” of Sloman et al., (1991). We prefer
our hypothesis on the grounds that a) the introduction of a new
incongruency principle would be very confusing in the person
memory literature where the “incongruency” effect already
occupies a prominent position, and b) our associative
recapitulation predicts inhibition effects only in exhaustive and not
in heuristic memory tasks, whereas Sloman et al. (1991) do not
differentiate between retrieval modes.

1359

non-cued items recalled

Method
Participants and design 84 University of Lisbon students
were randomly assigned to the cells of a 3 encoding
condition (individuals: John, Peter, Louis, Anthony,
personality trait: intelligent, friendly, ecological, artistic,
context: vacations, work, holiday, home) x 3 retrieval-cue
organization (same, different, no cue) x 2 cue replication
(1st block, 3rd block) between subjects factorial.
Procedure Participants were told that they were
participating in a study about the impact of different
physical contexts on behavior and personality. Afterwards
they were exposed to four lists of pre-tested behavioral
information organized by different dimensions (target,
personality trait or context). For example, when the
encoding list was organized by individuals, participants
were presented a first list with 8 items from John, followed
by 8 items from Peter, 8 items from Louis, and 8 items from
Anthony. Each item of information consisted in a behavioral
description such as “John won a chess tournament with 50
participants on his vacations”, or “Anthony only uses
biodegradable detergents at home”. Note that all the
conditions presented the same behaviors and that there was
no relation between individuals, traits and contexts. After
reading through the lists and before test participants
performed a 15 min. filler task. At test, and immediately
before retrieval, they were exposed to a subset of those lists.
In the matching condition, that subset followed the
organization used at encoding (e.g., individuals; the 8 items
presented were the first or the third list presented at
encoding; e.g., John or Louis) whereas in another condition
it presented an alternative organization (the 8 items
presented were the first or the third list presented at
encoding in one of the other two encoding conditions; e.g.,
intelligent or ecologic; vacations or ecologic). A third nocue condition was also included in which no part-set cues
were presented. Finally participants were asked to free recall
all the behaviors presented.

Results and discussion
The ANOVA computed on the number of recalled items
yielded a cue organization main effect [F(2,111)=24.27;
p<.0001; ή2=.18, MSe=5.05] revealing that the 3 part-set
cues conditions differed significantly.
Planned contrasts between no cue conditions vs. cued
(same and different organization) conditions t(111)=6.50;
p<.001, one-tailed, MSe=5.05, ή2=.28, showed that recall
performance in the absence of part-set cues (M=6.48) is
higher then when cues are presented (M=3.38), replicating
the part-set cuing inhibition effects found in the literature.
Further, the planned contrast between the 2 cues conditions
was reliable, t(111)=2.38, p<.009, one-tailed, MSe=5.05,
ή2=.05. When the retrieval-cues organization differs from
the encoding organization recall performance is lower
(M=2.88) than when encoding and retrieval-cues
organizations match (M=3.97).

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
no cues

same as encod.
cue organization

diff. from encod.

Figure 1: Number of non-cued items as a function of cue
organization

Experiment 2
Extending these findings to a collaborative recall paradigm,
we manipulated the organization of the information given to
the participants at encoding. In this paradigm, participants
encode the information individually. At test, in the
collaborative recall conditions they recall the information
collaboratively, whereas in the base-line nominal recall
condition they recall the information individually.
We expected that when retrieval cues (provided by other
participants’ recall outputs) do not recapitulate the
associative organization presented, exhaustive recall would
be impaired (collaborative inhibition effect will occur).
When retrieval cues recapitulate the associative organization
presented, exhaustive recall would not be affected
(collaborative inhibition effect will be released or lessened).

Method
Participants and design 129 Lisbon University students
were randomly assigned to the cells of a 2 group encoding
(same, different) x 2 group recall (nominal, collaborative).
Procedure Participants were given the same instructions as
in Exp. 1 and presented with the same stimulus materials. In
one condition we presented exactly the same list of
behavioral information organized in the same way to the 3
collaborative group members (all by target, or all by trait, or
all by context). In another condition the same information
was presented but with a different organization for the 3
participants (one by target, one by trait, and one by context).
After completing a filler task, participants were asked to
free recall all the behaviors presented either individually
(nominal group recall) or in turn (collaborative group
recall), and to write them down.

Results and discussion
The ANOVA computed on the number of recalled items
presents a group recall main effect, F (1,39)=8.08, p<.007,
MSe=13.52, ή2=.17, indicating that, overall, nominal group
recall (M=20.14) is higher than collaborative group recall
(M=16.95).
A planned contrast showed that, in different organization
encoding conditions, the collaborative inhibition effect was
replicated, such that recall was better at nominal than at
collaborative recall conditions (respectively, M=20.20 vs.

1360

non-redundent items recalled

M=15.27), t(39)= 3.07; p<.002 one-tailed, MSe = 13.52,
ή2=.19. This result is consistent with collaborative inhibition
effects found in the literature and support our hypothesis
regarding the retrieval inhibition effect of collaborative
groups in free recall when encoding and retrieval conditions
mismatched. In contrast, in same organization encoding
conditions, the well known collaborative inhibition effect
disappears (M=20.09 vs. M=18.64), t<1. As predicted, when
retrieval cues (provided by other participants’ recall outputs)
recapitulated the associative organization presented, recall
was not affected, while mismatching retrieval cues led to
collaborative inhibition.
21
nominal

20

collaborative

19

Procedure The nominal encoding condition corresponded
to the standard impression formation paradigm. Each
participant (tested in groups of three) was exposed to a list
of pre-tested behavioral information. In collaborative
encoding conditions participants (also in groups of three)
received the same information but had to make a comment,
in turn, about each of the presented behaviors. Each
participant had to comment on 1/3 of the behaviors
presented, that were recorded by the experimenter. After a
filler task, participants were asked to complete recall
individually or in collaboration.

Results and discussion

18
17
16
15
same

4 trait-expectancy replications (intelligent, unintelligent,
friendly, unfriendly) between subjects factorial design.

different

encoding organization

Figure 2: Non-redundant recall as a function of group
encoding and recall conditions

Experiment 3
Collaborative cognitive processes do not occur only at
recall, the process of forming an impression may be
collaborative as well. This experiment examines how the
match between encoding and recall contexts can influence
recall performance, by presenting a new paradigm of
collaborative encoding and recall (adapted from the
collaborative recall paradigm; Basden et al., 1997).
According to PAR, whenever retrieval does not
recapitulate the associations formed at encoding, recall
performance is particularly impaired. Thus, in nominal
encoding condition (when encoding is individual) the
number of items recalled in collaborative groups will be
lower than that of nominal groups (collaborative recall
inhibition). Again, collaborative inhibition arises because
when recall is performed collaboratively, each participant’s
attempt to follow their idiosyncratic associative encoding
organization interferes with others’ attempts to do the same.
Thus, collaborative retrieval fails to recapitulate the
associations formed at encoding. However in collaborative
encoding conditions, participants should form much more
similar associative organizations. Each participant’s attempt
to follow their idiosyncratic associative encoding
organization should no longer interfere with others’ attempts
to do the same. Thus, under collaborative encoding,
collaborative recall inhibition should be released or
lessened.

Method
Participants and design 123 Lisbon University students
were randomly assigned to the cells of a 2 encoding
(collaborative, nominal) x 2 recall (collaborative, nominal) x

From the ANOVA performed on the number of recalled
items two main effects emerged. An effect of recall
revealing the collaborative inhibition effect: groups of
isolated participants performed better at recall (M=9.87)
than collaborative recall groups (M=8.57). F(1,25)=16.77;
p<.0004, MSe=2.97, ή2=.40. And an encoding effect
showing that participants in collaborative encoding
conditions performed better (M=9.78) than those in nominal
encoding conditions (M=8.65). F(1,25)=12.74, p<.001,
MSe=2.97, ή2=.34. A possible explanation for this last result
is the fact that participants were required to comment on 1/3
of the presented items which may have increased their level
of attention relative to nominal encoding participants.
Finally, planned comparisons showed that both under
nominal [t(25)=3.12; p<.002, one-tailed, MSe=2.97, ή2=.28]
and collaborative impression formation contexts
[t(25)=2.71; p<.005, one-tailed, MSe=2.97, ή2=.23] recall
performance was better for nominal than for collaborative
recall groups, with no indication of moderation by the
collaborative nature of impression formation. This
unexpected result questioned whether collaborative
impression formation was indeed performed in
collaboration. Since under collaborative impression
formation comments were made in turn and always in the
same order participants may have focused more on the
behaviors they had to comment neglecting the others.
Further analysis of the collaborative impression
formation/nominal recall group conditions revealed that
participants recalled a much higher proportion of the
behaviors they commented on (M=.64) than of those they
did not (M =.48), t (26)=4.00, p< .0003, two-tailed, SD=.14,
ή2=.38, indicating that collaborative encoding conditions
failed to minimize the differences between idiosyncratic
associative organizations. A new experiment specifically
aimed at changing the collaborative encoding paradigm was
required.

Experiment 4
Experiment 4 replicates the previous experiment with some
changes in the collaborative encoding procedures. In the
collaborative impression formation condition instead of
asking participants to comment on the items in turn, we
asked them to make their comments in a random order (they

1361

only knew if they had to comment on each item or not after
reading it). We assumed that this change would lead
participants to form much more similar associative
organizations. Thus, under this condition, collaborative
retrieval should no longer fail to recapitulate the
associations formed by each participant at encoding and the
collaborative inhibition should disappear or be reduced.

Method
Participants and design 108 Lisbon University students
were randomly assigned to a design similar to Exp. 3.
Procedure The procedure was also similar to Exp. 3.
However, instead of asking participants to comment on the
items in turn, they should do it in a random order.
Moreover, while in Exp. 3 the experimenter recorded their
comments, in this experiment, after making or hearing a
comment, all the individuals had to write it down.

Results and discussion

non-redundent items recalled

The ANOVA computed on the number of recalled items
revealed a type of recall main effect F(1,20)=11.18, p<.003,
MSe=3.22, ή2=.36, where groups of isolated participants
performed better (M=9.86) than collaborative recall groups
(M=8.69) (collaborative inhibition effect). Results also
shown a type of encoding main effect F(1,20)=13.40,
p<.001, MSe=3.22, ή2=.40. Participants in collaborative
encoding conditions performed better (M=9.90) than those
in nominal encoding conditions (M=8.63). Further, the
collaborative inhibition effect was moderated by the
collaborative nature of impression formation as predicted.
Planned comparisons showed that in conditions where
impressions are individually formed collaborative inhibition
emerged at recall t(20)=3.55; p<.001, MSe=3.22, ή2=.39,
whereas when impressions were formed collaboratively, it
did not, t(20)=1.28; p<.107, MSe=3.22, ή2=.08.
nominal recall

11

collab. recall
10
9
8
7
nominal

encoding

collaborative

Figure 3: Non-redundant recall as a function of encoding
and recall conditions
Further analyses showed that the problem we encountered
in Exp. 3 was reduced in this experiment. We no longer
found significant differences, per participant, between the
proportion of commented (M=.58) and non-commented
(M=.51) recalled items, t(23)=1.65; p<.112, two-tailed,
SD=.14, ή2=.11, suggesting that participants were
processing the items they had to comment on and the items

commented on by the other 2 group members in more
similar ways.

General Discussion
In four experiments, we manipulated the match of the
organization present in the studied stimuli and in the
retrieval context, using a part-set cue paradigm (Exp. 1), a
collaborative recall paradigm (Exp. 2) and a new encoding
and recall paradigm (Exp. 3 and 4).
The provision of a subset of previously presented items at
retrieval decreased recall of non-cued items, particularly
when the part-set cues provided mismatched the
organization of materials presented at encoding. A parallel
result was obtained in conditions of collaborative recall. The
number of items recalled in collaborative-recall groups was
lower than that of nominal-recall groups (collaborative
recall inhibition) when encoding and recall conditions
mismatched. However when there was a match between
encoding and retrieval processing the collaborative
inhibition effect diminished. Finally, introducing a new
collaborative encoding and recall paradigm, we found that,
although in a non-collaborative impression formation
condition the collaborative inhibition effect was replicated,
when the impression formation process was performed
collaboratively, the difference between nominal and
collaborative recall conditions almost disappeared.
On the whole, our experiments provide a differential test
to the different explanations of part-set cuing and
collaborative inhibition effects, aiming at contributing to the
ongoing debate in memory research. As we argued before,
the present extension of part-set cuing effects to a context
that entails high levels of integrative processing cannot be
accounted by an occlusion/inhibition explanation (Anderson
& McCulloch, 1999). Also the strategy disruption account
does not seem to fit with the incidental nature of memory
involved in our impression formation tasks, where the
engagement on deliberate and conscious strategies at
learning to form a recall plan would not be necessary to
perform the suggested tasks.
Our full set of results seems to be more compatible with a
modified recall disruption hypothesis, our associative recapitulation hypothesis, such that the inhibition effects are
explained by the mismatch between recall and encoding
frameworks. In fact, we argue that this same theoretical
principle accounts for the result patterns across the four
experiments. The PAR simply states that when retrieval
search fails to follow the inter-item associations formed
during encoding, performance will be impaired. Part-set
cuing and collaborative encoding and recall effects represent
instances where the retrieval context can potentially provide
cues organized in a way that mismatches the idiosyncratic
associations formed at encoding. The mismatch between the
organization of the cues provided at test and the
organization used at learning leads to recall performance
impairments (part-set cuing and collaborative inhibition
effects). However, when the organization of the cues
provided at test matched the organization of the stimuli used
at study, these effects disappeared. Note that, when part-set
cues recapitulate the initial encoding organization, and when
collaborative recall groups share the same encoding

1362

organization, participants can follow the inter-item
associations formed at encoding. This similar associative
organization between encoding and retrieval reduces recall
impairment.
Traditionally, cognitive mechanisms have been
characterized as processes taking place within the individual
mind. However most cognitive activities take place in social
settings and many cognitive tasks are undertaken in a
collaborative manner. Memory is often such a cognitive
task. Our results stress the importance of studying person
memory and the role of collaborative encoding and retrieval
paradigms within the framework of memory processes as
cognitively distributed rather than simply individual
phenomena.
Our results replicate the part-set cuing and the
collaborative recall inhibition effect in person memory
contexts. It is our contention that these findings are
important because situations analogous to part-set cuing or
collaborative encoding and retrieval paradigms are likely to
occur frequently in the social cognitive world. The retrieval
of person or group information, even when it pertains to
specific facts, may often be truncated, thus inhibiting future
retrieval
attempts
of
non-retrieved
information.
Consequently, we argue that retrieval inhibition paradigms,
far from being laboratory whims, are crucial to
understanding social memory. In fact, in social contexts, it
seems likely that only under exceptional circumstances
recall and encoding context match or the opportunity to
recapitulate the associations formed at encoding arise.
Indeed, the case of social interference or social disruption of
these processes may well be the rule. Thus, we think that the
generalization of the findings derived from the study of
isolated individuals under optimal retrieval conditions must
be complemented with the consideration of retrieval
interference in social as well as in non-social contexts.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported in part by the Grant
POCTI/PSI/47252/2002 from the FCT (Portugal) to the first
two authors and the last author.

References
Anderson, M. C., & Bjork, R. (1994). Mechanisms of
inhibition in long-term memory: a new taxonomy. In D.
Dagenbach, & T.H. Carr (Eds.), Inhibitory processes in
attention, memory and language. San Diego, CA, USA:
Academic Press, Inc.
Anderson, M. C., & McCulloch, K. C. (1999). Integration as
a general boundary condition on retrieval-induced
forgetting. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 25, 608-629
Anderson, M. C., & Spellman, B. A. (1995). On the status
of inhibitory mechanisms in cognition: Memory retrieval
as a model case. Psychological Review, 102, 68-100.
Asch, S. E. (1946). Forming impressions of personality.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 41, 258-290.

Basden, D. R., & Basden, B. H. (1995). Some tests of the
strategy disruption interpretation of part-set cuing
inhibition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 1656-1669.
Basden, B. H., Basden, D. R., Bryner, S., & Thomas, R. L.
(1997). A comparison of group and individual
remembering: Does group participation disrupt retrieval?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 23, 1176-1189.
Dunn, E. W., & Spellman, B. A. (2003). Forgetting by
remembering: Stereotype inhibition through rehearsal of
alternative aspects of identity. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 39, 420-433.
Garcia-Marques, L., Hamilton, D. L. & Maddox, K. (2002).
Exhaustive and heuristic retrieval processes in person
cognition: Further tests of the TRAP model. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 193-207.
Garrido, M., & Garcia-Marques, L. (2003). Em busca da
distinção perdida: Acessibilidade versus disponibilidade
mnésicas em cognição social [Searching for the lost
distinction: memory accessibility versus memory
availability in social cognition]. Análise Psicológica, nº 3,
série XXI, 323-339.
Morris, C. D., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977).
Levels of processing versus transfer appropriate
processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 16, 519-533.
Nickerson, R. S. (1984). Retrieval inhibition from part-set
cuing: A persisting enigma in memory research. Memory
& Cognition, 12, 531-552.
Peynircioğlu, Z. (1989). Part-set cuing effect with wordfragment cuing: Evidence against the strategy disruption
and increased-list-length explanations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 15, 147-152.
Peynircioğlu, Z. (1995). Part-set cuing in incidental and
implicit memory. American Journal of Psychology, 108,
1995, 1-11.
Rundus, D. (1973). Negative effects of using list items as
recall cues. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 12, 43-50.
Sloman, S. A., Bower, G. H., & Rohrer, D. (1991).
Congruency effects in part-list cuing inhibition. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 17, 974-982.
Slamecka, N. J. (1968). An examination of trace storage in
free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 76, 504513.
Tulving, E., & Thompson, D. M. (1973). Encoding
specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory.
Psychological Review, 80, 352-373.
Weldon, M. S., & Bellinger, K. D. (1997). Collective
memory: Collaborative and individual processes in
remembering. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 1160-1175.

1363

