UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Componential Explanation in Philosophy, Cognitive Science and Computer Science

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6259x1x4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bosse, Tibor
Jonker, Catholijn M.
Treur, Jan

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Componential Explanation in Philosophy, Cognitive Science and Computer Science
Tibor Bosse (tbosse@cs.vu.nl), Catholijn M. Jonker1 (C.Jonker@nici.ru.nl), Jan Treur2 (treur@cs.vu.nl)
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Artificial Intelligence
De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
structured according to a number of aggregation levels. A
central role is played by interlevel relations between
properties at different levels of aggregation. For example,
for a system S with property G that consists of two
components A and B that have properties DP1 and DP2,
respectively, the implication DP1 & DP2 & T
G is an
example of an interlevel relation expressing that S has
property G in virtue of connectivity T and properties DP1
and DP2 of components A and B. Here the connectivity
property T denotes a property that describes the connection
or interaction between the components: transfers between
the components. Compositional verification analyses
properties of systems based on such interlevel relations.
In this paper it is explored how the notion of
compositional verification developed within Computer
Science relates to the notion of componential explanation as
developed within Philosophy and Cognitive Science (cf.
Cummins, 1975, 1983; Clark, 1997; Davies, 2001), and how
it can be used to obtain a formalisation of componential
explanation in a more technical sense, opening doors to
existing or new software tools to support the explanation
process. First the notion of componential explanation is
briefly described. Next compositional verification is
summarised, and it is shown by a case study on the
circulatory system, how the notions relate to each other.

Abstract
This paper shows how Componential Explanation as
discussed within Cognitive Science and Philosophy of
Science relates to Compositional Verification in Computer
Science. It is shown how formal techniques and methods
developed for Compositional Verification provide a formal
basis and automated support for Componential Explanation.
The role of formalised interlevel relations is shown to be
crucial for formalisation of the analysis on which a
componential explanation rests. A case study is used to
illustrate the thoroughness of the approach.

Introduction
The notion of componential explanation plays a role in
different disciplines such as Philosophy, Biology, Cognitive
Science, Computer Science and AI. Roughly spoken,
componential explanation describes how properties of a
system that is organised according to a number of
components, can be explained from properties of the
components and their interactions. For componential
explanation, Clark (1997) draws the analogy with modelling
and analysis methods within AI, referring to, among others,
Newell and Simon (1972) and Dennett (1978).3 He also
claims that componential explanation has a role to play in
less classical AI areas such as connectionist approaches: in
advanced connectionist work, complex tasks require highly
structured multi-layer networks.4 Clark (1997) gives
suggestions, but does not address in more detail how to
formalise componential explanation. This is the subject of
the current paper. To this end methods developed originally
in Computer Science are considered.
The area within Computer Science in which properties of
component-based systems are analysed in terms of
properties of their components is called compositional
verification; e.g., Roever et al. (1998, 2001), Jonker and
Treur (2002). Formalisation and automation are important in
the contributions to this area. The considered (software and
hardware) systems are assumed to be hierarchically

Componential Explanation in Philosophy
Hempel (1959) and Nagel (1961) focus on functional
explanations why certain items I (such as the heart) are
present within an organised system S (e.g., a human being).
They base the explanation on an attempted form of
deduction, concluding that the item I is necessary in the
context of the overall system S (for a certain function F). In
this line of reasoning the existence of functional equivalents
is problematic: why would another item I' with the same
functional contribution F not be possible instead? The
dilemma is that:
• either functional equivalents exist, then the necessity of the existence of
an item cannot be claimed deductively,
• or the necessity of the existence of an item can be claimed deductively,
but functional equivalents are not allowed.

1

Currently at: Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen, Nijmegen Institute for
Cognition and Information, The Netherlands.
2
Part of this work was performed as part of a position at Utrecht
University, Department of Philosophy, The Netherlands
3
‘Modular programming methods in classical AI lent themselves quite
nicely to a componential form of explanation. In attempting to understand
the success of such a program, it is often fruitful to isolate the various
subroutines, modules, etc. and to display their role in dividing the target
problem into a manageable series of subproblems.’
Clark, (1997, pp. 104-105)
4
‘In such cases it is possible to advance our understanding of how the
system succeeds by asking after the roles of these gross components (layers
and subnets).’ Clark, (1997, p. 105)

Hempel (1959) takes the first horn of this dilemma, Nagel
(1961) the second one. Hempel’s explanation does not
provide a deductive argument. Nagel’s is deductive, but
requires a premise excluding the existence of functional
equivalents, which is problematic (since there are no laws to
derive it).
Cummins (1975) avoided this dilemma by a change of
perspective. Instead of attempting to obtain a deduction
concluding the existence of a certain item I, his deductive
analysis A aims at concluding the systemic capacity C of the

95

overall system S, on the basis of properties of the
components of S. Within this analysis A the item I
contributes function F. This function F is needed in A in the
sense that, if it would be left out of A, capacity C cannot be
deductively concluded anymore. Davies (2001, Chapter 2,
pp. 25-27), discusses Cummins’ account on componential
explanation, also called systemic functional analysis; see
also Clark (1997, Ch. 6). The idea is as follows. For a
system S, one of its capacities C can be analysed: by virtue
of what does S exercise C? For example, the capacity C of
an animal to stay alive can be analysed in terms of different
components within the animal and the jobs they perform:
e.g., circulation, digestion, respiration.
According to Davies’ analysis, first the subsystems
performing such jobs are identified, and the relevant
capacities specified. For example, within Biology the
circulatory system contributes to C by a capacity C' to
transport oxygen and nutrients to the places within the
animal where they are used. A next level of functional
analysis focusses on a capacity of one of these subsystems,
for example the capacity C' of the circulatory system.
Considering the next level, the analytical approach also
needs to be performed for this subsystem, i.e., identification
of the main components and the jobs they perform. Example
capacities for this system are assimilation of oxygen and
nutrients in the blood, propulsion of blood, and absorption
of oxygen and nutrients. The heart is one of the contributing
components for these capacities; in the context of capacity
C' it can be attributed the (systemic) function F of pumping
blood. After presenting a brief overview of Cummins’
account, Davies (2001, Chapter 4) presents his own account
on componential explanation. A main addition is that the
phenomena analysed are hierarchically organised:

strategy, to be used in conjunction with other types of
explanation (for example, based on reciprocal input thoughtaction cycles, pp. 105-106), to explain interaction with the
environment.

Compositional Verification
In this paper the formalization of Jonker and Treur (2002) of
compositional verification for Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence, summarized in this section, is used as
starting point for the formalization of componential
explanation. Within software engineering, the purpose of
verification is to prove that, under a certain set of
assumptions, a system will adhere to a certain set of
properties, for example the design requirements. In this
approach, verification is accomplished by a formal analysis
of relations between properties and assumptions that
respects the levels of aggregation already present in the
compositional structure of the system.
A component-based system can be viewed at different
levels of aggregation. Viewed from the top level, denoted
by L0, the complete system is one component S. At the next
lower level of aggregation, level L1, the system component S
is a composition of components, and connections between
these sub-components. Each component is again composed
of its sub-components, and so on, until the lowest level of
aggregation is reached, in which components are no longer
composed of other components: primitive components.
The primitive components can be verified using dedicated
verification methods, such as described in, e.g., (Leemans,
Treur and Willems, 2002). Verification of a composed
component is done using properties of the sub-components
it embeds, and environmental properties of the component
(i.e., assumptions on its embedding in the rest of the
system). Given a set of environmental properties, the proof
that a certain component adheres to a set of properties
depends on the properties of its sub-components, and
properties of the interactions between those subcomponents. The compositional verification method can be
formulated in more detail as follows:

Let A denote the analysis of system S into its components, and C the
systemic capacity analysed. The item I within S has systemic capacity
function F if and only if:
(i*) I is capable of doing F
(ii*) A appropriately and adequately accounts for S’s capacity to C in
terms of the organised structural or interactive capacities of
components at some lower level of organisation
(iii*) I is among the lower-level components cited in A that structurally
or interactively contribute to the exercise of C
(iv*) A accounts for S’s capacity to C, in part, by appealing to the
capacity of I to F
(v*) A specifies the physical mechanisms in S that instantiate the
systemic capacities itemised

A. Verifying one Aggregation Level Against the Other
• Determine which properties are of interest (for the higher level).
• Determine which assumptions (for the lower level) and which
environment properties guarantee the higher-level properties.
• Prove the higher-level properties on the basis of these assumptions for
the lower level and environmental properties.

Here (i*), (iv*), and (v*) are items of Cummins’ account,
and (ii*) and (iii*) are adding hierarchical organisation.
Clark (1997)5 considers componential explanation (‘from
parts to wholes’, pp. 103-105) as a major explanatory

B. The Overall Verification Process
• Determine the properties that are desired for the whole system.
• Apply procedure A iteratively until primitive components are reached.
• Verify the primitive components using techniques specialised for the
type of component.

5

(1) An account of the gross behaviors of the well-functioning organism in
the environment - an account that may invoke collective variables whose
componential roots span brain, body, and world.
(2) An account that identifies the various components whose collective
properties are targeted by the explanations proper to (1). Two important
subtasks here are to identify relevant neural components and to account for
how these components interact.
(3) An account of the varying information-processing roles played by the
components (both internal and external) identified in (2) – an account that
may well assign specific computational roles and representational
capacities to distinct neural subsystems. Clark (1997, p. 126).

The results of verification are a hierarchy of properties at
the different aggregation levels, and the logical relations
between the properties of different aggregation levels, see
Figure 1. In the picture, Pjt,m is the set of properties or
assumptions of a component labeled j belonging to
aggregation level Lt. This set is used in the proof for a
component labeled m that is part of aggregation level Lt-1.
Let Pt,m = ∪j Pjt,m. Then, the hierarchy is constructed such that

96

Pmt-1,r,

for some r, being the label of the parent
component of m on level Lt-2.
Pt,m

P0

heart

inferior and
superior
vena cava

0

P1,0

1

P1,0

aorta channels

2

P1,0
other organ
capillaries

0

P2,2

1

pulmonary
veins

pulmonary artery
channels

lung
capillaries

2

P2,2

P2,2

systemic cycle

pulmonary cycle

Figure 2: Schema for the circulatory system.
0

Pn,k

1

Pn,k

2

Pn,k

In the next sections, a number of dynamic properties
relevant for the analysis of the system’s capacities are
presented. In particular, the following properties are shown
(all related to oxygen supply):

Figure 1: Hierarchy of properties for compositional verification.

Case Study: Circulatory System

•
•
•

In this section, a case study in the domain of the circulatory
system in mammals is used to illustrate how the
philosophical idea of componential explanation can be
worked out using the methods in compositional verification
within Computer Science. This case study is often used as
an example in philosophical literature. The analysis of the
system’s capacities in the case study is described in terms of
dynamic properties: temporal statements that relate different
states of a system (at different time points) to each other.
Such dynamic properties are identified at different
aggregation levels. Next, interlevel relations are established,
relating dynamic properties at different levels to each other.
The properties have been formalised using the Temporal
Trace Language TTL introduced in Jonker and Treur (2002)
(see also Bosse et al., 2006); for reasons of readability most
of them are presented here in semiformal form. It is shown
how this analysis can be used to obtain a componential
explanation according to Cummins’ and Davies’
perspective.
The circulatory system (see Figure 2) takes care of a
number of capacities, such as providing nutrients and
oxygen to the body and taking waste (e.g., CO2) out of the
body; e.g., Noordergraaf (1978), Rideout (1991). The main
property to focus on in this example is that the system
provides oxygen for all parts of the body. The organisation
of the circulatory system S is analysed as consisting of the
following active components that (by showing their specific
behaviours) all play their roles within the overall process:
heart, capillaries in lungs and other organs, arteries
(pulmonary artery channels, from the heart to the capillaries
in the lungs; aorta channels, from heart to the capillaries in
the body), veins (pulmonary veins, from the capillaries in
the lungs to the heart; inferior and superior vena cava, from
the capillaries in the body to the heart). These active
components work together due to a structure as depicted in
Figure 2.

environmental assumptions
dynamic properties specifying component capacities
dynamic properties for interaction between components (transfers)

At the top level, the system can be seen as one component.
At lower levels, properties of sub-components can be
identified, as well as properties of transfers between these
sub-components. The lowest level comprises properties of
primitive components and transfers between them.

Environmental Assumptions
The following environmental assumptions are considered:
EA1(i) Heart Stimulus Occurrence (with maximal interval i)
For any point in time t there exists a time point with t < t' ≤ t + i such that
at t' a heart stimulus occurs. Formalisation in TTL:
∀t ∃t’ [ t < t’ ≤ t + i & state(γ, t’) |= stimulus_occurs ]

EA2(winit) Heart Initialisation
There exists a time point t with 0 ≤ t ≤ winit such that at t the heart generates
a fluid volume V with any ingredients I
EA3 Oxygen Availability
At any point in time t oxygen is present in the air within the lungs.
EA4 Carbonacid Availability
At any point in time t carbonacid is present within the organs.

Here V is an amount of fluid, and I is a specification of
ingredients (a list of them).

Component Capacities
Below, the properties of components at the different
aggregation levels are discussed.

Component Properties at Aggregation Level 0
At the top level (level 0), it is expressed that oxygen is
successfully provided to the organs:
CP0(d) Oxygen Delivery Successfulness (with maximal interval d)
For any point t there exists a time point t' with t < t' ≤ t + d such that at t'
oxygen is delivered to the organs. Formalisation in TTL:
∀t ∃t’ [ t < t’ ≤ t + d & state(γ, t’) |= oxygen_delivered]

Component Properties at Aggregation Level 1
At one aggregation level lower (level 1), the following
properties are expressed, for the systemic cycle component
and for the pulmonary cycle component. For reasons of
97

presentation the remaining properties are presented only in
semiformal form

CP2d(e, f) Vena Cava Effectiveness
At any point in time t
if
the vena cava receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + e ≤ t' ≤ t + f such that at t' they
generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I

CP1a(u,v,u',v')
Systemic Cycle Successfulness
At any point in time t,
If
at t the systemic cycle component receives a fluid volume V with
ingredients I (including oxygen)
and carbonacid is present within the organs
then there exist time points t' ≤ t" with t + u ≤ t' ≤ t + v and t + u' ≤ t" ≤ t +
v' such that at t' oxygen is delivered to the organs
and carbonacid is taken from the organs
and at t" the systemic cycle component generates a fluid volume V with
ingredients I - oxygen + carbonacid
Formalisation in TTL:

Component Properties within the Pulmonary Cycle
CP2e(e, f) Heart Effectiveness in Pulmonary Cycle
At any point in time t0
if
at some t ≤ t0 the heart (in the pulmonary cycle) receives from
outside the pulmonary cycle a fluid volume V with ingredients I
and at t0 a heart stimulus occurs
then there exists a time point t1 with t0 + e ≤ t1 ≤ t0 + f such that at t1 the
heart (in the pulmonary cycle) generates within the pulmonary cycle
a fluid volume V with ingredients I

∀t ∀V ∀I state(γ, t) |= systemic_cycle_component_receives_fluid(V,I)
& state(γ, t) |= carbonacid_present
∃t’,t’’ I’ [ t+u ≤ t’ ≤ t+v & t+u’ ≤ t’’ ≤ t+v’
& state(γ, t’) |= oxygen_delivered
& state(γ, t’) |= carbonacid_taken
& state(γ, t’’) |= systemic_cycle_component_generates_fluid(V,I’)
& I’ = I - oxygen + carbonacid ]

CP2f(e, f) Pulmonary Artery Channels Effectiveness
At any point in time t
if
the pulmonary channels receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + e ≤ t' ≤ t + f such that at t' they
generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I

CP1b(u,v,u',v')
Pulmonary Cycle Successfulness
At any point in time t,
if
at t the pulmonary cycle component receives a fluid volume V with
ingredients I (including carbonacid)
and oxygen is present in the air within the lungs
then there exist time points t' ≤ t" with t + u ≤ t' ≤ t + v and t + u' ≤ t" ≤ t
+ v' such that at t' carbonacid is delivered to the air within the lungs
and oxygen is taken from the air within the lungs
and at t" the pulmonary cycle component generates a fluid volume V
with ingredients I - carbonacid + oxygen

CP2g(e, f) Lung Capillaries Effectiveness
At any point in time t
if
the lung capillaries receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I
(including carbonacid)
and oxygen is present in the air within the lungs
then there exists a time point t' with t + e ≤ t' ≤ t + f such that at t'
carbonacid is delivered to the air within the lungs
and oxygen is taken from the air within the lungs
and the lung capillaries generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I carbonacid + oxygen

Here V is an amount of fluid and I is a specification of
ingredients, as before, and I - A + B specifies the
ingredients of I except A and augmented by B.

CP2h(e, f) Pulmonary Veins Effectiveness
At any point in time t
if
the pulmonary veins receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + e ≤ t' ≤ t + f such that at t' they
generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I

Component Properties at Aggregation Level 2
At the lowest aggregation level (level 2), properties of the
primitive components are expressed. Notice that, considered
within the systemic cycle, the heart receives input from
outside this cycle, and generates output within this cycle. A
similar comment can be made for the heart within the
pulmonary cycle.

Interaction Properties
Interaction or transfer properties express that the different
components are connected in an appropriate manner to
enable proper interaction. Such connections are from one
component’s output to another component’s input, or (in the
special case of TP1a and TP1b) from one component’s input
to another component’s input. In a general form, delays can
be taken into account for the transfers. Note that in this case
the output of one component often is the input of the
connected component. Therefore, the input state property is
then taken identical to the previous output state property and
thus, the delays for transfers are assumed to be 0. As a result
all g’s and h’s in the specifications given below can be
taken 0.

Component Properties within the Systemic Cycle
CP2a(e, f) Heart Effectiveness in Systemic Cycle
At any point in time t0
if
at some t ≤ t0 the heart (within the systemic cycle) receives from
outside the systemic cycle a fluid volume V with ingredients I
and at t0 a heart stimulus occurs
then there exists a time point t1 with t0 + e ≤ t1 ≤ t0 + f such that at t1 the
heart (in the systemic cycle) generates within the systemic cycle a
fluid volume V with ingredients I
CP2b(e, f) Aorta Channels Effectiveness
At any point in time t
if
the aorta channels receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + e ≤ t' ≤ t + f such that at t' they
generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I

Interaction Properties at Aggregation Level 1
At level 1, the following transfer properties address the
interaction between the pulmonary cycle component and the
systemic cycle component.

CP2c(e, f) Organ Capillaries Effectiveness
At any point in time t
if
the organ capillaries receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I
(including oxygen)
and carbonacid is present within the organs
then there exists a time point t' with t + e ≤ t' ≤ t + f such that at t' oxygen
is delivered to the organs
and carbonacid is taken from the organs
and the organ capillaries generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I oxygen + carbonacid

TP1a(g, h) Systemic Cycle connects to Pulmonary Cycle
At any point in time t
if
at some t ≤ t0 the heart within the systemic cycle receives from
within the systemic cycle a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
heart within the pulmonary cycle component receives from outside
the pulmonary cycle a fluid volume V with ingredients I

98

TP2g(g, h) Lung Capillaries connect to Pulmonary Veins
At any point in time t
if
the lung capillaries generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
pulmonary veins receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I
TP2h(g, h) Pulmonary Veins connect to Heart
At any point in time t
if
the pulmonary veins generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
heart receives a fluid volume V with ingredients I

TP1b(g, h) Pulmonary Cycle connects to Systemic Cycle
At any point in time t
at some t ≤ t0 the heart within the pulmonary cycle receives within
the pulmonary cycle a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
heart within the systemic cycle component receives from outside the
systemic cycle a fluid volume V with ingredients I

Interaction Properties at Aggregation Level 2
At level 2, the following transfer properties were identified.
These properties correspond to the arrows in Figure 2.

Interlevel Relations for the Case Study

Interaction Properties within the Systemic Cycle

The idea of specifying dynamic properties at different
aggregation levels is that the dynamics of the whole
componential system can be (logically) related to the
dynamics of lower levels. At the highest level, the following
interlevel relation (between level 0 and level 1) holds:

TP2a(g, h) Heart connects to Aorta Channels
At any point in time t
if
the heart generates a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
aorta channels receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I

EA1 & EA2 & EA3 & EA4 & CP1a & CP1b & TP1a & TP1b

Property TP2a would not be fulfilled, for example, if the
heart opening were not connected to the aorta channels, so
that the generated fluid volume would stream away without
reaching the aorta channels.

CP0

Thus, global property CP0 is implied by the lower level
properties. Or, in other words, in all situations in which
properties EA1 through TP1b hold, property CP0 also holds.
In a similar manner, the following interlevel relations can be
established between properties at level 1 and 2:

TP2b(g, h) Aorta Channels connect to Organ Capillaries
At any point in time t
if
the aorta channels generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
organ capillaries receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I
TP2c(g, h) Organ Capillaries connect to Vena Cava
At any point in time t
if
the organ capillaries generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
inferior and superior vena cava receive a fluid volume V with
ingredients I
TP2d(g, h) Vena Cava connect to Heart
At any point in time t
if
the inferior and superior vena cava generate a fluid volume V with
ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
heart receives a fluid volume V with ingredients I

CP2a & CP2b & CP2c & CP2d & TP2a & TP2b & TP2c & TP2d
CP2e & CP2f & CP2g & CP2h & TP2e & TP2f & TP2g & TP2h

CP1a
CP1b

An overview of all interlevel relations that are related to
global property CP0 is depicted graphically in Figure 3
(comparable to Figure 1). These interlevel relations have
been automatically checked using the model checker SMV
(http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~modelcheck/smv.html; see also
McMillan, 1993). This analysis also proved that none of the
antecedents can be left out; in particular, if the heart’s
effectiveness fails, then CP0 cannot be concluded.

Componential Explanation for the Case Study
In the previous subsections a componential analysis A for the
circulatory system S has been formalised by compositional
verification methods from Computer Science. But in how far
does this indeed address componential explanation according
to Cummins (1975, 1983) and Davies (2001)? As an example,
consider the aorta channels as item I. The function F for this
item is given by the property Aorta Channels Successfulness,
CP2b(e, f): if it receives a blood stream at one point, it will
generate a comparable blood stream at another point. The
system’s capacity C is Oxygen Delivery Successful-

Interaction Properties within the Pulmonary Cycle
TP2e(g, h) Heart connects to Pulmonary Artery Channels
if
the heart generates a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
artery channels receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I
TP2f(g, h) Pulmonary Artery Channels connect to Lung Capillaries
At any point in time t
if
the artery channels generate a fluid volume V with ingredients I
then there exists a time point t' with t + g ≤ t' ≤ t + h such that at t' the
lung capillaries receive a fluid volume V with ingredients I

CP0

EA1

CP2a

CP2b

EA2

CP2c

CP2d

CP1a

TP2a

TP2b

TP1a

TP2c

CP1b

TP1b

TP2d

CP2e

CP2f

CP2g

Figure 3: Interlevel Relations for Global Property CP0.

99

CP2h

EA3

TP2e

EA4

TP2f

TP2g

TP2h

•
•

ness CP0(d). Then the function Successfulness of the Aorta
Channels within S is described by the following instantiated
pattern according to Davies:

how to identify properties of the whole, given properties of parts
how to identify properties of parts, given desired or required properties of
the whole

These issues are similar to the challenges discussed in this
paper. The circulatory system has been modelled from an
organisation modelling perspective in Bosse et al. (2004).

The item Aorta Channels within S has systemic capacity function Aorta
Channels Successfulness if and only if:
(i*) The Aorta Channels satisfy Aorta Channels Successfulness
(ii*) The analysis appropriately and adequately accounts for S’s capacity
Oxygen Delivery Successfulness in terms of the organised structural or
interactive capacities of components at some lower level of
organisation
(iii*) The Aorta Channels are among the lower-level components cited in the
analysis that structurally or interactively contribute to the exercise of
Oxygen Delivery Successfulness
(iv*) The analysis accounts for S’s capacity Oxygen Delivery
Successfulness, in part, by appealing to the capacity of the Aorta
Channels to satisfy Aorta Channels Successfulness
(v*) The analysis specifies the physical mechanisms in S that instantiate the
systemic capacities itemised

References
Bosse, T., Jonker, C.M., Meij, L. van der, Sharpanskykh, A., &
Treur, J. (2006). A Temporal Trace Language for the Formal
Analysis of Dynamic Properties. Technical Report, Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam. http://www.few.vu.nl/~treur/TTL.pdf
Bosse, T., Jonker, C.M. & Treur, J. (2004). Organisation Modelling
for the Dynamics of Complex Biological Processes. In:
Lindemann, G., Moldt, D., and Paolucci, M. (eds.), Proc. of the
International Workshop on Regulated Agent-Based Social
Systems: Theories and Applications, RASTA'02. Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2934. Springer Verlag, pp. 92-112.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body and World
Together Again. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Cummins, R. (1975). Functional Analysis. The Journal of
Philosophy, vol. 72, pp. 741-760
Cummins, R. (1983). The Nature of Psychological Explanation, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Davies, P.S. (2001). Norms of Nature: Naturalism and the Nature of
Functions. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Dennett, D. (1978). Brainstorms. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Fodor, J.A. (1983). The Modularity of Mind, Bradford Books, MIT
Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Hempel, C.G. (1959). The Logic of Functional Analysis. In: Gross,
L. (ed.), Symposium on Sociological Theory; New York: Harper
and Row, p. 271-287.
Jonker, C.M. & Treur, J. (2002). Compositional Verification of
Multi-Agent Systems: a Formal Analysis of Pro-activeness and
Reactiveness. In: (Roever et al., 1998), pp. 350-380. Extended
version in: International Journal of Cooperative Information
Systems, vol. 11, 2002, pp. 51-92.
Leemans, N.E.M., Treur, J. & Willems, M. (2002). A Semantical
Perspective on Verification of Knowledge. Data and Knowledge
Engineering, vol. 40, pp. 33-70.
Lomi, A., and Larsen, E.R. (2001). Dynamics of Organizations:
Computational Modeling and Organization Theories, AAAI Press,
Menlo Park.
McMillan, K.L. (1993). Symbolic Model Checking: An Approach to
the State Explosion Problem. PhD thesis, School of Computer
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 1992. Published
by Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993.
Nagel, E. (1961). The Structure of Science. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.
Newell, A. & Simon, H. (1972). Human Problem Solving. Prentice
Hall.
Noordergraaf, A. (1978). Circulatory System Dynamics. Academic
Press, New York.
Rideout, V.C. (1991). Mathematical and Computer Modelling of
Physiological Systems. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Roever, W.-P. de, Langmaack, H. & Pnueli, A. (eds.) (1998).
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Compositionality,
COMPOS'97. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1536,
Springer Verlag.
Roever, W.-P. de, Boer, F. de, Hanneman, U., Hooman, J.,
Lakhnech, Y., Poel, M. & Zwiers, J. (2001). Concurrency
verification: introduction to compositional and noncompositional
methods. Cambridge University Press.

Indeed, (i*) to (iv*) are satisfied by the analysis above.
However, to satisfy (v*), some specification of the physical
mechanisms of the Aorta Channels has to be added, for
example by referring to, e.g., Noordergraaf (1978).

Discussion
The article contributes to componential explanation in the
area of Philosophy and Cognitive Science by introducing a
formal framework of compositional verification as developed
within Computer Science. In particular, one of the formal
approaches to compositional verification has been applied to
a case study to provide a formal analysis, which can serve as
the basis for a componential explanation that corresponds to
the work of Davies (2001) and Cummins (1975, 1983). In
addition, the article contributes to the area of Computer
Science and Artificial Intelligence by making clear the
conditions on componential explanation to bear on computer
software, and provides an additional foundation for the ideas
of Clark (1997), Dennett (1978), Newell and Simon (1972).
The case study also shows the level of detail necessary to
complete a formal analysis of only one aspect of the
circulatory system that itself contributes to the capacity of an
organism to live. The rigorousness of a formal approach to
componential explanation therefore also begs for the
development and use of dedicated software support. In the
mean time, the formalization opens the doors to the use of
existing tools that support verification in Computer Science,
such as the model checker SMV.
The case study of the circulatory system has shown to be an
appropriate example for the application of compositional
verification. It may be expected that the approach is also
applicable to other compositional systems (in particular in
cognitive domains). For example, many authors (e.g., Fodor,
1983) claim that the human mind can also be structured by
components. In future work, it will be explored to what extent
the presented approach can be used to explain functions of the
mind.
Furthermore, componential explanation can also contribute
to the analysis of organisation models. Central issues in
organisation modelling are (Lomi and Larsen, 2001):

100

