UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparison-Induced Distribution-Density Effects on Recall of Values from Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/354596q4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bolender, Victoria
Choplin, Jessica M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparison-Induced Distribution-Density Effects on Recall of Values from Memory
Jessica M. Choplin (jchoplin@depaul.edu) and Victoria Bolender
DePaul University Department of Psychology
2219 North Kenmore Avenue
Chicago, IL 60614-3504
Abstract
Choplin’s (2004) model of distribution-density effects (see
also Choplin & Hummel, 2002) makes the odd prediction that
in a skewed distribution the smallest and largest values will
often be judged larger when drawn from a negatively skewed
distribution than when drawn from a positively skewed
distribution. This prediction is contrary to empirical findings
reported in the rather large distribution-density effect
literature, which has, for the most part, used category ratings
as the dependent measure. The experiments reported here
investigated this odd prediction using recall of values from
memory as the dependent measure. The findings support the
predictions of Choplin’s model and are not predicted by other
models of distribution-density effects.

Density Effects

Evaluations of attribute values such as grades (Wedell,
Parducci, & Roman, 1989), taste (Riskey, Parducci, &
Beauchamp, 1979), visual velocity (Sokolov, Pavlova, &
Ehrenstein, 2000), prices (Niedrich, Sharma, & Wedell,
2001), income (Hagerty, 2000) and so forth often depend
upon the density—or frequency—of the distribution from
which values are drawn (Krumhansl, 1978; Parducci, 1965,
1995). In particular, evaluation functions are typically
concave (downward) for positively skewed distributions and
convex (concave upward) for negatively skewed
distributions. Values drawn from positively skewed
distributions are also judged larger than are values drawn
from negatively skewed distributions when category ratings
are used as the dependent measure.
Several explanations for these effects have been proposed.
Parducci’s (1965) Range-Frequency Theory assumes that
people are aware of and use percentile rank information to
evaluate attribute values. Range-Frequency Theory explains
the finding that evaluation functions are often concave for
positively skewed distributions, because the density at the
lower end of positively skewed distributions gives low
values larger percentile rank scores than they would have
had otherwise. The slope of the function becomes shallow at
the sparse upper end of the distribution where percentile
rank scores increase at a slower rate. The reverse pattern of
changes in percentile rank scores in negatively skewed
distributions explains the finding that evaluation functions
are often convex for negatively skewed distributions.
Because percentile rank scores remain constant for the
smallest (percentile rank = 0.0) and largest (percentile rank
= 1.0) values regardless of the skew of the distribution (as
do range values), Range-Frequency Theory predicts that
judgments of the smallest and largest values ought not to be
affected by the skew of the distribution.
Haubensak (1992) suggested an alternative explanation
for density effects on evaluations of sequentially presented
values. He argued that since people do not know the

distribution density and range in advance, they tend to
assume that early values are typical or average and they
assign them intermediate verbal labels or category ratings.
After these initial labels or category ratings have been
assigned, people are obliged to use them consistently. Since
early values are most likely to come from the dense portion
of skewed distributions, the portion of the range at the dense
end of these distributions will be smaller than the portion of
the range at the sparse end. To cover the entire range of
values the remaining verbal labels or category ratings would
have to be assigned asymmetrically. This process of
assigning category labels to magnitude values almost
always produces a pattern of evaluation in which values
(including the smallest and largest values) are judged larger
when they are drawn from a positively skewed than from a
negatively skewed distribution. Occasionally, if an early
value is assigned a high or a low value rather than an
intermediate value, a high or a low value might be judged
larger when drawn from a negatively skewed distribution
than from a positively skewed distribution (see Haubensak,
1992, Figure 3 right panel), but both would not be
(Haubensak, personal correspondence, January 21, 2006).

Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory

1115

Choplin and Hummel (2002) and Choplin (2004) proposed
that their Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory of
attribute-value evaluation might explain some density
effects (see also Choplin & Hummel, 2005). ComparisonInduced Distortion Theory (CID Theory, Choplin, 2004;
Choplin & Hummel, 2002, 2005) is a theory of attributevalue evaluation in which verbal magnitude comparisons
(e.g., “This portion is larger than that portion,” “Hamburger
A is more fattening than Hamburger B,” and so forth)
systematically bias how people perceive, conceptualize,
judge, and recall attribute values. Such magnitude
comparisons are very common in everyday conversation;
and verbal magnitude comparisons that people articulate to
themselves subvocally appear to be ubiquitous (Choplin &
Hummel, 2005).
CID Theory starts with the observation that because
people use verbal comparisons in their daily lives to refer to
specific quantitative values and differences, verbal
comparisons become associated with these particular
quantitative values and differences (Rusiecki, 1985). To
illustrate the principle that comparisons are associated with
values and differences, Choplin and Motyka (2006) showed
a group of pretest participants a portion of “mashed
potatoes” that was approximately 2.8cm in diameter on a
photograph of a plate that was approximately 9.0cm in
diameter as shown in the top of Figure 1. The experimenters
then asked these participants to imagine and draw a larger

portion size on an empty plate like the one shown in the
bottom of Figure 1. The median portion size participants
drew was approximately 5.2cm in diameter. We will call
imagined sizes like this 5.2 cm diameter size comparisonsuggested sizes, because they are the sizes that are suggested
by comparisons. Of importance to the current discussion,
the difference between the portion size that participants
viewed and the portion size they drew was approximately
2.4 cm diameter on average (5.2cm minus 2.8cm). We call
imagined differences such as this 2.4cm difference
comparison-suggested differences, because they are the
differences that are suggested by comparisons. Notice that
this difference is defined empirically as the mean or median
of the differences imagined by a control group. While
Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory relies upon this
quantitative notion of a comparison-suggested difference,
this quantity is not a free parameter of the model. It is fixed
a priori by the responses of a control group.

ratings, magnitude estimation, judgments on a correlated
dimension, or—in the case of the experiments reported
below—recall of values from memory.
To demonstrate this principle, Choplin and Motyka
(2006) asked participants to view two portion sizes. One
group viewed pictures of two portion sizes (2.7cm and
3.3cm in diameter), one presented after the other, that
differed by a small amount (a difference of 0.6 cm
diameter). A second group viewed two pictures of portion
sizes (2.7cm and 7.3cm in diameter) that differed by a large
amount (a difference of 4.6cm diameter). Participants later
redrew the sizes from memory. The group that had seen the
sizes that differed by a small amount redrew sizes such that
the average difference between the diameters of the two
sizes was 1.6cm, a difference that was reliably larger than
the actual difference of 0.6cm, t(38)=6.53, p<.05. The group
that had seen the sizes that differed by a large amount
redrew sizes such that the average difference between the
diameters of the two sizes was 3.6cm, a difference that was
reliably smaller than the actual difference of 4.6cm,
t(38)=9.33, p<.05. This basic pattern of comparison-induced
bias was originally reported by Choplin and Hummel (2002)
and has been replicated in scores of unpublished
experiments.

Comparisons Might Create Density Effects
Comparison-induced biases like those just described might
produce distribution-density effects. To intuitively
understand how comparisons could create distributiondensity effects, consider the negatively skewed distribution
presented in Figure 2 (black circles represent presented
values; gray circles represent comparison-biased values).

Figure 1. Stimuli used to measure a comparison-suggested
difference in portions of “mashed potatoes.”
The basic idea underlying CID Theory is that when
people’s eyes tell them one thing and the sizes suggested by
verbal comparisons tell them something different, people
will combine the two sources of information by taking a
weighted average of the visual and the comparisonsuggested sizes. For example, if the actual difference
between two compared portion sizes was only 0.6cm
diameter (i.e., less than the comparison-suggested difference
of 2.4cm diameter), then averaging the two sources of
information would bias judgments of the sizes apart toward
the 2.4cm diameter comparison-suggested difference. The
smaller portion would be judged smaller and the larger
portion would be judged larger than they would have been
judged otherwise. Likewise, if the actual difference between
two compared portion sizes were 3.6cm diameter (i.e., more
than the comparison-suggested difference of 2.4 cm
diameter), then averaging the two sources of information
would bias judgments of the sizes together toward the 2.4
cm diameter comparison-suggested difference. The smaller
portion would be judged larger and the larger portion size
would be judged smaller. Note that we use the term
“judgment” to refer to any measure by which participants
might assess magnitude values including category or line

from Choplin and Hummel (2002)
Figure 2: Comparison-induced biases in a negatively
skewed distribution.
Values in dense regions will be more likely to differ from
each other by less than a comparison-suggested difference
than will values in sparse regions. Or if they differ from
each other by more than a comparison-suggested difference,
the degree to which these differences exceed the
comparison-suggested difference will be less than the
degree to which values in sparse regions exceed this
difference. Comparisons between values in dense regions
will, therefore, either be more likely to bias judgments apart
or be less likely to bias judgments together than will
comparisons between values in sparse regions.
By contrast, values in sparse regions will be more likely
to differ from each other by more than a comparisonsuggested difference than will values in dense regions. Or if
they differ from each other by less than a comparison-

1116

suggested difference, the degree to which these differences
subceed the comparison-suggested difference will be less
than the degree to which values in dense regions subceed
this difference. Comparisons between values in sparse
regions will, therefore, either be more likely to bias
judgments together or be less likely to bias judgments apart
than will comparisons between values in dense regions.
The overall effect of these comparison-induced biases
would be a pattern of evaluation in which values are biased
away from dense regions and toward sparse regions. Values
on the boundary between dense and sparse regions, such as
the second value from the left in Figure 2, would be biased
toward sparse regions (downward in the case of the
negatively skewed distribution shown in Figure 2). Values
at the tail of a skewed distribution (the sparse region) will
either be more likely to be biased toward the values to
which they are compared or be less likely to be biased away
from these values than will values at the head of a skewed
distribution (the dense region).
Small values placed at the tail of a negatively skewed
distribution, for example, would either be more likely to be
biased upward toward the values to which they would be
compared or be less likely to be biased downward away
from these values than they would have been had they been
placed at the head of a positively skewed distribution. Small
values should, therefore, be judged (recalled in the
experiments reported below) larger when placed within a
negatively skewed distribution than when placed within a
positively skewed distribution. Likewise, values placed at
the head of a negatively skewed distribution (i.e., large
values), would either be more likely to be biased upward
away from the values to which they would be compared or
be less likely to be biased downward toward these values
than they would be had they been placed at the tail of a
positively skewed distribution. Large values should,
therefore, also be judged (recalled) larger when placed
within a negatively skewed distribution than when placed
within a positively skewed distribution. To see the
mathematical model and simulations demonstrating how
this prediction is a necessary consequence of ComparisonInduced Distortion Theory please refer to Choplin (2004).
No previous model of distribution-density effects
(Haubensak, 1992; Krumhansl, 1978; Parducci, 1965, 1995)
predicts the pattern of biases that is predicted by
Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory.
In fact, the
predictions of Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory are
contrary to virtually all previous empirical findings. The
literature on distribution-density effects has consistently
found that values drawn from positively skewed
distributions are judged larger than values drawn from
negatively skewed distributions. However, these empirical
studies have primarily used category ratings as the
dependent measure, although they have occasionally also
used line analog or similarity ratings as the dependent
measure. Category and line analog ratings might be
inadequate to test these predictions, because they might be
rescaled to reflect the range of values (Choplin, 2004;

Volkmann, 1951). Similarity ratings are also inadequate to
test these predictions because they involve only pairwise
judgments. Choplin and Hummel (2002) argued that recall
of values from memory might be used to investigate how
people conceptualize values (see also Huttenlocher, Hedges,
& Vevea, 2000).
The goal of the research reported here was to investigate
whether empirical support for the predictions of
Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory could be found
using recall of values from memory as the dependent
measure. Note that Figure 2 was published in 2002, the
mathematical model of the theory was published in 2004,
and the empirical tests of the theory reported here were run
in the spring of 2005. The experiments reported here,
therefore, tested a strong a priori prediction of the model. It
was a necessary consequence of the model that at the time
had no empirical support and, in fact, seemed contrary to
reported empirical findings.
Note also that in modeling work not reported here, we fit
the mathematical model of Comparison-Induced Distortion
Theory to the results presented below. To do so, we
empirically measured the differences suggested by
hamburger-calorie comparisons and investigated a number
of possible comparison strategies that would determine
which values get compared to which (e.g., all pairwise
comparisons, random subset of pairwise comparisons,
comparisons to the most recent values, comparisons to
similar values, etc.). This modeling work will not be
reported here, but note that the qualitative predictions
described above hold regardless of the exact differences
suggested by hamburger-calorie comparisons or which
values are compared to which.

Experiment 1
The purpose of Experiment 1 was to investigate patterns of
bias in recall of values from memory. Comparison-Induced
Distortion Theory predicts that recall will be biased away
from dense regions and towards sparse regions. Therefore,
the smallest and largest values of a skewed distribution will
often be recalled larger when placed in a negatively skewed
distribution than when placed in a positively skewed
distribution.

Method
Participants. One hundred people volunteered to
participate after being approached by the experimenter on
the DePaul University campus or in the surrounding
community (50 in the positively skewed condition and 50 in
the negatively skewed condition).

1117

Materials and Procedure. Participants viewed seven
hamburgers and their respective caloric values presented in
either an ascending or a descending order. The hamburgers
and their associated caloric values were placed within either
a negatively skewed or a positively skewed distribution as
shown in Table 1. We were primarily interested in recall of
three values: the ¼ lb. Burger, ½ lb. Big Double Burger, and

⅔ lb. Monster Double Burger. To create a positively skewed
distribution of values, four hamburgers with caloric values
between the caloric values of the ¼ lb. Burger and the ½ lb.
Big Double Burger were included in the distribution of
values. To create a negatively skewed distribution of values,
four hamburgers with caloric values between the caloric
values of the ½ lb. Big Double Burger and the ⅔ lb.
Monster Double Burger were included in the distribution of
values. To ensure that participants spent some time
processing the seven values, they were asked whether they
were surprised by the number of calories in the distribution
of hamburgers. Participants were then given a distracter task
followed by a surprise recall task in which they recalled the
number of calories in each of the seven hamburgers.
Participants were instructed to estimate values, if they could
not recall exact values.
Table 1. Presented distributions of calories associated with
hamburgers.
Positively Skewed Distribution
Hamburger
Calories
1/4 lb. Burger
564.0
1/3 lb. Cheeseburger
599.9
1/3 lb. Bacon Cheeseburger
635.8
1/3 lb. Deluxe Burger
671.7
1/3 lb. Double Burger
707.6
1/2 lb. Big Double Burger
743.5
2/3 lb. Monster Double Burger
923.0
Negatively Skewed Distribution
Hamburger
Calories
1/4 lb. Burger
564.0
1/2 lb. Big Double Burger
743.5
2/3 lb. Big Bacon Double Burger
779.4
2/3 lb. Big Bacon Double Deluxe Burger
815.3
2/3 lb. Super Bacon Double Burger
851.2
2/3 lb. Super Big Bacon
887.1
Double Deluxe Burger
2/3 lb. Monster Double Burger
923.0

is, participants recalled more calories in the ¼ lb. Burger
when it was placed in a negatively skewed distribution of
values (527.9 calories) than when it was placed in a
positively skewed distribution of values (433.7 calories;
actual number 564 calories), t(98)=3.44, p < .01.
Participants also recalled more calories in the ⅔ lb. Monster
Double Burger when it was placed in a negatively skewed
distribution of values (974.2 calories) than when it was
placed in a positively skewed distribution of values (903.4
calories; actual number 923 calories), t(98)=2.46, p < .05.
Also as predicted by Comparison-Induced Distortion
Theory (see Figure 1) and analogous to the predictions of
other models of distribution-density effects, participants
recalled more calories in the ½ lb. Big Double Burger when
it was placed in a positively skewed distribution of values
(793.4 calories) than when it was placed in a negatively
skewed distribution of values (637.4 calories; actual number
743.5 calories), t(98)=6.43, p < .01. This result is
particularly problematic for Huttenlocher and her
colleagues’ category adjustment model (Huttenlocher et al.,
2000), as the recalled number of calories was systematically
biased away from the central tendency of the category.
Table 2. Recalled number of calories in Experiment 1. As
predicted, recall of the smallest and largest values was
generally biased away from the tail of the distribution and in
the direction of the head. The value on the borderline
between the sparse and the dense regions of the distribution
was biased away from the dense regions.
Hamburger
¼ lb. Burger
½ lb. Big Double Burger
⅔ lb. Monster Double Burger

Positive
skew
433.7
793.4
903.4

Negative
Skew
527.9
637.4
974.2

Experiment 2

Results

The results of Experiment 1 supported the predictions of
Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory. However, the
sequences in which values were presented might have made
this pattern of results particularly likely. In particular,
caloric values were presented simultaneously in either an
ascending or a descending order in Experiment 1. This
format might have constrained participants to make
primarily pairwise comparisons among adjacent values.
However, the qualitative predictions of ComparisonInduced Distortion Theory do not depend upon values being
compared in any particular order (although quantitative
predictions might differ somewhat, Choplin, 2004; Choplin
& Hummel, 2005). Rather, Comparison-Induced Distortion
Theory makes the same qualitative predictions across a
variety of comparison strategies (strategies that determine
which values get compared to which). The purpose of
Experiment 2, therefore, was to investigate whether the
effects observed in Experiment 1 generalize to random
sequences of values and to sequential presentation of values.
Half of the participants viewed hamburgers and their

Because we were interested in participants’ recall of the
distribution of values and not in whether participants could
correctly associate the number of calories with each
hamburger, each participant’s list of recalled calories was
sorted from smallest to largest. The smallest recalled value
was associated with the ¼ lb. Burger. The second recalled
value in the negatively skewed distribution and the sixth
recalled value in the positively skewed distribution were
associated with the ½ lb. Big Double Burger. Finally, the
largest recalled value was associated with the ⅔ lb. Monster
Double Burger. The results are presented in Table 2.
Consistent with the predictions of Comparison-Induced
Distortion Theory and inconsistent with other models of
distribution-density effects, the smallest and largest values
were recalled significantly larger when they were placed
within the negatively skewed distribution than when they
were placed within the positively skewed distribution. That

1118

associated caloric values presented simultaneously and the
other half viewed them presented sequentially.

Method
Participants. Two hundred volunteers participated after
being approached by the experimenter on the DePaul
University campus. There were fifty participants in the
negatively skewed condition and fifty participants in the
positively skewed condition in each of the simultaneouspresentation and sequential-presentation conditions.
Materials and Procedure. Fifty random sequences were
created for each of the positively and negatively skewed
distributions of values presented in Figure 1. Participants in
the simultaneous-presentation condition viewed these seven
values presented in order from top to bottom on the same
page. Participants in the sequential-presentation condition
saw the exact same sequences as did the participants in the
simultaneous-presentation condition, but each of the seven
values was presented on a separate page. To ensure that
participants spent some time processing these values, they
judged whether the numbers of calories in the hamburgers
were surprising. Participants then completed a distracter
task and recalled the number of calories in the seven
hamburgers they had viewed in any order. Participants were
instructed to estimate, if they could not recall exact values.

Results and Discussion
Each participant’s list of recalled caloric values was sorted
from smallest to largest. The smallest recalled value was
associated with the ¼ lb. Burger. The second recalled value
in the negatively skewed distribution and the sixth recalled
value in the positively skewed distribution were associated
with the ½ lb. Big Double Burger. Finally, the largest
recalled value was associated with the ⅔ lb. Monster
Double Burger. The results are presented in Table 3.

distribution-density effects, the smallest and largest values
were recalled significantly larger when they were drawn
from the negatively skewed distribution than when they
were drawn from the positively skewed distribution. That is,
for the ¼ lb. Burger there was a main effect of the type of
distribution in which it was placed such that participants
recalled more calories in the ¼ lb. Burger when it was
placed in a negatively skewed distribution of values (563.9
calories) than when it was placed in a positively skewed
distribution of values (513.8 calories; actual number 564
calories), F(1,196)= 14.66, p < .01. There was no main
effect of the type of presentation, F(1,196)=2.38, p>.05, nor
an interaction, F(1,196)= 0.16, p>.05. There was also a main
effect of the type of distribution in which the ⅔ lb. Monster
Double Burger was placed such that participants recalled
more calories when it was placed in a negatively skewed
distribution of values (906.7 calories) than when it was
placed in a positively skewed distribution of values (872.45
calories; actual number 923 calories), F(1,196)= 9.58,
p<.01. There was no main effect of the type of presentation,
F(1,196)= 1.16, p>.05, nor an interaction, F(1,196)= 0.14,
p>.05.
Finally, as predicted by Comparison-Induced Distortion
Theory (see Figure 1) and analogous to the predictions of
other models of distribution-density effects, participants
recalled more calories in the ½ lb. Big Double Burger when
it was placed in a positively skewed distribution (763.5
calories) than when it was placed in a negatively skewed
distribution (664.55 calories; actual number 743.5 calories),
F(1,196)=71.56, p<.01. This result is particularly
problematic for Huttenlocher and her colleagues’ category
adjustment model (Huttenlocher et al., 2000), as the recalled
number of calories was systematically biased away from the
central tendency of the category. Again, there was no main
effect of the type of presentation, F(1,196)=1.70, p>.05, nor
an interaction, F(1,196)=1.54, p>.05.

Table 3. Recalled number of calories in Experiment 2.
Replicating Experiment 1, recall of the smallest and largest
values was generally biased away from the tail of the
distribution and in the direction of the head. The value on
the borderline between the sparse and the dense regions of
the distribution was biased away from the dense regions.
Simultaneous Presentation
¼ lb. Burger
½ lb. Big Double Burger
⅔ lb. Monster Double Burger

Positive
skew
521.3
778.4
868.6

Negative
skew
576.6
664.9
898.6

Sequential Presentation
¼ lb. Burger
½ lb. Big Double Burger
⅔ lb. Monster Double Burger

506.3
748.6
876.3

551.2
664.2
914.8

Consistent with the predictions of Comparison-Induced
Distortion Theory and inconsistent with other models of

1119

General Discussion
Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory (Choplin, 2004;
Choplin & Hummel, 2002, 2005) makes the unique
prediction among theories of distribution-density effects that
the smallest and largest values in a skewed distribution
should often be judged larger when drawn from a negatively
skewed distribution than when drawn from a positively
skewed distribution. Two experiments found evidence for
such a pattern using recall of values from memory as the
dependent measure. In Experiment 1, hamburgers and their
associated caloric values were presented simultaneously in
either an ascending or a descending order. In Experiment 2,
hamburgers and their associated caloric values were
presented in random orders wherein the seven hamburgers
were presented either simultaneously on the same page or
sequentially on seven separate pages. The results supported
the predictions of Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory
across all orders and types of presentation.
Category ratings are often used to measure people’s
evaluations of magnitude. The dissociation between the

effects of distribution density on category ratings and the
effects of distribution density on recall of values from
memory raises the concern that researchers might be relying
too heavily upon category ratings to measure human
magnitude evaluation. Category ratings might be
particularly susceptible to biases such as primacy effects
(Haubensak, 1992) and rescaling to reflect the psychological
range of values (Volkmann, 1951), which might vary even
if the presented range is held constant (Choplin, 2004).
We do not think that recall of values from memory is
necessarily a better measure of magnitude evaluation than
category ratings. Recall of values from memory is
susceptible to its own biases. Rather, we think that
researchers should try to measure human magnitude
evaluation by seeking converging evidence across a variety
of dependent measures. Each measure will undoubtedly
have its own biases, but together these measures will
provide a more thorough, multifaceted picture of human
magnitude evaluation.

Conclusions
The experiments reported here suggest that some density
effects are likely created by verbal comparison-induced
biases. Verbal comparisons between values in dense regions
will tend to bias values away from each other (or, at least,
will be less likely to bias values toward each other). Verbal
comparisons between values in sparse regions will tend to
bias values toward each other (or, at least, will be less likely
to bias values away from each other). These biases produce
distribution-density effects.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by a grant from the Makray
Family Foundation and a grant from the DePaul University
Research Council. We thank Doug Wedell and Gert
Haubensak for helpful conversations.

References
Choplin, J. M. (2004). Toward a model of comparisoninduced density effects. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Choplin, J. M., & Hummel, J. E. (2002). Magnitude
comparisons distort mental representations of
magnitude. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131(2), 270-286.
Choplin, J. M., & Hummel, J. E. (2005). Comparisoninduced decoy effects. Memory & Cognition.

Choplin, J. M., & Motyka, L. (2006). Perceptual and Verbal
Comparison-Induced Biases on Food
Consumption. Manuscript in preparation.
Hagerty, M. R. (2000). Social comparisons of income in
one's community: Evidence from national surveys
of income and happiness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78, 764-771.
Haubensak, G. (1992). The consistency model: A process
model for absolute judgments. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18, 303-309.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Vevea, J. L. (2000). Why
do categories affect stimulus judgment? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129(2), 220241.
Krumhansl, C. L. (1978). Concerning applicability of
geometric models to similarity data:
Interrelationship between similarity and spatial
density. Psychological Review, 85, 445-463.
Niedrich, R. W., Sharma, S., & Wedell, D. H. (2001).
Reference price and price perceptions: A
comparison of alternative models. Journal of
Consumer Research, 28(3), 339-354.
Parducci, A. (1965). Category judgments: A rangefrequency model. Psychological Review, 72, 407418.
Parducci, A. (1995). Happiness, pleasure and judgment:
The contextual theory and its applications.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Riskey, D. R., Parducci, A., & Beauchamp, G. K. (1979).
Effects of context in judgments of sweetness and
pleasantness. Perception & Psychophysics, 26,
171-176.
Rusiecki, J. (1985). Adjectives and Comparison in English.
New York: Longman.
Sokolov, A., Pavlova, M., & Ehrenstein, W. H. (2000).
Primacy and frequency effects in absolute
judgments of visual velocity. Perception &
Psychophysics, 62, 998-1007.
Volkmann, J. (1951). Scales of judgment and their
implications for social psychology. In J. H.
Roherer & M. Sherif (Eds.), Social psychology at
the crossroads (pp. 279-294). New York: Harper &
Row.
Wedell, D. H., Parducci, A., & Roman, D. (1989). Student
perceptions of fair grading: A range-frequency
analysis. American Journal of Psychology,
102(233-248).

1120

