UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constructional Sources of Implicit Agents in Sentence Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1t97j10b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Goldwater, Micah B.
Markman, Arthur B.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constructional Sources of Implicit Agents in Sentence Comprehension
Micah B. Goldwater (micahbg@mail.utexas.edu)

Department of Psychology; University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-0187 USA

Arthur B. Markman (markman@psy.utexas.edu.edu)

Department of Psychology; University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-0187 USA
Abstract

(Jackendoff, 1990). Furthermore, verbs can be classified
by the semantic components and syntactic behavior they
share (Levin, 1993). For example, all verbs that share the
semantic component become (which specifies a change of
state for one of the participants) can appear in the “middle
construction.” The middle construction is composed of a
simple intransitive sentence, with a patient as subject plus
an adverb.

Much of the literature studying on-line sentence
comprehension focuses on the contributions of individual
lexical items, with specific interest in verbs. One aspect of
sentence meaning that has been claimed to be rooted in
verb representation is event structure. There is a growing
body of evidence supporting the claim that the verb is not
the sole contributor of event structure, but the syntactic
construction also contributes to event structure. One study
that is construed to support a verb-based view is Mauner &
Koenig (2000). One way to show this constructional
influence is through the interpretation of a novel denominal
verb (Kaschak & Glenberg 2000). We replicated Mauner &
Koenig (2000) with novel denominal verbs suggesting a
reinterpretation of their findings. We propose that verbs
and constructions each contribute event structure to on-line
sentence comprehension, and we discuss how constraintbased models can account for these results.

(1) The bread sliced easily.
(2) The ice melted quickly.
The event structure for these verbs and sentences can be
represented as (3), and (4). The adverb modifies this
whole event; the modification is not formalized here1.
(3) bread BECOME [ <Sliced> ]
(4) ice BECOME [ <Melted> ]

Keywords: Sentence Comprehension, Event Structure,
Construction Grammar, Thematic Roles, Semantics.

The general form for this class of verbs is shown in (5)
(5) x BECOME [ <State> ]

Introduction

These event structures can be read as: The patient, y,
comes to be in the state specified by the verb. All of the
verbs of this class share this event structure; they differ in
what state they specify. These verbs can also appear in
the passive, where the agent is always in the semantic
representation, but it is optional in the syntax. The
general form of the sentence structure is shown in (8) and
the event structure in (9).

The meaning of most sentences are events, or situations
(Jackendoff, 2002). The event structure is the “who does
what to whom” aspect of meaning. This is the aspect of
meaning that determines the sentence’s structure, its
syntax. The event structure of a sentence is composed of
the participants (or arguments) of the event and how they
relate, i.e. an agent acting on a patient. Two different
accounts for the source of event structure in language
have been proposed. The “lexical” account is that the
sentence’s event structure is built entirely from the event
structures of its words, with verbs as the major contributor
(e.g. Pustejovsky, 1991, Levin & Rappaport Hovav,
2005). The “constructional” account is that the syntactic
frame itself contributes event structure independently of
any of the particular words that make up the sentence
(Goldberg, 1995). Theoretical and experimental evidence
for each view will be discussed. Then we will present a
study designed to provide support for the constructional
account.

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

The bread was sliced easily (by the knife).
The ice was melted quickly (by the heat).
The X was Y-ed Z-ly (by W)
[w ACT] CAUSE [x BECOME [ <State> ]]

This event structure can be read as: The agent, w, acts
causing the patient, x, to come to be in the state specified
by the verb. In (6) and (7), the events to which the verbs
refer have a different structure than the events in (3) and
(4). If the entire event structure solely comes from the
1

The adverb is included in the example sentences because
some verbs, i.e. slice, cannot appear in an intransitive sentence
with a patient as a subject without the adverb. Of course some
verbs, i.e.melt, do not need the adverb to get the proper reading.

The Lexical Account: The theoretical evidence for the
lexical account is that a verb’s meaning is decomposable
and the components predict its syntactic behavior

273

Methods for Experimentally Studying the Accounts:
There is strong experimental evidence showing that the
constructional event structure cannot entirely replace verb
event structure. Koenig, Mauner, & Bienvenue (2003)
show that some verbs encode instruments while others do
not. For example, the verb behead specifies that an agent
uses an instrument on a patient, while kill only specifies
the agent and patient. Because an instrument is part of
behead’s event structure, readers can more easily
integrate an instrument into their semantic representation
if one is mentioned later in the utterance.

verb then one has to posit that verbs’ have multiple event
structures.
According to at least one account
(Jackendoff, 2002) these event structures are not stored
separately from the rest of the semantic representation;
they are an intrinsic piece of the semantic representation.
So, two event structures mean two semantic
representations. Two semantic representations means that
the verbs are polysemous, and polysemous words have
separate storage in the lexicon (Klein & Murphy, 2001);
different “senses” of the same “word” are actually
different lexical items. Lexical accounts often posit a
different stored item for each syntactic form in which a
verb appears (Pinker, 1989, Stevenson & Merlo, 1997).

While a complex verb-based event structure
representation is needed to explain the results of Koenig
et al (2003), constructional event structure may be the
best explanation for the results of Mauner & Koenig
(2000).
In these experiments, Mauner & Koenig
contrasted the differences between linguistically encoding
the agent of an event and just having conceptual
knowledge of the agent. In the first experiment, subjects
judged both (13) and (14) as nonsensical.

The Constructional Account: Construction Grammar,
(CG) (Goldberg, 1995) takes a different approach that
links event structure with the syntactic form itself. On
this view verbs need not be polysemous because they can
assume the event structure of the construction in which
they appear.
(10) John sneezed the foam off the coffee. (Sneeze
assumes the meaning of the Caused-Motion
construction)
(11) Bob baked his mother a pie. (Bake assumes the
change of possession aspect of the dative
construction’s meaning)

(14) The clocks had sold quickly, but no one sold them.
(15) The clocks were sold quickly, but no one sold them.

More evidence for constructional event structure is that
the same words in a different order specify different
events.

Neither (14) nor (15) explicitly mention that there was an
agent of the selling, but one’s conceptual knowledge of
selling events includes an agent. Mauner & Koenig
hypothesize that (15) linguistically encodes an agent
while (14) does not. In their framework the event
structure of passive verbs encodes an implicit agent; while
the middle forms of the verbs do not (see (5) and (9)
respectively for the representations). They argue that
(16) is grammatical while (17) is not because the
infinitive clause they share needs an agent to be
comprehended, and only (16) encodes the agent who is
raising some money for charity.

(12) John loaded the hay onto the cart. (The cart may
not be fully loaded.)
(13) John loaded the cart with hay. (The cart is fully
loaded.)

(16) The antique clocks were sold easily to raise some
money for charity.
(17) *The antique clocks had sold easily to raise some
money for charity.

If constructional event structure relieves the need to posit
polysemous verbs, then maybe it completely relieves the
need to posit any complex event structure to verbs. It
seems possible that some other meaningful aspect of
verbs inform the processing system of the constructions in
which they can appear. The verb would always assume
the constructional event structure while contributing none
of its own. It does not seem to be the event structure of
sneeze that allows it to appear in (10), so what does
license this use of sneeze?2 Maybe whatever that is allows
it to appear in the syntactic forms it usually does.

In their study, subjects read the entire first clause and
judged its sensicality. After the judgment, the rest of the
sentence was presented one word at a time. After each
word subjects pressed one button if the sentence
continued to make sense, and another if it did not. If the
sentence was judged as non-sense then the trial was over
and the next sentence’s main clause would appear. It was
predicted that if no agent was encoded in the first clause
then subjects should judge the sentence as non-sense
somewhere in the first four words of the infinitive clause.
In the examples above, the critical region is to raise some
money because it is this action that needs the agent. Every
sentence’s critical region shared the form of to, a verb, a
modifier, and a noun. Subjects judged significantly more
sentences with middle first clauses than passive at the
verb and the noun in the critical region.

If (10) was the first time a reader encountered sneeze in
this construction, and the verb is the only source of event
structure, then this reader could not construct an event
representation and consequently would not be able to
comprehend the sentence.

2

One of the biggest challenges facing CG researchers is how
to formalize the semantics of verbs that allows them to be
productively inserted into constructions. Constructional event
structure’s existence does not entail that any verb can be inserted
into any construction and just assume its event structure.
274

Mauner & Koenig (2000) suggested that the differences
between the two sentence types are rooted in the
differences in the representations of the verb.
A
constructional account is not ruled out however. There is
evidence that the verb contributes the same event
structure each time it is processed (McKoon & Ratcliff,
2003), which is predicted only if constructional event
structure is the source of the difference.3

those potatoes. We included the original stimuli from
Mauner & Koenig (2000), with only minor adjustments to
the post-critical region. If constructions can provide
event structure independently from the verb then
sentences with novel denominal verbs (i.e. (20) and (21))
will show the same pattern of sensicality judgments as
Mauner & Koenig’s original stimuli.
(20) The Russian potatoes were vodkaed easily to spike
the punch at the frat party.
(21)*The Russian potatoes had vodkaed easily to spike
the punch at the frat party.

How could someone show that Mauner & Koenig’s
results were actually rooted in constructional event
structure? One way would be to follow the method used
in Kaschak & Glenberg (2000) to provide experimental
evidence for constructional event structure.4 In their
study subjects interpreted sentences with novel denominal
verbs in different constructions. A denominal verb is a
verb derived from a noun, i.e. to hammer. The logic of
the experiment was that any difference in interpretation of
the novel denominal verbs was completely due to the
constructional event structure because if the verb was
novel, it could not have a pre-existing event structure.

One limitation of the present study is that it does not
completely isolate when the constructional event structure
makes its contribution. There are at least two potential
loci of this effect. One is during the main phase when one
is reading the main clause and using the construction to
interpret the novel verb. A second possibility is that
participants use event structure information when reading
the passages explaining the intended meaning of the novel
verbs. On this view, they instantiated an event structure
for the novel verbs, and that event structure affected
comprehension during the main phase of the experiment.
This explanation does not rule out the contribution of
constructional event structure because that structure
determined how the novel verbs were interpreted during
the passages. Therefore even if event structures were
instantiated for these verbs after a single reading, that
event structure was taken completely from the
constructional event structure. These possibilities will be
discussed below.

(18) John crutched Bill the apple.
(19) John crutched the apple.
Subjects interpreted (18) in line with the meaning of the
dative construction, which specifies a transfer of
possession, that is John transferred the apple to Bill using
the crutch. There was no such interpretation for (18).
This technique is relevant for the interpretation of
Mauner’s & Koenig’s (2000) results. If their results can
be replicated with novel denominal verbs, then that
supports constructional accounts.

Methods
Materials for the experiment included a packet of short
passages that made the intended meaning of the novel
denominal verbs apparent. During the main task, 14 sets
of sentence pairs (similar to the pair shown in (20) and
(21)) were included. Separate lists were made with one of
each pair in each list, counterbalanced across participants.
Also, the 14 pairs from Mauner & Koenig (2000)
Experiment 2 were used. These 28 experimental items
were intermixed with 42 filler sentences, 12 of which
were intended to not make sense. The filler sentences
shared features with the critical trials to ensure that
strategies were not being employed, adopting Mauner &
Koenig’s method. To prevent participants from making
judgments based on auxiliary verb alone, passive
sentences that contain the auxiliary have were used, as
well as sentences that contained was/were that did not
introduce an implicit agent. Also, sentences with
infinitive clauses in various sentence positions were used
to prevent special notice of their role.

Experiment
Kaschak & Glenberg (2000) showed that the
interpretation of novel denominal verbs depends on the
construction, because being novel, they have no event
structure of their own. The goal of the current research is
to replicate the results of Mauner & Koenig (2000) with
novel denominal verbs showing that constructions can
provide event structure independently of the verb.
The middle construction encodes no agent, and for a verb
to appear in it, it must have the notion of a change of state
in its meaning (Levin, 1993). To help produce this
interpretation, the nouns picked from which to derive the
verbs had a change of state as part of their meaning, i.e.
jelly is fruit in another state; vodka is made from potatoes.
Before the main task subjects read short passages that
made explicit what was meant by use of these nouns as
verbs. The passages made explicit that The potatoes had
vodkaed easily means that vodka was made easily from

Procedure. Subjects were tested individually, seated in
front of a computer. Before using the computer they read
14 short passages, one for each novel denominal verb.
They were asked a multiple choice question about the
meaning of the novel denominal verb; there was only one
plausible answer to ensure they understood the intended

3

Of course, it is still possible that constructions can provide
event structure independently of the verb and verbs can have
multiple event structure representations (see discussion below).
4
For a review of experimental evidence for Construction
Grammar see Goldberg (2004).
275

Familiar Verbs

meaning so that they could make rapid semantic
judgments in the main phase of the experiment.

0.35
0.3

The main phase used the program SuperLab on a Dell PC.
The sentences were presented as in Mauner & Koenig
(2000) Experiment 2, and as described in the introduction.
Partipants read the entire first clause and judged its
sensicality. The rest of the sentence had dashes in place of
words. After the judgment, the rest of the sentence was
presented one word replacing the dashes at a time. After
each word participants pressed the “1” button if the
sentence continued to make sense, and the “2” button if it
did not. The filler sentences were displayed in the same
way. The entire first clause was presented at once
because some verbs need the adverb to have the proper
reading in the middle construction. Many sentences could
have been prematurely called non-sensical at the main
verb if the entire sentence was presented one word at a
time.

0.25
0.2

Middle
Passive

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
main
clause

to

verb

modifer

noun

Sentence Region

Figure 1: Means and standard errors5 of adjusted
percentages of familiar verbs by participants.
Novel Denominal Verbs
0.35
0.3

Participants were instructed to read the sentences quickly,
but at a natural rate, and to make their sensicality
judgments as quickly as possible without sacrificing their
accuracy. They were given examples of sentences that
did not make sense. They then had 8 practice trials before
the main phase. This procedure differed from Mauner &
Koenig’s only in that subjects continued to judge
sentences until their completion even if they judged them
non-sensical because SuperLab cannot conditionally
present trials. During scoring, the important measure was
when they first judged a sentence as non-sense, later
judgments were ignored to keep analysis consistent with
Mauner & Koenig (2000).

0.25
0.2

Middle
Passive

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
main
clause

to

verb

modifier

noun

Sentence Region

Figure 2: Means and standard errors of adjusted
percentages of novel denominal verbs by participants.

Participants. Forty English-speaking undergraduates
from the University of Texas participated in this
experiment for partial course credit.

from all previous word positions by 7, which was the total
number of opportunities to respond “non-sense” in each
sentence condition.6 A similar procedure was followed to
adjust percentages for the analysis by items across
participants.

Results
Scoring procedure: We adopted the scoring procedure
from Mauner & Koening (2000) Experiment 2. To
evaluate changes in judgments across the main clause and
the critical region of the infinitive clause, we transformed
data into adjusted percentages that reflected the number of
remaining possibilities of responding “non-sense” at the
main clause, and at each word position in the critical
region. We adopted this procedure to minimize the
problem of using either the raw number or cumulative
percentages for which the value at any given word
position would be correlated with the value at proceeding
word positions. For each participant, percentages of
remaining “non-sense” responses were calculated at each
word position by dividing the number of “non-sense”
responses obtained at a given position by the remaining
number of opportunities to respond “non-sense” at that
position. The remaining number of opportunities to
respond “non-sense” at each position was determined by
subtracting the total number of “non-sense” responses

Analysis: Adjusted percentages of “non-sense” responses
for each of Mauner & Koenig’s stimuli with familiar
verbs and for the novel verbs were submitted to a 2 (List)
x 2 (Construction) x 5 (Region/Word position) ANOVA.
The analysis of the familiar verbs yielded significant main
effects of construction, f (1, 38) = 48.1, p < .001 by
participants, f (1, 13) = 54.234, p < .001 by items, and of
region/word position, f (4, 35) = 7.01, p < .001 by
participants, f (4, 10) = 11.711, p = .001 by items. There
was also a significant interaction of construction X
region/word position, f (4, 35) = 8.95, p < .01, by
participants, f (4, 10) = 7.741, p = .004 by items. What
are most important are the planned comparisons of the
specific sentence region in the two constructions. Mauner
& Koenig found significant differences at the main
5

Some standard error bars are too small to see.
There were 14 sentences taken from Mauner & Koening
(2000) and 14 that included the novel denominal verbs, so that is
7 of each in each construction.
6

276

clause, at the verb in the critical region, and at the noun in
the critical region. As can be seen in Figure 1, we
replicated their differences at the main clause, t (39) =
6.54 p < .001, by participants, t (13) = 6.47 p < .001 by
items, and at the verb, t (39) = 2.50 p < .02, by
participants, t (13) = 2.82 p < .015 by items.7 It should
not be surprising that we did not replicate all the
differences within the critical region because Mauner &
Koenig did not predict which specific word position
within that clause where the difference would emerge,
just that it would emerge somewhere in the region. The
analysis of the novel verbs revealed a similar pattern.
There were significant main effects of construction, f (1,
38) = 23.07, p < .001 by participants, f (1, 13) = 6.52, p <
.025 by items, and of region/word position, f (4, 35) =
5.70, p =.001 by participants, f (4, 10) = 11.916, p = .001
by items. Once again, the individual comparisons of
word positions are what is most important, and can be
seen in Figure 2. With the novel verbs, Mauner &
Koenig’s pattern was replicated, with significant
differences found at the main clause, t (39) = 2.82, p < .01
by participants, but not items t (13) = 1.89, p = .08, at the
verb in the critical region, t (39) = 3.40, p = .002 , t (13) =
2.52, p = .025 and at the noun in the critical region, t(39)
= 2.05, p < .05, by participants, but not by items t (13) =
1.36.

a verb in a single reading, allowing a permanent
instantiation of that verb’s event structure. This possibility
will be the subject of future research.
How can the independent contribution of constructional
event structure be incorporated into current models of
sentence comprehension? Here we will only focus on
constraint-based models (i.e. MacDonald, Pearlmutter, &
Seidenberg, 1994, McRae, Spivey-Knowlton &
Tanenhaus, 1998), though other models could potentially
account for these results as well (i.e., McKoon &
Ratcliff, 2003). Constraint based models already have a
lot of the necessary machinery to implement a
Construction Grammar framework.
In Construction
Grammar, constructions are conceived of as a pairing of
syntax and semantics, each with equal stature, in direct
opposition to “syntactocentric” models (see Jackendoff,
2002). Constraint based models process syntax and
semantics in parallel in direct opposition to two stage
models that consider syntax to be informationally
encapsulated (e.g. Ferreira & Clifton 1986).
The constraints incorporated into constraint-based models
are typically thematic fit, and the frequencies of words in
syntactic structures. There is nothing to prevent these
models from implementing a constraint of construction
meaning. Adding this constraint may not actually change
the model’s behavior most of the time. Let’s say that one
goal of the model is to determine the event structure of a
sentence. As the model makes it’s syntactic parse,
corresponding event structures are activated. Just as
verbs activate their syntactic preferences, they will
activate their event structure preferences. Often, the
verb’s syntactic preferences and the final parse of the
sentence are in congruence, which is why the verb has the
syntactic preferences it has. The same can be said for
event structure.
Most frequently the verb’s event
structure is congruent with the construction’s, but when it
is not (e.g. (3)) the construction’s event structure should
win the competition. The effects of constructional event
structure will also be shown in learning novel verbs, for
children (Gleitman, 1990) and adults.

Discussion
We replicated Mauner & Koenig (2000)’s key results that
there were more judgments of non-sense made in
infinitive clauses following middle constructions which
do not contribute an implicit agent than following passive
constructions that do contribute an implicit agent. This
pattern was produced with Mauner & Koenig’s stimuli
using familiar verbs and with novel denominal verbs. The
noticeable difference between the two stimuli sets’ pattern
is that more main clauses were rejected using the novel
verbs than the familiar verbs. This finding is not
surprising, because the main clauses’ verbs were novel.
Of importance, the majority of main clauses were
accepted suggesting that the passages read in the first
phase made the intended meaning clear. The present
experiment indicates that constructions can provide event
structure independently of the verb, and suggests a
different cause for the Mauner & Koenig (2000) findings.

A second aspect of Construction Grammar is less
obviously integrated with constraint-based models. One
of the main motivations behind Construction Grammar is
to eliminate the need for multiple verb event structures.
Event structure is the part of meaning that determines
syntactic behavior.
One event structure could be
construed as only leading to the activation of one
preferred syntactic from. A central tenet of constraintbased models is the activation of multiple syntactic forms
to varying degrees. There is a way to reconcile this. In
theoretical linguistics, event structure is sometimes
thought of as the syntax-semantics interface, sometimes
as a purely semantic representation. To reconcile the
discrepancy, one should only posit a single event structure
when event structure is conceived of as purely semantic,
although multiple semantic event structures are needed
when a verb is truly polysemous, i.e. in (22) and (23).

As mentioned above, there are two possible loci for the
effect of constructional event structure. One is during the
first phase of the study, when participants first encounter
the novel verbs. The second was during the main phase.
We do not think that the event structure was created
solely in the first phase of the study however. If so the
construction the verbs appeared in during that phase
would elicit fewer judgments of non-sense. This was not
the case however, as all verbs introduced in the first phase
appeared in the middle construction, not in the passive.
So this prediction is not supported. Still we cannot rule
out that the construction contributes an event structure to
7

All t-tests are two-tailed.
277

Goldberg, A. E. (1995). Constructions: A Construction
Grammar Approach to Argument Structure. Chicago:
U of Chicago Press.
Hare, M.L., McRae, K., & Elman, J.L. (2003). Sense and
structure: Meaning as a determinant of verb
subcategorization probabilities. Journal of Memory &
Language, 48, 281-2-3.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic Structures. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of Language: Brain,
Meaning, Grammar, Evolution. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Kascak, M.P., & Glenberg, A.M. (2000). Constructing
meaning: The role of affordances and grammatical
constructions in sentence comprehension. Journal of
Memory & Language, 43, 508-529.
Klein, D.V., & Murphy, G.L. (2001). The representation
of polysemous words. Journal of Memory & Language,
45, 259-282.
Koenig, J.P., Mauner, G., & Bienvenue, B. (2003).
Arguments for adjuncts. Cognition, 83, 67-103.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations: A
preliminary investigation. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Levin, B., & Rappaport Hovav, M. (2005) Argument
Realization. New York: Cambridge University Press.
MacDonald, M.C., Pearlmutter, N.J., & Seidenberg, M.S.
(1994). Lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity
resolution. Psychological Review, 101(4), 676-703.
Mauner, G., & Koenig, J.P. (2000). Linguistic vs.
conceptual sources of implicit agents in sentence
comprehension. Journal of Memory & Language, 43,
110-234.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (2003) Meaning through
syntax: language comprehension and the reduced
relative clause construction. Psychological Review 110,
490–525.
McRae, K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(1998). Modeling the influence of thematic fit (and
other constraints) in on-line sentence comprehension.
Journal of Memory and Language, 38, 283-312
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and Cognition: The
Acquisition of Argument Structure. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pustejovsky, J. (1991). The syntax of event structure.
Cognition, 41, 47–81.
Stevenson, S., & Merlo, P. (1997). Lexical structure and
parsing complexity. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 12, 349–399.
Trueswell, J.C., & Kim, A.E. (1998). How to prune a
garden path by nipping it in the bud: Fast priming of
verb argument structure. Journal of Memory &
Language, 39, 102-123.

(22) John accepted the gift.
(23) John accepted that he was defeated.
Hare, McRae, & Elman (2003) showed that context can
influence which sense of a verb is activated, and
correspondingly which syntactic form that a verb can
appear in is activated. But this does not reconcile the
single event structure multiple syntax problem. Compare
(23) with (24).
(24) John accepted defeat.
(24) uses the sense from (23), but the syntax from (22).
So the problem is how one has the semantics of the sense
from (23) and (24), with a single event structure and
multiple activated syntactic forms. A simplification of
mental accept’s event structure is: X accepts <state of
affairs>.
This event structure can activate multiple
syntactic forms because a state of affairs can be referred
to by a noun, or by a sentential complement, as in (24)
and (23) respectively.
While the support for the claim that verbs activate
multiple syntactic forms comes from the activation of
forms differing in the type of syntactic arguments (i.e
from Hare et al, 2003 and Trueswell & Kim, 1998), the
sentences used in this experiment, and in Mauner &
Koenig (2000) differed in number of syntactic arguments,
not type. To help resolve the issue of number, it becomes
useful to posit a level of event structure that is no longer
solely an intrinsic part of verb meaning, but is an interface
of syntax and semantics that represents the syntactically
realized event structure. If Mauner & Koenig’s proposal
that a verb’s event structure differs as a function of the
construction in which it appears means that different (verb
based) event structures are syntactically realized, then the
difference between their account and ours is rather small.
The remaining difference disappears if the verb takes on a
particular event structure by adopting the construction’s
event structure. The time course of this process, and the
proper linguistic analysis remain open issues, but this
study joins a growing body of evidence that supports the
existence and importance of constructional event
structures independent of particular verbs.

References
Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C., Jr. (1986). The independence
of syntactic processing. Journal of Memory &
Language, 25, 348-368
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition: A Journal of
Developmental Linguistics, 1, 3-55.

278

