UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Context Effects when Reading Negative and Affirmative Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3cz073k1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Kaup, Barbara
Ludtke, Jana

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Context Effects when Reading Negative and Affirmative Sentences
Jana Lüdtke (janaluedtke@gp.tu-berlin.de)
Institut für Psychologie und Arbeitswissenschaft
TU Berlin, Franklinstr. 28/29 (FR 2-6)
10587 Berlin

Barbara Kaup (Barbara.kaup@tu-berlin.de)
Institut für Psychologie und Arbeitswissenschaft
TU Berlin, Franklinstr. 28/29 (FR 2-6)
10587 Berlin
Abstract
In two experiments, participants were presented with
narratives in which a target entity (e.g., water) was
introduced. The final sentences affirmed or negated that a
particular property held for the target entity (e.g., The water
was (not) warm). The linguistic context was manipulated. In
Experiment 1, reading times for the negative target sentences
(but not those for the affirmative ones) were affected by the
context manipulation, with shorter reading times in conditions
in which the negated proposition had been explicitly
mentioned in the prior text. Experiment 2 demonstrated a
similar facilitation effect with respect to inferred propositions.
The results of the two experiments support pragmatic
considerations concerning the context dependency of the
processing difficulty associated with negative sentences.
Keywords: Negation; Pragmatics; Context effects

Introduction
It is well known that negative sentences are relatively hard
to process. In various studies with different methods,
negative sentences required more processing time and led to
higher error rates than the corresponding affirmative
sentences. A number of different explanations were
discussed in the literature, including explanations based on
sentence length, as well as explanations based on
grammatical or connotational aspects of negation (for an
overview see Kaup, Zwaan, Lüdtke, in press). The most
promising explanation rests on considerations concerning
pragmatic aspects of negation: The contexts in which
negative utterances occur are rather limited. Typically,
negative statements are uttered when the negated
proposition was either explicitly mentioned before by one of
the discourse partners or at least constitutes a plausible
assumption in the respective context. Thus, negation is used
to communicate deviations from what was previously
assumed or expected (e.g., Givon, 1978). This leads to the
prediction that negative sentences are difficult to process
mainly when presented outside of an adequate context. In
this case the respective assumption or expectation is not
available prior to encountering the negation, and
accordingly must be created retroactively. In contrast, when
presented in a context in which the negated proposition is
available prior to encountering the negation this additional
processing step is not required. Accordingly, in this case

negative sentences should not take longer to process than
their affirmative counterparts (or at least not as much).
This prediction was tested in a study by Wason (1965)
with respect to non-linguistic contexts. Participants were
presented with pictures of eight circles, seven in one color
and one in another color. They were then asked to complete
affirmative or negative sentence fragments. Negative
fragments (e.g., Circle No 3 is not …) took longer to
complete than affirmative fragments (e.g., Circle No 3 is....),
but this difference was significantly smaller when the
negative sentences referred to the circle with the exceptional
color than when they referred to one of the seven other
circles. Thus, participants profited from an adequate context
when processing negative sentences. In a study by
Glenberg, Robertson, Jansen & Johnson-Glenberg, (1999)
the same prediction was tested, but by manipulating the
linguistic context. To our knowledge this is the only study
that experimentally investigated the effect of the linguistic
context on the processing difficulty associated with negative
sentences (for studies investigating other types of context
effects with negation, see Giora, 2006). In Glenberg et al.’s
study, participants were presented with longer narratives in
which the penultimate sentence was either negative or
affirmative (e.g., The couch was / was not black). In the
supportive-context condition the previous text highlighted
the relevancy of the attribute dimension that was referred to
in the penultimate sentence (e.g., She wasn’t sure if a darkly
colored couch would look the best or a lighter color). In
contrast, in the non-supportive context condition, the prior
text highlighted a different attribute dimension (e.g., She
wasn’t sure what kind of material she wanted the couch to
be made of). Glenberg et al. analyzed the reading times of
the penultimate sentence, after correcting for sentence
length. In line with the predictions, negative sentences took
longer to process than affirmative ones in the nonsupportive contexts only.
The goal of the present work was to further investigate the
question of what constitutes an adequate context for the
processing of negative sentences. We focused on the idea
that negative sentences are particularly felicitous in contexts
in which the proposition that is being negated was either
explicitly mentioned or at least constitutes a highly plausible
assumption (Givon, 1978). As in Glenberg et al.’s
experiment, we manipulated the linguistic contexts in which

1735

negative and affirmative sentences were being processed. In
Experiment 1, the proposition that was affirmed or negated
in the target sentences (e.g., The water was / was not warm)
was either explicitly mentioned in the prior text or not. We
expected to find a strong context effect in the negative but
not in the affirmative conditions, with longer reading times
in the negative condition in which the negated proposition
was not explicitly under consideration in the prior text. In
Experiment 2, the proposition that was affirmed or negated
in the target sentences was not explicitly mentioned in any
of the conditions. In this experiment, the conditions differed
with respect to whether the respective proposition was
highly plausible in the context or not. Thus, in this
experiment we asked the question of whether the potential
facilitation effects obtained in Experiment 1 would
generalize to conditions where the affirmed or negated
proposition was likely to be inferred by the comprehender
when processing the prior text.

Method
Participants Thirty-six students of TU Berlin participated
for a financial reimbursement of EUR 8 per hour.
Materials The materials consisted of 66 short German
stories, 36 of which were used as experimental items, and
30 as filler items. The experimental items were constructed
according to the following schema (see Table 1): The first
two sentences specified the setting of the story. The next
sentence (variation sentence) described a situation in which
the protagonist asked a question (overtly or mentally) with
respect to a particular target entity (e.g., the water in the
pool). This sentence was available in three versions that
differed with respect to whether one, two, or no particular
possibility was being mentioned (one-poss, two-poss, and
no-poss condition, respectively). The next sentence (filler
sentence) was the same in all conditions. The final sentence
(target sentence) provided the answer to the protagonist’s
question. It either affirmed or negated that the attribute that
was mentioned in the one-poss condition (e.g., warm) held
for the target entity. This sentence was 18 syllables long in
the affirmative version and 19 syllables long in the negative
version for all items.
The filler stories were of comparable lengths and topics as
the experimental stories. 20 of the filler stories contained a
negation somewhere in the story. For each story, a simple
comprehension question was constructed with half of the
comprehension questions requiring a ‘yes’-response and the
other half requiring a ‘no’-response.

Experiment 1
Participants read stories that introduced a particular target
entity (e.g., water), and the final sentence of each story
either affirmed or negated that a particular attribute applied
to this entity (e.g., The water was / was not warm). There
were three different versions of the prior text: The
proposition that was affirmed or negated in the target
sentences was either explicitly mentioned in the prior text or
not, and it was either the only possibility under
consideration, or it was under consideration as one of two
alternatives (e.g., She wondered whether the water would be
warm / She wondered whether the water would be warm or
cold / She wondered what the water would be like). Hence,
the two explicit conditions in this experiment differed with
respect to implications concerning the protagonist’s
expectations. In the one-possibility condition (see Table 1),
the target proposition corresponded to a distinguished
possibility in the protagonist’s mind, or in other words
constituted a kind of expectation of the protagonist. In
contrast, in the two-possibility condition this was not the
case. Here the protagonist had not set his or her mind onto
one particular possibility.
Two hypotheses were investigated. First, if it is true that
negative sentences are easier to process in a context in
which the negated proposition was explicitly under
consideration prior to encountering the negation, then we
would expect to find a polarity-by-context interaction: The
processing of the negative target sentences but not (or not as
much) the processing of affirmative sentences should be
facilitated in the two explicit conditions (one-possibility and
two-possibility) compared to the condition, in which the
negated proposition was not explicitly mentioned (nopossibility condition). Second, if on top of explicit
mentioning, the status of the negated proposition plays a
role, then we might find a stronger facilitation effect in the
one-possibility condition, in which the negated proposition
was the only possibility under consideration and thereby in
some sense constituted an expectation of the protagonist.

Table 1: Sample Story for Experiment 1 (translated).
Setting

Variation
one poss
two poss
no poss
Filler
Sentence
Target Sen
Question

Danielle was glad that summer break
finally started. Today she was meeting her
friend Karen at the local swimming pool.
On her way to the pool, Danielle wondered
whether the water would be warm.
whether the water would be warm or cold.
what the water would be like.
She sat down at the edge of the pool next to
Karen, and carefully lowered her foot into
the water.
The water was (not) warm.
Were the girls meeting at a lake?

Design and Procedure Each participant read all 36
experimental items intermixed with all 30 filler items. The
36 experimental items were assigned to six sets, the 36
participants to six groups, and the assignment of versions to
sets and groups was according to a 6x6x6 Latin square.
Thus we employed a 2(polarity of target sentence:
affirmative vs. negative) x 3(context: one-poss, two-poss,
no-poss) x 6 group/set design with repeated measurement on
the first two variables. Text presentation was sentence by
sentence, self-paced by the participant. Pressing the spacebar after reading the final sentence elicited the presentation

1736

nicely to the predictions: Whereas the reading times for the
affirmative sentences were not significantly affected by the
context manipulation, the reading times for the negative
sentences were. As expected, the processing of the negative
sentences was greatly facilitated when the negated
proposition was explicitly mentioned in the prior text. The
fact that the two explicit conditions (one-poss and two-poss)
did not differ, indicates that for a negative sentence to be
felicitous, it is not necessary that the negated proposition
corresponds to a distinguished possibility. Rather, what
seems to be important is merely whether or not the negated
proposition was under consideration prior to encountering
the negation. It should be noted that the facilitating effect
due to explicitly mentioning the negated proposition cannot
be due to surface level priming, because the respective
effect was not observed in the affirmative conditions.
One might wonder whether the reading time differences
between the no-poss condition and the two explicit
conditions are indeed due to the fact that the explicit
conditions explicitly mentioned the negated proposition.
Wouldn’t it be possible that the difference has something to
do with whether or not the relevant attribute dimension was
being activated when processing the context, as in Glenberg
et al.’s study? To obtain more information on this issue, we
conducted a norming study: 17 new participants read the
experimental stories in the no-poss version, up to the word
prior to the negation. They reframed the question that the
protagonist was asking by mentioning two alternatives (as in
the two-poss condition). The answers were rated by two
judges with respect to whether or not the two alternatives
reflected the attribute dimension referred to in the target
sentence. Inter-rater reliability was .90 (determined
according to Cohen, 1960), and all discrepancies were
resolved by discussion. An ANOVA based on only those
items (N=26) for which more than 80 % of the participants
correctly produced the relevant attribute dimension,
replicated the earlier results: The context significantly
affected the negative but not the affirmative conditions
(negation: F1(2,28) = 3.6, p < .05; F2(2,19) = 4.2, p < .05
affirmation: both Fs < 1). Reading times in the negated
conditions were significantly faster in the two explicit
conditions than they were in the no-poss condition (no-poss
vs. one poss: F1(1,29) = 3.0, p = .09; F2(1,20) = 5.3, p <
.05; no-poss vs. two poss: F1(1,29) = 6.8, p < .05; F2(1,20)
= 4.2, p < .05; one-poss vs. two-poss: both Fs < 1)1.
Thus, the prolonged reading times in the no-poss
condition cannot be explained (away) by assuming that in
the no-poss condition the relevant attribute dimension was
not activated when the prior text was being processed.
Rather, what this post-hoc analysis indicates is that there is
contextual facilitation for the processing of negative
sentences beyond the mere activation of the relevant

of the comprehension question. Participants responded by
pressing the ‘.’- and ‘x’-key (marked with ‘y’ and ‘n’,
respectively).
The
experimental
session
lasted
approximately 30 minutes.

Results and Discussion
The analyses were performed on the reading times of the
target sentences in experimental items. Reading times
longer than 8000 ms or shorter than 500 ms were omitted. In
determining outliers within the remaining reading times, we
took not only differences among the participants into
account, but also differences among the items. We
employed a two-step procedure: First, the reading times of
each subject were converted to z scores. Then reading times
with a z score that deviated more than x standard deviations
from the mean z score of the respective item in the
respective condition were discarded, with x depending on
the number of observations per condition, as suggested by
Van Selst and Jolicoeur (1994). This eliminated less than
3.2 % of the data. The data of one participant was discarded
because he or she had made more than 10 mistakes in the
overall 36 experimental comprehension questions. The
mean reading times and standard deviations in the six
conditions are displayed in Table 2.
Table 2: Mean reading times and standard deviations in
Experiment 1 as a function of sentence polarity and context.
Polarity
Aff
Neg

One-poss
M / SD
2589 / 650
2776 / 786

Context
Two-poss
M / SD
2602 / 657
2840 / 830

No-poss
M / SD
2686 / 764
2991 / 901

An overall ANOVA produced a main effect of negation
(F1(1,29) = 22.5, p < .001; F2(1,30) = 43.5, p < .001), and a
main effect of context (F1(2,28) = 5.3, p < .01; F2(2,29) =
4.5, p < .01). The negation-by-context interaction was not
significant (F1(2,28) = 1.14, p = .32; F2 < 1). According to
the hypotheses we analyzed the data separately for the two
polarity conditions. As expected, a significant context effect
emerged for the negative conditions but not for the
affirmative conditions (negation: F1(2,28) = 5.4, p < .01;
F2(2,29) = 4.0, p < .05 affirmation: F1(2,28) = 1.1, p > .33;
F2 < 1). Planned comparisons indicated that participants
took significantly longer to read the negative sentences in
the no-possibility condition than in the one-possibility or
two-possibility condition (no-poss vs. one poss: F1(1,29) =
7.5, p < .01; F2(1,30) = 7.9, p < .01; no-poss vs. two poss:
F1(1,29) = 7.8, p < .01; F2(1,30) = 2.7, p < .11). The
reading times in the latter two conditions did not differ
statistically (F1<1; F2(1,30) = 1.1, p > .30).
The results of the overall ANOVA do not correspond to
the predictions: We did not find a significant polarity-bynegation interaction. However, according to the hypotheses
we nevertheless conducted separate analyses for the two
polarity conditions. The results of these analyses correspond

1737

1

Another potentially relevant variable concerns the protagonist’s
preference (e.g., in Table 1, Danielle most likely hopes that the
water will be warm). However, the present results do not seem to
depend on this variable: If we analyze the 13 items for which there
is clearly no preferred state, we get qualitatively equivalent results.

attribute dimension. A context that explicitly mentions the
negated proposition is a better context for the processing of
a negative sentence than a context that merely activates the
relevant attribute dimension.
The present experiment was geared towards a comparison
of the reading times in the three different contexts within the
two polarity conditions. Comparing the reading times within
the two polarity conditions allowed us to analyze the exact
same material in the different contexts, whereas a
comparison between the polarity conditions would have
meant comparing different sentences. However, Glenberg et
al.’s main result concerned a comparison between polarity
conditions, and our results thereby only indirectly relate to
these findings. We therefore conducted additional analyses
that directly compared the processing times required for the
affirmative and negative target sentences. Raw reading
times could not be analysed, as negative sentences always
contained one more syllable than their affirmative
counterpart. Thus, we corrected for sentence length by
means of dividing the sentence reading times by the number
of syllables in the sentence.2 Outliers were determined
according to the same procedure as before, except that persyllable reading times of more than 400 ms were excluded
prior to the standardization of the reading times. As
expected on the basis of Glenberg et al.’s study, negative
target sentences were read significantly longer than the
affirmative target sentences in the no-possibility context
condition, in which the target proposition was not under
consideration prior to the target sentence (F1(1,29) = 4.3; p
< .05; F2(1,30) = 4.0; p = .05). In contrast, in the two other
context conditions, negative and affirmative conditions did
not differ (two-possibility condition: F1(1,29) = 1.1; p >
.30; F2(1,30) = 1.5; p > .20; one-possibility condition:
F1(1,29) = 1.0; p > .30; F2<1). Thus, this analysis replicates
Glenberg et al.’s results, except that facilitation in the
present case resulted from explicitly mentioning the negated
proposition rather than from explicitly mentioning the
relevant attribute dimension.
In the present experiment, we demonstrated contextual
facilitation due to the explicit mentioning of the negated
proposition. In Experiment 2, we investigated whether there
is contextual facilitation due to implied propositions.

Experiment 2
Participants were presented with narrative stories that
suggested an inference concerning a particular property of a
target entity (e.g., that a boy’s T-shirt is dirty after he played
outside in the backyard). In the final sentences of each
2
We are aware of the fact that this procedure is not optimal,
because it may overestimate the per-syllable reading time, and
thereby risks an overcorrection. However, in the present case, the
preferred procedure of performing a linear regression with number
of syllables as predictor is not an option, because all of our
affirmative and negative target sentences were 18 and 19 syllables
long, respectively. Thus, number of syllables is perfectly
confounded with polarity in the present experiment.

narrative, this inference was denied, either by means of an
affirmative statement (e.g., … the T-shirt was clean) or by
means of an explicit negation (e.g., … the T-shirt was not
dirty). The stories differed with respect to how strongly they
implied the respective inference, as was assessed by a prior
norming study with an independent group of participants. If
it is true that a context which implies a particular
proposition, constitutes an adequate context for a negative
sentence that denies this proposition, then we would expect
to find a stronger facilitation effect for the processing of
negative sentences with ‘strongly implying’ stories
compared to ‘weakly implying’ stories. In other words, we
expect an interaction of polarity and implication strength,
with the difference in processing time between affirmative
and negative target sentences being smaller for the strongly
implying stories than for the weakly implying stories.

Method
Participants Sixty-four students of the Berlin University of
Technology participated in the experiment for a financial
reimbursement of EUR 8 per hour. Sixty-four additional
students participated in the norming study.
Materials We created 80 short German stories, 40 of which
were used as experimental items, and 40 as filler items. The
experimental items were constructed according to the
following schema (see Table 3): The first paragraph
specified the setting of the story. The next paragraph
(context-variation paragraph) was available in two versions
that implied contrary properties with respect to a particular
target entity (e.g., a boy’s T-shirt, either dirty or clean). The
final sentence of the story (target sentence) always denied
that the previously implied property was true for the target
entity, either by means of an affirmation or by means of
negation. The target sentences were 23-27 syllables long.
The filler stories were of comparable lengths and topics as
the experimental stories. 20 of the filler stories contained a
negation somewhere in the story. For 22 of the filler stories,
a simple comprehension question was constructed with half
of the comprehension questions requiring a ‘yes’-response
and the other half requiring a ‘no’-response.
Norming study Prior to the experiment proper, the 40
experimental stories were subjected to a norming study to
assess how strongly each story implied the target property.
Sixty-four participants were presented with the stories up to
but not including the target sentences. The relevant
background information from the target sentences was
provided below the story (e.g., for the story in Table 3:
[background information: The son is approaching his
mother; he is wearing a T-shirt]). Participants were then
asked a question concerning the target entity, which either
mentioned the target property or a contrary property (e.g., Is
the boy’s T-shirt dirty? / Is the boy’s T-shirt clean?).
Answers were given on a five-point scale ranging from No,
definitely not to Yes, definitely. Each story was available in
2(context) x 2(questioned property: target vs. contrary)
versions. There were eight different questionnaires with 20
stories each.
From the participants’ answers we calculated the
implication strength of each story: First, we re-coded

1738

participants’ answers such that a +2 was given in case
participants had checked “yes definitely” when asked about
the target property or “no, definitely not” when asked about
the contrary property. A +1 was given when participants in
these cases checked “yes, probably” and “no, probably not”
respectively. For the opposite check marks we gave negative
values (i.e., -2 or -1 for “yes” responses when asked about
the contrary property or “no” responses when asked about
the target property). A zero was given for “don’t know”
answers. The resulting mean implication strength for all
stories was .60 (range: -.14 – 1.54) with a mean standard
deviation of 1.2 (range: .85 – 1.61). The fourty experimental
stories were then ranked according to their mean value, and
grouped into five sets of 8 stories each (mean values of .075,
.31, .60, .86, and 1.16, respectively). For the analyses of the
target-sentence reading times, stories in the lower two sets
were combined into the category “weakly implying stories”,
and stories in the upper two sets were combined into the
category “strongly-implying stories”. Stories in the middle
category (N=8) were excluded from these analyses.

the between-items variable ‘implication strength’ (‘weakly
implying’ vs. ‘strongly implying’) that was determined in
the norming study (see above). Thus, we employed a
2(polarity of target sentence: aff. vs. neg.) x 2(implication
strength: strong vs. weak) design, with repeated
measurement on the first variable in both the by-participant
and the by-items analyses, and repeated measurement on the
second variable in the by-participants analyses only.
Text presentation was sentence by sentence, self-paced by
the participant pressing the space-bar. After reading the final
sentence of the story, participants were presented with a
picture of an entity which they were asked to name out loud.
The results of this task are irrelevant for the issues at hand,
and will therefore not be reported. For some of the filler
items, a comprehension question was presented after the
picture. Participants responded by pressing the appropriate
key (‘.’- and ‘x’-key, marked with ‘y’ and ‘n’, respectively).
The experimental session lasted approximately 45 minutes.

Results and Discussion

Table 3: Sample Story for Experiment 2 (translated).
Setting

Context 1
(dirty
expected)

Target Sen
Neg / Aff
Context 2
(clean
expected)

Target Sen
Neg / Aff

As the context manipulation was between materials in this
experiment, data analysis was directed towards a direct
comparison of the required processing time in the two
polarity conditions (manipulated within participants and
within items). In order to receive a measure for the required
processing time that is independent of sentence length, we
performed (separately for each participant) a linear
regression with the number of syllables as predictor.
Analyses were performed on the residual reading times.
Residuals below -500 and above 10000 were eliminated.
Otherwise, outlier elimination was preformed as in
Experiment 1 (reducing the data set by less than 2.5 %). The
data of three participants were eliminated because they had
made mistakes with more than one third of the
comprehension questions in the experiment. The mean
residuals in the four conditions are displayed in Table 4.

During the wedding reception the kids of
the guests were playing in the backyard of
the hotel.
Betty’s young son was not shy and
participated in any nonsense that the kids
could come up with. Just before dinner,
Betty summoned her son. She was going to
change his clothes because she wanted him
to look neat during the banquet.
When her son came running up to her,
Betty was astonished to see that his T-shirt
was not dirty. /
was clean.
Only Betty’s young son was sitting inside
in the corner reading books by himself. Just
before dinner, Betty summoned her son.
She was going to put a bib on him, because
she wanted him to look neat even after the
banquet.
When her son came running up to her,
Betty was astonished to see that his T-shirt
was not clean. / was dirty.

Table 4: Mean residual reading times and standard
deviations in Experiment 2

Design and Procedure Each participant read all 40
experimental items intermixed with all 40 filler items. Of
the 40 experimental items, 20 were presented in the
affirmative and 20 in the negative condition, whereby 10 of
each of these were presented in the first context and the
remaining 10 in the second context (see Table 3). Within the
ten stories in each of these four versions, the five normingstudy categories were represented by 2 stories each. Each of
the overall 40 experimental stories was read by 64
participants, 16 in each of the four versions.
For the reading-time analyses we collapsed across the two
affirmative and the two negative conditions, but included

Polarity

Implication strength
Weak
Strong
M / SD
M / SD

Aff
Neg

-125 / 301
22 / 329

-83 / 410
-71 / 344

1739

An overall ANOVA did not produce any significant effects
(polarity: F1(1,60) = 2.78, p = .10, F2(1,30) = 2.60, p = .12;
implication strength: both Fs < 1; polarity-by-implicationstrength: F1(1,60) = 1.69, p = .20; F2(1,30) = 1.29, p =. 27).
According to the hypotheses, we nevertheless conducted
separate analyses for the two implication-strength
conditions. As expected, the time required for processing
the target sentences in the affirmative and negative
conditions differed significantly only for the weaklyimplying stories (weak: F1(1,60) = 5.42, p < .05; F2(1,15) =
4.88, p < .04; strong: both Fs < 1).

As in Experiment 1, the results of the overall ANOVA do
not correspond to the predictions, because we did not find a
significant interaction effect. However, as in Experiment 1,
the results of the separate analyses corresponded nicely to
the predictions. Negative target sentences required more
processing time than their affirmative counterparts when the
context did not strongly suggest the negated proposition. In
contrast, when the context did strongly suggest the negated
proposition then negative sentences did not require more
processing time. Thus, the results replicate the previous
results, but this time the facilitation effect was due to
inferred instead of explicitly stated propositions.

General Discussion
The present paper was concerned with the question of
whether the processing of negative sentences is facilitated
when they are presented within an adequate context. More
specifically, we tested the hypothesis that negative
sentences are particularly felicitous in contexts in which the
proposition that is being negated was either explicitly
mentioned as a potential possibility in the prior text or at
least constitutes a highly plausible assumption (Givon,
1978). The results of the two experiments were in line with
this hypothesis. Experiment 1 demonstrated contextual
facilitation due to an explicit mentioning of the negated
proposition. Experiment 2 demonstrated that contextual
facilitation can be achieved without explicit mentioning the
negated proposition, namely when the respective
proposition corresponds to a highly plausible assumption in
the respective context.
The results of the present experiments are in line with
previous studies in the negation literature in demonstrating
the context dependency of the processing difficulty that is
associated with negative sentences. They go beyond what is
already known in the literature in two respects: First,
whereas Glenberg et al. (1999) showed that the processing
of negative sentences can be facilitated by highlighting the
relevant attribute dimension, our results suggest that there is
additional facilitation if the proposition that is being negated
was explicitly considered as a possibility in the prior text
(Experiment 1). Second, whereas Wason demonstrated that
negative sentences are relatively easy to process when they
state exceptions to a regularity that comprehenders infer
from their perceptual surrounding, our experiments
demonstrate that the same is true in narrative texts where
comprehenders build expectations on the basis of their
world knowledge (Experiment 2).
In Glenberg et al.’s experiment and in our Experiment 2,
the difficulty of processing negation was not only reduced
but completely eliminated when the sentences were
presented in an adequate context (as indicated by the fact
that processing times were even shorter in the negative
compared to the affirmative condition). This is surprising if
one considers the necessarily more complex representations
that need to be constructed for negative compared to
affirmative sentences. In propositional theories of language
comprehension this complexity comes about because a

negative sentence generally contains one additional
proposition as well as one additional level of propositional
encapsulation. In the experiential-simulations view of
language comprehension (e.g., Zwaan, 2004), this
complexity comes about because comprehenders of negative
sentences are assumed to create two simulations instead of
one, namely a simulation of the negated state of affairs as
well as a simulation of the actual state of affairs (e.g., Kaup
& Zwaan, 2003). Thus, on the basis of these considerations
one would have expected adequate contexts to reduce the
processing difficulty but not to eliminate it. What then are
the implications of this finding? One possibility is that
negative sentences are pragmatically even more adequate
than affirmative sentences when a prior expectation needs to
be denied (i.e., “not dirty” is preferred to “clean” when it
comes to denying the expectation that a particular T-shirt is
dirty). Possibly, this pragmatic advantage of negation in the
context of denial then makes up for the higher processing
complexity. Future studies are necessary to systematically
investigate polarity effects with different kinds of speech
acts.

Acknowledgments
We thank M. Burkert, L. Schalk, R. Schindele, and M.
Zirngibl for assistance with data collection. This research
was supported by grant KA 1389/2-2 to B. Kaup (DFG).

References
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20,
37- 46.
Giora, R. (2006). Anything negatives can do affirmatives
can do just as well, except for some metaphors. Journal of
Pragmatics, 38, 981-1014.
Givon, T. (1978). Negation in language: Pragmatics,
function ontology. In P. Cole (Ed.), Syntax and semantics
(Vol. 9: Pragmatics). New York: Academic Press.
Glenberg, A. M., Robertson, D. A., Jansen, J. L., &
Johnson-Glenberg, M. C. (1999). Not propositions.
Journal of Cognitive Systems Research, 1, 19-33.
Kaup, B., & Zwaan, R.A. (2003). Effects of negation and
situational presence on the accessibility of text information.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29, 439-446.
Kaup, B., Zwaan, R. A. & Lüdtke, J. (in press). The
experiential view of language comprehension: How is
negation represented? In F. Schmalhofer & C.A. Perfetti
(Eds.), Higher level language processes in the brain.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Van Selst, M., & Jolicoeur, P. (1994). A Solution to the
effect of sample size on outlier elimination. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47A, 631-650.
Wason, P. C. (1965). The contexts of plausible denial.
Journal of Verbal learning and Verbal Behavior, 4, 7-11.
Zwaan, R.A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In B.H. Ross
(Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, (Vol.
44.) New York: Academic Press.

1740

