UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Context and the Processing of Discourse: Priming and Genre Effects on Discourse
Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5m22b95k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Sagi, Eyal

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Context and the Processing of Discourse:
Priming and Genre Effects on Discourse Comprehension
Eyal Sagi (ermon@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
Many theories of discourse structure rely on the idea that the
segments comprising the discourse are linked through inferred
relations such as causality and temporal contiguity. These
theories suggest that all of the information needed to
determine the relation can be found when the discourse is
interpreted through the application of world knowledge.
However, Sanders (1997) found that the interpretation of
ambiguous relations can be affected by the discourse’s genre.
Two experiments examine whether these genre effects are
mediated through a cognitive process sensitive to nonlinguistic information. Experiment 1 shows that discourse
relations are affected by repetition priming effects, while
Experiment 2 suggests that the processing of discourse
relations is sensitive to the expected frequency of the relations
as exhibited in the text.
Keywords: Discourse, Discourse Relations, Genre, Priming

Introduction
Linguistic theories of discourse comprehension often
propose that local coherence within a discourse is
established through the use of discourse relations1 (e.g.
Asher & Lascarides, 2003; Hobbs, 1979; Kehler, 2002;
Mann and Thompson, 1988; Polnayi, van Den Berg & Ahn,
2003; Sanders, Spooren & Noordman, 1992). Most of these
theories are based on the segmentation of a discourse into a
set of segments (often sentences or phrases) which are then
bound together by discourse relations into a coherent unit.
For example, consider the discourse (1):
(1)
a. John is a good chess player.
b. He always beats James.
The two sentences form a complete discourse made up of
two discourse units. One way to bind the two discourse
fragments together would be to assume that sentence (1b) is
a justification for the claim made in (1a). By Asher and
Lascarides (2003)’s terminology the appropriate relation in
this case is elaboration2.
In addition to listing the possible relations and their
properties, some theories also suggest algorithmic processes

that may be employed to determine the appropriate
relations, given a sufficiently detailed account of the
discourse. For instance, Hobbs (1993) suggests that the
process of abduction can be used to determine the
appropriateness of candidate relations. Similarly, Asher &
Lascarides (2003) suggest each discourse relation imposes a
set of constraints on the discourse and that it is possible to
infer the appropriate relation by testing these conditions.
A similar notion of discourse structure arises from some
cognitive theories of discourse comprehension (van Dijk &
Kintsch, 1983; Kintsch, 1998). In congruence with most
linguistic theories, van Dijk and Kintsch suggest that the
discourse is structured hierarchically, and that each level in
the hierarchy acts as a summary of the content of the
original discourse. However, their account of the relations
between discourse segments is based on bridging inferences
rather than on a catalogue of specific discourse relations3.
While most theories of discourse structure focus on the
content and of the discourse as the source for discourse
relations it seems reasonable that other factors might
influence the specifics of the relation chosen by a
comprehender. For instance, Sanders (1997) conducted an
experiment to examine whether people are sensitive to the
source of coherence4 distinction outlined in an earlier work
(Sanders et al., 1992). He presented expert discourse
analysts with discourses that included “chameleon” causal
relations, whose source of coherence could be either
semantic or pragmatic. These sentences were embedded in
one of two possible genres – an argumentative version of
the text or a descriptive version. While participants found
both interpretations on the relation equally likely in the
argumentative version, most participants agreed that in the
descriptive version the source of coherence was most likely
semantic. Sanders also presented an analysis of discourses
of genres similar to those in the two versions. His analysis
suggested that the interpretations his participants arrived at
mirrored the distribution of relation types in the genre.
If we assume that Sanders’ interpretation of his results is
correct a new question arises – What is the mechanism (or
mechanisms) through which a discourse’s genre affects the
interpretation of ambiguous relations within it?

1

While this paper will use the term discourse relations, other
names have also been used in the literature for very similar
concepts. These include coherence relations (Kehler, 2002) and
rhetorical relations (Mann and Thompson, 1986).
2
For the sake of consistency, this paper will adhere to names and
definitions of discourse relations as presented in Asher and
Lascarides (2003). It should be noted that while the labels used by
theories for relations differ, it is often difficult to find specific
relations that different theories would categorize differently.
2071

3

van Dijk and Kintsch’s hierarchy is based on three distinct
hierarchy-forming processes, but those transform the discourse
propositions, rather than semantically constrain or enhance them as
discourse relations do.
4
“Source of Coherence” is one of four primitives Sanders et al.
(1992) suggest as the basis for a possible classification system of
coherence relations (e.g., Cause-Consequence vs. ArgumentClaim).

One possible explanation is that discourse comprehension
is directly affected by the perceived genre of the discourse
(e.g. Kintsch’s textual schema). This account implies that
people differentiate among discourse genres and that such
genres are discrete and identifiable types. While this is an
attractive notion, there might be situations in which several
different genres could be applicable. Furthermore, in some
cases a novel genre might be encountered, or even expected.
Moreover, it is likely that readers can construct models for
new genres as they encounter them (e.g. an undergraduate
encountering a research paper for the first time). Therefore
such a top-down notion of genre is probably insufficient as a
full description of the effects genre might have on the
analysis of a discourse.
A related explanation that does not rely on an explicit,
top-down, notion of genre is that ambiguous discourse
relations are interpreted based on a set of expectations.
These expectations can be affected by many different
cognitive processes – including some abstract awareness of
genre. However, awareness of genre is not strictly required.
Instead, a statistical approach may be employed. Initially, a
default set of expectations may be used. These expectations
are then adjusted with each discourse relation computed to
reflect the general frequency of relations within a discourse.
Given enough relations, this method will tend to
disambiguate ambiguous relations based on a probabilistic
model that matches the genre to which the discourse belongs
without requiring awareness of the genre itself – or even of
its existence. While awareness of genre is not required, this
account is still based on the composition of the discourse as
a whole. The set of expectations used to disambiguate
discourse relations would therefore gradually adapt to fit the
discourse as more of it is read and comprehended.
In contrast, it is also possible that the effects observed by
Sanders’ originate locally – without attending to the
structure or frequencies of relations in the discourse as a
whole. Whereas the process described above employs
information gathered from the entire discourse, a local
account focuses on discourse relations that directly precede
the segment in question. Such an account could, for
example, be based on direct replication – if a specific
discourse relation is underspecified, it may be possible to
use information from the previous relation in order to be
able to better compute the relation. This may be extended to
nearby relations, depending on the process(es) involved.
While the mechanisms of expectations and priming do not
rely on an explicit concept of genre they are still able to
predict the results described by Sanders (1997).
Furthermore, while genre might not be explicitly used by
these mechanisms it is still an underlying factor in their
facilitating effect. For instance, it is very likely that the
frequency distribution of discourse relations differs between
different genres.
The present experiments explore whether these two
mechanisms might take part in the process of discourse
comprehension. Experiment 1 investigates the possibility
that the processing of discourse relations is affected by
short-term, local, effects. Experiment 2 examines what
happens when participants frequently encounter a discourse
relation in a genre in which that relation is rarely used.
2072

Experiment 1
One possible explanation for the results described by
Sanders is that in addition to the content of the discourse
segments and the current representation of the discourse, the
process of computing discourse relations also takes into
account the results of recent discourse relations
computations. In cases where the previous discourse relation
computed is similar to the one being computed this may
lead to greater efficiency in the computation. Essentially,
the computation of a discourse relation might generate an
expectation that the same relation will be used again,
resulting in a repetition priming effect. Such effects are not
unlike those that have been demonstrated for syntactic
structures (cf. Bock & Levelt, 1994; Smith & Wheeldon,
2001). Experiment 1 explores this possibility.
Such effects require that the inferences used to identify a
specific discourse relation bear some similarity to one
another. As such, these inferences should be more than just
generalized bridging inferences as suggested by Kintsch
(2003). Rather, these inferences must include an explicit
reference to the type of relation involved (e.g. Parallel or
Elaboration).
Table 1: Sample Stimuli from Experiment 1
Relation
Parallel
Elaboration

Sentence pair
1: Julia is a respected chess player.
2: She excels at poker.
1: Julia is a respected chess player.
2: She has an analytical mind.

Table 2: Sample Question from Experiment 1
How many chess tournaments do you think Julia won?
1. None.
2. A few.
3. More than a few.
4. Many.
Participants were presented with pairs of sentences, one
pair at a time. These pairs were related through either a
parallel relation or an elaboration relation (see Table 1 for
sample stimuli). In cases where the two sentences were
connected through a parallel relation, the propositional
content of the second sentence mirrored that of the first
sentence but with a different object (e.g., “chess” and
“poker”). A sentence pair exhibited an elaboration relation
when the second sentence was used to provide evidence for
the truthfulness of the first sentence. In both cases the
sentence pairs described properties of individuals and no
relationship existed between the various sentence pairs.
In order to motivate participants to attend to the meaning
of the sentences and to the discourse relations that relate
them, participants were later asked to answer questions
about the people described in the sentences (see Table 2 for

a sample question)5. Four such questions followed each set
of 4 sentence pairs – one question per pair. Importantly,
because these questions were presented following the
presentation of four unrelated sentence pairs it is unlikely
that participants would delay the comprehension of the
sentence pairs until the relevant question was presented.
A presented sentence pair was considered primed if the
pair immediately preceding it was of the same type (e.g. a
pair exhibiting a parallel discourse relation following a pair
exhibiting the same relation). If discourse relations are
affected by repetition priming then participants should read
stimuli pairs faster when they are preceded by a pair of the
same type than when they are preceded by a pair of the
other type.

with the same sentences and therefore each participant was
exposed to exactly the same words and propositions.
However each head sentence participated in a parallel
discourse relation for half the participants, and an
elaboration relation for the other half of the participants. In
addition, a question was designed for each head sentence.

Methods

Results

Participants Forty-two undergraduate students enrolled at
Northwestern University participated in this experiment in
partial fulfillment of course requirements.

In order to better control for the variability in sentence
length, reading times for the sentence pairs were divided by
the number of words in the sentence pair6. Furthermore,
only sentence pairs preceded by a sentence pair were
included in the analyzed data7. Additionally, an initial
analysis of the distribution of the reading times showed a
significant positive skew of the distribution, as is often the
case with reading times. In order to normalize the
distribution, outliers were removed according to the method
described by Tukey (1977). Tukey defined outliers as values
that lie further than 1.5 times the inter-quartile range from
the appropriate inter-quartile percentile (below Q1 or above
Q3). The determination of outliers was performed separately
for each discourse relation type. This excluded 3.6% of the
data from the analysis.
The overall mean of reading times for each of the four
conditions is given in Table 4. Table 4 also shows the
difference between the primed and unprimed means as the
priming index. The means of the four conditions were
calculated for each participant, and a repeated-measures
ANOVA was performed on the resulting data. This
ANOVA used the relation type of the sentence pair and the
relation type of the preceding sentence pair as withinparticipant variables. There was a significant main effect for
the type of the discourse relation (sentence pairs exhibiting
a parallel relation took longer to read than pairs exhibiting
an explanation relation) (F(1,41) = 8.08; p < .01), and a
significant interaction between the type of relation exhibited
by the sentence pair and the type of relation exhibited by the
previous pair (F(1,41) = 9.81; p < .01). There was no
significant main effect for the type of discourse relation of
the previous sentence pair (F(1,41) = .66; p > .1).

Procedure Participants were asked to read pairs of
sentences as quickly as possible but to make sure they have
read the sentences carefully as they would be asked
questions about the content of the sentences. Sentence pairs
were presented on a computer screen, one pair at a time.
After reading a pair, participants pressed the spacebar in
order to proceed to the next pair, at which time the sentence
pair disappear. A second later, a new sentence pair
appeared. Reading time was measured as the duration
between the onset of presentation of a sentence pair and the
time the participant pressed the spacebar.
Over the course of the experiment, each participant was
presented with 32 sentence pairs, half of which exhibited a
parallel relation and half of which exhibited an elaboration
relation. Every fourth sentence pair was followed by a set of
four multiple choice questions. After participants answered
the four questions they were asked to press the spacebar
when they were ready to read the next sentence pair.
The sentence pairs presented to the participants were
constructed out of sets containing two possible first
sentences and two possible second sentences (see the
materials section below). The composition of the sentence
pairs, the order of their presentation, and whether they were
primed or not was counterbalanced across participants.
Materials The experimental stimuli consisted of 16 sets of
4 sentences. Each set included two “head” sentences and
two “tail” sentences. An experimental sentence pair was
constructed by joining together a head sentence with a tail
sentence. There two head sentences were analogous to one
another, while the two tail sentences were related to the
head sentences through either a parallel or an elaboration
discourse relation (see Table 3 for an example of such a
complete set). In this way, all participants were presented
5

It should be noted that if participants did not attend to the
sentence and did not draw any inferences about them, then no
priming effect should be expected.
2073

Table 3: Sample Stimuli Set from Experiment 1
Type
Head 1
Head 2
Parallel
Elaboration

6

Sentence pair
Stacy wears a ring on her index finger.
Traci keeps a ruby pendant on her desk.
She owns a Rolex watch.
She appreciates jewelry.

This is meant to make the sentence reading times roughly
comparable. However, since the comparison here is between the
reading times of the same sentences in either a primed position or
an unprimed position, normalization is not strictly required for the
purposes of the analysis.
7
This excluded the first sentence pair of each block – these
sentences tended to exhibit a significantly higher reading time,
presumably because they represented the start of a new “discourse”

An item analysis, using the same repeated measures
ANOVA used for the participant analysis yielded nonsignificant main effects (for the discourse relation: F(1,23)
= 2.91; p > .1; for the previous discourse relation: F(1,23) =
.155; p > .1) and a marginally significant interaction
(F(1,23) = 3.88; p = .06). While the item analysis revealed
no significant interaction, this is possibly because more
items are required for a significant effect due to the
relatively small effect size.
The interaction between the discourse relation of the
previous sentence pair and the discourse relation of the
current sentence pair represents the hypothesized priming
effect – If the two discourse relations match the sentence
pair is read faster than if the two discourse relations do not
match. To further explore this effect, two planned
comparisons were performed. These yielded a significant
difference for elaboration relations (t(41) = 2.70; p < .01,
one-tailed), but only a marginally-significant difference for
parallel relations (t(41) = 1.52; p = .07, one-tailed).
Table 4: Mean Word Reading Time for the current sentence
pair by Condition (ms).

Current
relation

Parallel
Elaboration

Previous relation
Parallel Elaboration
303
320
301
288

Priming
index
17
23

Discussion
Experiment 1 demonstrates that the processing of discourse
relations does exhibit repetition priming effects. In turn, this
lends support to the hypothesis that local effects might play
a role in genre effects on the processing of discourse, such
as those reported by Sanders (1997).
Furthermore, such effects are not predicted by models
proposing that discourse relations are determined through a
fixed process that is only affected by the semantic content of
the discourse segments and the context of the discourse,
such as the one described by Asher and Lascarides (2003).
In contrast, the abduction model proposed by Hobbs et al.
(1993) may account for this result by assuming that the
weights used in the computation are continually adjusted.
This result also suggests that the inferences drawn by
readers are differentiated based on the type of discourse
relations. It is unlikely that the observed priming effect can
occur between two generalized inferences that are based on
the specifics of the discourse in question. Instead, it is more
likely that a generalizing principle, such as the type of
discourse relation, is extracted. This provides support for
theories arguing that discourse structure is based on a
specific catalogue of discourse relations (e.g. Asher &
Lascarides, 2003; Mann and Thompson, 1988).
Nevertheless, even if local priming effects may be able to
account for the Sanders’ results, it may still be the case that
a less localized process might also play a role in the
interactions between genre and discourse relations. More
specifically, if we assume that the priming effects observed

2074

in experiment 1 are a result of shifts in the way the cognitive
process responsible for the determination of discourse
relations works then it is possible that under some cases
such shifts may be cumulative and result in a gradual shift
in processing expectations as to the structure of the
discourse. Experiment 2 examines a case in which such a
gradual shift may be evident.

Experiment 2
While experiment 1 demonstrated how a single instance of a
discourse relation can affect the processing of discourse,
experiment 2 attempts to create a situation that is closer to
that to which participants in Sanders’ experiment where
exposed to. The short, isolated discourses embodied by the
two-sentence lines of experiment 1 are replaced by a more
continuous narrative intended to produce a sense of genre.
However, while the genre employed in this experiment
might be broadly construed as a narrative, it is an overly
simplified narrative genre employing only two discourse
relations. The first relation used in experiment 2 is
narration. This relation is common and straightforward, it
relates to discourse segments through temporal continuity in
which the second segment follows the first one temporally,
while maintaining the same context.
The second discourse relation used in this experiment has
been named background by Asher and Lascarides. In many
ways, this relation is the inverse of the narration relation.
Instead of providing information as to “what happens after”,
the background relation provides background information
that pertains to the action described. Frequently, this is
information about a state that was in effect when the action
started, or even a prerequisite for the action. Table 5
presents a sample sentence pair for each of the two types.
While the relation is employed in the narrative genre, it is
much less frequent than the use of narration and other
relations that imply an advancing temporal flow. In a sense,
the notion of a narrative as telling a story relies on the
general tendency of its constituents to portray a sequence of
events in the same order in which those events occurred.
The background relation impedes and might even reverses
this flow, resulting in the a somewhat stunted narrative.
Table 5: Sample Stimuli from Experiment 2
Relation
Narration
Background

Sentence pair
1: John dismantled a Lego spaceship.
2: It took him 5 minutes to rebuild it.
1: John dismantled a Lego spaceship.
2: It took him 5 minutes to build it.

Experiment 2 relies on this scarcity of background
relations within the genre of narrative to examine how
participants’ expectations of a discourse shape their
comprehension of it. Participants are presented with
miniature stories – narratives, in essence. But those
narratives include a disproportionate number of background
relations. If participants’ expectations of the genre affect
their processing of discourse, then the frequency of

background relations should contradict their initial
expectations and slow their processing initially.
However, as their experience with the new genre grows,
their expectations might undergo a change – They might
learn that in this new genre background discourse relations
are frequent and normative and therefore come to expect
them. This may then result in increased efficiency in the
processing of such relations, and the discourse as a whole.

sentence pair involved. The model was statistically
significant (F(56, 679) = 8.54; p < .01; R2 = .41). There was
a statistically significant interaction between type and
ordinal position (F(1, 679) = 7.46 ; p < 0.01) as well as main
effects for both ordinal position (F(1, 679) = 45.72; p < .01)
and type of relation (F(1, 679) = 21.75; p < .01).
400

Background

Methods
Participants Twenty-three undergraduate students enrolled
at Northwestern University participated in this experiment
in partial fulfillment of course requirements.

300

ms
Narration
200

Procedure The procedure of this study is similar to that
used in experiment 1. Participants were asked to carefully
read pairs of sentences as quickly as possible. These
sentence pairs were presented on a computer screen, one
pair at a time. After reading a pair, participants pressed the
spacebar in order to proceed to the next pair, at which time
the sentence pair disappear. A second later, a new sentence
pair appeared. Reading time was measured as the duration
between the presentation of a sentence pair on the screen
and the time the participant pressed the spacebar.
Following each narrative, participants were asked to
answer three multiple choice questions regarding their
impressions of the child’s behavior. These questions were
the same for all the narratives.
There were two versions of each sentence pair, and the
presented version was counterbalanced across participants.
Furthermore, the order in which the narratives were
presented was also counterbalanced across participants.
Materials The experimental stimuli consisted of 8
narratives. Each narrative was made up of 4 sentence pairs,
and there were two versions of each sentence pair. Sentence
pairs belonging to the same narrative shared a single actor,
who was described as a child playing in a psychology lab.
In one version the two sentences were related through a
narration relation, while in the second the two sentences
were related through a background relation. The difference
between the versions was in the verb used to describe the
protagonist’s action in the second sentence.

Results

100
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Number of stories read
Figure 1: Mean Word Reading Time (in milliseconds) by
Type and Stories Read

Discussion
As predicted, participants in experiment 2 started out
processing background discourse relations fairly slowly.
Participants also showed dramatic improvement in their
processing of those relations across the experiment. It can
therefore be argued that the cognitive process underlying the
calculation of discourse relations is sensitive not only to
local, priming, effects, but also to the general frequency of
particular relations within the discourse.
Participants seem to be able to adjust their comprehension
strategies to accommodate new and unexpected discourse
schemas. This suggests that the processes underlying
sensitivity to genre as demonstrated by Sanders (1997) are
unlikely to require some overt notion of genre and are able
to adapt to a variety of discourse genres, even when such
genres are not explicitly defined. More generally, it appears
that the processing of discourse relations is affected by
previously computed relations, perhaps through a set of
implicit expectations about the structure of discourse.

General Discussion

In order to better control for the variability in sentence
length, reading times for the sentence pairs were divided by
the number of words in the sentence pair.
Figure 1 tracks the mean reading times for each type of
discourse relation as it changes across the course of the
experiment. A regression model was used in order to test the
hypothesis that participants improved more in their
processing of background discourse relations than in their
processing of narration relations. The regression model
tested for an interaction between the ordinal position of a
sentence pair within the experiment and its type while
controlling for both the participant and the particular

2075

This paper presented evidence that the people’s processing
of discourse relations is sensitive not only to the content of
the discourse, but also to the type and frequency of
previously determined discourse relations. Because these
factors are not strictly a part of the discourse, it seems that
the inference of discourse relations and structures takes into
account more than just the propositions of the discourse and
relevant world knowledge. Rather, the more general context
in which the discourse is encountered (e.g., what genres the
reader is versed in) plays a role as well.
Furthermore, these results might also affect theories that
are not directly concerned with cognitive processes, but

rather with the structure and representation of discourse. As
mentioned above, Sanders (1997) demonstrated that the
genre to which a discourse belongs affects participants’
perception of ambiguous discourse relations within it.
However, if the processing of discourse is affected by
factors such as priming and expectations, then it is likely
that the very interpretation of such relations, to the extent
that they are underdetermined, can also be affected. These
processes might therefore have some measure of influence
on the meaning people extract out of discourse relations.
Consequently, it is possible that the meaning of a
discourse is not strictly determined by its content. Instead,
these cognitive effects suggest that a discourse may only
have a determinate meaning within the scope of a specific
comprehension episode. This imposes limits on the
completeness of representation that can be achieved through
the analysis of a discourse in a context-less manner (e.g.,
without relating it to a specific comprehension episode). It is
therefore important that theories of discourse structure and
meaning allow for some indeterminacy as part of their
analysis. Indeed, some theories have already incorporated
mechanisms that allow discourse representations to be
underdetermined (e.g. Asher & Lascarides, 2003).
More generally, the comprehension of discourse is a
cognitive process and as such can be influenced by factors
other than those internal to the linguistic structure. Theories
of discourse comprehension, including those focused on
discourse structure and relations, must take the cognitive
underpinnings of the process into account.
Additionally, the results described in this paper suggest
that the distinction between various discourse relations
drawn by many theories of discourse structure is mirrored
by the cognitive processes in charge of discourse
comprehension. As such, it seems unlikely that simple
bridging inferences are the result of such processes as
suggested by Kintsch (2003). Instead, it is likely that
specific inferences are drawn in order to bind the segments
into a coherent discourse. These are probably based on
distinct relations such as elaboration and narration.
Moreover, if discourse relations have cognitive properties,
new questions arise. One such question pertains to the
nature of discourse relations: Most theories assume that
these relations are atomic concepts that index some logical
function. Some even suggest that discourse relations are
lexicalized (Knott, 1995). But is that necessarily so?
Sanders et al. (1992) argues that it is possible to classify
discourse relations using a small set of defining primitives.
If that is so, perhaps a discourse relation is nothing more
than a collection of primitives?
It is interesting to note that these cross-discourse effects
also suggest that discourse relations are inferred as part of
the comprehension process. This result provides support for
the hypothesis that discourse inferences are necessarily
drawn during comprehension as has often been suggested in
the literature (cf. van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983, pp. 49-51).
Finally, both Asher and Lascarides (2003) and Sanders et
al. (1992) argue that the set of discourse relations should be

2076

considered as a closed set – that discourse relations are
essentially primitives and that new ones cannot be learned.
However, as demonstrated by experiment 2, the ease with
which relations are comprehended can vary with experience
with the relation and the genre. While it is possible to
account for this result strictly through the use of differences
in expectations and processing, it is also possible to interpret
this result as indicating that some mechanism of learning
plays a part in the processing of discourse relations. If that is
the case, it is entirely possible that new discourse relations
can be learned. While the evidence presented within this
paper cannot resolve this issue, it suggests an approach that
may be able to shed a new light on it.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Lance Rips and the members of the
Rips lab for their help in designing the experiments and for
their useful comments regarding the analysis of the results.

References
Asher, N. & Lascarides, A. (2003). Logics of conversation.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bock, J. K. & Levelt, W. J. M. (1994). Language
production. Grammatical encoding. In: M. A.
Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of psycholoinguistics. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Hobbs, J. R. (1979). Coherence and coreference. Cognitive
Science, 3(1), 67-90.
Hobbs, J. R., Stickel, M., Applet, D. & Martin, P. (1993)
Interpretation as abduction. Artificial Intelligence, 63(12), 69-142.
Kehler, A. (2002). Coherence, reference and the theory of
grammar. Boston, MA: CSLI.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A Paradigm for
Cognition. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Knott, A. (1995). A data-driven methodology for motivating
a set of coherence relations. Doctoral Dissertation,
University of Edinburgh.
Mann, W.C. and Thompson, S. (1988) Rhetorical Structure
Theory: towards a functional theory of text organization.
Text 8(3), 243-81.
Polnayi, L., Van den Berg M. & Ahn D. (2003). Discourse
structure and sentential information structure. Journal of
Logical, Language, and Information, 12, 337-350
Sanders, T. (1997). Semantic and pragmatic source of
coherence: On the categorization of coherence relations in
context. Discourse Processes, 24, 119-148.
Sanders, T. J. M., Spooren W. P. M. & Noordman L. G. M.
(1992). Towards a taxonomy of coherence relations.
Discourse Processes, 15, 1-35.
Smith M. & Wheeldon L. (2001) Syntactic priming in spoke
sentence production – an online study. Cognition, 78(2),
123-164
Tukey, J. W. (1977) Exploratory Data Analysis. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
van Dijk, T. A. & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of
discourse comprehension. New York, NY: Academic
Press.

