UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Contextual Interference within the Perceptual Span in Reading Japanese Text

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9bm7t7kc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Asano, Michiko
Yokosawa, Kazuhiko

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Contextual Interference within the Perceptual Span in Reading Japanese Text
Michiko Asano (asano@L.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Humanities and Sociology,
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Kazuhiko Yokosawa (yokosawa@L.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Humanities and Sociology,
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

a role in guiding eye movements in reading texts (Kajii, Nazir,
& Osaka, 2001).
Is information on word spacing or distinctiveness the only
information that is extracted from the region of the perceptual
span in reading for guiding eye movements? Basic
information on whether there are letters, rather than other
kinds of visual stimuli, may be needed for reading.
Furthermore, information on whether the letters constitute a
sentence may also matter. Not only information about word
spacing but also about the general configuration of the
sentence may be used for guiding the eyes. People often feel
that they can tell in a brief look whether a visually presented
object is a letter or something else (e.g., a symbol), or
whether a letter string is meaningful text or a meaningless
random string. It is possible that these kinds of information
influence the control of eye movements.
In this study, we investigated the extent to which
information from all over the region of the perceptual span is
used for reading Japanese text. We had two hypotheses, as
follows. (1) Do characters in the non-foveal region of the
perceptual span influence reading efficiency? (2) If so, does
whether the characters constitute sentences have an influence
on reading efficiency? Three kinds of Japanese scripts are
used together in writing meaningful texts, and the visual
distinctiveness of them plays a role similar to word spaces in
spaced languages such as English (Kajii, et al., 2001). This
means that random strings made of Japanese Kanji, Hiragana,
and Katakana have information that can be used like word
spacing, although they have no configuration that looks like
sentence. By using Japanese text as stimuli, we could
manipulate whether there was a sentence or not in a region of
the perceptual span independently of word spacing.
We employed the moving window paradigm (McConkie &
Rayner, 1975). This method replaces the display in a certain
region around the reader’s current fixation point with letters
from the original text. The region of the original text changes
contingently with the eye movements. Namely, the
participant reads the original text through a ‘window’. The
influence of a relatively wide region of peripheral text on the
foveal reading processing can be investigated by using this
paradigm. In our study, participants read central text through
a three-character-width window. The text outside of the
window was replaced by other (peripheral) text. The
perceptual span in reading Japanese is about 12-13 characters
long (Ikeda & Saida, 1976; Osaka, 1987). By

Abstract
In two experiments, we investigated the contextual interference
effect within the perceptual span in reading Japanese text by
using the moving window paradigm (McConkie & Rayner,
1975). There were four conditions involving different kinds of
peripheral text: asterisk, random string, sentence, and control.
The results revealed that the efficiency of reading the central
text was degraded when the peripheral text consisted of
characters irrelevant to the central text (random strings or
sentences, Experiment 1). The interference effect was greater
when the peripheral text constituted a sentence than when it
was a random string (Experiment 2). A word recognition test
showed that the words in the peripheral text were processed to
some extent. These results suggest that the mere presence of
characters in the peripheral region of the perceptual span
interferes with the processing of the central text. Furthermore,
whether the peripheral text constitutes a sentence also
influences eye movements in reading.
Keywords: eye movement; Japanese text; moving window
paradigm; perceptual span; reading.

Introduction
Even though the eyes have good visual acuity only in the
fovea, information extracted from peripheral areas plays
important roles in reading text. The perceptual span in
reading is the region from which readers pick up information
during a fixation to exploit for reading. The size of the
perceptual span, determined by eye tracking experiments
using the moving window paradigm, is much larger than the
size of the fovea and the parafovea. Reading efficiency is
degraded when a smaller region of text than the span is given
to readers at one time (Ikeda & Saida, 1976; McConkie &
Rayner, 1975; Osaka, 1987).
Eye tracking studies have revealed that information such as
phonology (Pollatesk, Lesch, Morris, & Rayner, 1992),
orthography (McConkie & Rayner, 1975; White &
Liversedge, 2006), and the length of the word in the
parafovea (White, Rayner, Liversedge, 2005) is preprocessed
and exploited for smooth reading. There are a few studies of
information processing in the region outside of the parafovea
but in the perceptual span. Information on word spacing is
extracted from the region of the perceptual span and
influences where to move the eyes (McConkie & Rayner,
1975). In Japanese, an unspaced language with three kinds of
scripts (Kanji, Hiragana, and Katakana), the visual
distinctiveness of these scripts, instead of word spacing, plays
985

Figure 1: An example of a central stimuli text and various peripheral texts.
Note. The central text and the control condition text above mean “The operation was
miraculously successful, and she got well”. The peripheral text used in the sentence
condition above means “My father always drinks tea without sugar or milk”.
Participants Twenty Japanese native speakers, between 20
and 27 years old, with normal or corrected-to-normal vision
participated in this experiment. They were tested with a
vocabulary estimation test (NTT Communication Science
Laboratories, 1999), and all had normal Japanese
vocabularies.

presenting the central text only in a very small region in the
perceptual span, we made it likely that participants would
process the peripheral text in reading. This allowed us to
study the interference effect of processing different peripheral
texts on the central text.
There were four conditions of peripheral texts: asterisk,
random string, sentence, and control (see Figure 1). In the
asterisk condition, no available or distractive information is
given as peripheral text. If information from characters in the
peripheral text matters in reading, the interference effect of
the peripheral text in the random string and the sentence
conditions would be greater than in the asterisk condition. If
only distribution information from the three kinds of Japanese
scripts were extracted and used for word spacing, the reading
efficiency of the central text would be equally degraded in
both the random string and the sentence conditions, because
the distribution of the kinds of scripts could mislead eye
movements. If information about whether the peripheral
characters constitute a sentence were extracted, as we
hypothesized, the interference effect would be greatest in the
sentence condition. This would be because not only the script
distribution in the peripheral text, but also the sentence
structure which is irrelevant to the central text, would be
processed and used for guiding the eyes.

Apparatus Stimuli were displayed at the center of a monitor
(Sony Trinitron MultiScan G520) controlled by a computer
with a visual stimulus generator graphics card (Cambridge
Research Systems VSG 2/5). Reading times were measured
from the onset of the target stimuli by means of a digital
millisecond timer. Left eye movements were monitored using
a dual Purkinje eye tracker (Cambridge Research Systems
Video Eyetracker Toolbox 2.10). The resolution of the eye
tracker was 0.025 degree and the sampling rate was 50Hz.
Stimuli Sixty 25-character Japanese texts were used as
central text stimuli. They consisted of Kanji, Katakana, and
Hiragana characters in a typical text distribution. Each central
text stimulus was paired with a peripheral text of the same
length (25 characters). Three characters of the peripheral text
around the participant’s current point of fixation were
replaced with the characters of the central text in the
corresponding positions (see Figure 1). Thus, participants
always read the central text through a three-character-window
created in the peripheral text paired with it.
There were 15 trials for each of the four peripheral text
conditions (asterisk, random string, sentence, and control). In
the asterisk condition, the peripheral text consisted of 25
asterisks. In the random string condition, the peripheral text
consisted of characters chosen randomly from the characters
used for the 60 central texts. The random strings had no
meanings or meaningful words in them. In the sentence
condition, the peripheral text was normal Japanese text,
paired with the central text so that there was no semantic
relationship between their meanings. The random strings and
sentence peripheral texts consisted of Kanji, Katakana and

Experiment 1
Method
Design We used a within-participant one-way design with
four peripheral text conditions: asterisk, random string,
sentence, and control (normal reading condition with no
window). Reading time for the central text was measured.
Eye movements were also analyzed. A sentence
comprehension test was given in each trial in order to ensure
that participants read the central text with good
comprehension. After the experimental session was finished,
a recognition test for words that appeared in the stimulus texts
(central and peripheral texts) was conducted.
986

Hiragana in approximately the same distribution as the central
texts. In the control condition, the peripheral text was the
same as the paired central text. Namely, there was no
apparent window and the whole central text was always
displayed, like normal reading.
To make sure that participants read the texts with
comprehension, an easy comprehension test was administered
at the end of each trial. The participants were asked a Yes or
No question about the central text.
All the characters were displayed in MS Gothic (Japanese
fixed-width font). Each character subtended a visual angle of
1.01 degree horizontally and vertically. The stimuli texts were
written horizontally in black on a white display.

defined as an eye movement that exceeded the width of a
character (1.01 degree) within 20 ms. A fixation was defined
as a period of time when an eye did not move more than the
width of a character in 100 ms or longer.

Procedure Each participant was seated in front of the
monitor in a quiet room. A head and chin rest was used to
maintain a viewing distance of 57 cm. Participants responded
using a response key box connected to the computer.
Prior to beginning the experimental session, participants
engaged in a calibration task. Eight practice trials were given.
At the beginning of each experimental trial, 25 crosses (+)
in a horizontal row appeared for 300 ms as a fixation at the
center of the screen. Immediately after the offset of the
fixation, a stimulus text was presented. The four peripheral
conditions appeared in random order. Participants were
required to read the text silently and to press a key as soon as
they finished reading. Reading time was measured from the
onset of the stimulus text to the key press response. When the
response was made, or 15 s had passed since the onset of the
sentence without any response, the stimulus text disappeared.
Finally, a question was presented 1000 ms after the
disappearance of the stimulus text. Participants were required
to read the question silently and to answer using the key press.
If the response was incorrect, auditory error feedback was
presented. The question disappeared after the response was
made. The next trial began when participants made another
key press. The experiment consisted of one block with 60
trials.
After all the trials, a recognition test for the words that
appeared in the stimulus texts (both central and peripheral
texts) was administered; participants had not been informed
about this testing beforehand. Participants were shown 60
words on a sheet of paper: 20 words appeared in the central
texts, another 20 appeared in the peripheral texts, and the
other 20 did not appear in the experiment. Participants made
recognition judgments for each of the words on a five-point
scale of confidence from 1 (certain that the word is old) to 5
(certain that the word is new). The entire experiment took
about 45 minutes.

Reading Time and Comprehension Test Figure 2 shows the
results for the mean reading time per text. There was a main
effect of peripheral text, F(3, 57) = 264.41, p < .01. Tukey’s
HSD tests revealed that there was a significant difference for
every paired comparison for all of the conditions (all ps < .01),
except between the random string and the sentence condition
(the difference between these two conditions was marginally
significant, p = .08). This means that reading was slowed
down when the peripheral text was unavailable for reading,
and the interference effect was greater when the peripheral
text consisted of characters irrelevant to the central text (the
random string and the sentence conditions). Whether the
peripheral text constituted a sentence (compared to a random
string) did not result in a clear effect.
The scores on the central text comprehension test were
excellent (over 95% correct in all conditions) and there was
no main effect of peripheral text. Thus, participants read the
central text with equally good comprehension in all
conditions.

Results
Only the data from the trials in which the participant finished
reading the text stimuli within the time limit were used for the
analysis. Recognition judgments for the words that appeared
in trials in which the answer for the sentence comprehension
test was incorrect were also eliminated from the data analysis
of the recognition test. Repeated measures one-way
ANOVAs were used for the analyses.

Data Analysis The mean reading times for the central text,
the scores for the comprehension test, and the ratings on the
word recognition test were analyzed.
Eye movements were also analyzed: numbers and durations
of fixations, numbers and length of saccades (forward and
backward), and regression rates (ratio of backward saccades
to all saccades) for each of the text stimuli. A saccade was

987

Eye Movement Data Figure 3 shows the results for the mean
number of fixations per text (a) and the mean fixation
durations (b). The main effect of peripheral text was
significant for the number of fixations, F(3, 57) = 32.33, p
< .01. Tukey’s HSD tests revealed that there was a significant
difference for every paired comparison for all of the
conditions (all ps < .01), except between the random string
and the asterisk conditions, and the random string and the
sentence conditions (the difference between these two
conditions was marginally significant, p = .07). These results
suggest that more fixations were made in the asterisk, random
string, and sentence conditions than in the control condition,
and the number of fixations was the largest in the sentence
condition. A main effect of peripheral text was also observed
for the mean fixation duration, F(3, 57) = 62.39, p < .01.
Tukey’s HSD tests revealed that there was a significant
difference for every paired comparison for all of the
conditions (all ps < .01), except between the random string
and the sentence conditions. This means that the fixation
duration was longer when the peripheral text was unavailable
for
reading,
and
was
longest
when
the

Word Recognition Test There was a main effect of the kind
of word, F(2, 38) = 176.15, p < .01. Tukey’s HSD tests
revealed that there was a significant difference for each of the
paired comparisons of the three conditions: central, peripheral,
and new (all ps < .01). This means that the words that had
appeared in the central text were judged as “old”, and those
that had not appeared in the experiment were judged as “new”
with relatively good confidence (mean ratings: 1.70 and 3.74,
respectively). Furthermore, participants were significantly
less confident in judging the words that had appeared in the
peripheral text as "new" compared to the new words (mean
rating: 3.26).

Discussion
Most of the data revealed that reading slowed down and
became less fluent when the peripheral text was unavailable
for reading, especially when the peripheral text consisted of
characters irrelevant to the central text (the random string and
the sentence conditions).
Whether the peripheral characters constituted a sentence
had a weak effect, which was only sometimes marginally
significant. The results of the word recognition test, however,
suggest that the words in the peripheral text were processed to
some extent.
The results suggest that there were considerable differences
in the easiness of reading between the non-character (control,
asterisk) and the character (random string, sentence)
conditions. This difference might have caused a switching of
strategy or task set in reading, or difficulty in controlling eye
muscles. It is possible that this made the data noisy enough to
bury an effect of whether the peripheral text constituted a
sentence, which might have appeared as relatively small
differences. To avoid this problem, we reduced the conditions
to two in Experiment 2: the random string and sentence
conditions.

Figure 2: Mean reading time per text in Experiment 1.
Error bars represent standard errors.
peripheral text consisted of characters irrelevant to the central
text.
Briefly reporting the other eye movement results, saccades
(both forward and backward) were longer and more frequent
in the asterisk, random string, and sentence conditions than in
the control condition. Furthermore, the number of backward
saccades and both the forward and backward saccade lengths
were significantly different between the non-character
(control, asterisk) and the character (random string, sentence)
conditions. The regression rate was also higher in the
character than in the non-character conditions. However, an
effect of whether the peripheral text was a sentence, which
should be observed as differences between the random string
and the sentence conditions, was only sometimes marginally
significant, and was not clearly evident.

Figure 3: Mean number of fixations per text (a) and mean fixation duration (b) in Experiment 1.
Error bars represent standard errors.
988

participated in this experiment. They fulfilled the same
criteria as in Experiment 1.
Stimuli Sixty 25-character Japanese texts, which were the
same as those used in Experiment 1, were used as central text
stimuli. Half of the text stimuli were assigned to the random
string condition, and the remaining half were assigned to the
sentence condition.

Results
Reading Time and Comprehension Test Figure 4 shows the
results for the mean reading time for each text condition.
There was a significant main effect of peripheral text, F(1,
19) = 7.74, p < .05. This means that participants took more
time in reading the central text in the sentence condition than
in the random string condition. Thus, an effect of whether the
peripheral text constituted a sentence was clearly observed.
The scores on the central text comprehension test were
excellent (over 96% correct in both conditions) and there was
no significant difference between the two conditions. Thus,
participants read the central text with equally good
comprehension in both conditions.

Figure 4: Mean reading time per text in Experiment 2.
Error bars represent standard errors.

Eye Movement Data Figure 5 shows the results for the mean
number of fixations per text (a) and the mean fixation
durations (b). A main effect of the peripheral text was
significant for the number of fixations, F(1, 19) = 11.94, p
< .01. This suggests that there was an effect of whether the
peripheral text constituted a sentence or not on the number of
fixations. A main effect of peripheral text was not significant
for the mean fixation duration.
The results for the number of saccades (both forward and
backward) also showed significant or marginally significant
differences between the random string and the sentence
conditions. There were no significant differences between

Experiment 2
Method
Design We used a within-participant one-way design with
two peripheral text conditions: random string and sentence.
The basic method was the same as in Experiment 1, except
that there were only the random string and the sentence
conditions.
Participants Twenty Japanese native speakers (between 20
and 30 years old), who had not participated in Experiment 1,

Figure 5: Mean number of fixations per text (a) and mean fixation duration (b) in Experiment 2.
Error bars represent standard errors.

989

The results in Experiment 2 showed an effect related to
whether the peripheral text constituted a sentence. Irrelevant
peripheral sentences interfered more than random strings with
reading the central text. The results for fixations and saccades
suggest that the eyes moved and re-fixated on characters more
frequently in the sentence condition, without an increase in
fixation duration, saccade length, or regression rate.

It seems surprising that whether the peripheral characters
constituted a sentence had only a relatively small effect. This
suggests that readers can suppress information within the
perceptual span, which they usually exploit for reading, if it is
judged as distractive for the current reading task.
The present study cannot answer the question about which
aspects of “the peripheral text that constitute a sentence”
affect the reading of the central text. One possibility is the
words by themselves affect the reading. Another possibility is
that the characters construct a meaningful or syntactically
correct sentence. Considering that visual acuity is poor in the
peripheral visual field, the latter possibility seems less
plausible. We also had conducted an experiment the same as
Experiment 1 except that the window size was five characters
wide. The results were approximately the same as reported
here for Experiment 1, with smaller effects related to whether
the peripheral text constituted a sentence. This result also
casts doubt on the latter possibility because it suggests that
only the parafoveal information was extracted and influenced
the reading. Further study is needed to clarify the function
and the characteristics of the influence of a “sentence” on the
perceptual span of reading.

General Discussion

Acknowledgments

these two conditions in the results for the saccade length or
the regression rate.
Word Recognition Test There was a main effect of the kind
of word, F(2, 38) = 204.59, p < .01. Tukey’s HSD tests
revealed significant differences for every paired comparison
among the three conditions: central, peripheral, and new (all
ps < .01 except p < .05 for between the peripheral and the
new conditions; ratings: 1.49, 3.36, and 3.69, respectively).
This means that participants were significantly less confident
in judging the words that had appeared in the peripheral text
as "new" compared to the new words, as was also found in
Experiment 1.

Discussion

The authors wish to thank Ms. Kotomi Tanbo at the
University of Tokyo for her help in conducting this research.

In the two experiments reported here, we investigated
contextual interference within the perceptual span in reading
Japanese text using the moving window paradigm (McConkie
& Rayner, 1975). Reading time for the text, eye movements,
and word recognition were measured. The data revealed that
the efficiency of reading central text was degraded when the
peripheral text consisted of characters (random string and
sentence conditions, Experiment 1), and the interference
effect was greater in the sentence condition than in the
random string condition (Experiment 2). The results from the
word recognition tests showed that the words in the peripheral
text were processed to some extent.
These results suggest that the mere presence of characters
in the perceptual span in reading influences the processing of
the central text. Furthermore, whether the peripheral text
constituted a sentence influenced eye movements in reading.
An effect of whether the peripheral text constituted a
sentence was observed in the results for fixations and
saccades. These results suggest that eyes moved and refixated on characters more frequently in the sentence
condition than in the random string condition, without an
increase in fixation duration, saccade length, or regression
rates. This contrasts with the effect of the mere presence of
characters, which was also observed to increase fixation
duration and saccade length. A possible explanation for this is
that the “mere presence of characters” and “whether the
characters constitute a sentence” in the peripheral text differ
in the level where they influence reading. Visual information
for eye guidance may be extracted from the “mere presence
of characters” former, while higher-level information such as
lexical, syntactic, pragmatic, or semantic for reading
comprehension may be obtained from “whether the characters
constitute a sentence”. Further research is needed to clarify
this issue.

References
Ikeda, M., & Saida, S. (1978). Span of recognition in reading.
Vision Research, 18, 83-88.
Kajii, N., Nazir, T. A., & Osaka, N. (2001). Eye movement
control in reading unspaced text: The case of the Japanese
script. Vision Research, 41, 2503-2510.
McConkie, G. W., & Rayner, K. (1975). The span of the
effective stimulus during a fixation in reading. Perception
& Psychophysics, 17, 578-586.
NTT Communication Science Laboratories (1999). Goisu
suitei tesuto [Vocabulary estimation test]. Retrieved on 01/
15/2006, from http://www.kecl.ntt.co.jp/icl/mtg/goitokusei/
goi-test.html
Osaka, N. (1987). Effect of peripheral visual field size upon
eye movements during Japanese text processing. In J. K.
O'Regan & A. Levy-Schoen (Eds.), Eye movements: From
physiology to cognition. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Pollatsek, A., Lesch, M., Morris, R. K., & Rayner, K. (1992).
Phonological codes are used in integrating information
across saccades in word identification and reading. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18, 148-162.
White, S. J., & Liversedge, S. P. (2006). Foveal processing
difficulty does not modulate non-foveal orthographic
influences on fixation positions. Vision Research, 46, 426437.
White, S. J., Rayner, K., & Liversedge, S. P. (2005). The
influence of parafoveal word length and contextual
constraint on fixation durations and word skipping in
reading. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 466-471.

990

