UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Counterfactual Promises and Threats

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7n66f9mh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Byrne, Ruth M.J.
Egan, Suzanne M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Counterfactual Promises and Threats
Suzanne M. Egan (suzanne.egan@mic.ul.ie)
Department of Psychology, Mary Immaculate College,
University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland

Ruth M.J. Byrne (rmbyrne@tcd.ie)
Department of Psychology, University of Dublin,
Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland

First, we outline the way in which people understand
factual and counterfactual conditionals about neutral
matters, e.g. ‘if Rosanna was in Dublin then Tony was in
Vancouver’. Second, we consider how people understand
factual and counterfactual conditionals about promises and
threats. Third, we discuss the results of an experiment that
compared inferences from factual and counterfactual
promises and threats.

Abstract
We examine counterfactual conditionals about promises, such
as ‘if you had tidied your room then I would have given you
ice-cream’ and threats such as ‘if you had hit your sister then
I would have grounded you’. Reasoners tend to understand
counterfactual conditionals of the form, ‘if A had been then B
would have been’ by thinking about the conjectured
possibility, ‘A and B', and also the presupposed facts ‘not-A
and not-B’. We report the results of an experiment that
indicates reasoners may understand counterfactual
inducements somewhat differently by thinking about just the
presupposed facts: not-A and not-B. We discuss the
implications of the results for accounts of the mental
representations of promises and threats

Factual Conditionals

Conditional Inference

Suppose you are told ‘if Rosanna was in Dublin then Tony
was in Vancouver’. And suppose you discover that Tony
was not in Vancouver. What can you conclude? People find
this ‘modus tollens’ inference difficult to make. About half
of the participants given these premises in experiments
conclude that nothing follows. The other half concludes that
Rosanna was not in Dublin (see Evans, Newstead & Byrne,
1993). What sorts of mental representations and cognitive
processes underlie the inference? One view is that people
make conditional inferences by recovering the abstract
logical form of the premises, ‘if A then B’ and ‘not-B’, and
they access a mental repertoire of formal rules of inference
to construct a derivation or proof of a conclusion (Braine &
O’Brien, 1998). The ‘modus tollens’ inference is difficult on
this account because people do not have an inference rule
directly corresponding to it and so they must construct an
indirect derivation. Another view is that people make
conditional inferences by accessing domain-specific schema
which contain content-sensitive rules about certain
situations, such as permission situations, or causal situations
(Fiddick, Cosmides & Tooby, 2000). The ‘modus tollens’
inference is difficult on this account because its neutral
content does not readily map onto any of the domainspecific schema. A third view is that people make
conditional inferences by imagining possibilities (JohnsonLaird & Byrne, 2002). The conditional is consistent with
several possibilities, for example, Rosanna is in Dublin and
Tony is in Vancouver (A and B), Rosanna is not in Dublin
and Tony is not in Vancouver (not A and not B), and
Rosanna is not in Dublin and Tony is in Vancouver (not A
and B). A key principle of this account is that people keep
in mind only true possibilities. They do not keep in mind the
false possibility, Rosanna is in Dublin and Tony is not in
Vancouver (A and not B). A second key principle of this
account is that people keep in mind few possibilities,

When thinking about the past people often think about how
things could have turned out differently, e.g., ‘if I had left
earlier I would have arrived on time for the talk’ (e.g.,
Kahneman & Tversky, 1982; Byrne, 2002). Counterfactual
thoughts are implicated in emotions such as regret and
social ascriptions such as blame, and they play a role in
learning (Roese, 1994), reasoning (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991) and problem solving (Ginsberg, 1986).
Counterfactual conditionals have been studied by
philosophers (e.g., Stalnaker, 1968), linguists (Angeliki &
Dirven, 1997), psychologists (Kahneman & Miller, 1986)
and in artificial intelligence (Costello & McCarthy, 1999).
Counterfactual thoughts often focus on how an action
could have changed an outcome, e.g. ‘if I had arrived earlier
I could have prevented the accident’. Little is known about
how people reason about past actions and their outcomes.
We address actions and their outcomes by examining
inducements, i.e., threats and promises. Threats and
promises draw attention to an action and its consequence.
When a speaker utters a threat, he or she tries to dissuade
the hearer from taking an action, and emphasises its
negative consequence. When a speaker utters a promise, he
or she tries to persuade the hearer to take an action, and
emphasises its positive consequence. The aim of this paper
is to investigate how people reason about past actions and
their positive and negative outcomes and to do so we focus
on counterfactual conditionals about promises and threats
and we examine the inferences that people make from them
1257

because of the constraints of working memory. They may
understand the conditional by thinking initially about just a
single possibility, Rosanna is in Dublin and Tony is in
Vancouver (A and B). Their interpretation is not entirely
conjunctive however, and they may make a mental note that
there may be alternative possibilities to this one (see Table 1
below).
Table 1: Initial and explicit possibilities for the conditional
‘if A then B’
Initial Possibilities
A and B
…

Explicit Possibilities
A and B
Not A and not B
Not A and B

should be able to make the otherwise difficult ‘modus
tollens’ inference, given the counterfactual conditional. The
prediction has been corroborated (Byrne & Tasso, 1999).
Byrne & Tasso (1999) found that reasoners make more
‘modus tollens’ inferences from counterfactual than factual
conditionals. This finding is difficult for other theories of
reasoning to explain. For example, according to formal rule
theories (e.g., Braine & O’Brien, 1998) the logical structure
of factual and counterfactual conditionals is the same (i.e., if
A then B). Therefore, this theory is unable to explain the
difference in the rate of ‘modus tollens’ inferences from
factual and counterfactual conditionals.
Table 2: Initial possibilities for a factual and a
counterfactual conditional

Key: The three dots indicate a mental footnote that there may be alternative
possibilities

The ‘modus tollens’ inference is difficult on this account
because the information that Tony was not in Vancouver
does not fit in with the single possibility that people have
thought about initially to understand the conditional. To
make the inference, people must ‘flesh out’ their
understanding of the conditional to think about the
alternative possibilities. When they think about the
possibility that Rosanna is not in Dublin and Tony is not in
Vancouver, they can match the information that Tony is not
in Vancouver to the information in this possibility and
conclude that Rosanna is not in Dublin.

Counterfactual Conditionals
What mental representations and cognitive processes
underlie counterfactual conditionals such as ‘if Rosanna had
been in Dublin then Tony would have been in Vancouver’?
The model theory provides the only corroborated account of
counterfactual conditionals (Byrne & Tasso, 1999). The
subjunctive mood of the counterfactual conveys the
presupposition that in fact Rosanna was not in Dublin (not
A) and Tony was not in Vancouver (not B) (Fillenbaum,
1974). According to the model theory, people keep in mind
two possibilities from the outset to understand the
counterfactual conditional, the conjecture, ‘Rosanna was in
Dublin and Tony was in Vancouver’ (A and B) and the
presupposed facts ‘Rosanna was not in Dublin and Tony
was not in Vancouver’ (not-A and not-B) (see Table 2). In
fact, people often interpret that someone uttering the
counterfactual ‘if A had been then B would have been’
means to imply ‘not-A’ and ‘not-B’ (Thompson & Byrne,
2002). They are readily primed to read more quickly the
negative conjunction ‘not A and not B’ when they have first
read a counterfactual compared to when they have first read
a factual conditional (Santamaria, Espino, & Byrne, in
press).
The model theory predicts that reasoners should be able
to make the inferences that require access to the not-A and
not-B possibility more readily from counterfactuals
compared to factual conditionals. For example, people

Factual ‘if A then
B’
A and B
…

Counterfactual ‘if A had been then B
would have been’
Conjecture: A and B
Facts: Not A and not B
…

Four sorts of inferences from conditionals are usually
examined (see Table 3). Two are negative, the ‘modus
tollens’ (MT) inference, typically endorsed between 40%
and 80% of the time, and an inference known as the ‘denial
of the antecedent’ (DA), typically endorsed between 23%
and 75% of the time (Evans, et al., 1993). Given ‘Rosanna
was not in Dublin’ many people infer that ‘Tony was not in
Vancouver’. To make the inferences, reasoners must think
about the negative possibility (not-A and not-B). People
make more of these negative inferences from a
counterfactual than from a factual conditional, which
corroborates the suggestion that they think about the
negative possibility more readily for the counterfactual than
the factual.
Table 3: Four inferences from ‘if A then B’

Forward
Backward

Affirmative
A, therefore B
(MP)
B, therefore A
(AC)

Negative
not A, therefore not B
(DA)
not B, therefore not A
(MT)

Two other inferences are affirmative. The ‘modus ponens’
(MP) inference is to infer ‘Tony was in Vancouver’ from
the information that ‘Rosanna was in Dublin’ and this
inferences is endorsed almost universally (Evans, el al.,
1993). The affirmation of the consequent (AC) inference is
to infer ‘Rosanna was in Dublin’ from the information that
‘Tony was in Vancouver’ and is typically endorsed between
23% and 75% of the time (Evans, et al., 1993). To make the
inferences, reasoners must think about the affirmative
possibility (A and B). As predicted they make the same
frequency of the inferences that require access to the

1258

affirmative possibility which corroborates the suggestion
that they think about the affirmative possibility for both the
counterfactual and the factual.
The differences for factual and counterfactual
conditionals have been observed for conditionals about
neutral matters, and also for conditionals about causal
matters, such as ‘if the butter had been heated it would have
melted’ and definitional matters, such as ‘if the animal had
been warm-blooded it would have been a mammal’
(Thompson & Byrne, 2002). The content of a conditional
has a great influence on the inferences that people make
from it (Evans, Newstead & Byrne, 1993). Recent research
on counterfactual conditionals suggests that their content
also influences the inferences that people make from them
(Quelhas & Byrne, 2003). Our aim is to examine the
inferences that reasoners make from counterfactual
conditionals about threats and promises, which have never
been examined before.

Promises and Threats
Promises and threats are inducements to act. Promises and
threats are a type of speech act (Searle, 1969) in that the
hearer must understand the intention of the speaker. Because
language is intentional behaviour it may be considered to be
a form of action. When a speaker utters a promise, they are
performing an act, the act of promising. Promises and threat
regularly occur in everyday language in a variety of
situations.
What sorts of inferences do people make from promises
and threats? People tend to make the four inferences
(outlined in Table 3) very often from factual conditionals
about promises and threats such as ‘if you wash the car then
I will let you borrow it later’ (Newstead, Ellis, Evans &
Dennis, 1997). People may make inferences readily from
such conditionals because the speaker has a high degree of
control over the outcome (e.g., a parent has the power to
reward or punish the child’s action) (Evans & TwymanMusgrove, 1998). People tend to make more inferences
from promises and threats for which the speaker has a high
level of control over the outcome (e.g., if you wash the car
then I’ll let you borrow it later) compared to promises and
threats for which the speaker had a low level of control over
the outcome (e.g., if you wash the dishes then Mum will
give you some money) (Evans & Twyman-Musgrove,
1998).
We developed an account of the possibilities that
reasoners must keep in mind to understand factual promises
and threats and counterfactual promises and threats. We
outline the account and it’s predictions for factual promises,
factual threats, counterfactual promises and counterfactual
threats, in that order.
The intention of the speaker differs for promises and
threats. For promises the intention of the speaker is to
encourage the action by offering a reward, e.g. ‘if you are
good then I will buy you ice-cream’. The intention is made
explicit: the speaker wants the hearer to be good. We expect
that for the hearer to understand a promise, they must keep

in mind the action (being good), and the outcome (icecream) (Egan & Byrne, 2006). They may keep in mind a
single possibility, corresponding to what is mentioned in the
conditional, being good and getting ice-cream (A and B).
Accordingly, we predict that people will make more
affirmative inferences (MP and AC) than negative
inferences (MT and DA) from factual promises.
For threats the intention of the speaker is to discourage
an action by punishing it, e.g. ‘if you are bold then I will
ground you’. The intention is implicit: the speaker wants the
hearer not to be bold. We expect that for the hearer to
understand a threat they must also keep in mind the opposite
of what the speaker has said, that is, the negated action (not
being bold) and the negated outcome (not being grounded)
(Egan & Byrne, 2006). They may keep in mind not only the
affirmative possibility but also the negative one,
corresponding to the opposite of the elements mentioned in
the conditional, not being bold and not being grounded (notA and not-B). Accordingly we predicted that participants
should endorse similar rates of affirmative (MP and AC)
and negative (MT and DA) inferences for factual threats.
Promises and threats are generally uttered by a speaker
in an attempt to manipulate the future behaviour of the
hearer. But counterfactual conditionals about promises and
threats are different. A counterfactual conditional about a
promise, e.g., ‘if you had been good I would have given you
ice-cream’ conveys the presupposed facts that you were not
good and I did not give you ice-cream. The counterfactual
conditional conveys the presupposition that the behaviour
that the speaker wanted to promote has not occurred (you
were not good) and the positive outcome did not occur
either (no ice-cream). The counterfactual conditional about
a promise refers to a past action and outcome and so it is at
best an indirect attempt to manipulate future behaviour. For
counterfactual conditionals about promises (e.g. if you had
been good then I would have given you ice-cream) we
expect that people will think about two possibilities: the
conjecture mentioned in the conditional (e.g. be good and
get ice-cream) and the presupposed facts (e.g. not being
good and not getting ice-cream). We predicted that people
would make the same frequency of affirmative (MP and
AC) and negative (MT and DA) inferences from
counterfactual conditionals about promises.
Likewise, a counterfactual conditional about a threat, ‘if
you had been bold then I would have grounded you’
conveys the presupposed facts that you were not bold and I
did not ground you. The behaviour the speaker wanted to
prevent has not occurred (you were not bold) and the
negative outcome did not occur either (no grounding).
Nonetheless counterfactual conditionals about promises and
threats may continue to have illocutionary force with regard
to future behaviour. For counterfactual conditionals about
threats (e.g. if you had been bold then I would have
grounded you) we expect that people will think about two
possibilities: the conjecture (be bold and get grounded) and
the presupposed facts (not being bold and not getting
grounded). We predicted that people would make the same

1259

frequency of affirmative (MP and AC) and negative (MT
and DA) inferences from counterfactual conditionals about
threats.
Table 4. Summary of proposed possibilities people keep in
mind for factual and counterfactual promises and threats
Factual

Counter
-factual

Promise
A and B
…

Threat
A and B
Not A and not B
…

A and B
Not A and not B
…

A and B
Not A and not B
…

one counterfactual threat. For example, participants were
presented with a counterfactual promise such as Gemma’s
father said to her “if you had been bold then I would have
grounded you” and were then asked Do you think that if
Gemma is bold tomorrow then her father ground her?
Participants could select an answer from the options ‘yes’,
‘no’ and ‘can’t tell’.
The participants were recruited from Dublin University’s
psychology department’s participant panel (members of the
general public recruited through newspaper advertisements)
and they were assigned at random to the factual (n = 16) or
counterfactual (n = 19) groups, or to one of two controls:
past factual (n = 17) or the present subjunctive (n = 16) (see
(Egan & Byrne, 2006, for these results).

Inferences Endorsements
The results supported our predictions for factual promises
and threats (see Table 5). Overall people made reliably more
affirmative inferences than negative inferences (95% versus
69%) for factual promises. The result corroborates the
suggestion that reasoners initially keep in mind a single
possibility (A and B) when they understand a factual
promise. As predicted for factual threats however there were
no reliable differences in the frequency of affirmative and
negative inferences (83% versus 77%). This result supports
our suggestion that reasoners keep in mind two possibilities
(A and B, and not-A and not-B) when they understand a
factual threat.
For both counterfactual promises and threats we
predicted that there would be no differences between the
affirmative and negative inferences. Unexpectedly, the
results did not support this prediction. The results showed
that people made more negative than affirmative inferences
from both counterfactual promises (86% versus 66%) and
counterfactual threats (86% versus 67%). The result may
indicate that people initially keep in mind a single
possibility, the presupposed facts (not A and not B), when
thinking about a counterfactual inducement. They do not
keep in mind from the outset the conjecture mentioned in
the conditional (A and B).

In the experiment we test these four sets of predictions
regarding the possibilities reasoners keep in mind for factual
and counterfactual promises and threats. We also explore
the function of counterfactual promises and threats in
relation to their potential influence on future behaviour.

A Comparison of Inferences from Promises
and Threats
We gave 68 participants a set of 24 problems. Each problem
consisted of a conditionals premise (e.g., Laura’s mother
said to her “If you mow the lawn then I will pay you 10
euro”) a minor premise (e.g., Laura mowed the lawn) and a
set of three conclusions participants could chose from (e.g.,
Therefore (a) Laura’s mother paid her 10 euro; (b) Laura’s
mother did not pay her 10 euro; (c) Laura’s mother may or
may not have paid her 10 euro).
Each participant received a set of problems with either
factual or counterfactual conditionals (or one of two control
conditionals – for more details see Egan & Byrne, 2006).
The content of the problems was based on parents
promising their children a reward or threatening them with a
punishment. Each set of problems contained 12 promises
(e.g. if you fold the clothes then I will take you to the
carnival) and 12 threats (e.g. if you leave food on your plate
then I will make you load the dishwasher). Each type of
inference (MP, MT, DA, AC) was presented three times for
both promises and threats (i.e. 4 inferences x 3 instances x 2
inducement types (promises/threats) = 24 problems).
We tested the participants individually and presented the
problems on Macintosh computers using SuperLab 1.75.
Participants pressed the space bar to view each new piece of
information (the conditional, the minor premise, the
conclusion set), and each remained on screen to be joined by
the additional information. Participants were advised that
they could take as long as they needed to complete the task
but that they were being timed.
Once the 24 inference problems were completed
participants were presented with a prediction task to explore
the function of counterfactual inducements. This task
consisted of two problems: one counterfactual promise and

Table 5: Percentages of inferences endorsed from factual
and counterfactual promises and threats
MP

AC

MT

DA

Affirmative

Negative

Factual

Promise
Threat

94
88

96
77

69
75

69
79

95
83

69
77

Counter
factual

Promise
Threat

67
65

65
68

89
84

82
88

66
67

86
86

1260

The prediction task explored the function of counterfactual
inducements and the role they may play in conversation.
The majority of people said they could not tell whether
or not the child would still be punished tomorrow and there
was no difference in the rates between promises (63%) and

threats (57%) (see Table 6). However, for a threat a sizeable
minority (32%) thought that the child would be punished if
they were bold tomorrow, twice as many as thought that the
child would still be given a reward tomorrow in the case of
a counterfactual promise (15%, e.g., if you had mowed the
lawn then I would have paid you 10 euro).
Table 6: Percentages of responses on the prediction task
Threat
Promise

Yes
32
15

No
11
22

Can’t tell
57
63

Promises and threats are typically phrased with a present
tense antecedent and a future tense consequent and their
function is to manipulate the future behaviour of the hearer
by rewarding or punishing an action or non action (e.g., if
you are bold then I will ground you). However,
counterfactual promises and threats cannot directly
manipulate future behaviour because they are in the past
tense and the action or non-action is presupposed to have
already taken place (e.g. if you had been bold…). Although
counterfactual inducements are in the past tense, it appears
that they may still play a role in influencing the future
actions of the hearer, and this effect seems to be slightly
stronger for counterfactual threats than promises.
It may be that in uttering a counterfactual threat (e.g., if
you had been bold then I would have grounded you) a
parent wants to draw a child’s attention to what nearly
happened (e.g., being grounded) in case the child does not
realise the potential outcome of being bold. The aim of this
utterance may be to serve as a warning to the child in a
future situation. A similar account may be provided for
counterfactual promises (e.g., if you had mowed the lawn
then I would have paid you 10 euro) although our
experiment suggests that their influence on future behaviour
is not as strong as counterfactual threats. Nonetheless, it
may be that counterfactual promises serve as a general guide
to future behaviour (e.g., be good and you will be rewarded)
rather than as a specific instruction (e.g., if you mow the
grass tomorrow then I will pay you 10 euro). It may be that
a parent’s aim when uttering a counterfactual promise is to
draw the child’s attention to the missed opportunity, or
perhaps to make them feel guilty about not helping out with
chores for example. The negative feelings of regret and guilt
might make the child more likely to help out in future.

factual threats. Although linguists (e.g., Fillenbaum, 1976)
have drawn distinctions between promises and threats (e.g.,
in their natural rephrasing) previous psychological research
has focused more on comparing reasoning from promises
and threats to other types of contents (e.g., advice) rather
than to each other (e.g., Newstead et al., 1997; Evans &
Twyman-Musgrove, 1998; Ohm & Thompson, 2004). This
experiment provides a first indication that there may be
important differences between promises and threats in the
inferences that individuals are willing to draw from them.
Counterfactual conditionals about promises and threats
are understood differently from factual conditionals about
promises and threats. We found that people tend to make
more negative inferences than affirmative inferences from
them. The result indicates that people may tend to think
about a single possibility, the negative one (not-A and notB). One suggestion is that reasoners focus on the negative
possibility because it refers to the presupposed factual
situation that is implied by the counterfactual conditional to
have actually happened (e.g., Thompson & Byrne, 2002).
Perhaps the use of a realistic content such as inducements
encourages people to focus more on what actually happened
(not A and not B) rather than on the counterfactual
conjecture (A and B).
Our exploration of inducements has provided the first
account of counterfactual promises and threats and shows
that people keep similar possibilities in mind for both, based
on what is presupposed by the conditional (i.e., not A and
not B). We have also provided an account of factual
promises and threats. For factual promises reasoners seem
to initially keep just an affirmative possibility in mind (A
and B) but for factual threats they keep both an affirmative
and a negative possibility in mind (A and B, not A and not
B) from the outset. Our research has also revealed that
counterfactual inducements may have a role to play in
influencing future behaviour. Many judgements and
decisions to act in everyday life are based on whether or not
the outcome will be beneficial or detrimental. Hence, and
understanding of reasoning about promises and threats may
have important implications for how people reason in their
daily lives.

Acknowledgements

Conclusions

This research was funded by Enterprise Ireland and by the
Irish Research Council for the Humanities and Social
Sciences. Some of the results were presented at the
International Conference on Thinking in Leuven in 2004
and at the Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science
conference in Castlebar in 2004.

The results of the experiment support the idea that people
understand and reason differently from factual promises and
threats. Reasoners make more affirmative inferences than
negative inferences from promises, but they make the same
frequency of affirmative and negative inferences from
threats. Our findings support the suggestion that reasoners
initially keep a single affirmative possibility in mind (A and
B) from the outset for factual promises but two possibilities
in mind (A and B, not A and not B) from the outset for

References

1261

Angeliki, A. & Dirven, R. (1997). Conditionality,
hypotheticality, counterfactuality. In Angeliki, A. &
Dirven, R. (eds.) On Conditionals Again. John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Braine, M.D.S., & O’Brien, D. (1998). Mental Logic.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Byrne, R. M. J. & Tasso, A. (1999). Deductive reasoning
with factual, possible and counterfactual conditionals.
Memory and Cognition, 27, 726-740.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2002). Mental models and counterfactual
thinking about what might have been. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, Vol 6 (10), 426-431.
Costello, T., & McCarthy, J. (1999). Useful
Counterfactuals. Electronic Transactions on the Web, 3,
1-76.
Egan, S.M. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2006). Conditional reasoning
with factual and counterfactual inducements. In
preparation.
Evans, J.St.B.T. & Twyman-Musgrove, J. (1998).
Conditional reasoning with inducements and advice.
Cognition, 69, B11-B16.
Evans, J.St.B.T. Newstead, S.E. & Byrne, R.M.J. (1993).
Human reasoning: the psychology of deduction. Hove
UK: Psychology Press.
Fiddick, L., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2000). No
interpretation without representation: The role of domainspecific representations and inferences in the Wason
selection task. Cognition, 77, 1-79.
Fillenbaum, S. (1974). Information amplified: memory for
counterfactual conditionals. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 102, 44-49.
Fillenbaum, S. (1976). Inducements: on phrasing and logic
of conditional promises, threats and warnings.
Psychological Research, 38, 231-250.
Ginsberg, M. L. (1986). Counterfactuals. Artificial
Intelligence, 30, 35-79.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: a theory of meaning, inference, and
pragmatics. Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.

Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation
heuristic. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic & A. Tversky (Eds.),
Judgement Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (pp.
201 – 208). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman,D. & Miller, D.T. (1986). Norm theory:
comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological
Review, 93, 136-153.
Newstead, S.E., Ellis, M.C., Evans, J.St.B.T., & Dennis, I.
(1997). Conditional reasoning with realistic material.
Thinking and Reasoning, 3 (1), 49-76.
Ohm, E. & Thompson, V.A. (2004). Everyday reasoning
with inducements and advine. Thinking and Reasoning,
10 (1), 241-272.
Quelhas, A.C. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2003). Reasoning with
Deontic Counterfactual Conditionals. Thinking and
Reasoning, 9, 43 -66.
Roese, N.J. (1994). The functional basis of counterfactual
thinking. Journal of personality and Social Psychology,
66, 805-818.
Santamaria, C., Espino, O. and Byrne, R.M.J. (in press).
Counterfactual and semifactual conditionals prime
alternative possibilities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology:Learning, Memory and Cognition.
Searle, J.R. (1969). Speech Acts: an essay in the philosophy
of language. London: Cambridge University Press.
Stalnaker, R.C. (1968). A theory of conditionals. In N.
Rescher (Ed.), Studies in logical theory. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Thompson, V. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2002). Making inferences
about things that didn’t happen. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 28, 11541170.

1262

