UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Deontic Logic and Deontic Goals in the Wason Selection Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0v44p0dq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Hagmayer, York
Von Sydow, Momme

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Deontic Logic and Deontic Goals
in the Wason Selection Task
Momme von Sydow (momme.von-sydow@bio.uni-goettingen.de)
York Hagmayer (york.hagmayer@bio.uni-goettingen.de)
Institut für Psychologie, Universität Göttingen,
Gosslerstr. 14, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany
card, since only they may lead to a falsification of an
implication as defined by formal logics.
However, from early on empirical results have shown that
most participants do not act according to this norm. For
example, Johnson-Laird and Wason (1970) found that 96% of
the participants in their WSTs selected a wrong pattern of
cards, many choosing the p-and-q-cards instead.

Abstract
Domain-specific approaches of the Wason selection task
(WST) have postulated specifically adapted schemas or
Darwinian algorithms and abandoned a normative concept of
rationality. We propose a flexible deontic logic theory (FDL
theory), which is domain-specific but normative. The test of a
prescriptive rule does not involve testing its truth, as in the
standard WST, but rather selecting cases in which rules are
being violated or followed. Building on former theories of the
WST, we argue that the checking of prescriptive rules is based
on deontic logic and on a goal-based mechanism of focusing
either on conforming cases (cooperator detection) or on
deviating cases (cheater detection). Experiment 1 provides
support for four deontic types of conditionals. Experiment 2
provides evidence for the postulated interaction of deontic rules
and goals, including evidence for cheater, cooperator, or double
focus selections (p, q & non-q). These novel results favor FDL
theory and challenge both domain-specific and domain-general
theories of the WST.

Domain Specific Theories and Cheater Detection
The domain-general mental model theory (MM theory,
Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991, 2002) has tried to maintain the
logical-falsificationist norm and to explain the deviations by
incomplete representations of the tested rule.
Other phenomena, by which traditional domain-general
theories have been challenged, are so-called content effects.
Some thematic rules, such as “If I eat haddock I drink gin,”
did not enhance the performance, while particularly social or
deontic rules, such as “If a person is drinking beer, then the
person must be of full age”, did.
According to Cheng and Holyoak’s (1985; cf. Holyoak &
Cheng, 1995) pragmatic reasoning schema (PRS) theory,
content effects are due to specific reasoning schemas, which
are linked to goals and which are based on abstractions of
recurring experiences in society. Schemas do not always
enhance the selection of logical patterns; they may also
trigger illogical ones. In the deontic realm they proposed a
permission schema and an obligation schema.
Cosmides’ domain-specific social contract (SC) theory was
even more pronounced in abandoning any normative logical
basis for reasoning in the WST (Cosmides, 1989; Cosmides
& Tooby, 1992; Fiddick, Cosmides, & Tooby, 2000). Instead
Cosmides based her theory on a particular class of
evolutionary considerations. She found evidence for either
clear p-and-non-q selection patterns or opposed non-p-and-q
patterns in the testing of standard or switched social contracts.
This has been interpreted to count against a norm of logic and
in favor of an innate and specialized module of cheater
detection. Gigerenzer and Hug (1992) modified social
contract theory in showing perspective effects and in
dissociating the concepts ‘social contract’ and ‘cheater
detection’. They showed that “the crucial issue about social
contracts is the cheating option” (p. 165).

Introduction
Wason Selection Task
The Wason Selection Task (WST) (Wason, 1966) is one of
the most studied and most seminal tasks in the psychology of
reasoning. It has been of particular importance in the rise of
domain specific theories of rationality. The WST is
concerned with the testing of a hypothesis, typically a
conditional in the form of “if p then (always) q”. Participants
are requested to test the truth or falsity of the conditional in an
empirical world of four cards. The visible front sides of the
four cards represent examples for all logical categories
mentioned in the conditional: p (“A”), non-p (“K”), q (“2”),
non-q (“7”) (cf. Figure 1). On one side of each card is a p or a
non-p, on the other side a q or a non-q. Participants have to
select the cards they would turn over in order to test the truth
or falsity of the rule.
A

K

2

7

Figure 1: Cards of Wason (1966) “if there is a vowel on one
side there is an even number on the other side”

Flexible Deontic Logic Theory

The traditional yardstick with which to evaluate answers in
the WSTs has been a norm of correct logical-falsificationist
hypothesis testing (Popper). According to this universal norm
participants should always select exactly the p- and the non-q-

Here a flexible deontic logic (FDL) theory is advocated and
tested. (A first test of the theory was provided by von Sydow,
Hagmayer, Metzner, and Waldmann, 2005.) FDL theory can
be seen as a synthesis of converging lines of research in the

864

selections in deontic WSTs (cf. Experiment 2). The cells of
the tables represent states of affairs or actions, which can be
right or wrong, allowed or forbidden. A universal obligation
like “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself” implies that it is
right to love one’s neighbor and wrong to hate him/her.
A conditional obligation “if p then one is obliged to do q”
asserts that it is wrong if p & non-q happens. Assume that a
tribal rule says “If someone is a bachelor, then each month he
must bring fish to the medicine man” then it is forbidden to
be a bachelor and not to bring fish to the medicine man (cf.
Table 1).
A conditional prohibition “If someone is a bachelor, he is
forbidden from going to the bath house”, forbids that one is a
bachelor (p) and that one goes to the bath house (q)
(cf. Table 2).

WST debate. Although FDL theory owes much both to
domain specific and to domain general theories of the WST,
it differs from all these theories (for details: von Sydow,
submitted). With respect to recent developments FDL theory
combines deontic logics (Beller, 2003; cf. lately Bucciarelli &
Johnson-Laird, 2005) with the concept of a flexible focus on
different cells of an ought table (Sperber & Girotto, 2003; cf.
Oaksford & Chater, 1994). Two experiments will be reported
which dissociate FDL theory from other theories of the WST.
But firstly, we argue that the testing of descriptive and
prescriptive rules have different meanings. Secondly, we
advocate deontic logic as a basis for testing prescriptive rules.
Thirdly, we show how the goal of the task may flexibly,
though rationally, determine the focus on particular cells of an
ought table.

Rules about Is and Ought

Table 1: Ought table of a conditional obligation
Conditional
Brings
Does not
obligation
fish (q)
bring fish (¬q)
Bachelor (p)
Allowed
Forbidden
Husband (non-p)
Allowed
Allowed

The distinction of ‘is’ and ‘ought’ has always been
fundamental for philosophy. The distinction is even older
than Aristotelian logic. Moreover the distinction is also
essential in understanding any technical, moral or social
regulatory system. Although content effects in the WST have
been observed particularly for prescriptive rules, only few
researchers working on the WST have recognized the
importance of normative differences between testing
prescriptive and descriptive rules.
In contrast FDL theory assumes that descriptive and
prescriptive rules are normally tested differently. Firstly, only
descriptive rules can be falsified empirically (Manktelow and
Over, 1991). Secondly, in our view descriptive rules should
be tested according to the norms of Bayesian reasoning (e.g.,
Oaksford & Chater, 1994, 2003; v. Sydow, 2004, cf. e. g.
Evans & Over, 1996). In contrast the typical task of a tester of
a prescriptive rule (as normally formulated in the WST
tradition) is to search for particular cases, for instance, for
cheaters. In this paper we will only be concerned with
prescriptive rules.

Table 2: Ought table of a conditional prohibition
Conditional
Goes to the
Does not go to the
prohibition
bath house (q)
bath house (¬q)
Bachelor (p)
Forbidden
Allowed
Husband (non-p)
Allowed
Allowed
Table 3: Ought table of a conditional permission
Conditional
Eats
Does not eat
prohibition
Cassava root (q)
Cassava root (¬q)
Bachelor (p)
Allowed
Allowed
Husband (non-p)
Forbidden
Allowed
Table 4: Ought table of a conditional permission to refrain
Conditional
Hunts
Does not hunt
prohibition
Karogi oxen (q)
Karogi oxen (¬q)
Bachelor (p)
Allowed
Allowed
Husband (non-p)
Allowed
Forbidden

Testing Prescriptive Conditionals by Deontic Logic
Here it is advocated that domain-specific content effects,
which provide the basis for the illogical domain specific
approaches of the WST, could partly be explained and
systematized on the basis of a deontic logic, which analyzes
logical relations between prescriptive propositions (see e.g.,
Hilpinen, 1981). From deontic logic additional predictions
will be derived.
Although the phenomena connected to deontic reasoning
have received much attention in the WST debate, deontic
logic has only been exceptionally mentioned (see particularly,
Manktelow & Over, 1995; Beller, 2001; von Sydow et al.
2005). In different contexts Beller (2003) and, lately,
Buciarelli and Johnson-Laird (2005) introduced deontic logic
more fully, distinguishing four basic kinds of conditionals on
equal footing, including prohibitions (in contrast: JohnsonLaird & Byrne, 2002). Here, the postulated four kinds of
conditionals will be tested on equal footing using WSTs.
FDL theory postulates that the logical structure of a deontic
prescriptive rule is represented in full ought tables. FDL
theory opposes the claim of mental model theory that
incomplete representations are necessary to explain different

Moreover, one may formulate a conditional permission “If
someone is a bachelor, then he is allowed to eat the
aphrodisiac Cassava root” (Table 3) or a conditional
permission to refrain, “If someone is a bachelor, he may
refrain from taking part in hunting the dangerous Karogi
oxen” (Table 4).
Although the four rules are formally conditionals, they
forbid different cases in an ought table, as can be derived
from deontic logics. If the task is to look for violations of the
rule the forbidden cases provide the correct answers.

Flexible Focus on Cells of the Ought Table –
Cheater or Cooperator Detection or Both
FDL theory for the first time combines deontic logic with the
idea that different pragmatic contexts will focus people
systematically on different cases (see Sperber, 2003; cf.
Oaksford & Chater, 1994). The so called ‘cheater detection
algorithm’ is, in our view, nothing but a specific focus on the
865

forbidden cells of an ought table. Perspective effects
(Gigerenzer & Hug, 1992) may perhaps also be understood as
a shift of the focus, but they are only concerned with different
cheater cases (cf. Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1992). In contrast,
we advocate a flexible focus not only on cheater cases, but
also on other cells of an ought table. In deontic contexts,
checking prescriptive rules typically involves searching either
for individuals who have violated the rule or individuals who
have complied with the rule or even both (double focus).
Depending on whether punishments or rewards constitute the
current pragmatic goal, one should check for different cases
(v. Sydow et. al., 2004).
For a conditional obligation in which both goals are
plausible, like “if someone is a bachelor he is obliged to bring
a tiger skin to the medicine man” the p (bachelor) and non-q
case (brings no tiger skin to the medicine man) is the cheater
focus, and p and q (brings fish) would be the cooperation
detection focus. Finally the double focus on both cases should
result in a p, q and non-q pattern (Table 5a, b, c). In contrast,
for the prohibition rule “if p then it is forbidden to q” the
cheater focus is on p & q and the cooperator focus on p &
non-q and the double focus should lead to both selections.
The predicted interaction of focus and rule, and the double
focus postulated are inconsistent both with existing domainspecific and domain-general approaches of the WST (cf.
Discussion).

types of conditionals, each with a different forbidden ought
cell. Sixty-four students from the University of Göttingen
participated in the experiment.
Materials and Procedure In all conditions participants were
asked to imagine they were members of a council of elders,
which had police functions. The council’s purpose, they were
told, was to punish those who violated the rules of the tribe.
Then in the four conditions different conditional rules were
presented using the statements used earlier to demonstrate an
obligation, a prohibition, a permission, and a permission to
refrain (Table 1 to 4). The rest of the instruction only differed
in the description of the corresponding cards. Generally, four
male members of the tribe were presented to the participants
for possible checks. The tribesmen were represented by 4
cards, in the obligation condition, for instance, “Bachelor”
(p), “Husband” (non-p), “brings fish” (q), and “does not bring
fish” (non-q).
Participants had to decide which card(s) are “really needed
to be turned over to test whether the rule had been followed
or had been violated”. They were requested to indicate all
cards necessary to fulfil the given task.

Results
Table 6: Percentage of selected card combinations
for the four deontic conditionals
Pattern
Cond.
Cond.
Cond.
Cond.
proobperm. to
perhibition
ligation
refrain
mission
P, Q
81 %
6%
12 %
12 %
56
%
12
%
0%
0
%
P, ¬Q
69 %
6%
0%
0%
¬P, ¬Q
0%
56 %
6%
0%
¬P, Q
Rest
12 %
30 %
6%
24 %
n
16
16
16
16
Note. Predicted answers in darkened cells.

Table 5: (a) Cheater focus, (b) cooperator focus and
(c) double focus in a conditional obligation. The circle
indicates the focused cell
(a) Conditional
Brings
Does not bring
obligation
tiger skin (q)
tiger skin (non-q)
Bachelor (p)
Allowed
Forbidden
Husband (non-p)
Allowed
Allowed
(b) Conditional
obligation
Bachelor (p)
Husband (non-p)

Brings
tiger skin (q)
Allowed
Allowed

Does not bring
tiger skin (non-q)
Forbidden
Allowed

(c) Conditional
obligation
Bachelor (p)
Husband (non-p)

Brings
tiger skin (q)
Allowed
Allowed

Does not bring
tiger skin (non-q)
Forbidden
Allowed

Table 7: Card selections for four deontic conditionals

Experiment 1
In this experiment the four different kinds of basic deontic
conditionals, derived from deontic logic, will be tested in a
WST for the first time (cf. on other tasks Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 2005; Beller, 2003). PRS theory and SC theory have
not predicted the postulated systematics. Beller’s (2001)
experiment was similar to ours, but did not formulate the four
conditionals without negations on equal footing.

Card
selected

Cond.
prohibition

Cond.
obligation

Cond.
perm. to
Refrain

Cond.
permission

P
¬P
Q
¬Q
n

87 %
6%
93 %
12 %
16

87 %
12 %
25 %
81 %
16

19 %
69 %
87 %
12 %
16

31 %
75 %
12 %
87 %
16

Table 6 and Table 7 show the percentage of selected card
combinations and single selected cards in the four WSTs. The
predicted selections were predominant. It was possible to
elicit all four kinds of card selections, p & q, p & non-q, nonq & q, and also non-p & non-q. (Statistically, each pattern in
Table 6 was more frequent in the condition where it was
predicted than in the second most frequent condition. Top
down: χ2(1) = 15.18; 6.79; 13.33; 9.31; all p < 0.01.)

Method
Design and Participants The experiment had a betweensubjects design with four conditions corresponding to the four

866

Experiment 2

q), and “has not brought tiger skin” (or: “has not drunk from
the punch”, non-q).

In this experiment we aimed to test the central prediction of
FDL theory that the selection patterns of checking a
prescriptive conditional are determined systematically by the
interaction of the type of conditional (deontic logic) and of a
used focus (cheater focus, cooperator focus or double focus;
cf. v. Sydow et al., 2005). The goals were directly
manipulated and a double focus condition is used for which p
& q & non-q patterns are predicted. This pattern has never
been predicted to become the dominant pattern in a WST
before. Moreover, a double focus condition is particularly
useful for dissociating FDL theory, not only from PRS theory
and SC theory, but also from MM theory.

Results
Table 8 shows for each condition the number of participants
who selected particular patterns of card combinations. The
predicted answers are darkened.
Table 8: Percentage of selections of cards patterns
for different rules and different foci
Obligation rule
Prohibition rule
Card
Cheater Double Co- Cheater Double Copattern
focus operator
focus operator
P, Q
10 %
5 % 50 % 85 % 35 % 20 %
P, ¬Q
70 % 25 % 10 %
0%
5 % 35 %
P, Q, ¬Q
0 % 60 % 20 %
0 % 35 % 25 %
Rest
20 % 10 % 20 % 15 % 25 % 20 %
n
20
20
20
20
20
20

Method
Design and Participants The experiment had a 2 (obligation
vs. prohibition rule) × 3 (cheater vs. cooperator vs. double
focus) between-subjects design. 120 students of the
University of Göttingen participated in the experiment.
Materials and Procedure Participants were instructed to
read the text carefully. As in Experiment 1 the participants
had to imagine they were members of a tribal council of
elders. The council is described as being generally responsible for checking whether the rules of that tribe have been
followed or violated. Subsequently a particular rule was
presented. (The rules and the goals were highlighted.) In the
three obligation conditions the rule read: “If one is a bachelor,
then this year one is obliged to bring a tiger skin to the
medicine man”. In the three prohibition rule conditions it
read: “If one is a bachelor, then this year one is forbidden
from drinking a popular fruit punch”. The goals of cheater
and cooperator detection were both assumed to be applicable
to these rules. Then the goals were explicitly introduced (for a
more indirect manipulation cf. v. Sydow et al., 2005). For the
three conditions instructions read as follows. Cheater
conditions: “In checking this rule you have only one goal:
You should punish those, who have violated the above rule.”
Cooperator conditions: “In checking this rule you have only
one goal. You should reward those, who have followed the
above rule.” Double focus conditions: “In checking this rule
you have two goals at the same time: [First bullet.] You
should reward those, who followed the above rule. [Second
bullet.] You should punish those, who violated the above
rule.”
Four male members of the tribe were put forward for
possible checks. Each of the four members of the tribe was
represented by a card. Participants were instructed, that one
side of each card provided information about whether the
clansman is a bachelor or not, and the other side provided
information whether he has brought a tiger skin (or has drunk
from the fruit punch) or not.
The final instruction read: “Which card(s) do you have to
turn over, to check exactly for all possible cases in which the
above rule has been violated [alternatively: “followed”;
“violated and followed”]. Please mark all the cards
necessary.” The cards read: “Bachelor” (p), “Husband” (nonp), “has brought tiger skin” (or: “has drunk from the punch”,

Note. Predicted answers in darkened cells.

Descriptively, all comparisons between conditions went in
the predicted direction. This is the case as well for the p & q
pattern, the p & non-q pattern and the p & q & non-q pattern.
Table 9 additionally presents the number and percentage of
participants who selected specific cards for each condition.
Here even more clearly all predicted differences between the
conditions went in the predicted direction, which indicates a
corroboration of both the interaction of rule (prohibition
versus cooperator condition) and focus (cooperator versus
cheater focus), and the postulated ‘middle position’ of the
double focus condition.
However, particularly in Table 6, the results in the
cooperator and double focus condition of the prohibition rule
are less pronounced than one may have hoped. This may be
due to the term ‘forbidden’ in the prohibition rule which may
have rendered a cheater focus more probable. This may have
caused an increase of p & q & non-q double focus selections
in the cooperator condition and an increase of p & q cheater
selections
in
the
double
focus
condition.
Table 9: Percentage of selections of single cards
for different rules and different foci
Obligation rule
Prohibition rule
Card
Cheater Double Co- Cheater Double Cofocus operator
focus operator
P
90 % 100% 90 % 95 % 80 % 95 %
¬P
15 % 10 %
5 % 10 % 20 % 15 %
Q
20 % 75 % 80 % 95 % 90 % 50 %
¬Q
80 % 95 % 40 %
0 % 40 % 70 %
n
20
20
20
20
20
20
Note. Predicted answers in darkened cells.

If this is accepted, the statistical comparisons on the level
of single cards (see Table 10) show that the main predictions
are also confirmed in the prohibition rule as well. In the
double focus condition there were more cheater selections
(here q) than in the cooperator selection condition, but also
more cooperator selections (here non-q) than in the cheater

867

cheater detection module. Although FDL theory builds on the
idea that cheater detection differs from the normal testing of
the truth or falsity of a descriptive rule, FDL theory differs
from SC theory in advocating a flexible deontic logic of
testing prescriptive rules. Experiment 1 clearly goes beyond
SC theory by deriving more selection patterns from a system
of deontic logic than has been predicted by SC theory.
Moreover, Experiment 2 showed focus effects not only for a
cheater detection focus but also for a cooperator detection
focus and a double focus condition. SC theory cannot
distinguish these three kinds of foci – either the cheater
detection algorithm is triggered or not. Our results show that
cheater detection seems to be explicable as an aspect of a
more general strategy for focusing systematically on different
cells of an ought table.
PRS theory (Cheng & Holyoak, 1985; cf. Holyoak &
Cheng, 1995) proposed an obligation and a permission
schema which is incoherent with formal logics. Firstly, FDL
goes beyond PRS theory by deriving additional ‘schemas’
like a prohibition schema from deontic logic and by
confirming them in Experiment 1 and 2.1 Secondly, and more
importantly, the production rules of PRS theory should
always trigger particular selections, independent of a focus.
Hence, PRS theory cannot account for the found focus effects
in Experiment 2.
MM theory of the WST (1991, 1992, 2002) explains
deviations from logically correct reasoning by postulating
particular incomplete representations of conditionals.
Experiment 1 is not explicable by traditional MM theory
because no model for the prohibition has been proposed. The
problem in formulating such a model may be that the
application of the domain-general truth principle combined
with the normal incomplete representation of a conditional
(mainly comprising p & q) would result in an ‘empty
representation’ – which would be absurd. Lately, Buciarelli
and Johnson-Laird (2005) extended MM theory to include
prohibitions (implicitly giving up the truth principle), without
applying this theory to the WST. However, if applied to the
WST this theory may perhaps explain the findings of
Experiment 1, but the mental model component of the theory
would add nothing to the explanation. In any case, MM
theory (also in the advanced versions of Beller, 2001, 2003) is
clearly incoherent with the results from Experiment 2. The
results cannot be explained by the selective representations
postulated by current MM theory (Buciarelli and JohnsonLaird, 2005). For instance, for the obligation rule the
increased number of non-q selections both in the double focus
and the cheater condition relative to the cooperator condition
can be explained by a fleshed-out model. But if this is done, it
becomes inexplicable why in one of the fleshed-out
conditions (double focus condition) the number of q
‘cooperator’ selections is significantly higher than in the other
condition (cheater condition). MM theory in its current
formulation cannot account for the results of Experiment 2.
The two kinds of representations of an obligation (an
incomplete and a complete model) postulated by MM theory
cannot be reasonably matched to the three kinds of patterns

condition. Moreover, the pattern in the obligation rule
condition led to excellent results for the cheater, cooperator,
and double focus conditions.
Table 10 For the obligation rule: Comparisons of the single
card selections Q and Non-Q
Obligation
Hypotheses of FDL
Result
Positive?
f(q)Cheater < f(q)Cooperator χ2(1) = 14.40, p < .001
yes
2
yes
f(¬q)Cheater > f(¬q)Cooperator χ (1) = 6.67, p < .01
f(q)Cheater < f(q)Double
χ2(1) = 12.13, p < .001
yes
yes
f(¬q)Cheater = f(¬q)Double exact Fisher, p = .34
f(q)Double = f(q)Cooperator exact Fisher, p = 1.00
yes
yes
f(¬q)Double > f(¬q)Cooperator χ2(1) = 13.79, p < .001
Prohibition
f(q)Cheater > f(q)Cooperator
χ2(1) = 10.16, p < .01
yes
yes
f(¬q)Cheater < f(¬q)Cooperator χ2(1) = 21.54, p < .001
f(q)Cheater = f(q)Double
exact Fisher, p = 1.00
yes
exact Fisher, p < .01
yes
f(¬q)Cheater < f(¬q)Double
f(q)Double > f(q)Cooperator
χ2(1) = 7.62, p < .01
yes
(yes)
f(¬q)Double = f(¬q)Cooperator χ2(1) = 3.64, p = .057

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 provide evidence that selection
patterns are determined by deontic logic: The dominant
selection patterns always corresponded to the forbidden cell
of its respective ought table. Although the rules were all
formulated in terms of a conditional, the differences between
the conditions confirmed the four different kinds of card
selections predicted, including p and q patterns and non-p and
non-q patterns.
Experiment 2 provides novel support for FDL theory
(cf. von Sydow, et al. 2005) in supporting the postulated
interaction of a deontic rule and focus and additionally
showing novel double focus effects. First, the two rules and
the cooperator versus cheater conditions led to reversed q and
non-q selection patterns. Secondly, a predicted double focus
effect with a p & q & non-q selection pattern was clearly
found for the obligation rule. Until now this pattern has
neither been predicted to be dominant nor found to dominate
any deontic WST. In the prohibition rule the data suggest that
the formulation of the rule itself may have caused a shift of
the focus with a tendency to add a cheater focus in the
cooperator condition or to neglect the cooperator focus in the
double focus condition. Nonetheless, also in these three
conditions the data provided support for the postulated
differences and allowed to distinguish the double focus
condition from both the cooperator and the cheater detection
condition. Therefore, the results corroborate FDL theory.
Moreover, the results favor FDL theory over other theories
which cannot account for the results of the two experiments
without modifications or extensions. The rational interaction
of deontic rules and different goals of cheater and cooperator
detection has not explicitly been predicted by any current
theory of the WST.
SC theory (Cosmides, 1989; Cosmides & Tooby, 1992;
Gigerenzer & Hug, 1992; cf. Fiddick, 2004) has postulated a

1

If one aims to extend PRS theory, one may add production rules
like “If the precondition is fulfilled than the action is forbidden”.

868

Gigerenzer, G., & Hug, K. (1992). Domain-specific
reasoning: Social contracts, cheating, and perspective
change. Cognition, 43, 127-171.
Hilpinen, R. (1981) (Ed.). New Studies in Deontic Logic.
Norms Actions, and the Foundation of Ethics. Dordrecht:
D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Holyoak, K. J., & Cheng, P. W. (1995). Pragmatic reasoning
with a point of view. Thinking & Reasoning, 1, 289-313.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Wason, P. C. (1970). A theoretical
analysis of insight into a reasoning task. Cognitive
Psychology, 1, 134-148.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1992). Modal
reasoning, models, and Manktelow and Over. Cognition,
43, 1992.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Ruth M. J. Byrne (2002). A theory of
meaning, pragmatics, and inference. Psychological Review,
109, 646-678.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1990). Deontic thought and
the selection task. In K. J. Gilhooly, M. T. G. Keane, R. H.
Logie, & G. Erdos (Eds.), Lines of Thinking, Vol. 1.
Chichester, UK: Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1991). Social role and
utilities in reasoning with deontic conditionals. Cognition,
43, 183-186.
Manktelow K.I., & Over, D.E. (1992). Utility and deontic
reasoning: some comments on Johnson-Laird and Byrne.
Cognition. 43, 183-188.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1995). Deontic Reasoning.
In St. E. Newstead & J. St. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives
on Thinking and Reasoning (pp. 91-114). Hove, UK:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of the
selection task as optimal data selection. Psychological
Review, 101, 608-631.
Sperber, D., & Girotto, V. (2003). Does the selection task
detect cheater-detection? In J. Fitness & K. Sterelny (Eds.),
New directions in evolutionary psychology. Macquarie
Monographs in Cognitive Science. Sidney: Psychology
Press.
von Sydow, M. (2004). Structural Bayesian models of
conditionals. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, T. Regier (Eds.).
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1411-1416). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum Associates.
von Sydow, M., Hagmayer, Y., Metzner, N., & Waldmann,
M. R. (2005). Cooperation Detection and Deontic
Reasoning in the Wason Selection Task. In K. Opwis & I.K. Penner (Eds.). Proceedings of KogWis05. The German
Cognitive Science Conference 2005 (pp. 195-200). Basel:
Schwabe.
von Sydow, M. (submitted). Cooperator Detection and the
Deontic Logic of the Selection Task.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.), New
horizons in psychology. Harmondsworth, Middlesex, UK:
Penguin.

predicted and found by FDL theory. Hence, the results can
only be explained by a focus effects on a given representation
and not (only) by the selective representations postulated by
current MM theory.
Relevance Theory of the WST has discussed focus effects
even earlier (Sperber & Girotto, 2002, 2003; cf. Oaksford &
Chater, 1994). However, relevance theory does not employ
any concept of deontic logic and has not combined deontic
logic with focusing. Perhaps the results may be compatible
with Manktelow and Over’s (1991, 1992, 1995) decision
theoretic account. Although they have indeed made steps to
incorporate deontic logic, they neither treat prohibitions nor
combined deontic logic with a cooperator or a double focus.
Further research is needed to understand the differences
between the successful manipulation here, and their
unsuccessful manipulation based on the variation of
individual utilities (Manktelow & Over, 1990, 1992). Hence,
the current experiment is underspecified to count as
independent evidence in favor of a utility based approach.
(For instance, as seen in the ultimatum game, the construction
of foci needs not to be determined only by individual utility
but also by considerations about justice.)
In conclusion, FDL theory may provide a rational synthesis
of converging lines of research on the deontic WST. Our
results favor FDL theory and challenge current domainspecific and domain-general theories of the WST.

Acknowledgements
We thank Björn Meder, Michael Waldmann, and the anonymous reviewers for helpful and encouraging comments.

References
Beller, S. (2001). A model theory of deontic reasoning about
social norms. In J. D. Moore, & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 63-68). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Beller, S. (2003). The flexible use of deontic mental models.
In R. Alterman, & D. Kirsh (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 127-132). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2005). Naïve
deontics: A theory of meaning, representation, and
reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 50, 159-193.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning
schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has
natural selection shaped how humans reason? Cognition,
31, 187-276.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1992). Cognitive adaptations for
social exchange. In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby
(Eds.). The adapted mind. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Evans, J. S. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality in the
selection task: Epistemic utility versus uncertainty
reduction. Psychological Review, 103, 356-363.
Fiddick, L. (2004). Domains of deontic reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57, 447-474.

869

