UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Developing Higher-Level Cognitive Theories by Reduction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/78816472

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Bosse, Tibor
Jonker, Catholijn M.
Treur, Jan

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Developing Higher-Level Cognitive Theories by Reduction
Tibor Bosse (tbosse@cs.vu.nl), Catholijn M. Jonker1 (C.Jonker@nici.ru.nl), Jan Treur2 (treur@cs.vu.nl)
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Artificial Intelligence
De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
can be used to strengthen the usefulness and further
development of the higher-level theory.
This position acknowledges the achievements of
neuroscience and shows how to exploit these results where
possible, in favour of higher-level concepts instead of
against them. This paper shows how this perspective
provides a scientific and philosophical foundation for
higher-level notions. A practical method, based on formal
techniques and tools, is proposed to support the perspective.
The method will result, among others, in relational
specifications of the functional role and of the
representational content of these concepts; cf. Kim (1996,
1998, 2005). The method allows to check whether these
specifications are logically coherent mutually, and with
global behavioral properties, and, in as far as available from
neuroscience, consistent with neurological theories. The
resulting relational specifications can be said to specify
meaning and underlying mechanisms for the higher-level
concepts, and as such provide grounding of them both
within the higher-level theory and within physical reality.
Furthermore, the paper addresses different notions of
explanation in terms of the higher-level theory and the
lower-level theory. From a practical point of view, in a
specific case study the predictive value of higher-level
explanations is validated.

Abstract
Within philosophical literature, higher-level cognitive
concepts such as free will, authorship of actions, and
conscious control are often questioned. Neurological and
biochemical mechanisms underlying human behavior provide
alternative explanations of action. Reduction of cognitive
states to neurophysiologic states shows that higher-level
cognitive concepts in principle can be eliminated, replacing
them by neurophysiologic concepts. In contrast, in this paper
it is shown how reduction relations can be used in a
constructive manner to strengthen the scientific foundation of
higher-level cognitive concepts and further develop higherlevel theories in which these concepts play a role.

Introduction
Reduction is an important theme within literature in the area
of Cognitive Science, Philosophy of Science, and
Philosophy of Mind; e.g., Kim (1996, 1998, 2005), Bickle
(1998, 2003). One of the main perspectives advocated is
physicalism: the idea that all processes (among which
mental and biological processes), in one way or the other
have a physical basis. Within Biology the strong
development of biochemistry supports this perspective. For
Cognitive Science, the strong development of neuroscience
and its underlying biochemistry plays a similar role. These
developments sometimes lead to a position that considers
higher-level concepts, such as intention, free will, and
consciousness, just illusions, and not usable in a scientific
context; e.g., Wegner (2002).
A main question addressed in this paper is how to defend
such human-like, higher-level concepts. One strategy is to
criticise the existence of reduction relations; if these do not
exist, it is impossible to relate higher-level concepts to
lower-level ones, and in this way to eliminate the higherlevel concepts; e.g., Bennett and Hacker (2003, pp. 355366). This defensive strategy is not applicable in those cases
where reduction relations have been or are being shown to
exist. Another strategy is to put doubt on the quality of the
higher-level theory, for example, by claiming that there do
not exist cognitive laws that could be related to neurological
laws; e.g., Bennett and Hacker (2003, p. 362). This strategy
is not applicable in cases that the higher-level theory is
assumed to be still under development. In this paper a
different strategy is explored. This strategy takes the
existence of reduction relations in the present or in the
future as an assumption, and shows in some detail how they
1

On the Use of Reduction
In the philosophical literature on reduction of scientific
theories, in many cases the advantages for scientific practice
of having a reduction relation between two theories are not
addressed explicitly. In such cases, sometimes it is
implicitly assumed that these advantages are based on the
idea to use the lower-level theory instead of the higher-level
the theory. For example, Kim (1996, pp. 214-216)
emphasizes three advantages of reduction based on
(biconditional) bridge principles: ontological simplification
(following Smart, 1959), having to deal with fewer
assumptions about the world, and providing explanations of
the laws of the higher-level theory in terms of the lowerlevel theory. For example, if F and G are higher-level
entities and F* and G* lower-level ones with biconditional
bridge laws F ↔ F* and G ↔ G* (cf. Nagel, 1961), then F*
and G* can be used instead of F and G.3 An eliminative
perspective on the use of reduction provokes resistance from
those who defend an autonomous status for higher-level

3

Currently at: Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen, Nijmegen Institute for Cognition and
Information, The Netherlands
2
Part of this work was performed at a position at Utrecht University, Department of
Philosophy, The Netherlands

‘Such identities, one could argue, are essential to the ontological simplification that
we seek in theory reduction, for they enable us to dispense with facts involving F and
G as something in addition to facts involving F* and G*.’ (…) ‘It shows that fewer
basic laws, and fewer basic expressions, fully suffice for the description and
explanation of the phenomena of a given domain.’ Kim (1996, p. 215)

1032

theories in special sciences such as Biology and Cognitive
Science.
Historically, a main strategy to attack eliminative
tendencies in the literature on reduction has been to cast
doubt on the existence of reduction relations between
higher-level and lower-level theories; e.g., Davidson (1993);
Bennett and Hacker (2003). The idea is that when bridge
relations do not exist, it is impossible to use them for
elimination of the higher-level theory; thus it is protected.
Moreover, often also doubt is put forward about the
existence of psychological laws to be used in explanation of
human behavior.4 These are debatable strategies for several
reasons. Scientific progress made in areas such as
Biochemistry and Neuroscience makes (and still will make)
it harder and harder to maintain that reduction relations
cannot exist. It is more constructive to investigate what can
be gained for the higher-level theory from these scientific
achievements rather than to feel forced to ignore them.
Moreover, not (yet) having a perfect higher-level theory is
not an argument for its inexistence. Finally, it can easily be
questioned whether it is desirable to protect scientific
theories that have no connection to lower-level theories.

Reduction Relations and How to Exploit Them

sense but reductionist in the pragmatics sense ignores the
higher-level theory without assuming reduction relations to
a lower-level theory. There may be cases that a higher-level
theory is simply so far from what is required that the lack of
quality can be the reason that no reduction relations can be
found, and therefore this theory just should be discarded.
Eliminative reductionism (sometimes called eliminative
materialism; e.g., Churchland, 1986) is such a position: it
proposes to get rid of folk psychology (in favour of a
neuroscientific theory to be developed), because it is not
related to a lower-level theory and is not a scientific theory;
see also Bennett and Hacker (2003, pp. 366-377).
The position discussed in this paper falls in the remaining
category; it combines a reductionist perspective in the
structural sense with an anti-reductionist perspective in the
pragmatics sense. In other words, the claim is that an actual
or envisioned reduction in a structural sense (reduction
relations) can be useful to enforce the use and (further)
development of the higher-level theory. In Jonker, Treur and
Wijngaards (2002), this claim is illustrated for a case study
on the development of higher-level languages in the area of
Computer Science and AI. This case study shows how
reduction relations between higher-level and lower-level
languages within the computer, hidden for the human,
support the use of the higher-level language by the human in
practice, thus increasing the complexity of applications and
the speed with which such applications are developed.

The strategy discussed in this paper accepts the existence of
reduction relations, shaped in one way or the other, but
claims that this can go hand in hand with (and even support)
an anti-reductionist view on the development and use of
higher-level theories. To clarify the different possible
positions more explicitly, we distinguish between:
•
•

Higher-Level Explanations
In relation to reduction, different types of explanations can
be distinguished, according to what is to be explained
(explanandum) and what explains (explanans). The
explanandum can be either an instance of observed
behavior, the occurrence of an internal mental state, or a
general law or regularity of the higher-level theory. The
explanans can be found within the higher-level theory, the
lower-level theory and/or the reduction relations. Different
types of explanation can be distinguished; for example:

reduction in a structural sense: as a reduction relation, already
established or being established, between two theories and their
ontologies and laws, and
the pragmatics related to reduction: the use of an existing or to be
achieved reduction relation in scientific practice.5

This distinction makes four positions possible: antireductionist or reductionist in both senses, and antireductionist in one sense but reductionist in the other sense.
Positions discussed above include those reductionist in both
senses, respectively anti-reductionist in both senses. A
position that claims to be anti-reductionist in the structural
4

a
b
c
d

‘.. a neural pattern in one’s brain cannot have the logical consequences of believing
something: namely, being either right or wrong about what one believes. For there is
no such thing as a neural configuration’s being right or wrong about the truth of a
proposition (…) So, if there is no sense to literally identifying neural states and
configurations with psychological attributes, there cannot be general bridge principles
linking the reducing entities (neural configurations) with the entities that are to be
reduced (psychological attributes). But if there can be no bridge principles, then there
is no hope for any form of reduction that will allow one to derive the laws governing
phenomena at the higher level of psychology from the laws governing phenomena at
the neural level. So this form of derivational reductionism is chimerical.
Not only are there no bridge principles allowing any form of ontological reduction
of psychological attributes to neural configurations, but it is far from evident that there
is anything that can be dignified by the name of psychological laws of human action,
that might be reduced to, and so explained by reference to, whatever neurological laws
might be discovered. For, as far as explaining human action is concerned, it is clear
enough that although there are many different kinds of explanation of why people act
as they do, or why a certain person acted as they did, they are not nomological
explanations (i.e., they are nor explanations that refer to a natural law of human
behavior).’ Bennett and Hacker (2003), pp. 361-362
5
Notice that those papers describing a position as ‘eliminative’ in some sense usually
address this aspect of pragmatics. However, to be not committed to the more narrow
scope of these approaches as present in the current literature, here the more neutral
term ‘pragmatics’ is used.

e

explanation of observed behavior from the higher-level theory
explanation of observed behavior from the lower-level theory
explanation of the occurrence of a high-level mental state from the
higher-level theory
explanation of the occurrence of a high-level mental state from the
occurrence of lower-level states
explanation of a higher-level law or regularity from lower-level
laws or regularities

1033

Note that the level of description of the observed behavior
in a) and b) corresponds to the level of the theory from
which the explanation is provided. Explanations where the
explanandum is from the higher-level theory and the
explanans from the lower-level theory (as in d) and e)) are
sometimes called reductive explanations. These are
explanations of how higher-level elements work or are
realised in terms of underlying (lower-level) mechanisms;
see also Kim (2005, Ch. 4, pp. 93-120).
This section discusses why explanation of behavior with
explanans in a higher level-theory (type a)) are considered
more useful in practice than those from a lower-level theory
(type b)). First a perspective developed by Jackson and

Pettit (1988, 1990) is discussed. Subsequently, Dennett
(1987)’s view on the use of intentional stance versus
physical stance explanations is addressed.
Jackson and Pettit (1988, 1990) develop a notion of
higher-level explanation, meant to be suitable for special
sciences such as Biology, Cognitive Science and Social
Sciences: program explanation. According to this type of
explanation, ‘G occurred because F occurred’ (for higherlevel properties F and G) can be an adequate explanation in
the following way: F ensures (‘programs for’) some lowerlevel property P, which causes G. Or: F ensures (‘programs
for’) some lower-level property P, which causes a lowerlevel property Q for which G is a higher-level description.
For example, ‘Why did the vase break?’ can be explained
by: ‘Because it was fragile’. Here the higher-level property
of being fragile ensures the lower-level property of having a
specific molecular structure, and similarly for the broken
state of the vase. Jackson and Pettit emphasize that such a
form of higher-level explanation, based on the higher-level
theory (type a)) has advantages over causal explanation,
based on a lower-level theory (type b)), in the sense that
other information is provided, which implies increased
genericity: it not only applies to the actual world, but also to
other possible worlds, and thus to, possibly, the future.6
As opposed to explanations from a direct physical
perspective (the physical stance), Dennett, (1987, 1991)
advocates use of the intentional stance; cf. Dennett (1987),
pp. 37-39; Dennett (1991), pp. 37-42. He emphasizes the
advantage of the explanation of behavior from a higherlevel theory (type a)) compared to explanation from a lowerlevel theory (type b)). He considers tractability a criterion
for which the higher-level explanation makes a difference.7

reduction; e.g., Balzer and Moulines (1996). Using the
structuralist perspective, Bickle (1998, pp. 199-211)
discusses revisionary (or new wave) reduction. Bickle
(1998, pp. 205-208), illustrates this account for the higherlevel (folk psychological) and lower-level (neurobiological)
explanation in the context of Hawkins and Kandel's
(1984a,b) case.8 Here he proposes that by relating a folkpsychological explanation to a neurobiological account, a
decision can be made to enrich the former by introducing
some new intermediary states, based on the more detailed
path provided by the latter. He puts forward the possibility
to use a reduction relation in scientific practice not to
eliminate the theory T2 in favour of a theory T1, but to
extend or improve the theory T2 on the basis of theory T1.
Therefore, abandoning explanation on the basis of T2 and
replacing such explanation by explanation on the basis of T1
is not at issue; on the contrary, the explanatory value of T2 is
strengthened by the process of co-evolution of T2 and T1.
Based on an extended case study on memory consolidation,
he describes reduction relations and their use.9 For further
development, see Bickle (2003).
Kim (2005, pp. 98-102) puts forward functional
reduction; see also Kim, 1998, pp. 19-23, 97-103). In
schematic form (Kim, 2005, pp. 101-102):
STEP 1 [FUNCTIONALIZATION OF THE TARGET PROPERTY]
Property M to be reduced is given a functional definition of the following
form:
Having M =def. having some property or other P (in the reduction base
domain) such that P performs causal task C.
For a functionally defined property M, any property in the base domain
that fits the causal specification definitive of M (that is, a property that
performs causal task C) is called a “realizer” of M.
STEP 2 [IDENTIFICATION OF THE REALIZERS OF M]
Find the properties (or mechanisms) in the reduction base that perform
the causal task C.
STEP 3 [DEVELOPING AN EXPLANATION THEORY]
Construct a theory that explains how the realizers of M perform task C.’

Reduction Relations
In the classical approach (following Nagel, 1961), reduction
relations are based on (biconditional) bridge principles that
relate the expressions in the language of a higher-level
theory T2 to expressions in the language of the lower-level
theory T1. Kim (2005, pp. 98-102) calls this bridge law
reduction, as opposed to the type of reduction he puts
forward: functional reduction (see also the next paragraph).
Also functional reduction is based on relationships between
entities in the languages of the two theories; these
relationships are a bit less direct than biconditional bridge
principles. A type of reduction relation not relating
syntactical elements, but model structures is structural
6

‘According to (Lewis, 1988), to explain something is to provide information on its
causal history . . . A program explanation provides a different sort of information . . .
A program account tells us what the history might have been. It gives modal
information about the history, telling us for example that in any relevantly similar
situation, as in the original situation itself, the fact that some atoms are decaying
means that there will be a property realized - that involving the decay of such and such
particular atoms - which is sufficient in the circumstances to produce radiation. In the
actual world it was this, that and the other atom which decayed and led to radiation,
but in possible worlds where their place is taken by other atoms, the radiation still
occurs. ’ (Jackson and Pettit, 1990), p. 117.
7
‘Predicting that someone will duck if you throw a brick at him is easy from the folkpsychological stance; it is and will always be intractable if you have to trace the
protons from brick to eyeball, the neurotransmitters from optic nerve to motor nerve,
and so forth.’ (Dennett, 1991), p. 42.

The functionalization of mental properties makes them
relational: they are specified by how they relate to other
properties. Kim (1996, pp. 200-202) uses a similar idea to
solve problems in the area of representational content of
mental properties.10 In particular, concentrating on the
8

‘Of course, the functional profiles assigned to cognitive states on Hawkin and
Kandel's neurobiological account are much more fine-grained and detailed, for that
account recognizes distinctions and connections that folk psychology either lumps
together or leaves extremely vague (…) we can expect that injection of some
neurobiological details back into folk psychology would fruitfully enrich the latter,
and thus allow development of a more fine-grained folk-psychological account that
better matches the detailed functional profiles that neurobiology assigns to its
representational states. There is no principled reason against such enrichment.’
(Bickle, 1998), p. 207-208
9
‘In particular, entities characterised on the reduced theory primarily by their
functional (input-output) features get linked to complex structures (sequences and
combinations of entities and processes) whose dynamics and interactions specifiable
entirely within the reducing theory apply to roughly the same intended set of realworld systems, and provide causal mechanisms that explain the former’s functional
(input-output) profile. This, in rough outline, is the metascientific concept of a
theoretical posit becoming “structured through reduction”.’ Bickle (2003, pp. 98-99)
10
‘… to consider beliefs to be wholly internal to the subjects who have them but
consider their contents as giving relational specifications of the beliefs. On this view,
beliefs may be neural states or other types of physical states of organisms and
systems to which they are attributed. Contents, then, are viewed as ways of
specifying these inner states; wide contents, then, are specifications in terms of, or
under the constraints of, factors and conditions external to the subject, both physical
and social, both current and historical.’
(Kim, 1996, pp. 200-201); italics in the original.

1034

temporal dimension, a temporal relational specification can
be viewed as the specification of temporal relationships of a
mental state property to other patterns (‘factors and
conditions’) in past and future. In Kim’s proposal a mental
state property of a subject itself is distinguished from its
relationships to other items. This contrasts to some other
approaches where the mental state property is considered to
be ontologically constituted as one entity comprising both
the subject and the related items, or where the mental state
property itself is considered to be the relation between the
subject and the other items (cf. Kim, 1996, pp. 200-202).
The main difference between the specification of the
causal task of a mental property M and its representational
content is that the former describes the functional role of M
as a mediator between its close causal neighbors, whereas
the latter describes possibly more complex relationships of
M with states further away in position and time. The former
type of specification of M is best suited for a reduction
relation, for M to be mapped onto lower level properties and
their causal relationships within the lower-level theory, as
Kim (2005) proposes. The latter type of specification (of
representational content) can be used to specify its meaning,
and as such gives more detail and grounding of concepts
within the higher-level theory and within reality.

i.

c.

Most of these items can be supported by formal languages
and supporting tools. For 1. causal modelling formats can be
used, such as the LEADSTO language; cf. (Bosse et al.,
2005). For 2. and 3. a more expressive language is needed
such as TTL, or a temporal language as CTL; cf. (Bosse et
al., 2006; Goldblatt, 1992). For 4. the TTL checking
environment can be used and model checking tools such as
SMV11; cf. (McMillan, 1993). For 5. causal formats or
LEADSTO can be used, for 6. the TTL environment.

Case Study
The methodology is illustrated for a case study: the adaptive
behavior of Aplysia. Aplysia is a sea hare that is often used
to do experiments. It is an interesting case to use as
illustration, since its internal neural mechanisms are
relatively simple, and therefore well understood. Aplysia is
able to learn: it performs classical conditioning in the
following manner. This (a bit simplified) description is
mainly based on (Gleitman, 1999), pp. 155-156. Initially the
following behavior is shown: a tail shock leads to a response
(contraction), and a light touch on its siphon is insufficient
to trigger such a response. After the subject is a number of
times touched lightly on its siphon and then shocked on its
tail (as a consequence it responds), it turns out that the
behavior has changed: the animal also responds (contracts)
on a siphon touch. In this section some indications are given
on how to address this example (in particular, the high-level
state property of ‘having learnt to respond to a siphon
touch’) from the perspective described above.

Methodological Perspective
In our previous work, a number of cases studies already
have been undertaken to explore the usefulness in practice
of Kim’s relational perspective on reduction and
representational content. In these case studies, different
types of mental states have been examined: beliefs, desires
and intentions, trust, adaptation, core consciousness,
extended mind. It was shown how for practical (formal)
analysis and simulation the less complex higher-level theory
can be used. Based on this amount of work, a first
conclusion is that this perspective works fine in practical
contexts. Contrary to Kim’s quotes above, this perspective
is not used to eliminate the higher-level description, but
instead to strengthen it, giving it a solid basis. Based on
these experiences and the issues described above, the
methodological perspective is formulated as follows.
To analyse a certain high-level state property, perform the following steps:
1. analyse in a relational manner the functional role of the state property
in relation to other properties and formalise relational specifications
for the causal roles involved
2. distinguish a number of behaviors in which the property fulfills a role,
and formally specify these behaviors from an external perspective
3. analyse the property in a relational manner and formulate formalised
relational specifications for its representational content
4. analyse formally whether the specifications in 1., 2., and 3. are
coherent, i.e., whether they relate correctly; if needed correct them
5. analyse the property from a neurological point of view by identifying
neurological states that perform the same causal role; if needed
improve the specifications in 1., 2., and 3.
6. show how different types of explanations can be distinguished as used
in practice for different purposes
a. explanation of behavior
i. using laws or regularities from the higher-level theory,
independent of reduction relations
ii. using the lower-level theory
b. explanation of the occurrence of a high-level (mental) state

using the higher-level theory, relating it over time to other
states
ii. using reduction relations, relating it to the occurrence of
lower-level states
explanation of the mechanisms behind a higher-level law or
regularity:
i. using reduction relations, relating it to lower-level laws or
regularities

1. Relational specification of states and functional roles
Below, a formal model is provided of the states and
processes involved in Aplysia’s learning behavior. The basic
building blocks of this model are state properties
(descriptions of states of the process at a certain time point)
and their functional roles expressed by executable
properties (causal relations between state properties at
different time points). The state properties used are:
tail_shock
siphon_touch
contraction
sr(siphon_touch)
sr(tail_shock)
prep(contraction)
c1(r1)
c2(r2)

the animal is shocked on its tail
the animal is touched on its siphon
the animal contracts
sensory representation of a siphon touch
sensory representation of a tail shock
preparation state for contraction
control state for effect of sr(siphon_touch) on preparation
control state for effect of sr(tail_shock) on preparation

In addition, the following executable properties are
identified to describe the functional roles of the state
properties. Here, the expression α •→
→ β (pronounced α
leads to β) informally means the following: if state property
11

1035

http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~modelcheck/smv.html

α holds for a certain time interval, then after some delay,
state property β will hold for a certain time interval. For a
precise definition, see (Bosse et al., 2005).
LP1 tail_shock •→ sr(tail_shock)

|= c1(0.75) ⇒
∀t state(γ, t) =
∃t1, t2, t3, u1, u2, u3 t1 < u1 < t2 < u2 < t3 < u3 < t &
|= siphon_touch & state(γ, u1) =
|= tail_shock &
state(γ, t1) =
|= siphon_touch & state(γ, u2) =
|= tail_shock &
state(γ, t2) =
|= siphon_touch & state(γ, u3) =
|= tail_shock
state(γ, t3) =

Similarly, when looking forward, the representational
content of an internal state can be described by relating it to
future world states. The future representational content of
state property c1(0.75) can be informally described as follows:
‘if c1(0.75) occurs, then whenever the animal is touched on its
siphon, it will contract’, and conversely. In the TTL
language, the expression is formalized as follows:

LP2 siphon_touch •→ sr(siphon_touch)
LP3 sr(tail_shock) ∧ sr(siphon_touch) ∧ c1(r1) ∧ r1<0.75 •→ c1(r1+0.25)
LP4 sr(siphon_touch) ∧ c1(r1) ∧ r1>0.6 •→ prep(contraction)
LP5 sr(tail_shock) ∧ c2(r2) ∧ r2>0.05 •→ prep(contraction)
LP6 prep(contraction) •→ contraction
LP7 start •→ c1(0.0) ∧ c2(0.1)

The relational specification of the functional role of an
internal state property concerns relationships both backward
and forward in time. Given the model provided above, when
looking backward, the functional role of, e.g., state property
c1(0.75) (which represents the fact that the animal has learnt
to respond to a siphon touch) is the causal relationship
between c1(0.75) and the (past) states that cause c1(0.75). Thus,
looking backward the functional role of c1(0.75) is described
by executable property LP3. Likewise, when looking
forward the functional role of c1(0.75) is described by the
causal relationship between c1(0.75) and the (future) states
that are caused by c1(0.75), i.e., by executable property LP4.

|= c1(0.75) ⇒
∀t state(γ, t) =
|= siphon_touch ⇒ ∃t’’ > t’ state(γ, t’’) =
|= contraction ]
[ ∀t’ > t state(γ, t’) =
|= siphon_touch ⇒
& [∀t [ ∀t’ > t state(γ, t’) =
|= contraction ]
∃t’’ > t’ state(γ, t’’) =
|= siphon_touch ] ⇒ state(γ, t) =
|= c1(0.75)
& ∃t’ > t state(γ, t') =

2. Related behavior specifications
In this step, various behaviors can be described in which
Aplysia’s adaptivity fulfills a role. In general, example types
of behavior that can be used in this step are high-level
cognitive functions such as reasoning, planning and
language processing. With respect to the above case study,
an example behavior, specified from an external
perspective, is the following: “if a siphon touch occurs, and
at three different earlier time points t1, t2, t3, a siphon touch
occurred, which was directly followed by a tail shock, then
the animal contracts”. To make this expression more
precise, it can be formalized in a temporal language. For
example, in the Temporal Trace Language (TTL) by (Bosse
et al., 2006), the expression is formalized as follows:

4. Analysis of the coherency of the specifications in 1-3.
In general, if specifications are sufficiently complete and
correct, the specifications found in 1. (maybe extended for a
number of other related internal states) should logically
entail those found in 2. and those found in 3. This can be
verified using methods for logical and formal analysis. If
discrepancies are found, improvements are to be made. In
terms of the case study, part of the analysis has been to
verify (using the SMV environment; cf. McMillan, 1993)
that indeed the local properties LP1 through LP9 together
entail global property GP1. Likewise, it has been verified
that these local properties together entail the
representational content specifications.

GP1 ≡
|= siphon_touch &
∀t state(γ, t) =
∃t1, t2, t3, u1, u2, u3 t1 < u1 < t2 < u2 < t3 < u3 < t &
|= siphon_touch & state(γ, u1) =
|= tail_shock &
state(γ, t1) =
|= siphon_touch & state(γ, u2) =
|= tail_shock &
state(γ, t2) =
|= siphon_touch & state(γ, u3) =
|= tail_shock
state(γ, t3) =
|= contraction
⇒ ∃t' ≥ t state(γ, t') =

5. Analysis of the state from a neurological point of view
To analyze an internal state property from a neurological
point of view, neurological states have to be identified that
perform the same causal role. In (Gleitman, 1999) the
internal neural mechanisms for Aplysia’s conditioning are
described (see also Figure 1). A tail shock activates a
sensory neuron SN1. Activation of this neuron SN1
activates the motoneuron MN; activation of MN makes the
sea hare move. Moreover, a siphon touch activates the
sensory neuron SN2. Activation of this sensory neuron SN2
normally does not have sufficient impact on MN to activate
MN. After learning, activation of SN2 has sufficient impact
to activate MN. In addition, activation of SN1 also leads to
activation of the intermediary neuron IN. If both SN2 and
IN are activated simultaneously, this changes the state of the
synapse between SN2 and MN: it causes a state of this
synapse in which it produces more neurotransmitter if SN2
is activated. As a result, after a number of trials, activation
of SN2 also yields activation of MN.

3. Relational specification of representational content
The relational specification of the representational content
of an internal state property can be addressed both backward
and forward in time. When looking backward, the backward
representational content of an internal state can be
described, for example, by relating it to a history of past
world states. The representational content of state property
c1(0.75) can be described informally as follows: ‘if at three
different earlier time points t1, t2, t3, a siphon touch
occurred, which was directly followed by a tail shock, then
c1(0.75) will occur’, and conversely. In TTL, the expression
is formalized as follows:
∀t1, t2, t3, u1, u2, u3 t1 < u1 < t2 < u2 < t3 < u3 &
|= siphon_touch & state(γ, u1) =
|= tail_shock &
state(γ, t1) =
|= siphon_touch & state(γ, u2) =
|= tail_shock &
state(γ, t2) =
|= siphon_touch & state(γ, u3) =
|= tail_shock
state(γ, t3) =
|= c1(0.75) &
⇒ ∃t > u3 state(γ, t) =

SN2

siphon
touch
IN

MN

contraction
tail
shock
SN1

Figure 1: Aplysia’s internal neural mechanisms.

1036

Such neurological states can be related to the functional
states as described in step 1. by Kim (2005)’s functional
reduction. Some example relations are the following:
• sr(tail_shock) relates to SN1
• sr(siphon_touch) relates to SN2
• c1(0.0) relates to a synapse state forming a weak
connection between SN2 and MN
• c1(0.75) relates to a synapse state forming a strong
connection between SN2 and MN
• prep(contraction) relates to MN
Note that IN is not used in these relations. This shows that
the lower-level theory gives a more fine-grained account
than the higher-level theory.
6. Different types of explanations for different purposes
The knowledge generated under 5. can be considered as a
focus on specialized neurological knowledge, that can be
used to verify the specifications from a different focus in 1.
to 3. For the different types of explanations discussed above
(i.e., type a), b) and c)), instances can be formulated based
on the specifications obtained in 1. to 3. For example, an
explanation of type a) explains at a higher level why an
animal contracts in certain situations. The explanation of
this behavior of type a) refers to higher-level concepts such
as sensory representations and preparation states.

Discussion
Within philosophical literature, especially in the area of
Cognitive Science and Philosophy of Mind, higher-level
cognitive concepts are often questioned. Neurological and
biochemical mechanisms underlying human behavior
provide alternative explanations of action. Not seldom it is
argued that reduction relations between cognitive states and
neurophysiologic states show that higher-level cognitive
concepts can be eliminated and replaced by
neurophysiological concepts. To clarify the different
possible positions more explicitly, in this paper a distinction
is made between reduction in a structural sense (as a
reduction relation between two theories and their ontologies
and laws) and the pragmatics related to reduction (the use of
a reduction relation in scientific practice). This distinction
makes four positions possible: anti-reductionist or
reductionist in both senses, and anti-reductionist in one
sense but reductionist in the other sense.
The position discussed here in some detail combines a
reductionist perspective in the structural sense with an antireductionist perspective in the pragmatics sense. In other
words, the claim is that an actual or envisioned reduction in
a structural sense (reduction relations) can be useful to
enforce the use and (further) development of the higherlevel theory. A practical methodology is proposed to
develop higher-level theories by grounding them in lowerlevel theories. The methodology incorporates Kim (1996,
2005)’s perspective on relational specification and
functional reduction, and provides technical support by
formal methods and tools as developed in Computer Science
and Artificial Intelligence. It was shown how this

methodology can be used to formalise the adaptive
behaviour of Aplysia. Another case study that has been
undertaken addresses the processes leading to core
consciousness according to Damasio (2000) (see URL
http://www.cs.vu.nl/~tbosse/reduction/consciousness.doc).

References
Balzer, W., and Moulines, C.U. (1996). Structuralist Theory of Science.
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin.
Bennett, M. R., and Hacker, P. M. S. (2003). Philosophical foundations of
neuroscience. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Bickle, J. (1998). Psychoneural Reduction: The New Wave. MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Bickle, J. (2003). Philosophy and Neuroscience: A Ruthless Reductive
Account. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bosse, T., Jonker, C.M., Meij, L. van der, Sharpanskykh, A., and Treur, J.
(2006). A Temporal Trace Language for the Formal Analysis of
Dynamic Properties. Technical Report, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.
http://www.few.vu.nl/~treur/TTL.pdf
Bosse, T., Jonker, C.M., Meij, L. van der, and Treur, J. (2005).
LEADSTO: a Language and Environment for Analysis of Dynamics by
SimulaTiOn. In: Eymann, T. et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the Third
German Conference on Multi-Agent System Technologies, MATES'05.
Lecture Notes in AI, vol. 3550. Springer Verlag, pp. 165-178.
Churchland, P.S. (1986). Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science of
the Mind/Brain. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Damasio, A. (2000). The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the
Making of Consciousness. MIT Press.
Davidson, D. (1993). Thinking Causes. In: J. Heil & A. Mele (eds).,
Mental Causation. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Dennett, D.C. (1987). The Intentional Stance. MIT Press. Cambridge
Mass.
Dennett, D.C. (1991). Real Patterns. The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 88,
pp. 27-51.
Gleitman, H. (1999). Psychology. W.W. Norton & Company, New York.
Goldblatt, R. (1992). Logics of Time and Computation, 2nd edition, CSLI
Lecture Notes 7.
Hawkins, R.D., and Kandel, E.R. (1984a). Is There a Cell-Biological
Alphabet for Simple Forms of Learning? Psychological Review, vol. 91,
pp. 375-391
Hawkins, R.D., and Kandel, E.R. (1984b). Steps Toward a Cell-Biological
Alphabet for Elementary Forms of Learning. In: G. Lynch, J.L.
McGaugh, and N.M. Weinberger (eds.), Neurobiology of Learning and
Memory, Guilford Press, New York, pp. 385-404, vol. 91, pp. 375-391
Jackson, F., and Pettit, P. (1988). Functionalism and Broad Content. Mind,
vol. 97, pp. 381-400.
Jackson, F., and Pettit, P. (1990). Program Explanation: A General
Perspective. Analysis, vol. 50, pp. 107-117.
Jonker, C.M., Treur, J., and Wijngaards, W.C.A. (2002). Reductionist and
Antireductionist Perspectives on Dynamics. Philosophical Psychology
Journal, vol. 15, pp. 381-409.
Kim, J. (1996). Philosophy of Mind, Westview Press.
Kim, J. (1998). Mind in a Physical world: an Essay on the Mind-Body
Problem and Mental Causation. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Kim, J. (2005). Physicalism, or Something Near Enough. Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Lewis, D. (1988). Causal Explanation. In: Philosophical Papers, vol. 2.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
McMillan, K.L., (1993). Symbolic Model Checking: An Approach to the
State Explosion Problem. PhD thesis, School of Computer Science,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 1992. Published by Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1993.
Nagel, E. (1961). The Structure of Science. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Smart, J.J.C. (1959). Sensations and Brain Processes. Philosophical
Review, vol. 68, pp. 141-156. Reprinted in Rosenthal, D.M. (ed.), The
Nature of Mind. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1991.
Wegner, D.M. (2002). The illusion of conscious will. Cambridge, MA.
MIT Press.

1037

