UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Differences in Deference: Essences and Insights

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/77m662n4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Keil, Frank C.
Proctor, Caroline

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Differences in Deference: Essences and Insights
Caroline Proctor (caroline.proctor@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University
Box 208205, New Haven, CT 06511 USA

Frank C. Keil (frank.keil@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University
Box 208205, New Haven, CT 06511 USA

Abstract
If people have essentialist beliefs about natural kinds, it
follows that when an entity’s identity is uncertain, we should
defer to experts knowledgeable about its hidden inner nature.
In two experiments we presented students and lay adults with
scenarios involving ambiguous-looking natural kinds,
artifacts, and hybrid animal-artifacts and examined whether
they would choose to defer to an expert about its identity, and
if so, whether they would choose someone knowledgeable
about its internal structure or its function. Results indicate
differing patterns of deference for natural kinds and artifacts
and support an essentialist model of deference overall, though
deference was clearly affected by factors such as artifact
complexity and sample population. Implications for
essentialism, theories of artifacts, and an essentialist bias
when reasoning about living kinds are discussed.
Keywords: essentialism; deference; natural kinds; artifacts

Introduction
Considerable recent research on concepts has focused on
the notion of psychological essentialism, the belief that
concepts refer to entities with a true underlying nature, an
essence, that determines category membership and causes
observable properties. Yet, despite extensive research on
this idea, one of the underlying tenets of essentialism laid
out by Putnam (1975), deference, has received little
attention.
Putnam (1975) noted that societies have a division of
linguistic labor, in which only a subset of speakers actually
has knowledge of a particular essence. Thus, although
everyone can use the word ‘gold’, we do not all have exact
knowledge of its structure and properties; if in doubt about
identification, we can readily confer with those experts in
the linguistic community who do know, such as chemists.
The division of linguistic labor therefore predicts that if
people have intuitive essentialist beliefs about categories,
when membership is uncertain they should defer to those
experts who know a category’s essence. Moreover, since
essences are given privileged status in explaining category
members’ features, deference to essence experts might be
expected to trump deference to experts on other sorts of
properties and relations.
Of course not all categories have or are believed to have
essential properties. Different domains are essentialized to

1974

varying degrees (Gelman, 2003); membership in natural
kind categories tends to be absolute and unchanging despite
surface transformation (indicative of an inner essence),
while artifact categories are more graded and malleable
(Keil, 1989). Deference might therefore be expected to be
greater for natural kinds and less for artifacts, for which
there is still debate as to whether they have essences at all
(e.g., Bloom, 1996; Sloman & Malt, 2003).
Similarly, the identification of essence experts is easier
for natural kinds, where there are well-established scientific
authorities on their identification and anatomy. And even
though such experts might not always know an essence
completely, people believe experts can make a definitive
classification (Coley & Luhmann, 2000). In particular, the
idea that DNA determines the characteristics of natural
kinds has permeated popular culture for decades, thus
genetic experts clearly represent essence experts on living
kinds, despite the imperfect nature of their actual
knowledge.
Although the essentialist construal of deference assumes
that we consult biological experts about living kinds due to
beliefs in essences, other work suggests the influence of
more pragmatic factors. Some have argued that natural kind
categories have a graded non-absolute membership, with
category distinctions being a matter of convention (e.g.
Kalish, 1995; 2002, though see Diesendruck & Gelman,
1999; Estes, 2003 for conflicting findings). Consultation
with biological experts according to this view may be
merely because they are the authority on the most widely
used conventions of classification.
Such a position, both on concepts and on deference,
implies few domain differences for artifacts and natural
kinds, and evidence has been mixed. People are more likely
to believe experts can make absolute category judgments for
natural kinds than for artifacts (Coley & Luhmann, 2000)
and, moreover, when given specific scenarios with
ambiguous kinds, participants act on these beliefs,
endorsing options to “ask an expert” or “investigate”
(examine the entity further to discover essential properties)
for natural kinds more than artifacts (Malt, 1990; Kalish,
2002). For artifacts, participants judged either classification
as appropriate or favored “legislating” (establishing a rule to
make the classification). A notable exception was a
particular subgroup of artifacts, scientific instruments,
which both fall within the dominion of scientists and are

also more internally complex than other artifacts used in the
study. Deference to artifacts may thus be largely due to
pragmatic reasons: for commonplace artifacts whose
structure is simple and familiar, an expert’s additional
authority might be minimal and thus categories are regarded
as less objective and more open to legislation.
Other work has more explicitly measured what experts
people trust in categorization decisions. In such studies,
biological or chemical kinds (e.g., an apple or soap) that had
been substantially genetically or chemically modified so
their identity was unclear were described and participants
were told how essential experts (“biologists” or “chemists”)
or laypeople with little essential knowledge (“shoppers”)
had classified them. When asked for their own
categorization judgments, participants showed deference in
their decisions to both groups, though the tendency to
conform their categorizations to those of shoppers was
much weaker (Braisby, 2001, 2003).
Thus, although the tenets of psychological essentialism
suggest that people should defer to experts on essential
properties, science experts might sometimes be chosen for
conventional reasons. In addition, the opinions of people
with more practical experience in a domain might also be
selected. In the wake of such conflicting evidence, the
purpose of the following two experiments is to make a more
careful assessment of what domains we defer to experts on,
what experts we choose, and what external or pragmatic
factors can affect this process.
Prior work on deference has also only been done with
undergraduate as participants. However, as students are
immersed in an educational culture, they might not offer the
most representative sample of the everyday use of expertise
and deference. In fact, different deference patterns between
students and laypeople may well be a rough indicator of
what pragmatic factors are normally at work in such
decisions. If essence experts are being consulted because of
their privileged and absolute knowledge about kind identity,
then one should expect equal deference among students and
laypeople who share the same intuitive notions of essence.
However, if biological experts are consulted merely as
arbiters of the most useful classification convention,
deference to biological experts might be lower in laypeople,
as they are not as invested in the culture of scientific
authority and might have other practically-oriented
conventions for determining kinds that involve experts with
more functional or otherwise useful knowledge. In an
attempt to investigate this, our experiments compared the
responses of students to those of a sample more
representative of members of the general public.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we examined patterns of deference in
scenarios with ambiguous-looking natural kinds, pitting the
opinion of an essence expert against that of an expert with
more practical, use-oriented expertise. For comparison
purposes, we also included scenarios that featured hybrid
animal-artifact organisms. These were living kinds that

1975

were not “natural” but instead were designed and
engineered by people, created with the specific intention of
having certain functions – just like artifacts. Given that
these biological kinds were “artifactualized” and designed
for a specific purpose, we expected that participants would
choose to defer to an expert with knowledge relevant to that
purpose, while in line with essentialism and the division of
linguistic labor, they would choose to defer to the essence
expert for regular natural kinds.

Method
Participants Twenty students were recruited at a campus
library and 20 adults (19-73 years, M = 35.2) were
approached in a shopping mall and participated in exchange
for a chocolate bar. Only 25% of the mall participants had
completed a college degree and none were in school.
Materials The paper survey consisted of 15 questions, each
about a new biological kind described as appearing to be
halfway in between two biological categories. Two
scenarios were made for each biological kind, one depicting
the organism as being a pure natural kind discovered in the
wild, the other as an artifactualized natural kind created by
human efforts with intent for it to have particular properties
and serve a specific function. In order to make the
functional expert a credible source for resolving the kind’s
identity in either condition, all the described organisms had
functional properties, but in the natural kind case, this
property was incidental, while in the artifactualized kind
case the function was its reason for being. For example:
Natural Kind Scenario:
A wildlife artist camping on the remotest of the
uninhabited islands north of Scotland discovered a
colony of birds living in the area that she couldn't find
described in any of her bird books. It just so happens
this kind of bird has…
Artifactualized Natural Kind Scenario:
Insula, a company that produces down jackets and
sleeping bags is trying to make the warmest camping
and outdoor equipment possible. To do this they have
combined different varieties of bird to produce one
whose…
Both of these scenarios were completed by a description
of the same functional property:
… down feathers [that] trap as much heat as possible.
The new bird has some of the properties of a duck and
some of a goose: it looks about halfway in between the
two types.
Participants then read that an essence expert and a
functional expert had both examined the creature and
disagreed about its categorization. Subjects were instructed
to indicate which expert they were more likely to believe
and how confident they were on a one to seven Likert scale.
The essence expert was always described as knowing about
DNA and genetics while the functional expert was described
as knowing about the practical uses and purposes of the

living kind (similar to the knowledge exhibited by
“shoppers” in earlier studies). For example:
Klaus, who knows all about the genetic code of birds
and what genes differ between different species of birds
and which they have in common, says it is a duck.
Hans, who buys the equipment for government
projects at the North and South Poles and knows all
about what provides the best insulation, says it is a
goose.
In this way, we set up a minimal pairing; in each condition
the same creature with the same properties and experts was
presented, only the origin of both the animal and property
were different. This design rules out other potential
confounds such as differences in materials, symmetry, and
complexity that commonly plague comparisons of human
and man-made entities and is a novel method for studying
domain differences. Two versions of the questionnaire were
made such that subjects saw either the discovered or the
artifactualized scenario for each item, but not both, and the
presentation of the experts was counterbalanced.

Results and Discussion
The main dependent measure was each participant’s mean
proportion of selecting an essence expert. In all the
following relevant analyses, proportions were transformed
using the root-arcsine function to correct for non-uniform
residuals, though for ease of reading, means reported in the
text and tables are the untransformed percentages. A
2(subject type) × 2(scenario type) repeated measures
ANOVA on the mean percentage expert choice did not find
a significant effect of scenario type, F(1,38) = .22, ns, ηp2 =
.006 or a significant interaction, F(1, 38) = .001, ns, ηp2 <
.001. As expected by essentialism and seen in Figure 1,
participants overwhelmingly chose to defer to a DNA expert
for the discovered natural kind scenarios (M = 81.37%).
This was also the case, unexpectedly, for artifactualized
kind scenarios (M = 78.68%) despite cues in this condition
that the functional expert was an appropriate authority.
Mean Percentage Choice of
Essence Expert

Discovered
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Artifactualized

Students

Laypeople

Figure 1: Choice of essence experts among students and
laypeople in Experiment 1
Although this robust tendency to defer to biological
experts is consistent with the essentialist theory of
deference, there was also evidence of the influence of
practical cues, as laypeople (M = 72.83%) were overall less
likely to choose a biological expert F(1, 38) = 5.61, p < .05,

1976

ηp2= .13 than students (M = 87.22%) – suggesting they are
more concerned with the practical uses and classification of
an object than its esoteric hidden nature. There was no
indication of any tendency to respond randomly to these
types of questions in either sample, however, as all these
results were significantly different from chance (50%).
Experiment 2 was conducted to examine whether deference
to artifacts follows similar patterns to those seen here, and
also to improve upon the two-option forced-choice design,
which might have masked participants’ more nuanced
approach to deference.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 used a similar design as Experiment 1 but
employed a number of methodological improvements to
clarify how decisions of deference are made. One possible
concern is that participants might have realized the
relevance of both experts’ knowledge, but the forced-choice
design favored the biological expert because he or she
appeared superficially smarter, and also employed the
science buzzwords “genes” and “DNA”. In Experiment 2
we attempted to reduce the impact of these factors in two
ways: when selecting experts we included a third option in
which subject could indicate that both experts would know
the object’s identity equally well, and we also described the
essence expert in more layman’s terms as someone who
knew about the smallest internal parts of an item and how
they interact.
Another potential concern about our initial findings might
lie in our selection of experts; although prior work on
essentialism implies DNA experts are suitable authorities
for the categorization of animals (Putnam, 1975; Gelman,
2003) our assumption that a person knowledgeable about
the functional properties of an object would be an
appropriate expert for artifacts or artifactualized kinds is not
uncontroversial. In some tasks, people are unlikely to ask
an expert at all about this domain (Malt, 1990; Coley &
Luhmann, 2000); yet, in other tasks with ambiguous cases,
design history and intended function are important factors in
artifact identity (e.g., Chaigneau, Barsalou & Sloman, 2004)
implying that experts knowledgeable about function might
be an appropriate alternative.
Across all tasks, the extent to which artifact categories are
regarded as being suitable for expert judgment may depend
on the extent to which they are unfamiliar, complex or fall
under the cultural authority of experts (Kalish, 2002). Such
artifact authorities need not have knowledge about essential
features, they may just have a larger reservoir of facts about
certain objects, or greater experience with a specific
domain. Antique dealers, for example would likely have
privileged information about historical items, though this
knowledge might be stored in a family resemblance type of
structure as opposed to strict essence-based categories.
To investigate deference in this domain, in Experiment 2
we developed new scenarios involving ambiguous-looking
artifacts and asked participants whether they would consult
an expert at all, and if so, which of several options they

Method
Participants Twenty undergraduates participated in
exchange for five dollars and 20 adults (18-56 years, M =
30.4) responded to a posting on Craigslist.org and
participated in exchange for a free pass to a museum.
Materials Seven artifactualized natural kind items were
taken from the previous experiments (see bird example in
Experiment 1) and seven artifact items were constructed in a
similar manner, with a new product being created from parts
of two existing types to meet a specific functional need. An
example is below:
An agricultural company is trying to create a fan that is
best able to circulate and clean air in large barns. They
have designed the new fan using elements from existing
fan types that are used for differing purposes. Their
new product has some of the properties of a centrifugal
fan and some of an axial flow fan: it looks about
halfway between the two fan types
To assess whether people would choose to defer to an expert
at all about the kind’s identity, participants were first asked
to choose between “Well I guess you can call it whichever
type you want” and “We’d have to ask an expert to tell us
which type it is”. Participants that chose to defer were then
presented with two experts, and indicated whether they
thought both experts would know equally well what the
item was, or, if not, which expert they would be more likely
to believe. For both artifactualized kinds and artifact items
similar expert options were provided: one expert was
knowledgeable about the smallest interacting parts and the
other about the larger overall function of the entity. For
example, for the fan scenario:
Daryl knows all about the smallest internal constituent
parts of fans and how they interact with each other.
Eugene knows all about ventilation systems and which
fans work best in different environments.
Two version of the survey were created, the order of
presentation of the deference choice options and experts
were counterbalanced within each, and across the two
surveys the names of experts and their knowledge were
counterbalanced to prevent response bias based on the
experts’ names alone.
Student completed a paper version of the survey while lay
adults completed on online version that was identical in

1977

content, but administered with an interactive design.
Piloting with the paper version used in Experiment 1
revealed problems with lay participants not following stated
directions, such as choosing not to ask an expert but then
selecting one. To minimize such problems, the online
version had an if-then design that presented subjects with
the appropriate next question contingent on their responses.
Several studies have found little or no difference between
questionnaires administered in person and on the web (e.g.
McGraw, Tew, & Williams, 2000).

Results and Discussion
A 2(scenario: artifact vs. artifactualized kind) × 2(sample:
student vs. laypeople) repeated measures ANOVA on
participants’ mean deference to experts revealed two main
effects and no interaction, F(1,38) = .11, ns, ηp2 = .003.
As seen in Experiment 1, there was overall decreased
levels of deference for laypeople (M = 53.57%) than
students (M = 73.93%), F(1,38) = 4.80, p <.05, ηp2 = .11.
Also, as before, deference for artifactualized natural kinds
was high (M = 73.57%) confirming that even when given
the option not to, participants continued to treat
artifactualized kinds as if they were natural ones and
consulted experts about their identity. Deference for
artifacts was significantly lower (M = 53.93%), F(1,38) =
9.98, p <.05, ηp2 = .21, but closer examination of the artifact
stimuli revealed that there were actually two subgroups with
different patterns of deference.
Mean Percentage Deference

would select. Artifact items were compared to our
artifactualized natural kind items from Experiment 1 in
order to ensure deference patterns would replicate given our
design improvements. We hypothesized that for the
artifactualized natural kinds, participants would choose to
defer, and as in Experiment 1, would prefer the essence
expert. Given conflicting findings in the literature, we did
not make many specific predictions about patterns of
deference for artifacts. However, based on evidence of the
role of function in artifact categorization, we did expect
some degree of deference to these kinds, and a preference
for functional experts over ones knowledgeable about
internal makeup.

Artifactualized
Artifacts (all)
Complex Artifacts
Simple Artifacts

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Students

Laypeople

Figure 2: Mean percentage deference to any expert among
students and laypeople in Experiment 2
Four of the artifact items had intricate interacting parts, such
as a fan or an arc welding system, while the other three were
simpler artifacts with fewer – as well as static –
components, such as fishing lures or tires. An artifact type
× sample ANOVA revealed that artifact deference is
sensitive to differences in complexity: the choice to consult
an expert on simple artifacts was understandably low (M =
50.00%), while participants were significantly more likely
to consult an expert about the more complex artifacts, M =
60.25%, F(1,38) = 10.84, p < .01, ηp2 = .22. There was also
a non-significant trend towards greater deference in the
student population, F(1,38) = 2.32, p = .14, ηp2 = .06 and no
interaction, F(1,38) = .11, ns, η p 2 = .003. Thus, in contrast
to the conclusions of Coley and Luhmann (2000) and Malt
(1990), deference to experts for artifacts occurred, though to

Percentage Choice of Expert

a lesser extent than for natural kinds, and was sensitive to
pragmatic factors such as complexity.
Next, for those items on which people chose to defer we
examined expert choice using non-parametric analyses1.
Subject population, condition, and expert choice were
entered into a 2× 3×2 contingency table.
Log-linear
analysis revealed independent effects of subject population,
G2(4, N = 356) = 42.12, p < .001, and condition, G2(4, N =
356) = 80.62, p < .001, on expert choice, but these were
qualified by a significant interaction between all three
variables, G2(7, N = 356) = 120.32, p < .001 (see Figure 3).
Breaking the analysis down by subject population,
separate 2×3 chi-square analyses show that condition had a
significant effect on expert choice for both laypeople, χ 2(2,
N = 149) = 33.09, p <.001, and students, χ 2(2, N = 207) =
43.13, p <.001. The most popular expert choice for
artifactualized natural kinds was, as hypothesized and seen
in Experiment 1, the insides parts expert – though also as
seen previously, this preference was stronger in students.
For artifacts, as predicted, both groups indicated they
believed functional information was relevant to the
identification of artifacts: the students’ modal choice was
the functional expert alone while the laypeople
overwhelmingly chose that both experts would know, with a
minority equally choosing between function and essence
experts. Thus, function plays an important role in the
categorization of artifacts and function experts are an
appropriate alternative to the essence expert for
artifactualized kinds, validating the results of Experiment 1.
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

14.28
13.45

26.14

Both
Function
Essence

33.33
6.90

70.97

46.59
.

72.27

59.77

27.27
Students
Animals

Students
Artifacts

Laypeople
Animals

16.13
12.90
Laypeople
Artifacts

Figure 3. Percentage choice of experts in Experiment 2

General Discussion
We have examined patterns of deference in both students
and laypeople to natural kinds, artifactualized natural kinds,
and artifacts. In Experiment 1, acting in accordance with
essentialist predictions, participants preferred an essence
expert over a functional expert for natural kinds and even
extended this preference to hybrid organisms specifically
crafted for a particular purpose about which the other expert
was created to be knowledgeable. Experiment 2 replicated
this tendency to consult essence experts and confirmed it
was not due to a lack of an “ask-no one” alternative or
1

As deference for artifacts was low, there was insufficient power
to conduct analyses comparing expert choice for simple versus
complex artifacts.

1978

because the functional expert was an unacceptable option.
The addition of artifact stimuli showed that – though
participants are far less likely to consult an expert about
simple artifacts – functional experts were regarded as an
acceptable, and sometimes preferred, choice for this
domain.
The choice of function expert, particularly by students,
illustrates that participants are not always choosing the
expert that might be construed as being “smarter” because
of their knowledge of internal structure; instead, they
recognize that different problems require different expertise.
Laypeople, however, may not make this expertise
differentiation as strongly, as they are more likely to
indicate that both experts would know equally well. Across
both experiments, we also found that laypeople were
significantly less likely to choose essence experts and defer
in general than students. In fact, in Experiment 1, lay adults
were willing to consult pragmatic experts for natural kinds
discovered in the wild almost 30% of the time. Given that
the division of linguistic labor implies that consultation with
experts on genetics or internal structure should always be
the preferred option, do these discrepancies represent a
major problem for essentialist accounts of natural kind
categories and of deference? Not necessarily: there are some
methodological factors that may be able to account for these
unexpected results.
First, given the use of specific real world scenarios and
descriptions of specific experts, some variation in
participants’ confidence in experts is to be expected due to
individual differences in background knowledge or
experience with such authorities. Secondly, although it is
necessary to present ambiguous cases and alternative expert
opinions in order to test essentialist claims, these scenarios
also encourage participants to think of the creature as a truly
unusual and exceptional instance, one for which regular
beliefs about animals might not necessarily apply. Other
experiments in which participants have had to state whether
atypical instances were full or partial members of a kind, or
indicate whether legislation or investigation are appropriate
means of resolving a dispute have found stronger evidence
for absolute natural categories (Diesendruck & Gelman,
1999; Estes, 2003).
These other experiments on natural kinds have usually
used artifacts as a contrast category and in Experiments 2
we did the same. The greater deference to complex artifacts
is consistent with the idea that there is not a strict border,
but a continuum between artifacts and natural kinds (Keil,
1989) with complex artifacts taking on many of the
properties of natural kinds, such as the importance of hidden
internal structure, preservation of identity across surface
transformations, and also, as seen here, reliance on experts
for disambiguating identity. Closer examination of previous
work that seemingly failed to find indications of deference
to experts for artifacts reveals two patterns. Stimuli were
either simple, common artifacts (Malt, 1990) or averaging
results for all artifacts obscured important differences. In
particular, participants viewed experts as highly likely to

make an absolute determination of category membership for
many items, especially complex machines (Coley &
Luhmann, 2000).
Those participants who were willing to consult an expert
on artifact items in our Experiment 2 believed an expert on
function was an appropriate authority. Although this may
seem to lend support to functional theories of artifacts, both
this, and the opposing view that artifact categorizations are
unstable and context-dependent (Sloman & Malt, 2003)
make claims about the entire domain of artifacts. Such
global claims are undercut by the effect of complexity seen
here. In fact, the domain of artifacts is extremely large and
far more diverse than that of living things, a pattern that is
often not taken into account in experimental studies.
Although living things may vary widely in anatomy, they all
have the same biological building blocks, while man-made
objects combine natural materials adding layers of
complexity to meet a huge diversity of human needs – from
simple hand tools to passenger jets.
The general pattern of responding in deference
experiments provides support for the tenets of psychological
essentialism (Malt, 1990; Coley & Luhmann, 2000; Kalish,
2002). People seem to view natural kind categories as
having essences, for which they may not have direct
knowledge, but for which they clearly believe that
biological experts do. Moreover, they think such authorities
on essence are appropriate arbiters for the categorization of
hybrid creatures that are on the border between living kinds
and artifacts. Such artifactualized kinds may seem obscure
on first glance, but in fact most living things we interact
with today are not strictly natural, as we have shaped them
through selective breeding or genetic modification to suit
our needs and purposes.
The ability to understand how artifacts can be co-mingled
with natural kinds may be one of the latest to emerge in
children (Keil, Greif, & Kerner, in press), so it is not
unexpected to find some vestigial difficulty with this dual
status notion even in adults. Although it is clear that
organisms such as hunting dogs and genetically-modified
corn have been transformed for human purposes, a cognitive
conflict arises when people try to reclassify these things as
artifacts, which we are unaccustomed to considering as
living. The biological characteristics of living kinds (that
they develop, reproduce, share internal parts etc.) may be
too salient to ignore, and thus are used in categorization
judgments in preference over their less obvious functional
properties that indicate artifacthood. There are also far more
of those essence-related properties for engineered living
kinds than there are functional properties.
This intuitive tendency to categorize and defer based on
essences has strong implications for the current debate over
genetically modified organisms. With current science and
technology blurring the lines between natural kinds and
artifacts, people’s tendency to defer to geneticists and
biologists may lead them to ignore the practical and
functional consequences of these products. Important
questions remain concerning how people reason about these

1979

novel organism-artifacts and how this reasoning affects
political and scientific policy.

Acknowledgments
This work supported by NIH # R-37-HD023922 to F. Keil.

References
Bloom, P. (1996). Intention, history, and artifact concepts.
Cognition, 60, 1-29.
Braisby, N. (2001). Deference in categorization: evidence
for essentialism? In J. D. Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Mahweh, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Braisby, N. (2003). Deference and essentialism in the
categorization of chemical kinds. In R. Alterman & D.
Kirsh (Eds.) Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahweh, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Chaigneau, S. E., Barsalou, L. W. & Sloman, S. A. (2004).
Assessing the causal structure of function. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 153(4), 601-625
Coley, J. D., & Luhmann, C. (2000). Domain specific
relations between typicality and category membership.
Unpublished manuscript, Northeastern University.
Diesendruck, G. & Gelman, S. (1999). Domain differences
in absolute judgments of category membership: Evidence
for an essentialist account of categorization.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(2), 338-346.
Estes, Z. (2003). Domain differences in the structure of
artifactual and natural categories. Memory & Cognition,
31(2), 199-214.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.
Kalish, C. (1995). Essentialism and graded membership in
animal and artifact categories. Memory & Cognition,
23(3), 335-353.
Kalish, C. (2002). Essentialist to some degree: Beliefs about
the structure of natural kind categories. Memory &
Cognition, 30(3), 340-352.
Keil, F. (1989).
Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keil, F. C., Greif, M. L., & Kerner, R. S. (in press). A
World Apart: How concepts of the constructed world are
different in representation and in development. In S.
Laurence & E. Margolis (Eds.), Creations of the mind,
Oxford University Press.
Malt, B. C. (1990). Features and beliefs in the mental
representation of categories. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 289-315.
McGraw, K. O., Tew, M. D., & Williams, J. E. (2000). The
integrity of web-delivered experiments: can you trust the
data? Psychological Science, 11, 502-506.
Putnam, H. (Ed.) (1975). The meaning of ‘meaning’. In
Mind, language, and reality: Philosophical papers, Vol.
2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sloman, S. A. & Malt, B. C. (2003). Artifacts are not
ascribed essences, nor are they treated as belonging to
kinds. Language and Cognitive Processes, 18, 563-582.

