UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Differential Cue Salience, Blocking and Learned Inattention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5h38z6sf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Heckler, Andrew F.
Kaminski, Jennifer A.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Differential Cue Salience, Blocking and Learned Inattention
Andrew F. Heckler (heckler.6@osu.edu)
Department of Physics, Ohio State University
191 W. Woodruff Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Jennifer A. Kaminski (kaminski.16@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
210A Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

blocked cue in a new learning situation. These results
cannot be explained by the Rescorla-Wagner model or its
other variations (e.g., Van Hamme & Wasserman, 1994),
since they predict that nothing (or very little) was learned
about the blocked cue. To accommodate these findings of
attenuation of subsequent learning, a second explanation
of blocking was developed (Sutherland & Mackintosh,
1971; Kruschke & Blair, 2000). In short, this explanation
involves the modeling of attentional shifts and learned
attention or inattention to specific cues. In this model, the
cue B is blocked not because it accrues no associative
strength, rather it was blocked because it was learned to
be ignored. Later, when trying to associate B with another
outcome, the learner has difficulty because B was
previously learned to be ignored (rather than not learned
at all). Thus learned inattention naturally explains both
classical blocking results and subsequent attenuation of
learning.
In the above-mentioned discussion of blocking, it was
noticed early on that the relative salience of the cues play
significant role in the magnitude of blocking in rats and
pigeons (Kamin, 1969; Hall et al., 1977). However, the
vast majority of the studies above involve blocking with
cue of approximate equal salience, and to our knowledge
there are no published studies of the effect of differential
cue salience on blocking in humans. The issue of
differential salience in blocking is important for two
reasons. The first is practical: cues often vary
significantly in salience in real world situations thus
understanding the any possible effects of differential cue
salience is important for applications such as classroom
learning. Second, the issue of blocking and differential
cue salience is especially germane when considering the
paradigm that blocking is due to attentional shifts and
learned inattention. More specifically, if blocking is one
way to shift attention to favor one cue over another, and
differential salience is another mechanism that also shifts
attention, then one would expect an interaction between
blocking and differential salience. For example, if cue B
is blocked because the subject has learned to not attend to
it and to attend to another predictive cue A, then if the

Abstract
A classic blocking design is modified by varying the
relative salience of the blocked and the blocking cue. It is
found that, in accordance with the learned inattention
theory of blocking, the amount of blocking is diminished
when the blocked cue is more salient than the blocking cue.
In addition, when studying the patterns of answers about
the control cues, it is found that low salience cues were
preferred over high salience cues in the case when the
blocking cue was also of low salience. This novel result
may be explained by the simultaneous blocking of two
separate dimensional values of the blocked cue, and this
results in category blocking.

Introduction
When two cues are simultaneously paired with an
outcome, the learned associative strengths of each cue
with the outcome often differ. An excellent example of
this is the phenomenon known as blocking. In blocking,
cues A and B are paired with an outcome, and the
association of cue B with the same outcome is
significantly weakened if it is also learned that A alone is
associated with the outcome. For the last several decades
the phenomenon of blocking has played a major role in
many studies of associative learning. It is a robust
phenomenon first observed in rats (Kamin, 1969) and
since then has been observed in a variety of situations and
species, including humans (e.g., Mackintosh & Turner,
1971; Kruschke & Blair, 2000; Crookes & Moran, 2003;
Arcediano, Escobar & Miller, 2004).
There are two principle theories explaining the
phenomenon of blocking. One explanation uses the
influential Rescorla-Wagner model which claims that the
blocked cue B is only weakly associated with the outcome
because it is extraneous information: it does not add to the
accuracy of predicting the outcome, since A has already
been learned to be a perfect predictor (Rescorla &
Wagner, 1972). Thus in this model B is simply not
learned. However, Mackintosh and Turner (1971) found
in rats and Kruschke and Blaire (2000) found in humans
that there is a subsequent attenuation of learning of the
1476

salient or non-salient. The salient cues were colored (e.g.,
red, blue, green) and somewhat larger than the non-salient
cues which were all light gray. To demonstrate that the
colorful cues were indeed more salient than the grey cues,
nine participants (separate from the those in experiment 1)
were shown blank grids and asked to indicate as quickly
as possible whether or not they saw a shape on the grid
(i.e. cue on the chip). They saw 35 chips (14 highly
salient shapes, 14 less salient shapes, and 7 with no
shape). The response time was lower for the highly
salient shapes than for less salient shapes, independent
samples t-test t(16)= 2.76, p<.014.

salience of B is increased relative to A, the more attention
will inherently be paid to it and the more difficult to it
may be to block. Likewise, if the salience of A is increase
relative to B, then one would expect an enhancement of
the blocking effect. Therefore, in this study we will
examine the effect of differential cue salience on blocking
in humans.
When adding in differential cue salience to blocking,
there is another issue to consider which may help shed
light on the extent to which attentional shifting plays a
role in learning. This stems from the fact that when
adding salience, one is necessarily adding another
variable dimension to the stimulus. With two perceptual
dimensions to be learned, in certain conditions, there may
arise the possibility that both dimensions will be blocked,
either in tandem or separately. Significantly, in this
experiment, the added dimensional value can be constant
across stimuli, thus creating categories, such as the
category “colorful”. In this study we find evidence that
multiple dimensions can be blocked, including the
blocking of categories, and this adds a new challenge to
an explanation of blocking using the Rescorla-Wagner
model or the attentional shifting model.

Table 1. Design of Experiment
Phase

A salient

Condition
AB salient

B salient

Training
Phase 1
Training
Phase 2

A*→1
G*→2
A*B→1
C*D→3
E*F→4
e.g. B, D,
BD

A*→1
G*→2
A*B*→1
C*D*→3
E*F*→4
e.g. B*,
D*, B*D*

A→1
G→2
AB*→1
CD*→3
EF*→4
e.g. B*,
D*, B*D*

Test for
blocking

Experiment

Inverse
1,2,3,4
1,2,3,4
1,2,3,4
questions
Note: Letters denote cue (computer chip component) and
numbers denote outcome (appliance). An asterisk (e.g.
A*) denotes a high salience cue.

Method
Experiment 1, design shown in Table 1, follows a typical
blocking design. However the actual learning task
involves the learning of the association of shapes and
colors with an outcome, in contrast to many such
experiments which involve the association of words
(symptoms) with an outcome (disease). In particular, in
Experiment 1, participants were told that they were
learning about an appliance factory and they learned to
associate various cues (diagrams of computer chip
components that have different shapes and/or colors) with
specific outcomes (appliances). On each trial, they were
presented with a diagram representation of a computer
chip with either one or two “components” on it, placed
randomly in one of four positions on the chip. The
components were simple geometric shapes such as a
triangle or an oval. The participants were told that the
presented chip was installed inside a particular appliance
(represented as a picture) to help it operate, and they had
to answer which component (or combination of
components) went with each appliance. After each trial,
they were given feedback providing the correct answer.
Participants were randomly placed in one of six
conditions: 3 salience conditions × 2 shape conditions.
The experiment aims to study the effect of perceptual
salience on blocking, and the shape conditions, which are
two random permutations of the particular shapes with the
appliances, where added to counterbalance any effects of
particular shapes. The cues (computer chip components)
were geometric shapes placed on a simple diagram
representing a circuit board. The cues were classified as

The three salience conditions are shown in Table 1. In
the “A salient” condition the A cue is more salient that the
blocked cue B. In the “AB salient” condition, both cues
were of equivalent (high) salience, and in the “B salient”
condition, the blocked cue B was more salient than cue A.
In each condition, the cue A is first associated alone with
a particular outcome (e.g. blender), then in phase two both
cues A and B are associated with the same outcome. In
addition to A and B, other control cues such as C and D
are associated with another outcome in phase two, with no
training on these cues in the first phase. The learned
inattention theory predicts that since cue A was at first
solely associated with the blender, when both A and B are
subsequently associated with the blender, the learner will
learn to not attend to B and only attend to cue A, since
knowing B does not reduce the error rate in predicting the
outcome. However, cues C and D were learned only
simultaneously, and both will be learned equally well (at
least in the same salience condition). During the test
phase, two kinds of questions are used to test for
blocking: single-cue prompts and two-cue prompts. In
each case, the prompt is novel. For example, the learners
are shown a chip with component B (cue B) only and are
asked to chose in which appliance it would be installed.
Likewise they are also asked about a chip with both
components B and D. The standard blocking results
1477

have equal salience. In this case, the learners scored lower
(chose the previously associated appliance less) with the
blocked cue than with the control cue [paired t-test
t(48)=5.73, p<0.001], and an effect size of 0.82. However,
in the B-salient condition, while the blocked cue score is
lower than the control cue score, [paired t-test t(50)=2.2,
p=0.032], the difference, and thus the amount of blocking
is significantly reduced with an effect size of 0.31.
Overall, the scores on the blocked cue were dependent on
the condition, [F(2,149)=23.6, p<0.001].
In the case of the two-cue questions (Table 2), there are
two separate measures of blocking, The results are much
the same as the single-cue questions, only there is
stronger evidence that the blocking was greatly
suppressed or eliminated in the B-salient condition. When
the two-cue test stimuli include the blocked cue and a
similar-salience cue (e.g. B*D*), the standard blocking
result is replicated in the AB-salient condition: the
learners chose the outcome associated with the control
cue over the outcome associated with the blocked cue
35.7% to 4.1% [χ2(df=1, N=98)/2=12.32, p<0.001],
where, as Kruschke and Blair (2000) have done, the χ2
value is divided by 2, as a conservative estimate of the of
the possible lack of independence between the two
repetitions of the questions (Wickens, 1989). However, in
the B-salient condition, there was no significant
preference between the blocked and control cue, with the
respective percentages of 14.9% and 10.9% [χ2(df=1,
N=100)/2= 0.31, n.s.], thus the two-cue questions indicate
that the blocking was greatly suppressed in the B salient
condition, and this suppression is larger than for the onecue questions.

predict that at least for the equal salience condition, the
learner will not choose the previously associated outcome
as much for B as for D. Likewise, when both cues are
presented together, the learner will disregard B and
choose the outcome associated with D. Both of these
results indicate blocking occurred, but since they may
probe different learning or reasoning mechanisms, both
were included to determine the consistency and
robustness of the results. In the differential salience
conditions, the learned in attention theory predicts that
blocking will be enhanced when A is more salient and
blocking will be reduced or eliminated when B is more
salient.
Participants 156 undergraduate students (92 females and
64 males) from Ohio State University participated in the
experiment and received partial credit for an introductory
psychology course. Fifty two students were assigned to
each of three salience conditions that specified which cues
were salient.

Average Score (out of 5)

Materials and Design Table 1 shows the abstract design.
Training Phase 1 had 20 blocks of 2 trials (one for each
cue), Training Phase 2 had 20 blocks of three trials. The
first testing phase had one block of six trials with one-cue
questions (3 B and 3 D), and 2 blocks of nine trials of
both one and two-cue questions. Each trial consisted of
one multiple choice question. Participants were shown a
computer chip with a combination of components (cues)
and asked which of six appliances (outcomes) uses the
chip. The training phases included corrective feedback,
and the testing phases did not. In the final testing phase,
one block of four “inverse” questions were presented,
asking participants to match a particular outcome
(appliance) with a choice of cues. This is a total of 128
trials.
Procedure All training and testing was presented to
individual participants on a computer screen in a quiet
room. They proceeded through training and testing at
their own pace; and their responses were recorded.

Results and Discussion

5
4

Blocked Cue
Control Cue

3
2
1
0
A-salient

The participants successfully learned during the training
sessions, with an average score of 87% correct in Phases
1 and 2 (chance was 16%). This excludes 6 participants
who scored 2 standard deviations below average on at
least three of the training cue types. A one-way ANOVA
revealed that the scores on the training phases were
independent of condition (ps>0.2).
The rich results of the testing phase provide a
measurement of blocking in three different ways. In the
first and most straightforward way, Figure 1 displays the
response percentages for the relevant single-cue
questions. (Full details on response percentages in the
testing phase are in Table 2.) The standard blocking result
is replicated in the AB-salient condition when both cues

AB-salient

B-salient

Condition

Figure 1. Total Average Scores for B and D single cue
questions. The AB-salient condition shows significant
blocking, while A-salient and B-salient do not. Error bars
represent standard error of mean.
Examination of table 2 reveals similar results for the
two cue question E*B* vs. E*D* in the AB-salience
condition, with a significant preference for choosing the
outcome associated with D* over B* [paired t-test
t(48)=3.8, p<0.001], indicating blocking. Furthermore
comparing EB* vs, ED*, there was a marginal but no
significant preference for the outcome associated with the
1478

condition, when all of the cues have equal salience, there
is a no significant preference for the outcome associated
with D over E (32.7% to 18.4%) [χ2(1)/2=1.96, p=0.16],
which is to be expected, since D and E have equal
salience. In the B-salient condition, the cue E is less
salient than cue D, so one might expect an overwhelming
preference for cue D, analogous to the A-Salient
condition in which there was a preference for cue E when
it was more salient than D. However, in the B-salient
condition, the there was no significant preference for
either the outcome associated with the low salience cue E
or the outcome associated with the higher salience cue D
(52.9% to 33.7% respectively) [χ2(1)/2=1.84, p=0.17]—if
anything there was a slight (but insignificant) preference
for the low salience cue. A similar pattern occurred in the
responses to “inverse” questions, when the learners were
asked to choose which cue goes with a specific outcome.
When asked which cue went with appliance 3, the
participants in the A-salient condition preferred the high
salient (C*) over the low salient cue (D) (94.2 to 0%); in
the AB-salient they had no preference for the equal
salience cues (48.1% to 42.3%) [χ2(1)=0.09, p=0.76], and
a slight but insignificant preference for the low salient cue
(C) over the high salient cue (D*) (57.7% to 40.4%))
[χ2(1)=1.28, p=0.26].

similar-salience control cue over the blocked cue [paired
t-test t(50)=1.7, p=0.1].
The results for the A-salient condition in Figure 1 show
that the blocked cue B had very low scores. The average
one-cue score of 17.1% of the blocked cue is at chance
(16%), and it lower than either of the blocked cue scores
in the other conditions [post-hoc Tukey test, ps<0.001] .
Therefore either B was either completely blocked or
somehow not noticed and not learned. The control cue D,
which also had low salience compared to the cue it was
paired with in the training phase, had virtually identical
results as the blocked cue B in the A-salient condition.
Therefore D was also either somehow completely blocked
or somehow not learned. This results suggests that the
participants may have learned to ignore all low salience
(grey) cues in this condition, perhaps due to
overshadowing or some kind of categorical blocking, as is
discussed in the final section..
Table 2 reveals an unexpected pattern in responses to
the two cues question involving the control cues D and E
(or equivalently C and F), which also indicates that
something other than overshadowing, and perhaps
categorical blocking is taking place. In the A-salient
condition, when prompted with cues ED, the learners
overwhelmingly choose the outcome associated with E
over D (83.7% to 2.9%). This is consistent with the
single-cue questions, show that D was either completely
overshadowed or somehow blocked. In the AB-salient

Table 2. Percentage choice response. Letters A-E denote cues (computer chip components) and numbers 1-6 denote chosen
outcomes (appliances) during the testing phase. The “correct” choices given in training are shown in Table 1. Data in bold
font are discussed in the text.

Condition
A-Salient

AB-Salient

B-Salient

Cue
B
D
A*
E*
BD
E*B
E*D
B*
D*
A*
E*
B*D*
E*B*
E*D*
B*
D*
A
E
B*D*
EB*
ED*

Blank
0.4
1.2
1.9
0.0
1.9
0.0
0.0
0.8
1.2
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.4
0.4
0.0
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0

1
17.1
9.2
89.4
3.8
8.7
3.8
3.8
46.5
6.2
88.5
4.8
4.1
10.6
1.0
64.0
2.3
88.5
7.7
10.9
28.8
1.0

2
9.7
15.4
3.8
1.0
9.6
1.9
2.9
5.4
74.6
1.0
8.7
35.7
7.7
32.7
3.9
71.2
1.0
5.8
14.9
1.0
33.7

1479

Outcome
3
4
14.0 13.2
6.5
9.6
2.9
1.9
1.9 89.4
11.5 10.6
7.7 80.8
2.9 83.7
7.7 15.8
1.2
3.8
3.8
3.8
4.8 61.5
1.9
1.9
5.8 30.8
3.3 18.4
3.1
3.5
0.8
4.6
5.8
1.9
5.8 73.1
2.9
0.0
1.0 52.9
1.0 52.9

5
12.4
21.5
0.0
1.0
11.5
3.8
0.0
8.5
4.6
0.0
4.8
9.6
10.6
7.1
5.0
2.7
0.0
1.9
5.8
2.9
1.0

6 (don't know)
33.3
36.5
0.0
2.9
46.2
1.9
6.7
15.4
8.5
1.9
14.4
46.2
33.7
36.5
20.2
18.1
2.9
5.8
65.4
13.5
10.6

overshadowing (Edgell et al., 1992; Edgell et al., 1996;
Krushke & Johansen, 1999). This is not at odds with our
conclusion that this experiment supports the attentional
theory of blocking, as overshadowing has also been
explained in terms of attentional shifting (Krushke &
Johansen, 1999). Nonetheless, when comparing choice
percentages for various cues (which all are 100%
predictive), it is to be expected that the more salient cue
will be favored. Overshadowing alone could explain the
results of the A-salient condition, where the high salient
cues are strongly preferred and the low salient cues are at
or below chance. However there is reason to believe that
it may be only partially responsible for the signal.
Evidence for this comes the choice patterns for control
cues on the two-cue questions. In contrast to the A-salient
condition, in the B-salient condition there was certainly
not a strong preference for the salient cue, rather if
anything a slight preference for the low salient control
cue, even though the type and number of training trials for
these control cues was the same for both conditions. This
cannot be explained by overshadowing, but the results of
both conditions can be understood by one explanation,
which we will call “category blocking”. Notice that each
cue has two feature dimensions: shape and color. More
specifically, we can categorize the colors into two
categories: “colored” or “grey”. If we denote cue A as
colored shape one, or “Colored(s1)” and B as “grey shape
two” as Grey(s2), etc, then the relevant training for the
condition can be abbreviated as in Table 3.

General Discussion
The results of this experiment provides strong evidence
that differential cue salience significantly effects
blocking. When initially learned cue A and the blocked
cue B have similar salience, the classic blocking results
were replicated. When the initially learned cue was more
salient that the blocked cue (the A-salient condition)
blocking was enhanced. Most importantly, in the Bsalient condition when the blocked cue B was more
salient than the initially learned cue A, blocking was
significantly reduced or eliminated. Other researchers
such as Hall et al. (1977) and Arcediano, Escobar, and
Miller (2004) have found this same kind of attenuation of
blocking in rats and pigeons, and this study is an
extension of the results to humans.
These results are consistent with the model of
attentional shifting and learned inattention as an
explanation of blocking. In this model of error reduction,
the learner shifts attention away from the blocked cue B
in order to devote more attentional resources, which are
limited, to the cue A, which is always predictive (whereas
B is sometimes absent, thus not useful). The experiment
in this study supports the idea that attention may also be
shifted by differential cue salience. When cue B is more
salient than cue A, more attention is shifted to B, thus
blocking is attenuated. In the opposite case when A is
more salient than B, even more attention is shifted to A,
besides that due to blocking and blocking is enhanced.
In modeling attentional shifting in learning, Kruschke
(2001) has included cue salience as a parameter in his
EXIT model, and has successfully predicted classic
blocking results with equal cue salience. However, we
know of no experiments that have tested this model.
Nonetheless, a similar effect of cue salience on
associative learning was studied by Bohil, Markman, and
Maddox (2005), where they found that differential cue
salience can interact with and even mimic the inverse
base rate effect in categorization tasks. They propose that
their results support models of attentional shifting and that
“any stimulus element that can cause attention to shift
appropriately can lead to a learning effect analogous to
the inverse base rate effect”. The results of our
experiment are consistent with Bohil et al. (2005) in that
differential cue salience does effect a specific associative
learning phenomenon. It is worth noting that the cues they
used were labels (disease symptoms), and the differences
in feature salience were conceptual (sore muscles vs.
paralysis). This is in contrast to our experiment in which
the cues are perceptual (colored shapes) and the
difference in salience is also perceptual (colored and large
vs. grey and small).
It is important to consider that the attenuation or
enhancement of blocking may be at least partially due to a
known salience effect that is separate from blocking. It is
known that when two cues are presented, the more salient
one will be utilized more— this phenomenon is known as

Table 3. Blocking model of the category Colored or Grey.
sn denote specific cue shapes within the category.
A-Salient Condition:
Colored(s1) → 1
Colored(s1), Grey(s2)→ 1
Colored(s3), Grey(s4)→ 2
Colored(s5), Grey(s6)→ 3

B-Salient Condition:
Grey(s1) → 1
Grey(s1), Colored(s2)→ 1
Grey(s3), Colored(s4)→ 2
Grey(s5), Colored(s6)→ 3

Note that, ignoring the shapes sn for the moment, in the
A-salient condition, the category “grey” should be
blocked and in the B-salient condition “colored” should
be blocked. Therefore, we propose that since the stimuli
have two feature dimensions, both dimensions are
experiencing blocking effects. In this case one of the
dimensions fits within a category, namely Colored or
Grey, thus for this dimension the whole category may be
blocked. The choice percentages are consistent with this
explanation. For example, in the A-salient condition, both
s2 (ie. cue B) and Grey are blocked. This shows up in both
the choice percentages and scores of B, which are very
low. In effect, the cue B has four effects working against
it: the cue is “double blocked” (shape and grey are
blocked), the blocking is enhanced because of a
difference in salience, and there is overshadowing. In the
case of the low-salience control cue s4 (cue D), which is
Grey, one would expect it to be both “category blocked”

1480

performance deficit? Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
11(6), 1105-1110.
Bohil, C. J., Markman A. B., & Maddox, W. T. (2005). A
feature-salience analogue of the inverse base-rate
effect. Korean Journal of Thinking and Problem
Solving, in press.
Crookes, A. E., & Moran, P. M. (2003). An investigation
into age and gender differences in human Kamin
blocking, using a computerized task. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 24(1), 461-477.
Edgell, S. E., Bright R. D., Ng P. C., Noonan T. K., &
Ford L. A. (1992). The effects of representation on the
processing of probabilistic information. In B. Burns
(Ed.), Precepts, Concepts and Categories. New York:
Elsevier Science.
Edgell, S. E., Castellan, N. J., Roe, R. M., Barnes, J. M.,
Ng P. C., Bright R. D., & Ford L. A. (1996). Irrelevant
information in probabilistic categorization. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition 22), 1463-1481.
Hall, G., Mackintosh, N. J., Goodall, G., & Dal Martello,
M. (1977). Loss of control by a less valid or less salient
stimulus compounded with a better predictor of
reinforcement. Learning and Motivation, 8, 145-158.
Kamin L. J. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention, and
conditioning. In B.A Campbell & R. M. Church (Eds.),
Punishment. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Kruschke, J. K., (2001) The inverse base rate effect is not
explained by eliminative inference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and
Cognition 27, 1385-1400.
Krushke J. K., & Johansen, M. K. (1999). A model of
probabilistic category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition 25 (5),
1083-1119.
Kruschke, J. K., & Blair, N. J. (2000). Blocking and
backward blocking involve learned inattention.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7 (4), 636-645.
Mackintosh, N. J., & Turner, C. (1971). Blocking as a
function of novelty of CS and predictability of UCS.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 23,
359-356.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R., (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning: Variation in the effectiveness
of reinforcement and non-reinforcement. In A. H. Black
& W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning: II.
Current research and theory. New York: AppletonCentruy-Crofts.
Sutherland, N. S., & Mackintosh, N. J., (1971).
Mechanisms of Animal Discrimination Learning. New
York: Academic Press.
Van Hamme, L. J., & Wasserman E. A. (1994). Cue
competition and causality judgments: the role of
nonpresentation of compound stimulus events.
Learning and Motivation 25, 127-151.
Wickens, T. D. (1989). Multiway Contingency Tables
Analysis
for the Social Sciences, Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

(Grey is blocked) and overshadowed, and this is
consistent with the very low scores and choice
percentages of D compared to the colored cue s5 (cue E).
Since all of these effects work to attenuate the choice
percentages, it is difficult to know which is dominant.
The effect is more dramatic in the B-salient condition.
In this case s2 (cue B) and colored shapes are blocked.
However, the blocked dimension of color is highly
salient, so its blocking should be diminished and it would
also tend to overshadow non-salient cues, thus there are
competing factors to decrease the blocking of B, which is
observed in the choice and score data. The strong signal
of category blocking comes from the two-cue choice
scores of control cues s5(cue E) and s4(cue D). Normally,
one would not expect a different signal than from Asalient condition, since the training of the control cues is
identical in both conditions and ostensibly independent of
the first training phase. If anything overshadowing
predicts that there should always be a preference for the
more salient cue when prompted with the control cues
(Edgell et al, 1992). This is overwhelmingly true in the Asalient condition, but not true in the B-salient condition.
This might be explained by the fact that in the B-salient
condition, the category Colored is blocked, thus there
would be a preference for Grey, or the low salient cue,
and this blocking of the high salient category overcomes
the opposite effect of overshadowing.
As mentioned earlier, there is an inherent confound in
the design: when varying relative salience, one
necessarily varies the distinguishability of the stimuli
(hence varying two dimensions simultaneously). This
introduces a possible confound for our conclusions about
category blocking since overshadowing and blocking both
affect associative strengths. We have argued that these
two effects behave differently in different conditions,
allowing us to isolate their effects. Nonetheless, this
suggests another design: although varying the differential
salience necessarily implies varying the distinguishability
of the cues, it is possible to vary the distinguishability
without varying the differential salience. Thus, while
this experiment provides evidence for the novel result that
more than one dimension can be blocked at a time and
that this can result in category blocking, in order to
confirm this result it would be worthwhile to design an
experiment which more carefully controls each dimension
to explicitly test for category blocking and remove the
confound of salience.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the Institute of
Educational Sciences of the U.S. Department of
Education (#R305H050125) to Andrew F. Heckler and
Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Arcediano, F., Escobar, M., & Miller M. M. (2004). Is
stimulus competition an acquisition deficit of a
1481

