UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dissociating Word Reading and Lexical Decision in Neglect Dyslexia: A Connectionist
Account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5k02z7tt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Monaghan, Padraic
Pagliuca, Giovanni

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dissociating Word Reading and Lexical Decision in Neglect Dyslexia:
A Connectionist Account
Giovanni Pagliuca (gp517@york.ac.uk)
Padraic Monaghan (pjm21@york.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of York
York, YO10 5DD, UK

Abstract
Neglect dyslexia is a reading impairment acquired as a
consequence of brain injury characterized by failures to read
verbal material on the left side of a text or at the beginning of
words. Neglect dyslexia patients make many errors when
naming isolated words, whereas they perform nearly normally
when required to make a lexical decision judgment. This
behavior has been interpreted in terms of a dual route model
where a preserved lexical route is used to perform the lexical
decision task, and an impaired non-lexical phonological route
is used for naming. We trained a connectionist model to read
single words and then lesioned it in order to simulate neglect
dyslexia. We show that the damage to the model contributes
to the same naming/lexical decision dissociation in a model
with a single route for reading.

Introduction
Neglect dyslexia is a reading impairment usually associated
with right brain damage and unilateral visuospatial neglect.
Patients with neglect dyslexia may fail to read verbal
material on the left side of an open book, or the beginning
words of a line of text, or more often the beginning letters of
a single word (Bisiach & Vallar, 1988; Hillis & Caramazza,
1995).
Neglect dyslexia has been traditionally described
according to a general framework of word representation
proposed by Caramazza and Hillis (1990). In this model the
process of word recognition has been hypothesized to be
hierarchically organized through three stages (referred to as
"retinocentric", "stimulus-centered" and "word-centered"),
and neglect dyslexia has been shown to arise independently
at each of these levels with different patterns of reading
errors. With reference to the retinocentric level of
representation, neglect dyslexia has been interpreted as an
impairment of selective attention to the visual hemifield
contralateral to the lesion in reference to a spatial coordinate
system centred on the eye fixation point. Damage at this
level results in the classic failure to correctly report the
initial letters of a centrally presented word.
In the last few years a mounting body of evidence has
suggested that partial information from the contralesional
side is accessible at many levels of processing in these
patients. Vallar, Guariglia, Nico, & Tabossi (1996)
documented a patient with severe neglect dyslexia who was
impaired when asked to read aloud compound words such as
girasole (sunflower), made up of two words: gira (turn) and
sole (sun), but was able to produce appropriate associations
to the compound as a whole (e.g. rose). This relative sparing

of the associative task suggests that information from the
neglected side of the space is still accessible to the lexical
processing system to some degree. Relatedly, some patients
with mild neglect dyslexia impairments make less errors in
reading words than nonwords (Ladavas, Shallice, & Zanella,
1997a). This lexical effect also suggests that the lexical
representation of a word might be partially accessed.
Further evidence for preserved processing of some aspect
of lexical processing from the contralesional portion of the
word comes from a series of investigations by Ladavas,
Umilta’ and Mapelli (1997b). The authors found that Italian
patients who could not read words or nonwords aloud were
nevertheless able to perform correctly on a lexical decision
task and a semantic categorization task (living-nonliving)1.
This dissociation was found for the same stimuli.
Furthermore, Arduino, Burani and Vallar (2003) showed
that, for neglect patients, lexical decision was influenced by
the same morpho-lexical variables that influence lexical
decision in control participants. The authors asked 6 Italian
neglect dyslexic patients to perform a reading task on a list
of words and nonwords and then tested them on the same
stimuli on a lexical decision task. Patients made fewer errors
in lexical decision for a written stimulus than in reading the
word aloud. Arduino et al. (2003) also showed that lexical
decision was influenced by the frequency of the word (high
frequency words more likely to be accepted as lexical
entries than low frequency words) and by the presence of a
high frequency neighbor for the nonwords (a nonword with
a high frequency neighbor was less likely to be rejected).
Neglect dyslexia therefore provides insight into the
interaction and relative sparing of levels of lexical
processing in the brain. In the next section we review
models of reading that have been posited to account for the
fine-grained behavioral data in neglect dyslexics.

Neglect dyslexia and the Reading System
The dissociation between reading and lexical decision has
been interpreted by Ladavas et al. (1997a, 1997b) in terms
of an interaction between the attentional system and the two
main routes proposed by the dual route model of reading
(Coltheart, 1978; Coltheart, Rastle, Perry, Langdon, &
Ziegler, 2001). According to this theory, there are two
different procedures for producing a phonological code and

1910

1

Patient data comes from untimed responses. Performance under
such circumstances is almost 100% correct for reading and lexical
decision in matched controls.

the activities of the patterns generated over two different
orthographic layers, O1 and O2, corresponding to the
orthographic input and to feedback from an episodic
memory layer (EM), respectively. In this simulation, it was
demonstrated that the lexical decision task does not require
access to individualized word representations, because the
echo from the EM to the O2 resulted from the contribution
of a number of different word traces.
In this paper we describe a set of simulations using a
feedforward neural network that learns to map orthographic
onto phonological representations. We test the extent to
which a simple model of reading can be extended to
simulate neglect dyslexia performance in reading and show
a dissociation between reading and lexical decision tasks.
Semantics is not implemented in the model and we
investigate the extent to which treating lexical decision as a
process on the output of phonological processing can
resemble the behavioral data. From a theoretical
perspective, the results test whether a connectionist model
implementing a single mechanism (and not two independent
routes) and with no explicit word-level representation or
semantic support can offer a more parsimonious
interpretation of the neglect dyslexia dissociation than the
dual route account.

so converting a printed word into speech: a lexical route,
which involves accessing a stored lexical representation of
the word, and a nonlexical route, which involves assembling
a pronunciation by the application of grapheme-phoneme
correspondence rules. Patients with neglect dyslexia might
have a degraded visual representation of the letter string
which did not support correct reading through the nonlexical
route, a pathway that requires the scanning from left to right
of all the letters in a word, but it might still be strong
enough to activate the lexical route to perform a lexical
decision and identify the word as a whole single unit.
There are two main problems with this interpretation.
First, if the lexical route is spared, why do neglect dyslexic
patients fail to use this route to read aloud? Second, why is
only the nonlexical route affected by the attentional
disturbance and not also the lexical route?
Ladavas at al. (1997a) proposed that the lexical route
leads to a broadening of the attentional focus that
encompasses the single letters, whereas the nonlexical route
focuses on the single units (letters), the latter resulting in
being more affected by the attentional disruption.
Nevertheless, Arduino, Burani and Vallar (2002) reported
morpho-lexical effects in the reading task for mild neglect
patients, suggesting that when the attentional disruption is
less severe patients might still benefit from lexical
information in reading aloud as well as in lexical decision.
Another central issue for this debate is the nature of the
reading process itself. Connectionist approaches to reading
(e.g., Plaut, Seidenberg, McClelland & Patterson, 1996;
Seidenberg and McClelland, 1989) have challenged the
claim of the existence of two independent routes used to
read developing models that could successfully pronounce
monosyllabic words (regular and irregular) by use of a
single mechanism, without the application of any
conversion rule or “look up” procedure. Lexical knowledge
in these models develops from general learning principles
applied to the mappings among distributed representations
of orthographic inputs and phonological outputs, without
recourse to word-specific representations.
Lexical decision has also been explored in models
employing distributed representations. Plaut (1997) showed
that a feedforward network that maps orthography to
semantics with a direct pathway and also via phonological
representations can discriminate between words and
nonwords on a measure of familiarity defined over
semantics, with no need to consult any lexicon as suggested
by the dual route model (Coltheart et al., 2001).
Lexical decision can also be performed at the
phonological or at the orthographic level rather than in
terms of processing semantic representations (Waters &
Seidenberg, 1985). Connectionist models have also proven
effective in distinguishing words from nonwords using only
orthographic and phonological representations. The original
PDP model developed by Seidenberg and McClelland
(1989) could discriminate words from nonwords at the
orthographic level, using the orthographic error score as a
discriminator.
In another type of architecture, Ans,
Carbonnel and Valdois (1998) developed a connectionist
model which incorporated an orthographic checking
procedure and could perform lexical decision by comparing

Simulating neglect dyslexia
Method

1911

Architecture The network is comprised of an orthographic
layer with 208 units, a hidden layer with 100 units, and a
phonological layer with 88 units. The orthographic units
were fully connected to the hidden units, which in turn were
fully connected to the phonological output units. All the
connections were monodirectional. The orthographic
representations for words were slot based, with one of 26
units active in each slot for each letter. There were 8 letter
slots. Words were inputted to the model with the first vowel
of the word in the fourth letter slot. So, the word “help” was
inputted as “- - h e l p - -”, where “-” indicates an empty
slot.
At the output layer, there were eight phoneme slots for
each word. Three representing the onset, two for the
nucleus, and three for the coda of each word, and so “help”
was represented at the output as “- - h - l p -”. This kind of
representation has the advantage of capturing the fact that
different phonemes in different positions sometimes differ
phonetically (Harm & Seidenberg, 1999). Each phoneme
was represented in terms of 11 phonemic features, as
employed by Harm and Seidenberg (1999). The units were
standard sigmoidal units with real-valued output ranging
between 0 and 1 for the input and hidden layer, and –1 and 1
for the output layer.
Training and testing As a training set for the model, we
selected 2153 monosyllabic words from the CELEX English
database (Baayen, Pipenbrock, & Gulikers, 1995), a
dictionary based on a corpus of 17.7 million words. We
selected words with frequency greater than 68 per million in
the database. Each word was 1 to 8 letters long and was
assigned a log-transformed frequency according to its

frequency in the CELEX database (see Plaut et al., 1996, for
a discussion of log frequency compression). Words with
more than three phonemes in the coda were omitted from
the input set. The model was trained using the
backpropagation learning algorithm (Rumelhart, Hinton &
Williams, 1986), with the weight of the connections
initialized to small random values (mean 0, variance 0.5)
and learning rate M=0.01.
In addition to the word set, two sets of nonwords were
used for testing, making a total of 205 nonwords. The first
set was Glushko’s (1979) nonwords derived from regular
and irregular words; the second set consisted of 119
nonwords created by taking existing words from the training
corpus and replacing the first letter.
Words were selected randomly according to their
frequency. We stopped training after one million words had
been presented. For testing, we assessed the model’s
performance for a reading task and a lexical decision task on
all words in the training set, and for the nonwords.
For the reading task, the model’s production for each
phoneme slot at the output was compared to all the possible
phonemes in the training set, and to the empty phoneme
slot. For word presentations, if the model’s performance
matched that of the target phoneme representation for the
presented word, then the model was judged to have read the
word correctly. For the nonwords, more than one
pronunciation is possible for some words (e.g., bint can be
read to rhyme with mint or with pint). Accordingly, we used
the criterion of Harm and Seidenberg (1999) where the
nonword is judged to have been read correctly if the rime
(the int in the above examples) was consistent with at least
one of the rimes in the corpus of words (Harm &
Seidenberg, 1999).
For the lexical decision task we used a measure of
familiarity assessed at the phonological output. The
production of the model was compared against the targets
for all the words in training set to find the one that matched
the closest. The distance between the actual output
activation and the closest word in the corpus was computed
as a measure of Euclidean distance across all the phonemes
in the word. The lower this distance value, the closer the
output was to the target. This distance measure was taken to
reflect familiarity of the system to the presented word.
The naming task and the lexical decision task can
therefore be distinguished in terms of whether the model can
correctly read each letter individually in the word or whether
the model can produce an output representation close to the
target word when considered across all phoneme positions.
Lesioning Unilateral neglect following damage to the right
hemisphere of the brain has been widely interpreted as a
selective attentional impairment to stimuli presented in the
left visual field. This general picture also applies for neglect
dyslexia. Theories of neglect have typically suggested that
each hemisphere of the brain prioritizes attention to the
contralateral visual field, with a gradient of attention
(Kinsbourne, 1993) or neuronal gradient, where more
neurons respond to stimuli in the contralateral visual field
(Monaghan & Shillcock, 2004; Pouget & Driver, 2000).

Figure 1: Neuronal gradients in the left and right
hemisphere applied to a model of orthography to
phonology.
Figure 1 shows how the neuronal gradients account applies
to the reading system. The figure indicates the orthography
of the word as visual input producing graded activations
across the word in the left and right hemispheres, which
combine to produce the phonology of the word at the
output.
In order to simulate damage to the right hemisphere of the
brain, we reduced the activation from input letter slots along
a gradient from left to right, such that the largest reduction
in activation was from the leftmost letter slots (see Figure
1). The reduction decreased monotonically from left to right
letter slots. We used two severities of lesioning. The severe
lesion was implemented by reducing the weights of the
connections to the leftmost (first) letter slot by 75%, the
connections to the second letter slot by 64%, reduction of
53% to the third letter slot, and so on across the input units.
Hence, the gradient was linear, ending with a 0% reduction
of connections to the rightmost unit. We refer to this as the
75% lesion. A milder lesion reduced connections from the
first letter slot by 50%; the second slot was reduced by 43%,
the third letter slot by 36%, and so on, to zero reduction for
the rightmost letter slot. We term this the 50% lesion.

Results
Unlesioned performance
Naming task. After 1 million patterns had been presented
the model correctly reproduced 95.4% of the words in the
corpus, which was a level comparable to the accuracy
achieved by Seidenberg and McClelland’s (1989)
feedforward model of reading. On the nonword reading,
overall the model scored 71.3% correct (73% on Glushko’s
regular nonwords, 71.1% on the irregular ones, and 69.5%
on the remaining words created from the corpus of words).
The model generalizes to novel items to the same extent as
other feedforward connectionist models of reading (Harm &
Seidenberg, 1999; Seidenberg and McClelland, 1989). In
the remainder of the analyses, we report assessments of the
model’s reading of just those words and nonwords that the
model initially read correctly.

1912

Number of Neglect Errors

1.6

1.5
1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1
1

short

medium

long

Figure 2: Mean of errors per word as a function of length in
the severe lesion model.
100

Percentage of errors

90

Reading task
Lexical decision task

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Neglect
subjects

75% lesion

50% lesion

Figure 3: Percentage of errors in the reading task and the
lexical decision task in neglect patients and the two lesioned
models. Neglect data are adapted from Ladavas et al.
(1997a). Words and nonwords are collapsed together.
Lexical decision. We performed a discriminant analysis
with word/nonword as a grouping variable and the
familiarity measure described in the previous section as a
discriminating variable. The model correctly classified
97.7% of the stimuli: 98.2% of the words and 90.3% of the
nonwords. The familiarity measure can accurately
discriminate words from nonwords, P2 (1) = 1873.88, p <
.001. Most of the few nonwords incorrectly classified as
words were phonologically similar to the words (“beed”
similar to “bead”, “dore” similar to “door”, “fite” similar to
“fight”). Overall, the model was very accurate at
discriminating words from nonwords in the lexical decision
task.
75% lesion performance
Naming task. In order to assess the extent to which the
lesioned model resembled neglect dyslexic behavior, we
examined the model’s naming performance according to the
same criteria used by Ladavas et al. (1997a). An error was
considered a neglect dyslexia error only when the rightmost
50% of the phonemes of the words and nonwords were
correctly reported in the correct position and at least one of
the leftmost phonemes in the phonological representation
was omitted, misplaced or reported in a wrong position
(e.g., drank read as “rank”, ink read as “onk”).

When the lesioned model made a reading error, it was
usually an omission or substitution of the first phoneme.
The model made errors on reading 79.2% of the words and
77.0% of the nonwords. Of these, 73.5% of the wordreading errors were classified as neglect errors, and 73.0%
of the nonword errors were neglect errors.
A further hallmark of neglect reading errors is that longer
words tend to be read less accurately than short words
(Tegnér and Levander, 1993). We tested this prediction in
the model to verify whether the severe lesioning procedure
succeeded in reproducing this feature. Words were grouped
according to their length in number of letters (short words
group: 1 to 3 letters long; medium length words group: 4 to
5 letters long; long words group: 6 to 8 letters long). The
errors for each word length group are shown in Figure 3. An
ANOVA was performed on the errors for the words in the
three length groups, and there was a significant effect of
length, F(2, 1193) = 27.2, p < .001, indicating greater rate of
errors for longer words. Thus, combined with the neglect
errors produced in reading, the model matches two of the
standard features usually found in neglect dyslexia patients.
Lexical Decision. All the words and nonwords were tested
for the familiarity measure to reflect lexical decision. This
was regardless of the type of error (neglect/non-neglect)
produced in the reading task. A discriminant analysis of
words/nonwords for the familiarity measure was performed
to assess the extent to which this measure could be used to
guide lexical decision performance. The lesioned model
classified correctly a total of 70.8% of the stimuli. 72.4% of
the words were classified correctly and 47.9% of the
nonwords, P2(1) = 32.01, p < .001. Even after lesioning, the
familiarity measure could discriminate effectively between
words and nonwords.
The percentage of neglect errors produced in reading was
then compared to the percentage of errors in the
classification task. The results are shown in the left side of
Figure 3. Errors were more numerous in the reading task
than in the lexical decision task: 29.2% errors in lexical
decision versus 73.5% errors in reading, P2(1) = 763.6, p <
.001. The model produced the behavioral dissociation
shown by neglect dyslexia patients.
A possible confound in the dissociation may be due to a
difference in task complexity, with chance level
performance of correct lexical decision being 50% and
chance level for the naming task being considerably lower.
This point was addressed by Ladavas at al. (1997b), where
they gave patients’ responses to the reading task to normal
control subjects in order to make a lexical decision. It was
assumed that, if indeed the lexical decision task was easier
than reading, then controls subjects would have guessed
correctly the status of the stimulus. This prediction was not
confirmed. Control subjects could not produce correct
responses on the basis of patients’ response. It was
concluded that guessing strategies on the patients’ part were
unlikely to be the cause of increased accuracy for lexical
decision.
50% lesion performance
Naming task. The model with a mild lesion made errors
on 40.5% of the words and 44.5% of the nonwords. Neglect

1913

errors accounted for 73.3% of the word errors and 65.6% of
the nonword errors. The length effect for the mild lesioned
model was not significant, F(2, 607), p < 1. This less severe
impairment to the strength of connection weights in the
model also resulted in reading errors reflecting those of
mildly impaired neglect dyslexic patients.
Lexical decision. We generated the familiarity measure
for all the words and nonwords that the model read correctly
before lesioning. The familiarity measure was entered into a
discriminant analysis as before. The results are shown in the
right side of Figure 3. The model correctly classified a total
of 85.6% of the stimuli: 87.8% of the words and 54.2% of
the nonwords, P2 (1) = 305.22, p < .001.
A comparison between the lexical decision performance
and the reading one revealed again that the lexical decision
task was less impaired by the lesioning than the reading
task: 14.4% errors in lexical decision vs. 34.8% errors in
reading, P2(1) = 232.4, p < .001.

Discussion
The dissociation between word reading and lexical decision
shown by neglect dyslexic patients and what it reveals about
the reading system has been the topic of this computational
investigation. Patients with neglect dyslexia perform very
poorly while reading words but show an almost preserved
performance when making a lexical decision on the same
stimuli. This dissociation has been traditionally interpreted
in terms of the dual route model of reading as resulting from
the interaction between the impaired attentional mechanism
and the routes used to read a string of letters (Ladavas et al.,
1997a, 1997b). According to Ladavas et al. (1997a) the
visual representation of the word, although degraded by the
attentional disruption, is still strong enough to support the
use of the lexical route and correctly perform a lexical
judgment. However, if the route is intact, this cannot explain
why neglect patients fail to use the lexical route to read
aloud words.
One possibility is that the presence of both words and
nonwords in the same list might have supported the
preferential use of just the non-lexical route (Coltheart et al.,
2001). Yet, Ladavas at al. (1997a) reported no effect of list
manipulation on the errors made by patients in reading.
Performance of patients when reading pure lists (words
only) and when reading mixed lists (words combined with
nonwords) did not differ.
Connectionist models of reading provide an alternative
interpretation of the naming/lexical decision dissociation.
Proponents of the connectionist approach showed that a
model implementing a single mechanism (Seidenberg and
McClelland, 1989:, Plaut et al., 1996) can successfully read
regular and irregular words and perform a lexical decision
with no recourse to any lexicon or set of pronunciation
rules, and without making additional architectural
assumptions about multiple routes in processing.
In line with this approach, we demonstrated first that a
standard connectionist model of reading could successfully
perform a reading task and a lexical decision task on a
phonological similarity basis. The unlesioned model could
1914

adequately read and distinguish between words and
nonwords without using feedback to an orthographic
representation and without using semantic representations.
We also demonstrated that a standard model of reading in
the connectionist tradition could be impaired according to
theories of neuronal gradients of activity responding to
different points across the visual field (Pouget & Driver,
2000). When lesioned according to this neuronal gradient,
the model simulated neglect dyslexia reading behavior in
terms of producing omissions and replacements to letters
only on the left side of the word, and, for the severe
lesioning, reflecting the length effect in naming responses.
The lesioned model also replicated the dissociation
between reading tasks and lexical decision tasks in terms of
accuracy of performance for both severities of lesioning.
The model replicates this finding without any recourse to a
dual route or a distinct lexical representation. The
dissociation emerges in the model from the difference
between a measure of global phonological similarity for the
lexical decision task and a measure of similarity at a
componential level – activation of single phonemes – for the
reading task. In the model, the activation of individual
phonemes is not sufficient to reach threshold for
reproducing the phoneme, particularly at the left portion of
the word, yet the subthreshold activity of the individual
phonemes are still contributing to the global similarity used
for the lexical decision task.
However, the model is not exhaustive in its coverage of
neglect data, and the points at which the model requires
attenuation highlight additional mechanisms in the normal
and the impaired reading system. One critical finding that
the model cannot replicate is the lexicality effect found in
the reading performance of patients, where words are read
better
than
nonwords.
Models
with
semantic
representations, such as by Plaut (1997) and Mozer and
Berhmann (1990) produce this effect. In the latter model –
MORSEL – a stored lexical/semantic representation of the
word boosts the processing of degraded information from
the visual perception and results in words being more
resistant to impairment than nonwords (which by definition
lack any lexical representation).
Another important difference between our model and
human performance is the quality of the dissociation
between the reading task and the lexical decision task.
While our model displays relatively greater impairment on
the reading task, human subjects show more or less total
sparing on the lexical decision task. The trend shown by the
model is still a major point and reflects the dissociation
between the two tasks, nevertheless we believe the lack of
semantic support in the model might have resulted in words
being less strongly represented and more prone to
misclassification. We believe a model with such level of
representation integrated with the orthographic and
phonological ones, such as the one developed by Harm &
Seidenberg (2004), could in principle reflect the same total
sparing shown by humans.
Our model showed that judgments about the phonological
representation itself can mimic lexical decision behavior
without requiring top-down feedback from semantic
representations. We have shown that these bottom-up

effects can make a substantial contribution to higher level
effects in neglect dyslexia behavior.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an EU Sixth Framework
Marie Curie Research Training Network Program in
Language and Brain: http://www.ynic.york.ac.uk/rtn-lab.
Thanks to Lisa S. Arduino, Cristina Burani, Jelena MirkoviT
and five anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on this
research.

References
Ans, B., Carbonnel, S., Valdois, S. (1998). A connectionist
multiple-trace memory model for polysyllabic word
reading. Psychological Review, 105 (4), 678-723.
Arduino, L.S., Burani, C., Vallar, G. (2002). Lexical effects
in left neglect dyslexia: a study in italian patients.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 19, 421-444.
Arduino, L.S., Burani, C., Vallar, G. (2003). Reading aloud
and lexical decision in neglect dyslexia performance: a
dissociation. Neuropsychologia, 41, 877-885.
Baayen, R.H., Pipenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Linguistic Data
Consortium, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA.
Bisiach, E., Rusconi, M.L. (1990). Break-down of
perceptual awareness in unilateral neglect. Cortex, 26,
643-649.
Caramazza, A., & Hillis, A.E. (1990). Levels of
representation, coordinate frames and unilateral neglect.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 7, 391-445.
Coltheart, M. (1978). Lexical access in simple reading task.
In G. Underwood (Ed.). Strategies of information
processing (pp.151-216). London: Academic Press.
Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., & Ziegler,
J. (2001). DRC: a dual route cascaded model of visual
word recognition and reading aloud. Psychological
Review, 108, 204-256.
Glushko, R.J. (1979). The organization and activation of
orthographic knowledge in reading aloud. Journal of
Experimantal Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 5, 674-691.
Harm, M.W., & Seidenberg, M.S. (1999). Phonology,
reading and dyslexia: insights from connectionist models.
Psychological Review, 163, 491-528.
Harm, M.W., & Seidenberg, M.S. (2004). Computing the
meaning of words in reading: cooperative division of
labor between visual and phonological processes.
Psychological Review, 111, 662-720.

Hillis, A.E., & Caramazza, A. (1995). A framework for
interpreting distinct patterns of hemispatial neglect.
Neurocase, 1, 189-207.
Kinsbourne, M. (1993). Orientational bias model of
unilateral neglect: Evidence from attentional gradients
within hemispace. In I.H. Robertson & J.C. Marshall
(Eds), Unilateral neglect: clinical and experimental
studies. LEA: Hove, UK.
Ladavas, E., Umilta’, & C., Mapelli, D. (1997a). Lexical
and semantic processing in the absence of word reading:
evidence from neglect dyslexia. Neuropsychologia, 35,
1075-1085.
Ladavas, E., Shallice, T., & Zanella, M.T. (1997b).
Preserved semantic access in neglect dyslexia.
Neuropsychologia, 35, 257-270.
Monaghan, P., & Shillcock, R. (2004). Hemispheric
asymmetries in cognitive modelling: Connectionist
modelling of unilateral visual neglect. Psychological
Review, 111, 283-308.
Mozer, M.C., & Berhmann, M. (1990). On the interaction of
selective attention and lexical knowledge: a connectionist
account of neglect dyslexia. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 2, 96-123.
Plaut, D.C. (1997). Structure and function in the lexical
system: Insights from distributed models of word reading
and lexical decision. Language and Cognitive Precesses,
12, 765-805.
Plaut, D.C., McClelland, J.L., Seidenberg, M.S., &
Patterson, K.E. (1996). Understanding normal and
impaired word reading: Computational principles in
quasi-regular domains. Psychological Review, 103, 56115.
Pouget, A., & Driver, J. (2000). Relating unilateral neglect
to the neural coding of space. Current opinion in
neurobiology, 10, 242-249.
Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E., & Williams, R.J. (1986).
Learning representations by back–propagating errors.
Nature, 323, 533-536.
Seidenberg, M.S., & McClelland, J.L. (1989). A distributed
developmental model of word recognition and naming.
Psychological Review, 96, 523-568.
Tegnér, R., & Levander, M. (1993). Word length coding in
neglect dyslexia. Neuropsychologia, 31, 1217-1223.
Vallar, G., Guariglia, C., Nico, D., Tabossi, P. (1996). Left
neglect dyslexia and the processing of neglected
information. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 18, 1-14.
Waters, G.S., & Seidenberg, M.S. (1985). Spelling-sound
effects in reading: Time course and decision criteria.
Memory and Cognition, 13, 557-572.

1915

