UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dual Processes, Development, and Scalar Implicature

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/50n4b8qn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Feeney, Aidan
Scrafton, Susan

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dual Processes, Development, and Scalar Implicature
Susan Scrafton (susan.scrafton@durham.ac.uk)
Child Development Research Unit, Wolfson Research Institute,
Queen’s Campus, Durham University,
Stockton-on-Tees TS17 6BH United Kingdom

Aidan Feeney (aidan.feeney@durham.ac.uk))
Applied Psychology, Queen’s Campus, Durham University
Stockton-on-Tees TS17 6BH United Kingdom

process. However, we will first consider the distinction in
more detail and review the very limited developmental
literature that it has motivated.
Evidence for the existence of two types of thinking comes
from a range of sources using a variety of methodologies.
One important piece of evidence concerns people’s ability
to resist background beliefs when engaged in deductive
reasoning. In the belief bias paradigm (Evans, Barston &
Pollard, 1983) participants are presented with syllogisms
where the validity of the conclusions and the believability of
the premises have been crossed in a fully factorial design.
Although people tend to accept more valid than invalid
conclusions, they also tend to accept more conclusions that
are believable than unbelievable. This finding is taken as
evidence for the co-existence of belief-based heuristic
processes, and separate analytic processes capable of
decontextualising the information in the problem.
Further studies of belief bias have shown that it is more
common in older people (Gilinsky & Judd, 1994) and under
conditions of speeded response (Evans & Curtis-Holmes,
2005). The tendency to respond in accord with logical
validity on the belief bias task is also known to be
associated with IQ (Stanovich & West, 1998). These
findings support the claim that there are separate processes
for reasoning, one of which is fast, computationally
inexpensive and context-driven, whilst the other is slow,
computationally expensive, heavily dependent on working
memory and responsible for dexcontextualising the
problem. Furthermore, neuropsychological studies have
shown a within-subject anatomical disassociation between
areas associated with belief-based responding and those
associated with logical responding (Goel & Dolan, 2004).

Abstract
Dual process theories suggest that our thinking is determined
by separate, but interacting, heuristic and analytic processes.
We describe an experiment designed to investigate the
development of these processes. We examined the extent to
which groups of 6, 9, 12, and 15 year-old participants and a
group of adults were sensitive to scalar implicature in
pragmatically enriched and pragmatically impoverished
contexts. For younger participants we find high rates of
pragmatic responding in enriched contexts and high rates of
logical responding in impoverished contexts. Early
adolescents displayed universally pragmatic responding
whilst logical responding re-emerged in older adolescents and
adults. These results suggest that heuristic processes develop
earlier than analytic processes but that they are not well
developed until early adolescence.
Keywords: Reasoning, pragmatics, heuristics, context

Introduction
Cognitive development has traditionally been viewed as
unidirectional, with the simple, inefficient and intuitive
thought processes of childhood gradually replaced by more
complex, efficient, systematic and analytical processes.
However, this view that simpler processes are supplanted by
more complex ones is challenged by dual-process theorists
who suggest that different kinds of thinking may interact
(see Evans & Over, 2004; Sloman, 1996; 2002; Stanovich,
1999; Stanovich & West, 2000). According to dual-process
theories (for recent reviews see Evans, 2003; Osman, 2004)
there are two separate but interacting processes for
reasoning. Heuristic processes are believed to be fast,
parallel, automatic, and unconscious in nature. They are
often described as being associative, as they result in
pragmatic responding that is often driven by context.
Importantly, they are also cognitively undemanding and
hence, may emerge relatively early in development.
Analytic processes, on the other hand, are conscious,
controlled, constrained by working memory capacity and
slower than heuristic processes. In addition, they are held to
be responsible for decontextualised thinking (Stanovich,
1999), which underlies our ability to reason or decide
independently of context. The main aim of this paper will be
to consider the developmental trajectory of the two types of

Developmental Evidence
Dual process theories are based, by and large, on adult data
and have not been widely applied to reasoning in children
and adolescents. A notable exception is Klaczynski’s work
on adolescent thinking (Klaczynski, 2001; Klaczynski &
Cottrell, 2004). Klaczynski (2001) examined the gap
between young and middle adolescents’ performance on
reasoning tasks and traditional standards of reasoning. He
showed that rather than being random errors, non-normative
responses were positively correlated, normative responses
were positively correlated, and the two forms of response
774

A scalar inference or scalar implicature (SI) is the
assumption made by the hearer that the speaker’s use of a
weaker term implicates that the stronger term does not hold.
Consider the use of the word some in the following
sentence:

were largely independent of each other. Support for a twoprocess model came from both factor analysis, which
revealed that the two types of response did not load onto the
same factor, and the finding that normative analytical
responding was positively correlated with IQ. Finally, he
found that normative responding was more likely in middle
than in early adolescence whereas non-normative
responding was not associated with age. These findings can
be interpreted as evidence for the existence of one type of
thinking that is well developed by early adolescence and
another which continues to develop between the ages of 12
and 15.
Other relevant evidence has been described by Handley,
Capon, Beveridge, Denis and Evans (2004) who
investigated the degree to which logical responding by 10year-olds in a belief bias task is predicted by working
memory capacity and the ability to inhibit prepotent
responses. Handley et al. (2004) discovered that each of
these individual differences variables is a significant and
independent predictor of the tendency to respond logically.
The findings suggest that analytic thinking, essential for
logical responding, requires working memory resources and
that heuristic and analytic processes may operate in parallel.
Handley et al. (2004) suggest that responses based on faster
heuristic processing dominate unless inhibited by the
information processor in favour of a response based on
slower analytic processes.
The picture that emerges from these investigations is of
dual processes that are present in some form by 10 years-ofage. Whereas there is no evidence that pragmatic or
heuristic processes are not fully developed by that age, there
is evidence that analytic processes are still developing at the
age of 15. However, one dissatisfying aspect of the studies
that we have described is that the full age range has not been
investigated. Had it been so, it might have been possible,
not only to demonstrate the emergence of analytic
processes, but also to investigate the development of
heuristic processes, and so to trace the relationship in
development between the two types of thinking.

(1) Some of the students attended the lecture.
According to Grice’s (1989) maxims of conversation, if it is
known that a strong term such as all is the case then the
speaker should use the stronger term. As it is not used in
this case, sentence 1 will often be interpreted as:
(2) Some but not all of the students attended the lecture
However, logically some is an existential quantifier
asserting that there is at least one. Consequently it is
compatible with all, as at least one does not preclude all and
so the sentence could be interpreted as:
(3) Some and maybe all of the students attended the lecture.
In the reasoning literature it has long been known that adults
frequently interpret some pragmatically (Ceraso & Provitera
1971; Begg & Harris, 1982) rather than logically.
There has been a resurgence of interest in the
interpretation of scalar terms with Noveck’s (2001) findings
that young children appeared not to derive SIs and so
appeared to be more logical than adults. He discovered that
8 and 10 year old children were more likely to agree with
the statement “Some elephants have trunks”, than adults,
with logical response rates of 89%, 85% and 41%
respectively. However, the children were generally very
good at detecting the inappropriateness of other statements
that were not pragmatically infelicitous. For example, they
correctly agreed with the statement “Some birds live in
cages” and correctly disagreed with “All dogs have spots”.
Accordingly, Noveck concluded that they failed to derive
SIs because the pragmatic interpretations were not yet
available to them. These results appear to be borne out by
other studies looking at the interpretation of some, which
have also found high rates of pragmatic responding amongst
adults (Papafragou & Musolino, 2003; Bott & Noveck,
2004) and high rates of logical responding amongst children
(Papafragou & Musolino, 2003; Pouscoulous & Noveck,
2004).
However, there is evidence to suggest that children are not
always insensitive to the implicature associated with some,
and can give pragmatic interpretations if there is a change in
context (Feeney, Scrafton Duckworth & Handley, 2004;
Papafragou & Tantalou, 2004), or in task demands
(Papafragou & Musolino, 2003). For example, Feeney et al.
(Expt. 2, 2004) presented 8-year-olds with relatively
impoverished materials, such as those used by Noveck
(2001), and with pragmatically enriched storyboards in
which a girl was seen, for example, to eat three biscuits.
When asked by her mother what she had been doing, the girl

Scalar Implicature and Dual Processes
One problem with designing a truly developmental study is
finding a reasoning task equally as suitable for young
children as for adults. Klaczynski (2001) was able to
highlight the relationship between normative and nonnormative responding because he chose tasks where the out
puts of the two systems were in accordance or in conflict
with each other. However, many of the tasks he used are
unsuitable for use with young children. Below, we describe
an experiment designed to investigate the development of
sensitivity to scalar implicature, a particular kind of
conversational inference, in participants aged from five
years up to adulthood. We chose to examine scalar
implicature because it lends itself to a developmental
approach and because scalar terms appear to place the two
systems for reasoning in conflict.

775

context. Third, because logical responding re-emerges in
adulthood, as the ability to process problems analytically
develops we might expect to observe that adults give fewer
pragmatic responses than the highly pragmatic adolescents.
In addition to these predictions, if dual process theory is
correct, we would not expect to see more logical responding
in the enriched condition for any of the age groups.

replied that she had eaten some of the biscuits. Children
tended to accept Noveck’s statements (57% logical response
rate), but rejected the girl’s statement (21% logical response
rate), thus demonstrating selective sensitivity to the scalar
implicature.
Explanations for this pattern of findings can be offered in
terms of dual processes for reasoning. For example, one
interpretation of the finding that children answer
pragmatically in one context but logically in another is that
at age eight, the ability to reason using heuristic processes is
still developing. For Noveck’s materials, children may
respond logically to “Some giraffes have long necks”
because they are unable to employ the relevant pragmatic
heuristic either through the lack of contextual clues or a lack
of experience (or because there is no incentive to invest
more cognitive resources to compute the implicature). In the
Feeney et al. (2004) enriched task the context readily
supports the pragmatic interpretation. The laws of
conversation say that the girl should use the strongest term
possible to describe her actions; to do otherwise suggests an
intention to deceive. Supported by the pragmatics of the
context children give pragmatic responses. The fact that
they do not make a logical interpretation even though they
were able to do so in the statements task, suggests that their
logical responses are not due to the use of analytic processes
for decontextualised reasoning. However, adults who
respond logically on Noveck’s materials may do so in spite
of the availability of the pragmatic interpretation. Because
their analytic processes are more fully developed, they are
more likely to be able to resist the effects of conversational
context, decontextualise the problem, and respond logically.
Unfortunately, we do not have adolescent data for either
of the tasks used in Feeney et al. (2004) or adult data for the
enriched task. Such data might be very informative with
respect to the developmental relationship between the two
types of thinking. For example, previous work suggests that
heuristic processes are developed before analytic processes
(Klaczynski, 2001). Accordingly, there may be a point in
adolescence, when heuristic processes are well developed
and analytic processes are still developing, at which
children are wholly pragmatic in their responses. As Feeney
et al. (2004) found evidence that logical responding is also
common in adults, it is possible that adolescents at this point
in development may be even more pragmatic than adults.

Method
Participants
One hundred and nine people participated in the experiment.
These were split into five age groups: 24 Year 1 children,
age range 5 years 9 months to 6 years 9 months; 23 Year 4
children, age range 8 years 9 months to 9 years 9 months;
22 Year 7 children, age range 11 years 10 months to 12
years 10 months; 21 Year 10 children, age range 14 years 10
months to 15 years 10 months; and 19 adult participants.
The Year 1, Year 4, and Year 7 groups were recruited from
two schools in the North East of England. The Year 10
group was recruited from a local school and a youth group.
The adult participants were recruited at Durham University.
Materials
Participants heard a list of 24 statements and saw a series of
16 storyboards.
Impoverished Materials: These materials are based on the
statements used by Noveck (2001), and concern three types
of information; factually universal, factually existential and
absurd. A factually universal statement is one where the
quantifier all best describes how many of a group possess a
particular feature, such as all elephants have trunks. A
factually existential statement is one where the quantifier
some best describes how many of a group possess a
particular feature, such as some animals have stripes, whilst
an absurd statement is one where neither quantifier correctly
describes it, such as garages sing. The statements used
describe a relation between the quantifier and the noun and
can be broken down into subgroups, which can be seen in
Table 1, along with an example for each context. Each
statement was presented with either all or some preceding it,
although each participant received only one form, which
resulted in two sets of materials. The statements within each
set were randomly ordered.

Experiment

Enriched Materials: The 16 storyboards are taken directly
from Feeney et al. (2004). Each of the storyboards contained
four or five coloured photographs, depending on the
condition, and depicted a theme. There were 16 themes each
of which concerned the activities of a girl in relation to a set
of objects she finds, such as eating sweets or picking
flowers. In each storyboard the girl was seen finding three
objects and interacting with either two or three of them. In
each case she was asked, by her mother, what she has done
to the objects. She replied by stating that she has interacted
with all/some of them, such as, “I’ve eaten all/some of the

In this experiment we will compare the sensitivity of groups
of 6, 9, 12, and 15 year-old participants, as well as a group
of adults, to the scalar implicature associated with some. We
derived three predictions from dual-process theory. First,
the effect of context should be seen at an early age. If the
performance of the 8 year-old children in the Feeney et al.
(2004) study is due to partly developed heuristic processes,
then we may observe sensitivity to the implicature in some
contexts but not in others. Second, if heuristic processes
develop before analytic processes there should be an age at
which pragmatic responding will be the norm regardless of
776

statements than to the all statements, Wilcoxon matched
pairs signed ranks test z = 7.17, T = 63, p < .001, and to the
false/infelicitous statements than to the true statements,
Wilcoxon matched pairs signed ranks test z = 7.05, T =
113.5, p < .001. Turning now to the infelicitous some
statements, a Mann Whitney test reveals that the Year 1
children gave significantly more logical responses than the
Year 4 children, U = 93.5, p < .001, the Year 4 Children
gave significantly more logical responses than the Year 7
children, U = 115.5, p < .001, and the Year 7 children gave
significantly fewer logical responses than either the Year 10
children, U = 107, p < .005, or the adults, U = 56.5, p <
.001 There was no significant difference in the number of
logical responses given by these last two age groups, U =
105.5, p = .164.

biscuits”.Participants saw each theme in one of the four
forms, which were systematically allocated amongst the
four subgroups. Two sets of materials were prepared. There
were two pairings of statements and storyboard materials
and the order of presentation was counterbalanced.
Table 1: The different truth/quantifier subgroups with an
example from each context
Sub Group
True/
All
False/
All

Impoverished
(Sentences)
All elephants have
trunks
All dogs have spots

Absurd/
All
True/
Some

All garages sing

Infelicitous/
Some

Some giraffes have
long necks

Some animals have
stripes

Enriched
(Storyboards)
I ate all the biscuits
(ate 3/3 biscuits)
I dirtied all the
towels
(dirtied 2/3 towels)

Table 2: Mean number of logical responses (and standard
deviations) for quantifier terms broken down by context and
age

I broke some of the
tiles
(broke 2/3
tiles)
I picked some of
the flowers (picked
3/3 flowers)

Truth/

Context

Felicity
True/

Absurd/
Some policemen are
Some
made of jelly
Note. The enriched condition contained no absurd subgroup

Yr 1

Yr 4

Yr 7

Yr 10

Adult

3.95

3.86

4.00

3.88

3.82

(0.21)

(0.35)

(0.00)

(0.33)

(0.39)

Impov

3.91

4.00

3.86

3.76

3.88

(0.29)

(0.00)

(0.35)

(0.44)

(0.33)

Enrich

3.73

3.95

3.91

3.94

3.59

(0.63)

(0.21)

(0.29)

(0.24)

(1.00)

3.91

3.91

4.00

4.00

3.94

(0.29)

(0.29)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.24)

Enrich

Felicitous

False/

Procedure
Participants received instructions on how to complete each
task immediately before they attempted that task. For the
impoverished task, participants were told that they would
hear a series of statements and they had to decide whether
each was true or false. For the enriched task, participants
were told that they would see a number of storyboards and
hear accompanying text. Their task was to decide whether
the response made by the child was true or false. For both
tasks the participant had an answer sheet on which to record
their decisions.

All

Infelicitous
Impov

Some
True/

Yr 1

Yr 4

Yr 7

Yr 10

Adult

3.59

3.68

4.00

3.94

3.94

(0.50)

(0.48)

(0.00)

(0.24)

(0.24)

Impov

3.73

3.95

3.95

4.00

4.00

(0.46)

(0.21)

(0.21)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Enrich

0.95

0.27

0.14

1.35

1.35

(1.36)

(0.55)

(0.35)

(1.84)

(1.62)

3.95

1.95

0.18

1.35

2.18

(0.21)

(1.84)

(0.50)

(1.66)

(1.63)

Enrich

Felicitous

Results

False/

The participants’ responses were coded with respect to their
logical correctness. The correct logical response for the
true/felicitous all categories is true whilst the correct logical
response for the false /infelicitous all categories is false.
However for some the correct logical response is always
true, regardless of truth or felicity.
Before the data was analysed the scores of 2 year 1
children, 4 Year 10 children and 2 adults who scored at or
below chance levels in one of the true all categories were
removed. The mean scores and standard deviations for the
remaining participants broken down by truth, term and
condition can be seen in Table 2.
Collapsing results on the impoverished task across age
group, fewer logical responses were given to the some

Infelicitous
Impov

Note: The maximum number of correct logical responses for
each statement type was four.
Collapsing across age group on the enriched task, fewer
logical responses were given to the some storyboards than to
the all storyboards, Wilcoxon matched pairs signed ranks
test z = 8.32, T = 62.5, p < .001, and to the false/infelicitous
storyboards than to the true storyboards, Wilcoxon matched
pairs signed ranks test z = 8.51, T = 2.5, p < .001. For the
infelicitous some materials, there was a significant

777

impoverished condition. However, from this age onwards
the children could also detect the implicature in the
statements at a rate equal to or greater than that of the
adults, to the extent that the Year 7 children were
universally sensitive to the implicature regardless of
context. After Year 7 the participants remained largely
insensitive to the effect of context but rates of logical
responding increased.
So can these findings be accounted for by a dual-process
theory of reasoning, and if so how might these processes
develop?
There is certainly evidence of pragmatic responding in
adults. Although their logical responses are close to ceiling
on the other categories, the amount of pragmatic responding
on infelicitous some suggests that a pragmatic heuristic has
been activated. The fact that the adults are not influenced by
context suggests that this heuristic is well developed in that
it is activated in contexts that facilitate logical responding in
children.1 This lack of effect of context also suggests that
those participants who gave predominantly logical
responses (see Table 3 for individual patterns of responding
for each age group) did so because they had
decontextualised the task.

difference in the number of logical responses made between
the age groups, Kruskal-Wallis test, H (4) = 11.8, p < .02.
The Year 7 children made significantly fewer logical
responses than the Year 10 children, Mann Whitney test U =
126.5, p < .025, but there was no significant difference in
logical responding between the Year 10 children and the
adults, Mann Whitney test U = 138.5, p = 0.82.
Once again collapsing across age groups, fewer logical
responses were made to infelicitous some in the storyboard
condition than in the statement condition, Wilcoxon
matched pairs signed ranks test z = 5.01, T = 98, p < .001.
The effect of context for each age group can be seen in
Figure 1. Fewer logical responses were made in the
storyboard condition by the Year 1 children, Wilcoxon
matched pairs signed ranks test z = 4.05, T = 0, p < .001,
and by the Year 4 children, z = 3.23, T = 1.5, p < .002, but
there was no significant effect of context for the other age
groups, p > .05.

Mean Number of Logical Responses

4

Infelicitous Some
Enriched Context

3.5

Infelicitous Some
Impoverished
Context

3
2.5

Table 3. Types of responder broken down by age group
Responsea

2
1.5

0.5
0
Year 4

Year7

Year10

Year 7
(n=22)

Year 10
(n=17
4
10

Adult
(n=17)
4
6
4
1
1

Log/Log
Prag/Prag
21
Prag/Log
Neut/Log
Prag/Neut
1
1
Log/Neut
1
Log/Prag
1
Neut/Prag
1
Note. Log = logical responder ≥ 3 correct responses; Prag = pragmatic
responder ≤ 1 correct response; Neut = neutral responder = 2 correct
responses.
a
In the response category the pairings show the enriched context
followed by the impoverished context.

1

Year 1

Age Group
Year 1
Year 4
(n=22)
(n=22)
5
10
16
9
1
1
2

Adult

Age Group

Figure 1. Mean number of logical responses to infelicitous
some for each age group according to context.

Discussion
At the outset we predicted: (1) an effect of context in young
children; (2) that in early adolescents pragmatic responding
would be the norm regardless of context; and (3) that adults
would give fewer pragmatic responses than the highly
pragmatic adolescents. The results of this experiment have
confirmed all three of these predictions. Thus, sensitivity to
the implicature associated with some is dependent on age,
and for some ages, on the context in which the scalar term
appears. In addition, no age group had higher logical
response rates in the enriched than in the impoverished
condition.
The Year 1 children were able to spontaneously detect the
implicature but only if the context was supportive, as in the
case of the pragmatically enriched storyboards. The Year 4
children were also greatly influenced by the context in
which the scalar term appeared and were more likely to
respond pragmatically in the enriched rather than in the

In the early adolescent group (Year 7), the total
predominance of pragmatic responding regardless of context
suggests that by this age the heuristic system is well
developed but that the analytic system is, at best, still
developing. By middle adolescence, however, logical
responding has re-emerged and where it occurs, it appears to
be the result of thought processes operating on
decontextualised representations. The finding that
adolescents who give the logical response do so across both
contexts supports this conclusion.
The reasoning processes of the youngest participants
appear to rely mainly on context. Although the children can
respond pragmatically they can only do so in the
1

If the materials had been designed solely for adults they could
have been more complex and might have produced an interaction
with context.
778

Evans, J.St.B.T. and Over, D.E. (1996). Rationality and
Reasoning. Hove: Psychology Press.
Feeney, A., Scrafton, S., Duckworth, A. and Handley.
(2004). The Story of Some: Everyday pragmatic
inferences by children and adults. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology. 58, 2, 121-133.
Gilinsky, A.S., & Judd, B.B. (1994). Working memory and
bias in reasoning across the life-span. Psychology and
Aging, 9, 356–371.
Goel, V. & Dolan, R.J. (2003). Explaining modulation of
reasoning by belief. Cognition, 87, B11-22.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Handley, S.J., Capon, A., Beveridge, M., Dennis, I. And
Evans, J.St.B.T. (2004) Working memory, inhibitory
control and the development of children’s reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning. 10, 2, 175-195.
Klaczynski, P.A. (2001). Analytical and heuristic processing
influences on adolescent reasoning and decision making.
Child Development, 72, 3, 844-861.
Klaczynski, P.A. and Cottrell, J.M. (2004). A dual-process
approach to cognitive development: The case of
children’s understanding of sunk cost decisions.
Thinking and Reasoning, 10, 147-174.
Noveck, I.A. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: Experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition. 78, 165-168
Osman, M. (2004). An Evaluation of Dual-Process Theories
of Reasoning. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review. 11, 6,
988-1010.
Papafragou, A. and Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar
implicatures: Experiments at the semantics-pragmatics
interface. Cognition. 86, 253-282.
Papafragou, A. and Tantalou, N. (2004) Children’s
Computation of Implicatures. Language Acquisition: A
Journal of Developmental Linguistics. 12, 1, 71-82.
Pouscoulous, N. and Noveck, I.A. (2004). Implicatures et
développement. Psychologie Française. 49, 2, 193-207.
Sloman, S.A. (1996). The Empirical Case for Two Systems
of Reasoning. Psychological Bulletin. 119, 1, 3-22.
Sloman, S.A. (2002). Two Systems of Reasoning. In T.
Gilovich, D. Griffin and D. Kahneman (eds.) Heuristics
and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stanovich, K.E. (1999). Who is Rational? Studies of
individual differences in reasoning. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Stanovich, K.E. and West, R.F. (2000). Individual
Differences in Reasoning: Implications for the
rationality debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 23,
645-726.
Stanovich, K.E., and West, R.F. (1998). Individual
differences in rational thought. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 127 (2), 161-188.

pragmatically enriched context. The complete absence of
predominantly pragmatic responders (see Table 3) suggests
that the heuristic system is not well developed or easily
activated. This lack of development is also suggested by a
small group of predominantly logical responders. Their
responses are unlikely to be due to the same processes as
those of the predominantly logical responders in the Year 10
and adult groups as there is a complete absence of this type
of responder in Years 4 and 7. It is more likely that this
group of Year 1 children have failed to activate a pragmatic
heuristic than that they have engaged in analytical thought.
Similarly, the logical responses that are evident in the Year
4 children are only found in the impoverished condition. If
these children were true logical responders then one would
expect to see some evidence of decontextualisation and
logical responding in the enriched context.
In conclusion we propose that young children appear to be
logical because they do not have a fully developed ability to
reason heuristically. In the developing state these processes
are effective only if the context supports them. However, as
development continues they come to dominate to the extent
that pragmatic responding is the norm regardless of context.
After this, the operation of more fully developed analytic
reasoning processes may be observed in some individuals.
This leads to the re-emergence of logical responding, which
appears to be the product of analytical thought. In terms of
dual processes we have evidence that heuristic processes
develop before analytic processes and that heuristic
processes are highly sensitive to context whilst they
themselves are developing.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a studentship to the first author
from the Wolfson Research Institute at Durham University.

References
Begg and Harris (1982). On the Interpretation of
Syllogisms. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior. 21, 595-620
Bott, L. and Noveck, I.A. (2004). Some utterances are
underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar
inferences. Journal of Memory and Language. 51, 3,
437-457
Ceraso, J. and Provitera, A. (1971). Sources of Error in
Syllogistic Reasoning. Cognitive Psychology. 2, 400-410
Evans, J.St.B.T. (2003). In Two Minds: Dual-process
accounts of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 7,
10, 454-459.
Evans, J.St. B. T., Barston, J. L., & Pollard, P. (1983). On
the conflict between logic and belief in syllogistic
reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 11, 295-306.
Evans, J.St.B.T. and Curtis-Holmes, J. (2005). Rapid
Responding Increases Belief Bias: Evidence for the
dual-process theory of reasoning. Thinking and
Reasoning. 11, 4, 382-389.

779

