UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Concreteness on Representation: An Explanation for Differential Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/39f9h59z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Heckler, Andrew F.
Kaminski, Jennifer A.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Concreteness on Representation: An Explanation for Differential Transfer
Jennifer A. Kaminski (kaminski.16@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208A Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Andrew F. Heckler (heckler@mps.ohio-state.edu)
Department of Physics, Ohio State University
191 W. Woodruff Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA
Abstract
This study investigated the nature of internal representations
constructed from learning concrete or generic instantiations of
an abstract concept. Undergraduate students learned
instantiations of a mathematical group that were generic,
communicated concreteness relevant to the concept, or
communicated concreteness irrelevant to the concept. Students
who learned relevantly concrete instantiations were unable to
recognize relational structure in the context of novel elements,
while students who learned with no relevant concreteness were
able to recognize the structure. This differential ability suggests
participants constructed different representations which may in
turn be responsible for differential transfer, with generic
instantiations promoting transfer and relevantly concrete
hindering. When given the alignment of elements across
domains, all subjects transferred equally well, suggesting that
alignment of elements helps disembed relational structure.
Keywords: Cognitive Science; Psychology; Education;
Learning; Transfer; Analogical reasoning, Knowledge
Representation.

Introduction
Transfer, or the ability to use prior knowledge in a novel
situation, is a major goal of education, yet it is often
difficult to achieve. Researchers have documented both
transfer failures and transfer successes (e.g. Gick &
Holyoak, 1980, 1983). Successful transfer across isomorphs
has been construed as a process of analogical reasoning
from a learned base domain to a novel target transfer
domain which requires success on each of four
subprocesses: (1) representation of the transfer domain, (2)
retrieval of prior domain, (3) alignment of elements and
mapping of structure across domains, and (4)
implementation of the analogy (see Rattermann, 1997 for
review). Of crucial importance is alignment and mapping of
structure (see Gentner, 1983) which requires first that
relational structure is recognized in the transfer domain.
One factor affecting both retrieval and alignment is the
degree of similarity of the base and transfer domains.
Superficial similarity between the base and transfer domains
such as storyline can facilitate the retrieval of an analogous,

previously learned domain (Gentner, Rattermann, & Forbus,
1993; Ross, 1987, 1989). In addition, elements that are
similar across domains can promote transfer if they play
analogous roles. On the other hand, if similar elements play
different roles across domains, the likelihood of successful
transfer diminishes significantly (Ross, 1987, 1989).
In the absence of glaring similarities across domains,
what other characteristics of the learning domain might
affect transfer to a novel isomorph? Concreteness of the
learning domain has been shown to hinder transfer
(Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003; Sloutsky, Kaminski, &
Heckler, 2005). However, not all concreteness is the same.
The concreteness involved in the earlier studies also
hindered learning (Sloutsky et al, 2005) or did not
significantly facilitate it (Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003).
Another possibility with some intuitive appeal is that a
domain that promotes quick learning would also promote
transfer. However, the results of a previous study
demonstrated that quick learning does not necessarily
translate into successful transfer (Kaminski, Sloutsky, &
Heckler, 2005). College undergraduates learned a simple
mathematical concept that was instantiated through different
artificial domains. The goal of the study was to investigate
whether instantiating an abstract concept in a concrete
manner would have benefits or costs for learning and
transfer. Of particular interest was the impact of a type of
concreteness that might give rise to the “ah-ha” effect by
helping to communicate the relevant concept. This
“Relevant Concreteness” underlies many instructional
materials such as base ten blocks and portions of pizzas that
are used to teach arithmetic. For relevant concreteness, the
storyline and symbols were designed to help communicate
the relevant mathematical structure. Colorful, patterned
symbols were used to add extraneous, perceptually engaging
“Irrelevant Concreteness”. Therefore, subjects learned one
of four domains: (1) Generic, in which arbitrary black
symbols were used and storyline offered no insight to the
relevant concept, (2) Irrelevant Concreteness, same storyline
as the Generic, but perceptually rich symbols, (3) Relevant
Concreteness, in which the storyline and symbols
encouraged participants to draw upon their everyday
knowledge to learn the structure, and (4) Relevant &

1581

Irrelevant Concreteness, same storyline as Relevant
Concreteness with perceptually rich symbols (see Table 1).
The results of the study found, as expected, an advantage
of relevant concreteness for learning. With minimal
training, students who learned the relevantly concrete
domain performed significantly higher when tested than
students who learned the domain with no relevant
concreteness. However, this benefit was limited only to
learning with minimal training. With protracted training,
students who learned the generic domain scored as highly as
those who learned with relevant concreteness. Only subjects
who learned the irrelevantly concrete domain scored lower
that the relevantly concrete group. Most interesting was
transfer performance. When presented with a novel
isomorphic domain, subjects who learned the generic
instantiation ably transferred conceptual knowledge, while
subjects who learned with relevant or irrelevant
concreteness did not. Interestingly, both irrelevant and
relevant concreteness hindered transfer, but a comparison of
both learning and transfer suggests that they did so for
different reasons. Irrelevant concreteness hindered learning
and thus subsequently hindered transfer, while the relevant
concreteness appeared to hinder transfer by possibly
obfuscating the analogy between the learning and transfer
domains.
Additional (albeit inconclusive) evidence that relevant
concreteness obfuscated the analogy between the learning
and transfer domains comes from similarity ratings. When
asked to rank similarity between each learning domain and
the transfer domain prior to learning, participants ranked all
learning domains as equally similar to the transfer domain.
However, after training, similarity between the generic
learning domain and the transfer domain increased, whereas
similarity between concrete learning domain and the transfer
domain remained low. One possibility is that it is easier to
align a generic learning domain with the transfer domain
than a concrete learning domain. Given that alignable
structures are considered more similar than non-alignable
(Markman & Gentner, 1993), it is possible that differential
alignability could underlie both differential transfer and
differential similarity.
Another possibility is that failure to transfer is due to an
inability to recognize the relational structure in the transfer
domain. Learning a generic instantiation allowed
recognition of structure while learning with a relevantly
concrete instantiation did not. This suggests that
categorically different internal representation were
constructed depending on what type of instantiation was
learned. Internal representations of a concept might contain
the following types of information: (1) relational structure
that defines the concept, (2) elements that instantiate the
concept, and (3) other extraneous information such as
storyline. To possess structural knowledge of a particular
instantiation implies that the internal representation contains
both elements and relations. The fact that participants in all
conditions performed well on the learning test indicates that
elements and relations were represented. But perhaps for

Relevant Concreteness, the element information and
relational information are so tightly bound that the relational
information cannot be recognized elsewhere, while for
Generic and Irrelevant Concreteness, the relational
information can be disassociated from the learning
elements.
The goal of experiment 1 was to test the hypothesis that
learning a relevantly concrete instantiation leads to a
representation in which relational information is bound to
element information, while learning with a generic or
irrelevantly concrete instantiation does not. In particular,
after learning, can a participant recognize truths and
violations of relational structure when expressed with either
familiar or novel elements?

Experiment 1
Method

1582

Participants Fifty three undergraduate students from Ohio
State University participated in the experiment and received
partial credit for an introductory psychology course. Students
were randomly assigned to one of three conditions that
specified the type of instantiation they learned.
Materials and Design The experiment consisted of two
phases. In phase 1, all participants learned an instantiation of
a mathematical concept. The type of instantiation learned was
a between-subjects factor: Relevant Concreteness, Irrelevant
Concreteness, and Generic. In phase 2, participants were
presented with expressions involving either familiar elements
from phase 1 or novel elements and were asked whether the
rules are the same as those of phase 1.
Phase 1 used the same to-be-learned concept that was used
in our previous research (Kaminski et al., 2005; Sloutsky et
al., 2005). This was a commutative group of order three. In
other words the rules were isomorphic to addition modulo
three. The idea of modular arithmetic is that only a finite
number of elements (or equivalent classes) are used. Addition
modulo 3 considers only the numbers 0, 1, and 2. Zero is the
identity element of the group and is added as in regular
addition: 0 + 0 = 0, 0 + 1 = 1, and 0 + 2 = 2. Furthermore, 1 +
1 = 2. However, a sum greater than or equal to 3 is never
obtained. Instead, one would cycle back to 0. So, 1 + 2 = 0, 2
+ 2 = 1, etc. To understand such a system with arbitrary
symbols (not integers as above) would involve learning the
rules presented in Table 1. However, a context can be created
in which prior knowledge and familiarity may assist learning.
In this type of situation the additional information is relevant
to the concept.
In the Relevant Concreteness condition, the symbols were
three images of measuring cups containing varying levels of
liquid (see Table 1). Participants were told they need to
determine a remaining amount when different measuring cups
of liquid are combined. In particular,

and

will

statements. In the Generic condition, the symbols were black;
and in the Irrelevant Concreteness condition, the symbols
were colorful and patterned.
Training and testing in all conditions were isomorphic and
presented via computer. Training consisted of an introduction
and explicit presentation of the rules through examples.
Questions with feedback and examples with complex
combinations were given.
After training, the participants were given a 24-question
multiple-choice test designed to measure the ability to apply
the learned rules to novel problems. Many questions required
the application of multiple rules. The following are examples
of test questions in the Generic condition.

Table 1: Stimuli and rules across domains.
Relevant
Concreteness

Generic

Elements

Rules of Commutative Group:
Associative

For any elements x, y, z:
((x + y) + z) = (x + (y + z))

Commutative

For any elements x, y: x + y = y + x

Identity

There is an element, I, such that for any element, x:
x+I=x

Inverses

For any element, x, there exists another element, y,
such that x+ y = I

(1) What can go in the blanks to make a correct statement?
___ ,

Specific Rules:
is the identity
These
combine

Remainder

fill a container. So for example, combining

Result

,

would have remainder

and

and

. In this domain,

behaves like 0 under addition (the group identity element).
acts like 1; and
combination of

acts like 2. For example, the
and

?

,

,

Æ

_____.

Participants in the Relevant Concrete condition saw the
analogues of these questions.
Phase 2 of the experiment consisted of 26 test trials. On
each trial, participants were presented with a set of three
expressions. They were told that each set is from a new
system and asked whether the new system follows the same
type of rules as the system they had previously learned. Four
types of trials were used. Table 2 shows examples of each
type of trial, as expressed for the Relevant Concrete
condition. For the Generic and Irrelevant Concreteness
conditions, the analogous statements were expressed with the
generic black symbols or their colorful counterparts
respectively. Six trials involved the same elements as the
learning phase and the same relational structure (E+/R+). Six
trials involved the familiar elements, but different relational
structure (E+/R-). Six trials involved novel elements and the
familiar relational structure (E-/R+). Another six trials
involved both novel elements and novel relations (E-/R-). In
addition two questions were posed in which familiar elements
were cross-mapped to play different roles in the same
relational structure.

would have
remaining. Additionally, participants were
told that they should always report a remainder. Therefore
they should report that the combination of

Æ

(2) Find the resulting symbol:

is the identity
Operands

, ___ ,

For example, in the statement
is playing the role that
domain.

does not fill a container

and so
remains. This is analogous to 1 + 1 = 2 under
addition modulo 3. Furthermore, the perceptual information
communicated by the symbols themselves can act as
reminders of the structural rules. In this case, the storyline and
symbols may facilitate learning.
The conditions with no relevant concreteness were
presented to the participants as a symbolic language in which
three types of symbols combine to yield a resulting symbol
(see Table 1). Combinations are expressed as written

held in the learning

Procedure All training and testing was presented to
individual participants on a computer screen in a quiet room.
They proceeded through training and testing at their own
pace; and their responses were recorded.

Results and Discussion

1583

Three participants (one Perceptually Rich, two Generic)
were removed from the analysis for failing to learn; their

E+/R+

E-/R+

E+/R-

E-/R-

learning test scores were less than 11 and no different than
chance score of 9. In all conditions, participants successfully
learned the concept. The mean test scores of 19.6 (SD = 4.1)
for the Relevant Concreteness group, 17.3 (SD = 4.0) for the
Perceptually Rich group, and 18.2 (SD = 2.8) for the
Generic group were above a chance score of 9, one sample
t-tests, ts > 8.54, ps< .0005. The differences between groups
was not significant, one-way ANOVA, F (2, 47) = 1.67, p
=.199, ηp2 = .066.
While there were no differences in learning across
condition, there were considerable differences in ability to
discriminate familiar and novel relational structure in phase
2 depending on the presence of familiar or novel elements.
To measure discriminability in the context of familiar
elements, the number of “yes – same structure” responses
for E+/R+ trials minus the number of erroneous “yes – same
structure” responses for E+/R- trials was calculated (see
Figure 1) and submitted to an ANCOVA with condition as a
between-subjects factor and learning test score as a
covariate. The results found no difference in
discriminability across condition, F (2, 42) = .289, p > .75,
ηp2 = .01; and a significant effect of learning F (1, 46) =
11.67, p < .0005, ηp2 = .20. This discriminability accuracy
supports the proposition that successful learning results in
representations that contain both elements and relations.
However, when trials involved novel elements, there were
striking differences in discriminability, where participants in
the Relevantly Concrete condition were unable to recognize
the familiar structure while participants in both the Generic
and the Perceptually Rich conditions were able. Scores of
the number of “yes – same structure” responses for E-/R+
trials minus the number of erroneous “yes – same structure”
responses for E-/R- trials were calculated (see Figure 1) and
submitted to an ANCOVA with condition as a betweensubjects factor and learning test score as a covariate. Results
revealed a significant effect of condition, F (2, 46) = 12.22,
p < .0005, ηp2 = .35, with a lesser effect of learning F (1, 46)
= 7.62, p < .009, ηp2 = .14. Therefore, in the context of novel
elements, the ability to recognize learned structure does not

depend as much on how well the initial instantiation was
learned, but rather on what type of initial instantiation was
learned.
Responses to cross-mapped trials provide additional
evidence that when learning a relevantly concrete
instantiation, structure is tightly bound to the elements as
presented during learning. These trials presented the learned
structure, but switched the roles of familiar elements. None
of the participants in the Relevant Concreteness condition
were able to recognize structure when elements were crossed
mapped, while 25% of participants in the Generic condition
and 29% in the Perceptually Rich condition correctly
recognized familiar relational structure with cross mapped
elements. Scores for these questions were submitted to an
ANCOVA with condition as a factor and learning test score
as a covariate. There was a main effect of condition, F (2, 46)
= 3.68, p < .04, ηp2 = .14, and no significant effect of learning
scores, F (1, 46) = 1.49, p > .22, ηp2 = .03.
Therefore, the type of instantiation from which the concept
was learned significantly affected the learner’s ability to
recognize the same relational structure in the context of novel
elements. Learning an instantiation that communicated no
relevant concreteness, whether generic or perceptually rich,
allowed participants to recognize relational structure
elsewhere, while learning a relevantly concrete instantiation
did not. For relevant concreteness, relational structure is
embedded in the learning context creating an inability to
recognize structure in an isomorph that results in an obstacle
for successful transfer. What might help the learner
overcome this obstacle? One possibility is explicitly stating
the correspondence between elements of the learning and
transfer domains. Giving the alignment of elements should
help the learner recognize common structure in the transfer
domain and subsequently align the two domains and
successfully transfer. The purpose of Experiment 2 was to
investigate whether giving participants the correspondence
between elements would facilitate transfer.

1584

1

Disciminability %

Table 2: Examples from Phase 2 of Experiment 1.

0.75

Relevantly
Concrete
Perceptually
Rich
Generic

0.5
0.25
0

Familiar
Elements

Novel
Elements

Figure 1. Discriminability: “Same Structure”
Responses on R+ trials minus “Same Structure”
Reponses on R- trials presented as a percentage.
Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Eighty-three undergraduate students from Ohio
State University participated in the experiment and received
partial credit for an introductory psychology course. Students
were randomly assigned to one of five conditions that
specified the domain they learned in the first phase of the
experiment and whether or not they were given the
correspondence of elements.
Materials and Design Material were similar to those used in
the previously discussed transfer study. The experiment
included two phases: (1) training and testing in a learning
domain and (2) testing of the transfer domain. Two types of
learning instantiations were considered: Relevant
Concreteness and Generic. Training and testing of these
domains was identical to that used in Experiment 1. The same
transfer domain was used for all conditions and was
isomorphic to the Relevant Concreteness and Generic
domains. The experiment has a 2 (Learning Domain:
Relevantly Concrete vs. Generic) by 2 (Alignment: Mapping
vs. No Mapping) between-subjects design. Therefore, there
were four conditions, Relevant Concreteness Map, Relevant
Concreteness No Map, Generic Map, Generic No Map, and a
Baseline. A fifth learning domain was constructed as a
baseline for spontaneous performance in the transfer domain.
This domain involved unrelated arithmetic and matching
questions, thus training in the learning domain should not
facilitate performance in the transfer domain in this condition.
For Generic and Relevant Concreteness, half of the subjects
were given the correspondence (or mapping) of elements
across domains and half of the subjects were not.
In the four experimental conditions, the learning domain
tests were the same 24-question tests used in Experiment 1.
The transfer domain test was isomorphic to these tests.
Training in the learning domain across the four conditions
was isomorphic and was identical to that of Experiment 1.
The transfer domain was described as a children’s game
involving three objects:
. Children
sequentially point to objects and a child who is “the winner”
points to a final object. The correct final object is specified by
the rules of the game (rules of a mathematical group).
Participants were not explicitly taught these rules. Instead
they were told that the game rules were like the rules of the
system they just learned and they need to figure them out by
using their prior knowledge (i.e. transfer). In addition to this
suggestion to transfer, participants in the Map conditions
were also given the correspondence between elements of the
learning and transfer domains. For example, in the Generic
Map condition, they were told that
is like

, and

is like

is like

,

. Participants in

the Relevant Concreteness Map condition were shown the
analogous correspondences. In the Generic No Map and
Relevant Concreteness No Map, the correspondences were
not given. Then participants were asked to study a series of
examples from which the rules could be deduced, afterward
the multiple-choice test was given. Questions were presented
individually on the computer screen along with four key
examples at the bottom of the screen. The same four
examples were shown with all test questions. Following the
multiple-choice questions, participants in the four
experimental conditions were asked to indicate a level of
similarity between the learning and transfer domains.
Procedure As in experiments 1, training and testing were
presented to individual participants on a computer screen in a
quiet room. They proceeded through training and testing at
their own pace; and their responses were recorded.

Results and Discussion
Three participants (one Relevant Concreteness Map, one No
Relevant Concreteness Map, one No Relevant Concreteness
No Map) were eliminated from the data because their
learning or transfer scores were more than two standard
deviations below the mean of their respective conditions.
Participants in all conditions successfully learned, mean
learning test score = 20.4 (SD = 2.35) for Relevant
Concreteness and mean = 19.0 (SD = 4.32) for Generic.
Mean scores were significantly above chance score of 9, one
sample t-tests, t (31)s > 13.08, ps < .001. There was no
significant difference in learning between Concrete and
Generic conditions, independent samples t-test, t (62) = 1.65,
p > .10.
There were clear differences in transfer across conditions
(see Figure 2). Transfer scores were submitted to an
ANCOVA with learning domain condition (Generic or
Relevant Concreteness) and alignment (Map or No Map) as
factors and learning score as a covariate. The results
revealed significant effects of both condition, F (1, 57) =
10.12, p < .003, ηp2 = .15, and alignment, F (1, 57) = 9.04, p
< .005, ηp2 = .14, and a significant interaction between the
two F (1, 57) = 15.59, p < .0005, ηp2 =.22. Learning score
was also a contributing factor, F (1, 57) = 30.32, p < .0005,
ηp2 =.35. In other words, participants who learned the
relevantly concrete instantiation successfully transferred
only when given the correspondence of elements. However,
giving the correspondence offered no additional benefit for
those who learned the generic instantiation; they were able
to transfer with or without being given the correspondence
of elements.
In addition, similarity ratings followed the same pattern as
transfer. Participants in the Generic conditions and the
Relevant Concreteness Map condition rated the similarity of
the learning and transfer domain as highly similar on a scale
from 1 (completely dissimilar) to 5 (structurally identical),
mean = 4.6 (SD = .71) with no differences between
conditions, ANOVA F (3, 60) = 9.37, post-hoc Tukey ps >
.303. A mean rating of 3.2 (SD = 1.4) for the Relevant

1585

Mean Test Score (Max = 24)

22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8

the ability to recognize novel instantiations. The power of
abstract concepts lies in their ability to provide insight and
understanding of the new through transfer. Giving the
correspondence of elements can promote transfer, but
certainly this correspondence is not always available. This
research provides additional support for the argument that
the benefits of relevant concreteness for learning come at
the cost of transfer.

Relevantly
Concrete
Generic

No Map

Map

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103) to Vladimir M.
Sloutsky and by a grant from the Institute of Educational
Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education
(#R305H050125) to Andrew F. Heckler and Vladimir M.
Sloutsky.

Figure 2: Mean Transfer Test Scores in Experiment 2.
Note: Horizontal line represents mean transfer score in baseline
condition. Error bars represent standard error of mean.

Concreteness group was lower than that of the other
conditions, post-hoc Tukey p < .02.
In sum, giving participants in the Relevant Concreteness
condition the correspondence of elements allowed them to
transfer as well as participants in the Generic conditions.

General Discussion
Previous research has demonstrated that relevantly
concrete instantiations of an abstract concept can promote
quick learning, but dramatically hinder transfer. At the same
time generic instantiations can be learned as well and in
addition can facilitate transfer. The current research
elucidates what underlies this differential transfer ability.
Successful transfer requires that the relational structure of
an isomorphic domain is recognized to the extent that the
learned and transfer domains can be aligned and the analogy
subsequently implemented. Experiment 1 demonstrated that
learning with relevant concreteness hinders the ability to
recognize relational structure in a novel isomorph, while
learning with generic or irrelevantly concrete instantiations
does not. The inability to recognize structure creates an
obstacle to transfer. However, Experiment 2 demonstrated
that if given the correspondence of elements across
domains, learners can overcome this obstacle and
successfully transfer. This suggests that aligning the
elements helps students disembed the relational structure
from the learning context.
Successful transfer depends on more than simply the
similarity between domains. In fact, perceived similarity
may be a product of alignment and transfer. Students who
learned the relevantly concrete instantiation and were given
the correspondence of elements not only successfully
transferred conceptual knowledge, but also rated the
learning and transfer domains as highly similar, while
students who were not given the correspondence failed to
transfer well and did not rate the domains as highly similar.
The appeal of relevant concreteness in teaching is
certainly understandable. Presenting an abstract concept to
students through a familiar instantiation can make learning
quicker and easier than teaching with bland, generic
symbols. However, for abstract concepts, the goal of
learning is not simply knowledge of one instantiation; it is

References
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., Forbus, K. D. (1993). The
roles of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability
from inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
524-575.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 460466.
Goldstone, R. L. & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46(4), 414-466.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
Relevant concreteness and its effects on learning and
transfer. In B. Bara, L. Barsalou & M. Bucciarelli
(Eds.), Proceedings of the XXVII Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
431-467.
Rattermann, M. J. (1997). Commentary: Mathematical
reasoning and analogy. In L. D. English (Ed.)
Mathematical Reasoning: analogies, metaphors, and
images (247-264). Mahwah, New York: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 13, 629-639.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarity: Different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 15, 456-468.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and
transfer. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.

1586

