UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Embodied Action as a 'Helping Hand' in Social Interaction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8sd4j6bj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Lindblom, Jessica

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Embodied Action as a ‘Helping Hand’ in Social Interaction
Jessica Lindblom (jessica.lindblom@his.se)
School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skövde,
P.O. 408, 541 28 Skövde, SWEDEN

That is, cognitive functions are manifested in artifacts, and
dynamic and social processes can be directly observed and
studied. However, the main focus in DC is on the flow and
transformation of information through different media at a
more general level, rather than the particular role of the
body in these processes. This means, despite the emphasis
on interactions between agents and their material as well as
social surroundings, the DC approach offers not much on
the embodied nature of human cognition, as usually
conceived, and currently it is peculiarly ‘disembodied’.
This paper aims to complement the general
understanding on the embodied nature of social interaction
and cognition, and therefore presents part of an emerging
framework, which emphasizes the roles of dynamically and
socially embodied actions in the social realm.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next
section presents research from different disciplines that
stress the crucial role of embodiment in social interaction.
Next, based on these issues, a theoretical framework is
outlined, which portrays five fundamental functions of
embodied actions in social interaction. Then an instrumental
case study in an everyday social situation is presented,
which illustrates parts of the developing framework. The
paper ends with a summary and discussion.

Abstract
Although embodiment has become an important concept in
many areas of cognitive science during the past two decades,
most research has focused on individual agents and their
interactions with the environment. This paper focuses on the
social dimension of embodiment, and offers a conceptual
framework that addresses embodied actions in the social
realm. The framework identifies some fundamental functions
of embodiment in social interaction, which are also illustrated
by a case study in an everyday social setting. Generally
speaking, embodied actions provide a helping hand in social
interaction, both in a literal and practical sense.
Keywords: embodiment; social interaction; joint action;
dynamically embodied actions

Introduction
The ability to engage in social interaction is one of the
building blocks of human culture, and is the foundation for
the complexity of social life and social cognition. Despite
these facts, the main focus in most theories of embodied
cognition has until now been on the relation between the
individual body and its cognitive processes, in interaction
with the physical environment (cf., e.g., Chrisley & Ziemke,
2003; Clark, 1999; Núñez, 1999; Riegler, 2002; Wilson,
2002; Ziemke, 2003).
However, Johnson and Rohrer (in press), for instance,
point out that “embodied cognition is often social and
carried out cooperatively by more than one individual”.
Therefore, there is a need to move beyond the current
emphasis on the interactions between the individual and the
physical environment, to interactions between agents and
their social environment. Others have recognized this as
well, and argued that theoretical knowledge of embodiment
needs to be extended beyond current notions and/or levels
of ‘individual’ embodiment (cf., e.g., Anderson, in press;
Lindblom & Ziemke, 2003; 2005, in press; Sinha & Jensen,
2000).
Many theories of social and cultural cognition tend to
overlook the role of the body in social interaction by
treating embodied social interactions such as body posture,
gaze and gesture as nothing but the visible outcomes of
mental intentions (cf. Tomasello, 1999; Tomasello et al.,
2005; Frith & Wolpert, 2004). On the other hand, the
distributed cognition approach proposed by Hutchins
(1995), for instance, treats these social interactions and the
external materials involved, as directly observable cognitive
events in the situated interaction (Johnson, 2001). With this
crucial change in perspective, much of cognition that earlier
was hidden ‘inside’ the skull has now become apparent.

On the Embodied Nature of Social Interaction
Recent work in cognitive science and related disciplines
indicates that the body plays several important roles in
social interaction. In order to deepen our understanding of
social embodiment, an integrated approach is necessary,
which analyzes and identifies the fundamental functions of
embodiment in social interaction and cognition. But so far
there is no common theoretical framework considering such
a crossdisciplinary approach.
In this paper, I will briefly address different
perspectives, ranging from phenomenology, neuroscience,
social psychology, and gesture to linguistics. These
perspectives flow not only vertically through time but also
horizontally across disciplines. There is, of course, much
more research, that can and should be integrated
conceptually, but due to space limitations, the aim here is
limited to showing how crucial the body and its
sensorimotor processes are in social interaction and
cognition.

Phenomenology
Already in the 1940s, the French philosopher MerleauPonty argued that intercorporeality constitutes the basis of
intersubjectivity and social interaction (cf. Lindblom &

477

Ziemke, in press). Intercorporeality means that one's own
lived body is the locus of intersubjective experience, which
is based on the close intermodal links between visual
perception, kinaesthetic-proprioception, and motor behavior
(Gallagher, in press).
Moreover, Dautenhahn (1997) states that humans are
very social creatures, with the ability to read ’social signs’,
emotions and states of another agent’s mind. She argues that
the phenomenological social understanding of others is
based on an embodied simulation mechanism. That means,
the body might be used as a mediator in the process of
perceiving others. This mediation functions as a matching
system that allows one to adopt other persons’ point of view
by simulating their mental states with a resonant state of
your own (cf. Rizzolatti et al., 2002; Svensson, Lindblom &
Ziemke, in press). In short, one is able to put oneself in
another person’s ‘shoes’ through some form of embodied
simulation. Roughly speaking, this implies that one’s own
understanding of social interaction and another agents’ mind
is more than the exchange of communication signals.

students who received poor grades. Moreover, subjects
primed with concepts commonly associated with elderly
people (e.g., ‘gray’, ‘bingo’, ‘wrinkles’) exhibited
embodiment effects such as slower movement when leaving
the experimental lab, as compared to a control group primed
with neutral words. Several other studies also show similar
effects.
Secondly, the observation of bodily states in others
often results in bodily mimicry in the observer. People often
mimic behaviors, and subjects often mimic an
experimenter’s actual behavior, e.g. rubbing the nose or
shaking a foot. Subjects also tend to mimic observed facial
expressions, which is widely documented in the literature.
Thirdly, bodily states produce affective states, which
mean that embodiment not only facilitates a response to
social stimuli but also produces tentative stimuli. For
example, subjects rated cartoons differently when holding a
pen between their lips than when holding it between their
teeth. The latter triggered the same musculature as smiling,
which made the subjects rate the cartoons as funnier,
whereas holding the pen between the lips activated the same
muscles as frowning and consequently had the opposite
effect. Moreover, bodily postures influence the subjects’
affective state, e.g., subjects in an upright position
experienced more pride than subjects in a slump position.
Fourthly, compatibility between bodily and cognitive
states enhances performance. For instance, several motor
performance compatibility effects have been reported, in
which subjects responded faster to ‘positive’ words (e.g.
‘love’) than ‘negative’ words (e.g. ‘hate’) when asked to
pull a lever towards them.
These examples as well as other studies demonstrate
that there is a strong relation between embodied and
cognitive states in social interaction. In short, the bidirectional swapping between these states occurs
automatically without any higher knowledge structure.

Neuroscience
Recent neuro-scientific findings suggest that such a
resonance mechanism may rely on special kinds of visuomotor neurons called mirror neurons (e.g., Gallese &
Goldman, 1998; Gallese, Keysers & Rizzolatti, 2004).
Mirror neurons are located in area F5 in the monkey brain
and become activated both when performing specific goaldirected hand (and mouth) movements and when observing
or hearing about the same actions (Kohler, et al., 2002;
Rizzolatti et al., 2002). Because mirror neurons respond to
both conditions, it has been argued that the mirror system
functions as a kind of action representation, since it links
’action’ and ’action-perception’. Consequently, this
mirroring mechanism enables the agent to understand the
meaning of the observed action by embodied simulation.
Moreover, it has been speculated that the mirror system
might be a basic mechanism necessary for imitation and
‘mind-reading’, i.e., attributing mental states to others (e.g.,
Rizzolatti et al., 2002; Svensson, Lindblom & Ziemke, in
press). Taken together, the consideration of the mirror
neuron system as the neurobiological underpinning of
‘intercorporeality’ and simulation theories as the basis of
social interaction and mind-reading, provides significant
examples of ‘more’ embodied views of social cognition.

Gesture
A significant embodied aspect of cognition is gesture, which
constitutes a pan-human ability that may provide important
information to the listener, since gesture offers speakers the
means of expressing thoughts difficult to articulate in
speech (Goldin-Meadow, 2003; McNiell, 1992).
Accordingly, gesture is a natural part of communication,
and even blind people produce gestures at the same rate, and
in the same manner, as sighted persons (Goldin-Meadow,
2003). In addition, there is evidence which demonstrates
that gesturing is a ‘boon to the gesturer’, and besides
reflecting thoughts it might also shape thoughts (GoldinMeadow, 2003). Gesturing may be a form of processing
initial ideas that are shadowed but not hidden. As a result,
gesturing functions as a vehicle of thought. Hence, gesture
and speech complement, but do not compete, with each
other (Goldin-Meadow, 2003).
It is important to notice that gesture has not only
visual, but also kinaesthetic dimensions, and this
phenomenological understanding may be crucial for how

Social Psychology
Empirical evidence from social psychology has also
demonstrated how social thought and judgments can be
affected by bodily states, actions and motivations (cf.
Barsalou et al., 2003; Niedenthal et al., 2005). Barsalou et
al. (2003), e.g., have identified the following four kinds of
social embodiment effects.
Firstly, perceived social stimuli do not only produce
cognitive states, but also bodily states. For example, it has
been reported that high school students who received good
grades in an exam adopted a more erect posture than
478

•

the “body knows the world through the hand” (in Goodwin,
2000). In other words, gesture enables people to embody
and communicate their thoughts in action.

The body as a means and end in
communication and social interaction.
• Bodily actions and gesture as a helping hand
in shaping, expressing and sharing thoughts.
• The body as a representational device.
The body functions as a social resonance
mechanism. From an embodied perspective, there is no
need to decode or represent embodied social stimuli to more
’advanced’ or cognitive states since the bodily states in
themselves actually are cognitive or affective states, as
related work portrays. Furthermore, the social resonance
mechanism does not only function in direct or online social
interaction, but functions also in off-line interaction when
the social stimuli are more abstract like in words and
concepts. Hence, this first function portrays how cognitive
and bodily states of the interacting partners are reflected in
both themselves and in-between them.
The body functions as a means and end in
communication and social interaction. Mirror neurons
and the mirror neuron system are suggested to provide the
linkage between ’action’ and ’action-perception’, and
apparently, this implies that the body and its sensorimotor
processes are ‘cognitive’ in themselves, and not only
bounded by the brain. The great benefit of this actionunderstanding linkage, beside the parsimony of the account,
is the inbuilt dual ability of grasping both the ‘what’ and
‘why’ aspects of the present action, i.e., what the action is
about as well as catching the intention behind the
movement. Different degrees of activation of and couplings
with the mirror neuron system form a continuum between
basic levels of action-understanding to more advanced ones,
such as gestures and language. Although the current
knowledge of the underlying mirror neuron mechanism is
unable to explain in detail the whole complexity of human
social interaction, it does shed light on how the interacting
partners are able to share the communicated meaning in the
dialogue. Hence, this second function offers a tentative
explanation of that particular linkage, thereby unifying the
‘inside and ‘outside’ perspectives of socially embodied
interaction.
Bodily actions and gesture functions as a helping
hand in shaping, expressing and sharing thoughts.
Besides speech, gesture is a significant (embodied) aspect of
social interaction, which may provide important information
to the listener, since gesture offers speakers the means of
expressing thoughts difficult to articulate in speech.
Through gesturing, we are able to generate and embody
dynamical associations between different matters, which can
offer new insights to the present situation or problem at
hand. In addition, gesture sometimes serves as an explicit
instance of the action-meaning embodied in speech,
suggesting that hand movements are physical
externalizations of the speaker’s ideas. Hence, this third
function stresses how bodily actions operate both outwardly
(inter-subjective) and inwardly (intra-subjective) in social
interaction and cognition, in which our embodiment

Linguistics
Iverson and Thelen (1999) demonstrate converging
empirical evidence, which suggests that the systems of hand
and mouth movements are not two separate systems. Rather,
they should be viewed as an integrated communicative
“speech-language-gesture” system that links the embodied
origin of thought and cognition. Interestingly, the human
homolog to area F5 in the monkey brain is Broca’s area,
which has several crucial functions in language production
(Arbib, 2005). Rizzolatti and Arbib (1998) suggest that the
human mimetic capacity (cf. Donald, 1991) is a natural
extension of the action-recognition mechanism based on
mirror neurons, allowing human ancestors to communicate
to a higher degree than other primates. Moreover, empirical
results support a close coupling between language and
action, and linguistic meaning is suggested to be grounded
in bodily action (cf. Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002).
Bodily mimesis has recently been suggested to bridge
the gap between language and embodiment (Zlatev, in
press). Bodily mimesis is the volitional use of the body for
constructing and communicating representations in the form
of imitation and gesture. It is worth highlighting that the
emergence of these bodily representations for the sake of
communication might serve as the foundation for the
phylogenetic development of a “human language” in form
of a conventional symbolic system (Zlatev, in press).
However, it is for future work to clarify the relation between
mirror neurons, embodied simulation mechanisms, gesture,
and the emergence of language.

A Framework of Socially Embodied Actions
The disciplines discussed here offer highly complementary
rather than alternative views on the role of embodiment in
social interactions. By integrating these perspectives, we
can obtain a deeper understanding of socially embodied
actions. Another significant aspect of the proposed
framework is that it integrates the ‘outside’, (third-hand
perspective) and ‘inside’ (first-hand perspective) standpoints
of the body in social (cognitive) interactions. From the
‘outside’ perspective, the framework demonstrates the role
of the body in social interactions, by not separating thought
from socially embodied actions, thus grasping the human
sensitivity for bodily intentions in cognition. From the
‘inside’ perspective, it applies the empirical findings within
neuroscience and related fields, offering a more thorough
understanding of the phenomenological aspects and the
underlying neural mechanisms that facilitate this human
sensitivity of social interaction.
Based on the previous ideas and empirical findings, I
have identified the following four fundamental functions of
embodiment in social interaction:
• The body as a social resonance mechanism.

479

(paradoxically) both constrains and enables the possibilities
of expressive actions.
The body functions as a representational device. In
addition to speech, there is the more controversial claim that
the body also has representational properties, where certain
kinds of gesture, portraying representational aspects, are the
least provocative and most obvious examples of the body as
an (external) representational device. The neurological roots
of this ability might be the activity of the mirror neurons,
since their linkage between ‘action’ and ‘action-perception’
might propose a kind of ‘action representations’ that are
directly enacted in social interaction. Furthermore, since
mirror neurons are able to compensate for missing
‘information’, and yet seem to ‘understand’ the goal of the
action, it can be argued that the grasping of the action does
not require a declarative understanding, since it is
meaningful in themselves. Hence, the cognitive processes of
social (cognitive) interaction are suggested, to varying
extents, to be grounded in embodied ‘representations’ that
have representational content. It should be noted, however,
that we are not denying mental concepts as such, but
questioning their organization, since they may be the result
of and grounded in embodied interactions and not the
underlying requirement for cognitive processes.

intersubjectivity, which are better displayed in the actual
video recording.
The Filly Episode
The mustang horses at BBHC normally range freely in
several herds on the prairie, but sometimes they have to be
looked after. In this episode a couple of fillies have been
dewormed and are kept in a paddock for surveillance. One
of the fillies is lying on the ground, weakened by the
medical treatment, and has made some unsuccessful efforts
to rise. In addition, Bob has made some attempts to
encourage the filly to rise, by patting her and clapping his
hands, but his efforts have failed. Otherwise, the filly seems
to be pretty alert. In short, the present task is to assist the
filly to rise, and the following episode is illustrated by a few
selected video frames.
The participants, besides Bob, are Dag (D), BoChief
(BC), Peter (P), Catrin (C), and myself. A joint effort to
help the filly is suggested, and C says 1 “you’ll have to take
each other by the hands and together lift …from underneath”.
Bob is sitting on his heels beside the filly and initiates a
lifting attempt, when BC and D enter the scene in order to
assist. Together, they make an effort to lift the filly but they
fail, seemingly because they do not really know how to
cooperate, and consequently the un-regulated interaction,
lasting about 5 seconds, comes to nothing (Figure 1). This
means, the spoken words alone were not sufficient for coregulation to emerge.

Case Study
In order to illustrate the emerging framework’s potential, an
instrumental case study was conducted. Due to the topic’s
situated nature, the study was carried out in an everyday
social activity ‘in the wild’ (cf. Hutchins, 1995). It offers
additional empirical evidence in support of the previously
addressed framework, by focusing on how we embody our
thoughts in action through multimodal interactions such as
gesture, speech, posture, and gaze.
The case study was carried out during a guided tour, in
which I participated, at a ranch that maintains and preserves
the Blackfeet’s herds of Spanish mustang horses. The ranch,
named Blackfeet Buffalo Horse Coalition (BBHC), is
situated outside Browning, Montana, in the US. The
participants in the study were first and foremost the head of
BBHC, Bob Black Bull, and a group of Swedish visitors,
which all are familiar to handle horses. It should be noted
that Bob does not speak Swedish, whereas the visitors
understand English, but mostly communicate in Swedish
within the group. The data collecting technique used was
participant observation with video recording.
The unit of analysis is socially embodied actions in coregulated interaction, but due to space limitations here I
only present the analysis of a short episode that exemplifies
the four fundamental functions of embodiment in social
interaction and communication, which go far beyond the
bounds of internal mental processes. Hence, the analysis
considers both the spoken words and bodily actions, and the
social situation at hand, which in many cases actually
provide meaning to the embodied actions. The media used
here, such as verbal descriptions and photographs, are quite
‘static’ and unable to capture the dynamics of motion and

Figure 1: A sequence of the failed lifting attempt by Bob,
BC and D (from left to right).
Therefore, they need to try again, and in order to explain
how they should do it, P says: ”take… take each others’
hands… from opposite sides ” – and I add “from underneath”.
At that point in time, D aligns his bodily position towards
Bob’s, just for a short moment, which can be seen as a way
of establishing a joint focus of attention and agreement of
the task ahead. Then Bob turns around, and while pointing
at C and looking at her, he says: ”Catrin, come over here, we
need you so we can pick her up”. While Bob utters the above
sentence, he moves his right hand, which initially points at
C, from her toward the filly, and this action is now being
accompanied with his left hand and unites in a movement
that can be interpreted as a kind of lifting gesture (Figure 2).
The lifting gesture begins with him lowering his upper body
and hands a little, and then he continues the whole gesture
upwards. Thus, this gesture illustrates how he expresses and
shares his thoughts in action as well as in speech. Moreover,
by actually doing the lifting gesture he uses his body as a
tool or representational device for the sake of
communication.
1

480

All quotes are translated from Swedish by the author.

2a

2b

2c

2d

2e

2f

recognition in D, via some kind of embodied simulation
mechanism (cf. above).
The whole sequence in Figure 2 takes less than three
seconds, in which D’s gesture lasting only one second, but
obviously it is enough, since when they are actually going to
do the next lift , D repeats his lifting gesture, but now also
towards BC while Bob is looking at them. This illustrates
how the body functions as a social resonance mechanism
and facilitates the understanding of another person’s actions.
Finally, in the successful lifting of the filly, C joins the
men and takes hold of the front of the filly, whereas Bob
and D grasp each others’ hands under the filly’s belly, and
when Bob utters “up” they are all co-regulated and as a
result, the filly finally stands up and is able to join the other
horses. This means, the previously uttered vocal suggestions
how to ‘assist’ each other to lift the filly, were not enough
for a co-regulated lifting action to emerge. Instead, when the
participants were able to express and share their thoughts in
cross-modal interaction, these socially embodied actions
(including speech) were realized in the successful lift. All in
all, embodied actions provide a ‘helping hand’ in the joint
social interaction, and in a practical sense, gesturing actually
enabled the men to embody their thoughts in actions and
also their hands lent the filly a hand.

Summary and Discussion

Figure 2: The first two frames (a-b) show Bob’s shift in
pointing from C to the filly, and the following ones (c-f)
display Bob’s lifting gesture and then D’s accompanying
gesture.

This paper has presented different views on the embodied
nature of social interaction and joint action; resulting in a
conceptual framework of how socially embodied actions are
used in meaning-creating activity and interaction, which
also has been illustrated in a case study. Thus, this paper
contributes to extending the understanding of the social
dimension of embodiment in current theories of embodied
cognitive science.
However, the proposed framework is still work in
progress, and needs further elaboration. Firstly, beside these
four presented functions, the case study also reveals how
crucial embodied actions are in the emergence and
engagement of the shared social situation, actually ‘lending
a hand’ for the shared situation to occur and be manifested.
Secondly, there is a need to consider the different kinds of
social interactions in communication (e.g., dyadic and
triadic interactions), and then analyzing in what ways
socially embodied actions are used in these meaningcreating activities. Thirdly, it is of importance to regard how
embodied actions are integral parts of the always ongoing
relational dialogue, that is, actions are always in relation to
some prior information, and socially embodied actions do
also play a fundamental role in this process. Finally,
additional analysis of empirical evidence may provide
further support for the above issues, which will
subsequently be incorporated in the final framework
(Lindblom, forthcoming).
To conclude, the framework suggests that our socially
embodied actions (movement, touch, speech, gaze, posture,
gesture, etc.) do not simply serve to express our internal

It is important to notice that the timing of the upward
action of his hands and torso coincides with the last part of
the utterance (”pick her up”) and the particular forming of his
hands (Figure 2b-2e) into a general gesture of the imaginary
grip. Hence, it can be viewed as a way to assure D they
should lift her up jointly, which is represented by the
gesture that represents the close grip of each others’ hands.
Then (Figure 2e) before Bob lowers his hands, D who has
been looking at Bob, starts to make a gesture of lifting,
which is slightly different, as a way to share Bob’s idea of
how to lift, as well as showing that he actually has
understood what to do in the next try (2e). However, D does
not make the same representational gesture for lifting.
Instead, he expresses how he should act from his
perspective – how he should use his hands in the coming
lift, whereas Bob’s gesture rather reflects how to grasp each
others hands jointly. In short, different perspectives of the
lifting are expressed, but they both are ways to shape and
externalize thoughts in socially embodied actions.
It should be noted that besides creating, showing and
expressing thoughts, Bob’s lifting gesture has kinaesthetic
and phenomenological aspects. This means, besides the end
result of the gesture, the dynamics in the action itself is a
fundamental part of the cognitive function since the
phenomenological experience of the bowing action are part
of the action understanding in Bob as well as the action

481

language, and mind: Embodiment. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Kohler, E., Keysers, C., Umilta, M. A., Fogassi, V. &
Rizzolatti, G. (2002). Hearing sounds, understanding
actions: action representation in mirror neurons. Science,
287, 846-848.
Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (2003). Social situatedness of
natural and artificial intelligence: Vygotsky and beyond.
Adaptive Behavior, 11(2), 79-96.
Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (2005). Body-in-motion:
broadening the social mind. Proceedings of the XXVII
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp.
1284-1289). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (in press). Embodiment and
social interaction: implications for cognitive science. In T.
Ziemke J. Zlatev, and R. Frank (Eds.), Body, language,
and mind: Embodiment. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lindblom, J. (forthcoming). On the embodied nature of
social interaction and cognition (working title). Doctoral
dissertation, University of Linköping, University of
Skövde, Sweden.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
Niedenthal, P. M., Barsalou, L. W., Winkielman, P.,
Krauth-Gruber, S. & Ric, F. (2005). Embodiment in
attitudes, social perception, and emotion. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 9 (3), 184-211.
Núñez, R. (1999). Could the future taste purple? Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 6(11-12), 41-60.
Riegler, A. (2002). When is a cognitive system embodied?
Cognitive Systems Research, 3(3), 339-348.
Rizzolatti, G. & Arbib, M. A. (1998). Language within our
grasp. Trends in Neurosciences, 21, 188-194.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L. & Gallese, V. (2002).
From mirror neurons to imitation: facts and speculations.
In A. N. Meltzoff and W. Prinz (Eds.), The imitative mind
– development, evolution, and brain bases. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Sinha, C. & Jensen de Lopez, K. (2000). Language, culture
and the embodiment of spatial cognition. Cognitive
Linguistics, 11, 17-41.
Svensson, H., Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (in press). Making
sense of embodied cognition. In T. Ziemke, J. Zlatev, T.
and Frank R. (Eds.) Body, language, and mind:
Embodiment. Berlin: Mounton de Gruyter.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M, Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T. & Moll, H.
(2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: the origins
of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28,
675-735.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & review, 9(4), 625-636.
Ziemke, T. (2003). What’s that thing called embodiment?
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1305-1310). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum
Zlatev, J (in press). Embodiment, language, and mimesis. In
T. Ziemke J. Zlatev, and R. Frank (eds.), Body, language,
and mind: Embodiment. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

cognitive processes, but are themselves part and parcel of
cognition.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Bob BlackBull at the BBHC
and the visitors for their participation, and Tarja Susi, Tom
Ziemke, and Paul Hemeren for discussions and helpful
comments.

References
Anderson, M. (in press). How to study the mind: In F.
Santoianni, and C. Sabatano (Eds.). Embodied Cognition
and Perceptual Learning in Adaptive Development.
Cambridge Scholars Press.
Arbib, M. (2005). From monkey-like action-recognition to
human language. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 28, 105167.
Barsalou, L. W., Niedenthal, P. M., Barbey, A. K. &
Ruppert, J. A. (2003). Social embodiment. In B. H. Ross
(Ed.) The Psychology of Learning and Motivation. New
York: Academic Press.
Chrisley, R. & Ziemke, T. (2003). Embodiment. In
Encyclopedia of cognitive science. London: Macmillian.
Clark, A. (1999). An embodied cognitive science? Trends in
Cognitive Science, 3 (9), 345-351.
Dautenhahn, K. (1997). I could be you. Cybernetics and
Systems, 25(8), 417-453.
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Frith, C. & Wolpert, D. (Eds.)(2004). The neuroscience of
social interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S. (in press). Phenomenological and
experimental contributions to understanding embodied
experience. In T. Ziemke, J. Zlatev and R. Frank (Eds.),
Body, language, and mind: Embodiment. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Gallese, V. & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the
simulation theory of mind-reading. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 2(12), 493-501.
Gallese, V., Keysers, C. & Rizzolatti, G. (2004). A unifying
view of the basis of social cognition. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8 (9), 398-403.
Glenberg, A. M. & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & review, 9(3),
558-565.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Hearing gesture - how our
hands help us think. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within
situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32,
1489-1512.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Iverson, J. M. & Thelen, E. (1999). Hand, mouth and brain
– the dynamic emergence of speech and gesture. Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 6 (11-12), 19-40.
Johnson, C. M. (2001). Distributed primate cognition: a
review. Animal Cognition 4, 167-183.
Johnson, M. & Rohrer, T. (in press). We are live creatures.
In T. Ziemke, J. Zlatev, and R. Frank (Eds.), Body,
482

