UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Exploring the Relationship Between Pain and Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0h44t8zp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Kyburg, Alice I.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Exploring the Relationship Between Pain and Perception
Alice I. Kyburg (kyburg@uwosh.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of Wisconsin Oshkosh
Oshkosh, WI 54901 USA
Abstract
It is the goal of this paper to contribute to the conceptual
understanding of pain.
We specifically explore the
relationship between pain and perception, surveying three
philosophical works that define pain somehow or other in
terms of perception. We critique this work and also explore
some of its empirical implications. We briefly consider for
each of these accounts how pain can be learned (or
unlearned), what role distraction plays in pain processing, and
the kinds of chronic pain research proponents of the account
would favor. We consider whether the various accounts of
pain offer significant empirical distinctions and conclude with
a request for assistance from cognitive psychologists.
Keywords: pain, perception

Introduction
While all of us are personally familiar with pain, we have
little understanding of it from an objective point of view.
We have observed that a subject's state of mind can affect
her pain experience, as when she is under hypnosis or in a
state of anxiety, but we do not know how to make sense of
this observation. People with the same bodily injuries
sometimes report drastic differences in the amount of pain
they feel. It also appears that people sometimes learn to feel
pain under circumstances that initially did not hurt. In all of
these cases, are people really experiencing varying degrees
of pain or could it be that the pain is constant and some
other variable is changing? How can such a question be
answered?
People on opiates sometimes say they are in pain but that
it does not bother them. Some experts say that since pain
that is not bothersome is impossible, we should infer that
these subjects are misspeaking. Others take the claims of
patients on opiates to be true and use them to motivate new
accounts of pain. Some clinicians claim that some people
who believe they are in pain are simply imagining it even
though their pain behavior is similar to those subjects whose
pain is indisputably real. Others argue that a sincere report
of pain leaves no room for doubt concerning whether or not
a subject is in pain. How are we to determine which, if
either, is the right response to these cases?
The various positions people take on these issues impact
those who are suffering along with the scientific research
that would seek solutions for them. It seems, though, that
scientists cannot resolve these disputes through empirical
studies if they cannot agree about when, and to what degree,
pain is present in their subjects. Using an arbitrary but
precise definition of pain may help scientists to agree about
when their subjects are in "pain", as they have defined the
term, and what the correlated physiology is. It cannot shed

light on the above issues, however, which concern our
ordinary concept, not the arbitrary, scientifically defined
one.
Some philosophers take the above disagreements as
evidence that our concept of pain is incoherent, for instance,
Dennett (1978). They argue that there is no fact of the
matter regarding whether or not pain can be learned or
imagined or whether someone could have pain that does not
bother them. We believe that this conclusion is premature
and that there is more to be learned about pain from the
difficult problems described above. Nelkin (1994) wrote
that “…the common-sense concept [pain] does seem to pick
out an important kind of experience – even if common sense
only dimly understands the experience – and science needs
to explain that type of experience, not something else totally
unrelated to it.”1 We shall attempt to shed some light, in
particular, on the notion that pain somehow or other is to be
understood in terms of perception. We also hope to
encourage a much needed dialog between philosophers and
psychologists about the usage of terms such as ‘sensation’
and ‘perception’. We conclude with the observation that
conceptual analysis can take us only so far in making sense
of pain in terms of perception and that the final judgment
regarding the relationship between pain and perception must
be based on which cognitive model is best supported by
empirical considerations.

Pain is not a Simple Sensation
There is a view of pain sometimes taught in medical
textbooks that pain is a kind of sensation resulting from
somatic pain receptors delivering signals to a pain center in
the brain. This view implies, first, that pain is a basic
sensation, i.e., it is a simple linear process that begins with
the stimulation of sensors at the location of the pain and
ends with a judgment that there is pain at such and such a
location. This view seems not to recognize the complicated
data surrounding pain described above. The consensus
among scientists who study pain seems to be that such a
view misses all of the interesting complexity surrounding
pain (Chapman, 1986).
In recent philosophical literature, the view that pain is a
basic sensation is also largely rejected. Among other
reasons, philosophers like to point out that there seems to be
no single sort of sensation common to all pains. There also
seems to be no pain processing center in the brain which
receives such sensory signals. Rather, there are many
regions of the brain that are active in any case of pain
experience. These observations have led to a proliferation

1652

1

p. 326

of alternative accounts of pain, the most promising of which
incorporate into the concept of pain some sort of role for
perception.

Pain and Perception

it must at least involve information processing that leads to
a depiction of the way some aspect of the world is.
Whatever pain is, it is not something in the world (or even
in the body) that a perceptual system has evolved to detect.
To think otherwise, we think, is to take too literally common
ways of speaking about pain, such as “I have a pain in my
shoulder.”

Perception is typically thought of as complex information
processing, involving low-level input to the sensory organs,
which process it into higher-level information, the final
output being a depiction of some aspect of the outside
world. Scientists assume that this processing is influenced
by cognitive factors such as attention and stability, other
sensory modalities, associations, memories, beliefs and
attitudes. Thus, what one sees (or does not see) can be
influenced by one’s expectations and focus of attention, as
well as what one was seeing moments earlier. What one
hears can be influenced by what one sees. Whether one
smells rice or popcorn can depend on one’s belief
concerning which food is normal for the setting. What pain
researchers realize is that if pain is a product of perception
then one can expect such influences to play a role in one’s
experiences of pain. Just as one can “see” a deer when
hunting only to learn later that one has shot the neighbor’s
dog, one can have pain in a circumstance in which there is
only a light touch and no bodily damage. In fact,
researchers can credit the mysteriousness of all of the
empirical data described above to the complexities of
perception and clinicians can more easily avoid the
temptation of categorizing odd cases of pain as being
“merely in the head”. If pain is the result of a perceptual
process, they can accept the patient’s claim that his pain is
real. Pain formerly understood as “merely in the head” can
now be understood as a very real product of the head.
But saying pain has something or other to do with
perception is not saying all that much. What is the
perceptual process and how is pain experience tied to it?
What, exactly, is perceived when we have pain?

Pain is a Sensation Derived From a Perception

On Perceiving Pain

Perhaps pain is a sensation, but one that is the product of a
complex perceptual process. Hall (1989) argues that having
pain amounts to having pain sensations, where the latter are
the sensations that are experienced when the body is in a
certain perceptual state. Hall does not say what the objects
of such perception are, leaving one to wonder just what he
has in mind. On his view the same pain sensation can be
felt as pleasant or unpleasant, depending on one’s
psychology and also on the evolutionary role that particular
kind of pain sensation may have played. In other words,
there are pain sensations, on the one hand, which are the
product of complex perceptual processes, and then there is
the matter of our feelings toward those sensations.
To better understand this conception of pain, it may help
to look more generally at the difference between perception
and sensation. Unfortunately, there is much disagreement
among philosophers in this area. What we can say is that
sensations are generally understood to be non-conceptual in
character and inseparable from experience. They are also
often taken to be non-representational.
In contrast,
perceptions are often understood to have conceptual or
cognitive components, they are representational in
character, and they are, at least in principle, separable from
experience. Following Peacocke (1983), let us say that the
representational content of a perception is the way it
presents the world as being. Some philosophers hold that
perceptual experiences are purely representational. Others
hold that while representational, they also have some
sensational properties, namely what is left after they are
stripped of their representational content. It seems to me
that the way to understand Hall’s view of pain is from the
second perspective. Perception of some sort must take place
for us to have pain. What pain is is what is left when one
strips the representational content from this perception, i.e.,
the remaining sensation.
Still, without specifying exactly what Hall has in mind for
the object of this perceptual process, it is difficult to make
complete sense of his proposal. What is being perceived?
And why should one suppose that the affective component
of our pain experience, which may well be a part of
representational content of the correlated perception, has
nothing to do with the sensation derived from this
perception? Why wouldn’t the resulting sensation we call
pain, on this view, incorporate this affective dimension?
Hall’s view is also controversial in light of the fact that
psychologists take sensations to be low-level stimulations of
sensory nerves whose signals are delivered in a linear way
to higher-level brain regions without “top-down” influences.

One view of pain, rarely made explicit, is that what is
perceived when we have pain is pain itself. Scientists
sometimes seem to write as if pain were the object of a paindetecting perceptual process. Chapman (1986) writes,
“Unless the stimulus source is clear and the stimulus is
intense, noxious sensory input is characterized by
substantial uncertainty.
When uncertainty exists, the
impulse barrage is susceptible to classification at several
different levels of information processing.
Such
classification may reduce it to a trivial pain experience, lead
to an experience that is not pain but some vaguely similar
sensation (e.g., tightness, cramping), or it may amplify the
sensory signal and associate it with great threat.”2 Aydede
and Guzeldere (2002) at times talk explicitly of pain
perception and describe it as a form of “inner perception”.
We find the notion of pain as an object of perception to be
confused. We think that whatever one means by perception,
2

p. 162
1653

Yet, Hall seems to say that sensations are a function of
perception. This is not simply a matter of Hall using poor
terminology, for if Hall were to use the phrase ‘phenomenal
experience’ in place of ‘sensation’ he would lose a
component of his theory that sets it apart from the others,
namely that there is a difference between our complete
experience when having pain, and the way the pain itself
feels. According to Hall, we may find a pain horribly
uncomfortable or we may not mind it at all, but in either
case what we mind or don’t mind is the same particular
sensation.3

Pain is a Perception or Quality of a Perception

perceiving bodily damage is unpleasant for us, perhaps even
necessarily so.
Douglas (1998) holds a subtly different view of pain,
emphasizing that pain is a sort of response to an object, e.g.
a boil or a burn, or a response to an event that is normally
damaging to the body, e.g. a slap or a stab. His view is that
how we feel when we perceive or sense this physical
damage is pain. That is, pain is a quality of a mental
process. Like Pitcher, Douglas sees pain as neither an
object of perception nor a sensation nor any other kind of
mental object. Note that on this view, if one perceives
bodily damage (through the appropriate perceptual
processes), one has pain. The experience does not have to
have a particular quality before it can be counted as pain.
The very act of perceiving in this way makes it the case that
there is a way that it feels, and how it feels is pain. At first
blush, it seems that on this view pain could, conceivably,
not be bothersome. The cases of subjects on opiates could
be understood in this light. Due to the effect of the drug, the
perception of bodily damage takes on a different, perhaps
less bothersome, quality than normal.

An alternative view reduces pain experience to a particular
perceptual event. Pain scientists are understood to be
studying a complex perceptual process. The process usually
begins with nociceptors, which fire in response to tissue
damage or stress. The information being passed along from
the nociceptive system serves both as (1) a warning system,
providing information about tissue damage or threat of
damage, its extent, and its location, and (2) a reminding
system, repeatedly supplying information that injury is
present in an area of the body so that physical movement
will be adjusted to best enable healing. The warning
system, which produces a quicker brighter signal, is
dominated by A-delta fibers. The reminding system, which
produces an especially unpleasant and diffuse signal, is
dominated by C-fibers. Since any perceptual system which
is to account for pain must be processing signals produced
by these two systems, it seems a natural suggestion that
what is being perceived when one experiences pain is the
state of the body, and in particular, in cases of injury or
pending injury, information about the body at the location
where the injury is taking place.
Pitcher (1970) holds such a view. He suggests that to have
pain is simply to perceive bodily damage. The state of
misperceiving bodily damage is similar enough to the state
of perceiving bodily damage that we describe the latter as a
case of having pain as well. It seems to us as if we are
sensing bodily damage, and we have “an immediate
inclination to change [our] ‘state of awareness,’ an
immediate desire to want it to stop, just as a person who has
a pain in the normal cases usually has.”4 This may be
analogous to cases where we report to the eye doctor that we
see spots even though we are entirely certain there are no
spots where we are looking. On Pitcher’s view, the usual
unpleasantness of having pain is due to the fact that

Contrasts and Comparisons

3

What might the difference be between Hall’s view of pain
being the sensation resulting from perceiving something and
Douglas’s view that it is the way it feels to perceive that
thing? The answer to this question must be highly
speculative, given the incompleteness of Hall’s account. It
seems, though, to be something like this: Pain, for Douglas,
while not itself a mental object, is inherently tied to both our
beliefs and our feelings. The way that it feels to perceive
has everything to do with how we understand (read
represent) what is happening to us and the emotions such
understanding triggers. Our perception of bodily damage is
highly cognitively penetrable – our pain is influenced by our
thoughts and feelings. In contrast, Hall makes perfectly
clear that he means to exclude the affective dimension from
pain sensation. A pain sensation may be of one sort versus
another sort due to the various beliefs that influence the
perceptual process from which the pain sensation is derived.
But in the end, the sensation one has is just that, a sensation.
For Douglas, how we feel when we have that pain sensation
is another matter. It is influenced by our emotions and by
facts about evolution. What we take this to mean is that
emotional factors do not determine the sort of pain sensation
one has but may influence what it is like for a given person
to have that sensation.
From a scientific point of view it may seem as if the
views of Hall, Pitcher and Douglas, while theoretically
different, are empirically equivalent. That is, it may be that
every bit of empirical data has an explanation on each view
and each view makes the same empirical predications. For
instance, on each view, the pain one has is a function of a
perceptual process. On each view, the pain one feels can be
affected not only by the blocking of nociception but also by
changes in the other variables involved in the perceptual
process. For instance, by redirecting attention away from a

It would be interesting to compare Hall’s account with the
account in (Nelkin, 1991).. Nelkin, proposes that pain is a noninferential evaluated phenomenal state. As such, there is no pain
perception.
Rather, there are phenomenal states that are
representational (i.e., sensation in my foot which is similar to the
sensation of being cut with a sharp object) that are immediately
evaluated in a form of introspection (i.e., that [sensation in my
foot] means bodily damage.) The comparison might reveal just
how central to Hall’s account the role perception really is.
4
Pitcher, p. 385
1654

bodily disorder on which a subject is focused, his or her
perceptual processing could be altered, which, on all three
views, could positively impact the experience of pain he or
she is having. On both Pitcher’s and Douglas’s views, the
subject’s perception of bodily damage changes due to the
redirected attention. Perhaps less severe bodily damage is
perceived. For Pitcher, a change in one’s perception of
bodily damage is, by simple definition, a change in one’s
pain. On Douglas’ view, the new perception would, in this
case, have a way that it feels that differs in quality from the
earlier one – it would be less unpleasant. In contrast to
these views, Hall’s view suggests different possibilities:
either this altered perception would bring with it new, and
less unpleasant, sensations or, alternatively, the redirected
attention might not impact the perception or the derivative
pain sensations, but would instead impact the subject’s
emotional disposition toward these sensations, resulting in a
less unpleasant experience of the same pain sensation.
Each view also offers a way to understand pain as
something that can be learned (and unlearned). Suppose
one learns that a chemical one regularly works with is
highly carcinogenic and soon after notices for the first time
that it hurts to inhale it. Or, perhaps, after several weekly
deep muscle massages, one becomes certain of their benefit
and ceases finding the experience painful. Since pain is
understood on all three accounts to be a function of
perception and beliefs are understood to impact perception,
it follows that acquiring new beliefs, i.e., learning, on all
three views, can bring with it, new pain experience or even a
disappearance of pain. For Pitcher and Douglas there is a
second way in which pain can be learned. New beliefs can
lead to new emotional responses to particular events, which,
on their views, can impact one’s perceptions just as one’s
beliefs can. And, finally, though it seems that Hall holds the
view that pain sensations are unaffected by emotions, he
would clearly allow the new emotions that sometimes
accompany new beliefs to lead to new experiences of the
same pain sensations. Thus, a follower of Hall might say
that in the above cases, one comes to experience a given
pain sensation as more or less unpleasant, for instance.
Note that on this account, the pain sensations remain
constant. There is no learned (or unlearned) pain, just
learned and unlearned experiencing of a given sensation.
We believe that how one understands the relationship
between pain and perception can have direct implications
for how one goes about doing clinically oriented research on
pain. One might ask in what pain treatment would consist
for each of theories above? On Pitcher’s view, since pain is
defined as the perception of bodily damage, short of fixing
the damaged part of the body, one could hope to relieve pain
only by affecting the corresponding perception of that
damage. On Douglas’s view, the aim could be the same,
since pain experience is understood to be a quality of the
perception itself. Of course, there would be many different
ways to affect a perception of bodily damage. One could
focus on the lower levels of processing or one could focus
on “top-down” influences such as emotions and beliefs.

Some of these ways could be described as teaching a subject
not to feel pain.
Hall’s view of pain entails different possibilities for pain
treatment, and therefore different research foci. To relieve
pain, one could aim to affect a subject’s experience of his
pain sensation, while leaving the sensation in tact. This goal
would focus on his emotional disposition. Or, one could
aim to modify the sensation itself by modifying the
corresponding perception, as Pitcher and Douglas would
have you do. But for Hall, this aim would involve
impacting lower-level processing or possibly high-level
beliefs, but not, it seems, emotions.
It is difficult to rule out a different possibility for relieving
pain, on Hall’s conception of pain -- it could be that the
sensation that normally underlies a particular perception
could be impacted by a drug, say, without affecting the
perception itself. This would open the door for treatments
that aim to change, not our perceptions nor our emotions,
but the sensations such perceptions produce.
This
possibility is clearly ruled out on Pitcher’s understanding of
pain. A parallel possibility may exist from Douglas’s
perspective on pain -- perhaps a drug could impact the way
that it feels to have particular perception. This would
depend on whether anything besides the perception itself
impacts the way that a perception feels

1655

Conclusion
It might appear that all three accounts can explain the same
mysterious pain phenomena, since on all three accounts
beliefs and attitudes impact how one feels during one’s
experience of pain. In fact, the different cognitive models
these accounts of pain suggest may contain enough
variables to support explanations of just about any pain
phenomena. On the other hand, it also is possible that these
accounts imply differences that really are empirically
significant. At the very least, it seems that whether a pain
scientist thinks of pain as Hall does or as Pitcher or Douglas
do would make a difference to the questions one seeks
answers to. For example, whether one thinks of chronic
pain (in the absence of any signs of bodily damage) in terms
of illusory reporting by a perceptual system or as an
abnormal way of experiencing a normal sensation will lead
to different biases and different research agendas. In the
latter case, one might consider the effects of various antidepressants on chronic pain. In the former case, one might
seek more detailed knowledge of the bodily damage
detecting system to see what might be causing the “misfire.”
And while it may be that both research agendas ultimately
contribute to our knowledge of how to treat chronic pain, it
is reasonable to expect the steadiest flow of clinical
advances when we arrive at a strong model of the
processing systems that underlie pain.
So, should philosophers conclude that the ultimate way to
resolve the above debate is to refer it to the psychologists?
If there really are empirical differences in the competing
ways of understanding pain in terms of perception, then
ultimately it should be up to those doing the empirical work

to tease out which perspective corresponds to the strongest
cognitive model. Perhaps this much is clear: one way to
move forward in the philosophical debate regarding the
relationship between pain and perception is for
psychologists to offer their two cents regarding the
underlying cognitive models. . They could also offer their
opinions on whether the various relationships proposed by
the philosophers really have empirical significance.
But to request feedback from empirical scientists is neither
to give up on the philosophical enterprise nor to dismiss the
folk concept of pain as altogether incoherent or unimportant.
Nor is it to say that philosophical work on pain has reached
its limit. Rather, it is merely to recognize that the
philosophical study of pain and the related studies of
perception and sensation can benefit from greater
knowledge of how psychologists understand such concepts
as “perception” and “sensation” and how they think pain is
best modeled. Ultimately, our current “folk” concepts of
pain and perception and the corresponding psychological
concepts are inextricably tied to one another. A greater
understanding of either one can help advance our
understanding of the other.

References
Aydede, M. and Guzeldere, G. (2002) Some foundational
problems in the scientific study of pain. Philosophy of
Science, 69 S265–S283.
Chapman, C. R. (1986), Pain, perception, and illusion. In R.
A. Sternbach, (Ed.), The Psychology of Pain, Second
Edition, New York: Raven Press.
Dennett, D.C (1978) Why you can’t make a computer that
feels pain. Synthese 38 (3).
Douglas, G. (1998) Why pains are not mental objects.
Philosophical Studies 91,127–148.
Hall, R. J. (1998) Are pains necessarily unpleasant?
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 49, 643–59.
Nelkin, N. (1994) Reconsidering Pain. Philosophical
Psychology 7(3), 325–343.
Peacocke, C. (1983) Sense and Content: Experience,
Thought, and their Relations, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pitcher, G. (1970) Pain perception. Philosophical Review
74, 368–93.

1656

