UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gender Differences in Learning the SPSS-Software

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4s38r6w9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Beierlein, Constanze
Imhof, Margaret
Berierlein, Regina

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gender Differences in Learning the SPSS-Software
Regina Vollmeyer (R.Vollmeyer@paed.psych.uni-frankfurt.de)
Margarete Imhof (M.Imhof@paed.psych.uni-frankfurt.de)
Constanze Beierlein (C.Beierlein@paed.psych.uni-frankfurt.de)
Institute for Psychology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University, PO Box 111932
60054 Frankfurt/Main, Germany

Abstract
In the literature it is often assumed that females are at a
disadvantage when working with the computer. Whereas
differences could be found in attitudes towards computers
(Whitley, 1997) there are only few studies examining
performance. As gender per se can not explain performance
differences, we used the cognitive-motivational process
model (Vollmeyer & Rheinberg, 1999, 2000) to find possible
explaining variables. The model assumes that initial
motivation affects strategies and motivation during learning
which then influence performance. Therefore, we had male
and female students solve four statistics tasks with the help of
the SPSS-Software, which was an unknown program for
them. Although males and females did not differ in initial
motivation, male students were able to solve more statistical
tasks than female students. Motivation and flow-experience
could be identified as mediating variables.

Introduction
Not only psychologists but also politicians as the German
Rectors’ Conference (Hochschulrektorenkonferenz, 1998)
demand that students at all educational levels should be
prepared to use multi-media and communication technology
because this offers the chance to create courses independent
of time and space through distance learning. However, there
are already warnings that developing such courses may put
female learners at a disadvantage. Researchers describe this
difference as “gender gap” (e.g., Jackson, Ervin, Gardner, &
Schmitt, 2001) or even “digital divide” (e.g., Schaumburg,
2004).
What kind of differences were empirically observed?
Three areas can be found: Computer use, computer
attitudes, and computer performance. In the 1990ies,
Whitley (1996) reported in his meta-analysis that females
used the computer less frequently than males. Nowadays,
this difference is more specific, for school male and female
students work the same amount of time, but privately males
spent more hours with the computer (for German students:
Middendorf, 2002). Beside computer use males and females
differ in their attitudes towards computers (Whitley, 1996).
In this context, the construct of self-efficacy has been
studied most often. It is defined as “people’s judgments of
their capabilities to organize and execute courses of action
required to attain designated types of performances. It is
concerned not with the skills one has but with judgments of
what one can do with whatever skills one possesses.”
(Bandura, 1986). Females describe themselves as less self-

efficacious regarding the computer than males (e.g.,
Schaumburg, 2004; Whitley, 1996). However, there is a
huge variety of how this construct has been operationalized.
It ranges from asking about specific handling (“I feel
confident getting software up and running”, Durndell, Haag,
& Laithwaite, 2000) to more general perceptions (“I find
working with computers very easy”, Cassidy & Eachus,
2002). In our own study (Imhof, Vollmeyer, & Beierlein,
2005) we used a questionnaire with general perceptions and
could not find differences in self-efficacy between male and
female students.
The most interesting question is whether there are also
gender differences in computer performance. As gender is a
descriptive variable that cannot explain effects, it is
necessary to find mediating variables, explaining what male
computer users do differently from female. Thus computer
use or computer attitudes like self-efficacy, are candidates
for such mediating variables. Searching for studies on this
topic has been disappointing because there are only a few.
Roy, Taylor, and Chi (2004) found that male students
retrieved more task-relevant information on an online task
than female students. In a formatting task, Shapka and
Ferrari (2003) could not find gender differences.
Schaumburg (2004) reported only gender differences in
knowledge of standard software if explicit computer
instructions were missing. In our own study (Imhof et al.,
2005) students had to redesign a Power Point presentation.
In this task male students could reconstruct more features of
the presentation than female students. Taking self-efficacy
into account, Shapka and Ferrari (2003) could not find its
effect on performance. Imhof et al. (2005) reported some
evidence that self-efficacy can be regarded as a mediating
variable for the gender effect on performance.
As the empirical basis for gender effects on performance
lacks theoretical explanations, we embedded this research
question into the cognitive-motivational process model
(Vollmeyer & Rheinberg, 1999, 2000) that offers possible
mediating variables.

The Cognitive-Motivational Process Model

2323

Vollmeyer and Rheinberg (1999, 2000) developed the
model aiming (1) to specify aspects of initial motivation, (2)
to collect possible mediators for the influence of initial
motivation on performance, and finally (3) to emphasize the
importance to measure the learning process as well as the
outcome. To demonstrate how motivational and cognitive

variables interact it is necessary to interrupt the learning
process to measure indicators for these variables.
Initial Motivation. Based on literature research Vollmeyer
and Rheinberg (1999, 2000) described four aspects of initial
learning motivation. These aspects are measured after
learners have received the information about the learning
material and the pertaining task.
(1) Probability of success is an aspect that has been
discussed as early as in the models of Lewin, Dembo,
Festinger, and Sears (1944), Atkinson (1957), and is also
part of more recent theories such as Bandura’s self-efficacy
construct (1986), Anderson’s ACT-R theory (1993) and
Wigfield and Eccles’s Expectancy-Value Model (2002). It is
assumed that learners, at least implicitly, calculate the
probability of success taking into account their ability and
the perceived difficulty of the task.
(2) Anxiety can be partly interpreted as fear of failure in a
specific situation (Atkinson, 1957). This aspect is not the
opposite of high probability of success, as it can be high for
learners who are in a social situation in which they do not
want to fail even though they expect to succeed.
(3) Interest means that the content to be learned is important
for a learner (e.g., Krapp, Hidi, & Renninger, 1992). If
learners are interested they have positive affects and
positive evaluations regarding the topic.
(4) Challenge assesses whether learners accept the situation
as an achievement situation in which they want to succeed.

could show that there is no relationship between learners’
self-reported strategies and their actual use. Therefore, we
did not use questionnaires to measure learning strategies but
tried to find objective measures. As a first explorative
indicator we analyzed the number of mouse clicks the
students did while using a computer program and the time
for solving the tasks.

Mediating Variables. Initial motivation affects the learning
process in that learners in a positive initial motivation are in
a more positive motivational and functional state during
learning and they also choose more effective learning
strategies. The instruments assessing the mediating
variables are administered several times during learning.
(1) Motivational state. Whereas initial motivation refers to
participants’ appraisals, affects and interpretations of the
learning situation before having started to learn,
motivational state refers to the participants' motivation
during the learning period. This state variable reflects
aspects of the initial motivation, however, shortened scales
are administered in order not to disturb motivation.
(2) Functional state. This describes the learners’ state of
concentration and effort while they work with the learning
material. As a construct, which comes close to what we
mean by functional state, we chose flow (Csikszentmihalyi,
1975). Flow is a pleasant state, in which the following
characteristics occur: (1) a challenge-skill balance, (2)
merging of action and awareness, (3) unambiguous
feedback, (4) concentration on the task at hand, (5) time
transformation, and (6) merging of action and awareness.
(3) Strategies. Learning strategies are regarded as an
important predictor for the learning outcome. Already Craik
and Lockhart (1972) described why deep processing of the
learning material leads to better knowledge than shallow
strategies. However, it seems to be a problem to find
indicators for deep processing. For example, Artelt (2000)

Predictions. We presented our students with four statistical
tasks, which they had to solve in a certain time period.
According to the literature, female students should differ
from male students regarding their computer attitudes and
computer self-efficacy. We took this into account in
Hypothesis 1: Male students have a more positive initial
motivation (more challenge, interest and probability of
success, less anxiety) than female students. As we used
statistical tasks as learning material, we controlled for
differences in prior knowledge.
Hypothesis 2 covers all mediating variables: Male
students are expected to have a more positive motivational
state and to experience more flow (i.e., functional state). In
addition, they use better strategies.
Hypothesis 3 postulates gender differences in computer
performance: Male students solve more statistical problems
with a computer program than female students.
Hypothesis 4 combines the single hypotheses and assumes
causal relationships: Because male students have a more
positive initial motivation and perhaps more knowledge
about statistics they start already with better strategies and
have more flow-experience and a more positive
motivational state during learning. Thus, they outperform
female students.

Method
Participants
Forty students (18 female, 22 male) from the Economics
Department at the University of Frankfurt, Germany,
participated in the study. They were enrolled in a statistics
class, but had not been introduced to the SPSS-software. We
chose this population as gender is equally distributed.
Participants received € 7.00.

Procedure

2324

We told prospective participants that they had a chance to
learn about the SPSS software when they participated in our
study. In the session we informed them that they had to
work on four tasks (descriptive statistics, calculate a
correlation, create a boxplot, create a histogram) using the
SPSS-software. They had to solve them in a sequence as
task difficulty increased. In total, they had thirty minutes for
all tasks. Participants were interrupted every 10 minutes to
measure their motivational and functional state. Following
the instructions, we measured their initial motivation and
their knowledge about statistics. We measured the process
variables three times during the task.

Participants had to write down their solutions on a paper;
for the graphical task they had to generate an output-file.
For every correct feature in the task they scored one point.
The total represents the performance measure for each
individual.

Performance. As participants had to solve four tasks with 3
to 6 points each (in total 18), we calculated a total sum score
by counting the points they had reached.

Results
Hypothesis 1. First, we tested whether male students have
a more positive initial motivation (high interest, high
challenge, high probability of success, low anxiety). or a
better knowledge about statistics than female students.
However, none of the means (see Table 1) was statistically
different, all p’s >.05. Therefore, we concluded that none of
our variables, measured before working with the SPSSsoftware, could explain a potential effect of gender on
performance. Hypothesis 1 had to be rejected.

Material
Knowledge about Statistics. To control for prior
knowledge, we developed a multiple-choice questionnaire
with nine items. If participants had learned the content of
their statistics course well they would have been able to
answer all the questions.
Initial Motivation. After reading the instructions,
participants completed the QCM (Questionnaire of Current
Motivation, by Rheinberg, Vollmeyer, & Burns, 1998). This
questionnaire measures initial motivation on the four factors
probability of success (example items: “I think I am up to
the difficulty of the task”, “I probably won’t manage to do
this task”), anxiety (example items: “It would be
embarrassing to fail at this task”, “I feel petrified by the
demands of this task”), interest (example items: “After
having read the instruction the task seems to be very
interesting to me”, ”For tasks like this I don’t need a reward,
they are lots of fun anyhow.”), and challenge (example
items: “This task is a real challenge for me”, “If I can do
this task, I will feel proud of myself”). The answer format is
a seven-point scale.
Mediating Variables. Three mediating variables were
measured several times during learning.
(1) Motivational state. Participants answered eight items
from the QCM every ten minutes, two for each scale. This
reduction had the advantage that students were not
interrupted for too long and the items became homogenous
(Cronbach’s α between .66 - .68).
(2) Functional state. To measure how much our participants
got into flow when exploring the software, they filled in the
FKS (Flow Short Scale, by Rheinberg, Vollmeyer, &
Engeser, 2003) every ten minutes (example items “I am
totally absorbed in what I am doing”, “I know what I have
to do each step of the way.”). This scale consists of 10 items
on a seven-point scale.
(3) Strategy. To obtain a rough indicator for what
participants were doing, we counted the number of mouse
clicks for each 10-minute period. To retrieve this
information we used the program StatWin and also used
Screen Virtuoso to videotape the students’ learning. In
addition, we took the time how long participants needed to
finish each task (Time can also be regarded as performance
measure).

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the female (n = 18) and
male students (n = 22) on knowledge about statistics, initial
motivation, mediating and dependent variables.
Gender
Knowledge about
Statistics
Interest
Challenge
Probability of success
Anxiety
Motivational state (last
10 minutes)
Functional state (flow)
(last 10 minutes)
Number of mouse
clicks (last 10 min)
Time on first task (in
sec)
Time on second task
(in sec)
Time on third task
(in sec)
Time on fourth task
(in sec)
Performance

female
male
female
male
female
male
female
male
female
male
female
male
female
male
female(n=17)
male (n=17)
female (n=12)
male (n=21)
female (n=12)
male (n=20)
female (n=9)
male (n=18)
female (n=3)
male (n=14)
female
male

M
17.72
19.64
4.28
4.43
5.33
4.99
4.06
4.61
3.66
3.22
4.19
4.77
4.00
4.62
41.53
76.24
861
476
318
241
354
345
378
282
5.86
10.50

SD
3.48
4.70
0.94
0.90
1.04
0.90
1.08
0.84
0.97
1.13
0.82
0.57
1.26
0.87
22.52
23.65
432
493
239
207
165
219
160
118
4.35
3.42

Hypothesis 2. As we had neither effects of prior knowledge
about statistics nor initial motivation, we now regarded the
mediating variables. For analyzing Hypothesis 2, we noticed
that it took more male students (n = 14) less than 30 minutes
to complete the tasks than female students, χ2 (1) = 11.38, p
< .001 (see Table 2). This result is complemented by the
observation that only 12 out of 18 female students actually
finished the first task, as compared to 21 out of 22 male

2325

students. Among those students who finished the first task,
male students had been faster than female students, t(31) =
2.25, p < .032, d = 0.83 (see Table 1). For the remaining
three tasks, time on task was equal for male and female
students, p’s > .20. However, for each task, there were more
male students who had completed it than female students.
This produced missing data for the later time periods.
Therefore, we decided to analyze the mediating variables for
the individual’s last ten minutes. For example, when
students stopped working after 10 to 19 minutes, we looked
at their motivation questionnaires that had been completed
prior to this period, which was, in this case, the initial
measure (0 – 10 minutes).
Another problem occurred that six protocols were
incomplete. Therefore, only 34 out of 40 could be used for
analyzing strategies.
First, we looked at the differences between male and
female students concerning the mediating variables (see
Table 1). As the number of participants is unequal at each
time point, we report the means for each individual’s last
round. On the variables motivational and functional state
male students report a higher motivation and a higher flowexperience than female students (motivational state: t[38] =
2.61, p = .013, d = .82; functional state: t[38] = 1.80, p =
.079, d = .57). This result partially confirms the second
hypothesis.
As an indicator for strategies, we used number of mouse
clicks. However, at this time of our research, it is hard to
say whether more or less mouse clicks are an indicator for a
good strategy. Using this weak indicator, we found that
male students had more mouse clicks than female students
when exploring SPSS (t[32] = 4.38, p < .001, d = 1.50, see
Table 1). These results can be summarized that, although
male and female students had the same initial motivation,
females’ motivation and flow was already lower than males’
after 10 minutes. In addition, they explored the program less
than male students. Thus, Hypothesis 2 was confirmed.

To test this assumption we calculated a path analysis (n =
34) The basis for the path analysis are the correlations
between gender, mediating variables (always individual’s
last 10 minutes) and performance as shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Correlations between gender, process variables and
performance (r, p).

Gender (1)
Motivational
state (2)
Flow (3)

3

4

5

-.38
.025

-.31
.077
.55
.001

-.61
<.001
-.08
.65
-.23
.19

-.54
.001
.61
<.001
.55
.001
.06
.74

Mouse
clicks (4)
Performance
(5)

The theoretical model presumed that gender affected each
of the mediating variables (i.e., number of mouse clicks,
motivational and functional state), and that these variables
affected performance. However, as was obvious from the
correlations (see Table 3), the number of mouse clicks do
not affect performance. So, to solve the tasks, it does not
matter, whether a student looks at many features and tries
many different options. Therefore, we dropped the link from
mouse clicks to performance and instead had a direct link
from gender to performance. The path analysis in Figure 1
shows the empirically gained model for which, as expected,
the Χ2-test is not significant, Χ2(1) = 0.58, p = .49. This
model has a good model fit, GFI =.99, CFI = 1.00, RMSEA
= .001.

Motivational
state

-.38

Table 2: Number of male or female participants finishing
before 30 minutes vs. working until the end.

female
male

2

Gender

finishing
before 30 minutes
at the end
2
16
14
8

-.61

Mouse clicks

.33
Performance

-.33
-.31

Hypothesis 3., We tested whether male students had an
advantage in solving the four statistical tasks. We found a
strong effect, t(38) = 3.78, p < .001, d = 1.19, that male
students reached about 11 out of 18 points, but female
students only 6 points (see Table 1).
Hypothesis 4. As gender affected neither initial motivation
nor knowledge about statistics (Hypothesis 1) we restated
the fourth hypothesis saying that gender affects performance
through the mediating variables (i.e., motivational and
functional state, strategies).

Flow-

.26

Figure 1: Path analysis of the variables explaining
performance in using SPSS. (Numbers printed bold p < .05,
others p < .10)
The model in Figure 1 demonstrates that indeed
motivational and functional state are mediating variables:
Male students are more motivated during learning and are
more likely to experience flow than female students. These
positive states facilitate performance, in this case to solve
more tasks with the SPSS-program. However, beside the
motivational and functional state, there is still an

2326

unexplained link between gender and performance. Contrary
to expectation the number of mouse clicks cannot explain
the gender effects on performance and, thus, cannot be
regarded as mediating variable. This result needs more
explorative analyses.
Explorative Analyses. To find an explanation, why female
students were less motivated already after 10 minutes into
the task, we analyzed this first time period. In the first 10
minutes, 11 males and 12 females had found the button
“Means” in the SPSS menu and had clicked on it (for males
after M = 120 sec [SD = 105], for females after M = 212 sec
[SD = 192], t[21] = 1.42, p = .17, d = .60). Although not
significant, this difference has a medium effect size. It took
the remaining four female students longer than the seven
male students to press the “ok”-button in the menu “means”
(for males M = 199 sec [SD = 124], for females M = 281 sec
[SD = 111], t[9] = 1.09, p = .31, d = .69). These results
demonstrate that it was harder for female students to
understand the structure of the program, whereas male
students seem to familiarize themselves more quickly with
the program’s surface. Although females click less often,
this strategy cannot be regarded as the reason for their
poorer performance (see path analysis).
Interestingly, male students were more motivated during
learning even if they experienced failure. This conclusion
can be deducted from Figure 2. As male students finish the
task faster, their number decreases (see Table 2). It could be
expected that the remaining male participants approach the
same motivational state as the female students (after 20 or
30 minutes); however, their motivation is still as high as
after 10 minutes. The same pattern was also found with the
flow-measure.

5

4

n = 22
n = 18

n = 15
n = 18

n=8
n = 16

3
10 min

20 min

30 min

motivation - female
motivation - male

Figure 2: Motivational state while working on SPSS-tasks.

Discussion
The aim of this research was to investigate whether female
students are at a disadvantage compared to male students
when working with the computer. However, we not only
wanted to describe this effect, we also wanted to explain it.
We chose a student population, who was asked to solve
statistical tasks with the SPSS-Software. We found that
male students solved more statistical tasks than female
students. Why did this expected disadvantage occur? When

working with this statistical program, male and female
students could already differ before they even start working.
However, we could not find any differences in either
knowledge about statistics or in initial motivation. Male
students and female students estimated the challenge, their
interest, their anxiety, and their probability of success at
similar levels. It is especially interesting that we did not
detect differences in probability of success. This aspect is
similarly operationalized as self-efficacy, a construct for
which gender differences have been reported rather
frequently.
If there are no differences between males and females’
attitudes and prior knowledge, it is necessary to look
carefully at what happened in the 30-minutes learning
period. According to the cognitive-motivational process
model, we measured strategy and motivational and
functional state every ten minutes. In doing this, we
observed that already after ten minutes female students were
less motivated and explored fewer features of the program
(i.e., number of mouse clicks). Whereas a lower
motivational and functional state was detrimental for
learning, the number of mouse clicks did not influence
performance. In the first ten minutes, females had problems
to find the menu that they needed to complete the first task;
in general it took them longer to answer the first out of four
tasks.
On the basis of this result, it could be argued the females’
failure during learning is responsible for their poorer
learning outcome, as opposed to their low motivation during
learning. To disentangle these influence variables it would
be necessary to run a study with more participants so that a
path analysis can be calculated. For the data of this study we
would argue that motivational and functional state play an
important role during learning, as male students who
experienced similar failure than female students reported a
higher motivation than female students.
To conclude, although initial motivation was similar
between male and female students, they could not use the
features of the program in the same way. Males enjoyed the
computer work more than females. But why was it more
easy for males to find the correct features? To answer this
question, further studies should investigate computer use, a
variable on which female and male students still differ,
especially in using computers for private purposes (Imhof et
al., 2005). Maybe male students have developed broader
knowledge which they can access to better examine
unknown programs.
Drawing on these conclusions, we want to address two
issues: (1) improvement of the methods, and (2) remarks for
the educational setting.

2327

Improvement of the Methods. The measure that was used
as an indicator for strategies was not satisfactory. As a
rough indicator for deep versus shallow strategies, we
counted the number of mouse clicks. Even when
formulating the hypotheses we did not know whether many
mouse clicks were indicative of a deep or a shallow strategy.

Now after analyzing the data it is safe to say that number of
mouse clicks is not a valid indicator as it did not correlate
with any performance measure. In this study we had used
videos (ScreenVirtuoso) to explore how students use the
SPSS-program, but as too many videotapes were
incomplete, we have not enough statistical power for
analyses. Therefore, further research should look for a valid
measure of strategy and include observational data.
Remarks for Educational Settings. In this study, there was
no evidence that male and female students differed before
starting to work with the computer. Therefore, interventions
should focus on the learning period. Female students need to
be prepared that experiencing failure during work with an
unknown computer program should not decrease their
motivation. Therefore, they need some advice how to
monitor their motivation in self-regulated learning
environments. In addition, they need strategies how to
explore an unknown program in a self-regulated learning
task.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the University
Fund for Gender Studies to Margarete Imhof and Regina
Vollmeyer.

References
Anderson, J. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Artelt, C. (2000). Wie prädiktiv sind retrospektive
Selbstberichte über den Gebrauch von Lernstrategien für
strategisches Lernen? [How predictive are self-reported
strategies for their actual use?]. Zeitschrift für
Pädagogische Psychologie, 14, 72-84.
Atkinson, J. W. (1957). Motivational determinants of
risktaking behavior. Psychological Review, 64, 359-372.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and
action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Cassidy, S., & Eachus, P. (2002). Developing the computer
user self-efficacy (CUSE) Scale: Investigating the
relationship between computer self-efficacy, gender and
experience with computers. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 26, 133-153.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of
processing: A framework for memory research. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond boredom and anxiety.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Durndell, A., Haag, Z., & Laithwaite, H. (2000). Computer
self-efficacy and gender: A cross cultural study of
Scotland and Romania. Personality and Individual
Differences, 28, 1037-1044.
Hochschulrektorenkonferenz (1998). Empfehlungen zur
Hochschulentwicklung durch Multimedia in Studium und
Lehre [Recommendations for university development by
multimedia in teaching and research]. http://www.
wissenschaftsrat.de/texte/3536-98.pdf.

Imhof, M., Vollmeyer, R., & Beierlein, C. (2005). Gender
specific aspects of computer use in transition. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Jackson, L. A., Ervin, K. S., Gardner, P. D., & Schmitt, N.
(2001). Gender and the internet: Women communicating
and men searching. Sex Roles, 4, 363-379.
Krapp, A., Hidi, S., & Renninger, K. A. (1992). Interest,
learning and development. In K. A. Renninger, S. Hidi, &
A. Krapp (Eds.), The role of interest in learning and
development (pp. 3-25). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lewin, K., Dembo, T., Festinger, L., & Sears, P. S. (1944).
Level of aspiration. In J. McHunt (Ed.), Personality and
the behavior disorders (Vol. 1, pp. 333-378). New York:
Ronald Press.
Middendorf, E. (2002). Computernutzung und Neue Medien
im Studium [Computer use and new media in higher
education]. Bonn, Germany: Bundesministerium für
Bildung und Forschung.
Rheinberg, F., Vollmeyer, R., & Burns, B. D. (2001). FAM:
Ein Fragebogen zur Erfassung aktueller Motivation in
Lern- und Leistungssituationen [A questionnaire to assess
current motivation in learning situations]. Diagnostica,
47, 57-66.
Rheinberg, F., Vollmeyer, R., & Engeser, S. (2003). Die
Erfassung des Flow-Erlebens [The assessment of flow]. In
J. Stiensmeier-Pelster, & F. Rheinberg (Eds.), Diagnostik
von Motivation und Selbstkonzept [Diagnosis of
motivation and self-concept] (pp. 261-279). Göttingen,
Germany: Hogrefe.
Roy, M., Taylor, R., & Chi, M.T. (2004). Searching for
information on-line and off-line: Gender differences
among middle school students. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 29, 229-252.
Schaumburg, H. (2004). Laptops in der Schule – ein Weg
zur Überwindung des Digital Divide zwischen Jungen
und Mädchen [Laptop computers in the classroom – A
way to overcome the technological gender gap among
students]? Zeitschrift für Medienpsychologie, 16, 142154.
Shapka, J. D., & Ferrari, M. (2003). Computer-related
attitudes and actions of teacher candidates. Computers in
Human Behavior, 19, 319-334.
Vollmeyer, R., & Rheinberg, F. (1999). Motivation and
metacognition when learning a complex system.
European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 541554.
Vollmeyer, R., & Rheinberg, F. (2000). Does motivation
affect performance via persistence? Learning and
Instruction, 10, 293-309.
Whitley, B. E. (1997). Gender differences in computerrelated attitudes and behavior: A meta-analysis.
Computers in Human Behavior, 13, 1-22.
Wigfield, A., & Eccles, J. S. (2002). The development of
competence beliefs. In A. Wigfield, & J. S. Eccles (Eds.),
Development of achievement motivation (pp. 91-122). San
Diego: Academic Press.

2328

