UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generalizing from Simple Instances: An Uncomplicated Lesson from Kids Learning Object
Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7rb1x60t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Goldstone, Robert L.
Smith, Linda B.
Son, Ji Y.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Generalizing from Simple Instances:
An Uncomplicated Lesson from Kids Learning Object Categories
Ji Y. Son (jys@indiana.edu)
Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47401
Abstract

Development of Shape-based Noun Categories

Abstraction is the process of stripping away irrelevant
information so that learners can generalize on relevant
similarities. Can we shortcut this process by directly teaching
abstractions in the form of simplified instances? We tested
this prediction in the domain of shape-based generalization
and found that young children were able to generalize better
when taught with simplified shapes rather than complex
detailed ones. Simplicity during training allowed shape
novices to generalize like shape experts.
Keywords: category generalization, shape, word learning.

Early word learning is defined by proper generalization.
Children comprehend that certain nouns go with particular
categories of objects at about 9 months of age
(Huttenlocher, 1974). Paul Bloom (2000) summarizes how
extremely early words are learned and extended to new
instances slowly but soon the pace of both learning and
generalization accelerates such that shortly after 24 months,
children add words to their vocabulary at a staggering rate
and also generalize a newly learned name broadly and
correctly to category members after experiencing just one
instance (Markman, 1989). These young word learners do
not need to experience a whole variety of elephants or
staplers to know the range of things that are elephants or
staplers. One example will do; apparently these children
know the right similarity to generalize over.
The relevant similarity, at least for concrete noun
categories, often involves shape (e.g., Clark, 1973; Imai,
Gentner & Uchida, 1994). The key experimental results
documenting the importance of shape to children’s noun
generalizations derive from a task in which children are
taught a name with a single never-before-seen exemplar
then asked to generalize that name to new also never-beforeseen instances. In these tasks, 18 month olds show a limited
bias to extend object names by shape whereas 30 month
olds systematically extend the category name to new
instances by shape, ignoring a variety of other properties
including color, size, material, and fine-grained details.
At the same time children also become able to recognize
common object categories from highly minimalist
representations of their 3-dimensional shapes. Figure 1
shows an example of a minimalist shape which leaves out
finer grained details, coloring, and texture information in
contrast to the richly detailed and lifelike versions presented
to 18 to 24 month olds in an experiment by Smith (2003).
Although to adults these objects seem very similar, younger
children with more limited word knowledge did not
recognize the simplified forms but did recognize (nearly
perfectly) the richly detailed versions when asked, “Where
is the ice cream?” In contrast, slightly older children with
more advanced word knowledge recognized the simplified
shapes just as well as they recognized the richly detailed
shapes. Smith proposes that the process of category learning
was abstracting shape descriptions.

Introduction
Applying past learning to new circumstances requires the
recognition of similarities between those past experiences
and the present. The relevant similarities are often
embedded with many task-irrelevant similarities and
differences. Thus, processes of abstraction – of finding the
right similarities – are crucial to theories of generalization
(see Harnad, 2005 for a defense of this assumption).
Abstraction and generalization are also crucial to
understanding the differences between immature and mature
learners and between novices and experts, as mature
learners generally, and experts more specifically (e.g., Chi,
Bassok, Lewis, Reimann & Glaser, 1989; Gick & Holyoak,
1983), seem able to abstract the right similarities over which
to generalize past experiences. Such abstracted
understandings may be responsible for experts’ ability to
transfer their learning to highly dissimilar situations
(Holyoak, 1984).
The experiments reported here explore the relationship
between abstraction and generalization. If the key to
generalization is the formation of a sufficiently minimal
description of the relevant properties, then one should be
able to directly teach that abstraction and, as a consequence,
get broad and appropriate transfer. Some studies with adults
learning difficult domains such as chicken sexing
(Biederman & Shiffrar, 1987) or scientific principles
(Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003; Sloutsky, Kaminski &
Heckler, 2005) have shown generalization benefits when
information is presented with more perceptually abstract
forms that leave out irrelevant details. In this paper, we ask
whether training with abstractions increases transfer in a
specific domain: the development of 3-dimensional object
recognition in toddlers. Around 2 years of age, when young
children become experts in generalizing names for things to
new instances, is this an expertise based on abstraction?
2174

objects were constructed from 2 to 4 geometric components.
They had no details and were painted a uniform color.
There were 12 unique objects painted in 12 unique colors,
that were arranged into 3 stimulus sets of four objects each.
Each set contained (1) a target exemplar trained with a
name, (2) an unnamed training distractor, (3) a transfer
target with the same exact shape as the exemplar but
different in color, and (4) a transfer distractor with the same
exact shape as the training distractor but different in color.
Figure 2 shows a training exemplar and transfer target pair
for the complex condition and for the simple condition.
Unique names were paired with each of the three training
exemplars: zupp, wazzle, and peema.
Figure 1: Realistic detailed stimuli and its corresponding
minimalist shape of a familiar object used in Smith (2003).
Are simple representations responsible for shape-based
generalization? Then these very young children, who do not
recognize simple shapes nor generalize by shape, may
benefit from explicit training with simple instances rather
than complex detailed ones. In particular, simple training
should result in shape-based generalization. Our
experiments use two types of training: novel names linked
to simple objects or complex ones. But there is one driving
question: Is there greater generalization from training with
the simplified or detailed shape? The results of the two
experiments provide insights into the development of object
recognition and also into broader issues of learning.

Experiment 1
Children are presented with a single novel exemplar and
taught its name and then asked to generalize the name to
other objects.
Children participated in one of two
conditions. In the complex condition, names were paired
with richly detailed exemplars. The generalization targets
were the very same detailed shape as the exemplar – only
differing in color. In the simple condition, the names were
paired with simple shape abstractions and the generalization
targets were the same shapes in a different color. These
simple stimuli provide shape information unencumbered by
frills and details. In contrast, the stimuli in the complex
condition present lots of extraneous (and potentially
useable) features. If minimalist representations of shape
promote generalization, and rich ones hamper it, then these
young children should show more appropriate patterns of
generalization in the simple than in the complex condition.

Procedure and Design. There were two between-subject
conditions, Complex and Simple. Children in the complex
condition only saw complex objects and those in the simple
only saw simple objects.
The task was based on one used previously by Woodward
and Hoyne (1999). In the familiarization phase, the child
was taught the name of the target (e.g., “This is a zupp.”)
and also acquainted with a second object, the distractor, that
was not named (e.g., “Look at this.”). Objects were present
ed one at a time. This familiarization sequence was repeated
twice. The second phase, test, occurred after a 3 sec delay.
This phase began with a memory test. The original target
and distracter were placed on the table and the child was
asked to get the target by name (e.g., “Where is the zupp?”).
The memory test was immediately followed by a
generalization test, two new objects, the transfer target and
transfer distractor, were placed on the table, one matching
the training target in exact shape, the other matching the
training distractor. Both of these generalization objects
differed in color from the familiarization exemplar and
distracter. The child was asked for the target by name. The
memory and generalization tests were then repeated for this
same set. The spatial location of the correct choice
alternated between test trials. This whole procedure was
repeated for each of the 3 unique stimulus sets, yielding a
total of 6 memory tests (2 per unique stimulus set) and 6
generalization tests (2 per unique stimulus set).

Method
Participants. Thirty-one children participated (15 male, 16
female). The mean age was 17 months (range 15 to 20
months).
Materials. Two corresponding sets of novel objects,
complex and simple, were created for this task. Fantasy
vehicle toys were purchased for the complex objects. They
had detailed parts that were intricately painted using three
different colors to enhance the finer details. The simple
2175

Figure 2: Exemplar/transfer target pairs for complex (top)
and simple (bottom) conditions in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Performance on both memorization and generalization trials
are shown in Figure 3. Children in both the simple and
complex conditions exhibited similar performance on the
memory trials, scoring 67% correct, t(29) = -.231. Clearly
they can link a name to a specific object, simple or complex,
and remember it. In contrast, performance on the
generalization tests showed a strong effect of stimulus type.
Children correctly generalized the name of the simple
exemplars more than complex ones, t(29) = -2.495, p<.05.
Children in the simple condition generalized to the same
shaped transfer target on average 68% of the time (SD =
.21) whereas the children in the complex condition did so
only 44% of the time (SD = .31), consistent with
performance at chance.

the same complex shape (including fine details) but
differently colored.
This pattern is predicted if simplified shapes provide
children with the right amount and type of information for
forming shape-based object categories, whereas richly
detailed objects provide too much information (at least for
very young children who cannot abstract global shape from
such a complex whole). However, the results are also
puzzling. After all, the many details on the complex forms
(excluding color) were potentially relevant in that they were
shared by the training and transfer target. Indeed, Tversky
(1977) found that adults judge a complex object as more
similar to itself than a simple object is to itself. Presumably
this is because of the increase in number of overlapping
features. In the present experiment, the complex training
and transfer targets have more overlapping features than do
the simple ones and thus should be more similar, and as a
consequence should yield better transfer. But they do not.
This analysis of feature overlap, however, assumes that the
learner registers all the features for the complex objects.
This may be beyond the attentional ability of young children
who may sample different featural details for the two
differently colored complex things. The objects stripped of
details in the simple shape condition avoid this problem of
too much information by limiting the information available.
This first experiment examined children’s ability to make
near transfer of an object name to an exact shape match and
found that simple training exemplars led to more
generalization by shape than did complex ones.
By
hypothesis, however, the contribution of directly teaching
abstractions is that doing so also enables appropriate far
transfer. We test this hypothesis in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2

Figure 3: Results of Experiment 1.
However, the effect of simplicity in Experiment 1 could
be attributed a general difficulty of learning about complex
things so for each child, we determined the likelihood of
correct
generalization
following
only
successful
memorization trials and averaged over all memorizationgeneralization pairs (6 total). There was a significant
difference in the conditional probabilities of shape
generalization given memorization between the simple and
complex groups, t(29) = -3.412, p<.01. When participants
in the complex condition correctly memorized the target
object, the conditional probability of generalization was
only 0.48. However, the conditional probability for the
simple object group was 0.83. Even when the children were
able to remember and identify the initial complex object,
they were unlikely to generalize to a same-shape differentcolor object.
In brief, children who learned a name for an object
presenting only simple geometric information about overall
shape readily extended the category label to a new object of
the same simple shape regardless of the color difference.
Children who learned a name for a complex object did not
generalize that name to a new complex object with exactly

To extend the findings of Experiment 1, we changed the
generalization targets from near exact shape matches to far
structural shape matches. There are two conditions in this
experiment. In the Simple-to-Complex condition, children
were presented with a simple idealized shape as the
exemplar, taught its name, and then tested to determine
whether they would extend that name to a richly detailed
realistic object of the same global shape. In the Complex-toSimple condition, children were presented with a complex
realistic object, taught its name, and then tested to determine
whether they would extend that name to a simplified shape
idealization of that object. If similarity is symmetric, then
generalization from the exemplar to transfer target in the
two conditions should be identical. However, if an
internally represented abstraction directs attention to the
right properties at transfer, then we should find greater
generalization in the simple-to-complex condition than in
the complex-to-simple condition.

Method

2176

Participants. Thirty-seven children (16 males, 21 females)
participated. Mean age was 20.5 months (range 16.9 to
27.0).

versions of the idealizations. Each child was tested on four
unique stimulus sets created by forming four targetdistractor pairs from the 8 object categories. Since each
memory and generalization test for each of the four unique
stimulus sets was repeated twice, there was a total of 8
memory tests (2 per each set) and 8 transfer tests (2 per each
set).
Order of stimulus sets and designation of
target/distractor within sets were counterbalanced across
children. The spatial side of choice on test trials alternated
across trials.

Results and Discussion

Figure 4: Realistic detailed stimuli and corresponding
simple shape of an unfamiliar object category used in
Experiment 2.

Figure 5: Results of Experiment 2.
Materials. The stimuli used in this experiment were
selected to be from real categories likely to be unfamiliar to
young children: artichoke, manatee, doily, reamer, masher,
jellyfish, watering can, sand castle (see Fenson et al, 1994,
for a normative list of nouns typically known by 30
months). They were named with their real world labels.
There were two versions of each object, one a richly
detailed and colorful real or toy version and the other a
simplified shape. The simple stimuli were composed from
2-4 geometric components and painted gray. Figure 4
shows the realistic artichoke and its corresponding idealized
shape.

Figure 5 shows children’s performance on the memory and
generalization trials in the two conditions. An analysis of
variance yielded a significant interaction between
presentation order and test type, F(1,35) = 8.844, p<.005.
Children identified the labeled target on the memory trials
equally in the two conditions, t(35) = .026, and did so with
considerable accuracy: 78% (SD=.15). However, children in
the complex-to-simple condition were much less likely to
generalize that learning to the same-shape targets than
children in the simple-to-complex condition, t(35) = -4.551,
p<.001. Children who learned labels with the complex
object transferred that name to the simple object 59%
(SD=.15) of the time while children who had the simple
learning exemplar transferred the name to the complex
object with 80%
(SD=.12) shape-based responses.
Children who learned names of simple objects can
generalize to complex instances despite the addition of
shape details and colors. However, children learning with
complex objects could not generalize to the simplified
shapes striped of their details.
Again, as in Experiment 1, training with simplified
exemplars promoted transfer, and in this case, far transfer to
an object of the same global shape but not the same exact
shape. This is a critical skill in the development of object
recognition and noun categories. Instances of a basic level
category, while roughly similar in shape, are not the exact
same shape. Varieties of chairs, varieties of cups, and
variety of trucks are the “same shape” only under some
highly abstract and minimalist description of shape. The
present results indicate that directly teaching children such
an abstraction enhances generalization. By giving the child
the abstraction we provide what children normally build
slowly through repeated experience with a variety of
instances, a minimalist and thus category-encompassing
description of shape.

Procedure and Design. The procedure was identical to that
of Experiment 1 with two phases: familiarization and test.
For the children in the complex-to-simple condition, the
familiarization stimuli – training target and distractor – were
the richly detailed complex versions. The test stimuli –
transfer target and distractor – were the simplified shapes of
the complex objects. For children in the simple-to-complex
condition, the familiarization stimuli were the simple shape
idealizations and the test stimuli were the complex realistic

General Discussion

2177

The children who participated in the present experiments are
not yet full-blown experts in learning object names.
Nonetheless, we were able to make them look more
advanced by providing them with exemplars that were
simpler versions of the detailed shapes of real things in the
world. Presumably, one limitation on young children’s
extension of a newly learned object name to novel category
members is the need to extract a minimal description of the

their idealized shapes indicates that simplified
representations have to be developed as object categories
are learned. The present results add that one can foster the
development of these abstractions by explicitly showing
them to young children. This finding has particular
relevance in the context of understanding and remedying
atypical developmental trajectories. Recent work (Jones &
Smith, 2005) suggests that late-talking children do not
generalize object names by shape and also that they do not
recognize common objects from simple shape caricatures of
2-4 geometric components. Training these children to
abstract global shape and to generalize names by shape may
well help them over a significant developmental hurdle.

shape from the more complex and idiosyncratic learning
instance. When we provide this abstraction for young
children, they systematically extend a newly learned name
by shape.
These results contribute specifically to
understanding the development of shape abstractions for
object recognition but also to understanding how learning
and transfer happens generally.

Abstractions for Learning to Recognize Objects
The results reported here indicate a particular importance of
simplicity during training, in directing attention to a subset
of information while learning object categories. This is
crucial particularly for young learners who have difficulty
appreciating the relevant similarity, in this domain global
shape information, They fail to generalize past learning
because they attend too much to easily separable features
and parts to recognize things (e.g., Rakison & Cohen, 1999).
Colunga (2003) showed that 18-month-olds looked at and
used features such as eyes and face when recognizing
pictured animals, and wheels and headlights when
recognizing vehicles. Twenty-four-month-olds, in contrast,
looked broadly at different parts of the pictures, and used
overall shape in deciding what the entities were.
An over-emphasis on features rather than global shape
may be a general property of nonexpertise in visual object
recognition, which may be relevant to the results of
Experiment 1. In that experiment, the children failed to
extend the name of an object to exact shape replica that
differed only in color when those shapes were complex with
detailed featural information. These complex shapes, more
than the simple ones, offer many opportunities for
generalization because of their very complexity and many
features. For example, if a child had noticed only the fancy
exhaust on an exemplar vehicle, that child should have been
able to extend the name to the target simply by finding that
same exhaust. However, the children were apparently
unable to do this. The problem with trying to recognize
objects by their features – and perhaps the reason children
abandon this in the early course of development – is that
there are too many densely packed features that are, at this
scale, similar to each other.
Models of object recognition reflect adult behavior in
that, as varied as they might be, there is a strong preference
to use shape information over other dimensions of variation.
Object-based models, such as the recognition-bycomponents account (Hummel & Beiderman, 1992),
emphasize shape by depending on minimal shape
descriptions. View-based approaches, by strengthening
commonalities across view-specific instances, result in
representations that capture shape (Palmieri & Gauthier,
2004; Edelman & Intrator, 2000). Note that both object and
view-based accounts posit psychological descriptions of
shape that emphasize some aspects of shape over others and
are thus simplifications of the more numerous, more varied,
more detailed, and more specific shapes of real experience.
Smith’s (2003, also Jones & Smith, 2005) finding that
young children cannot recognize well known objects from

Abstractions for Learning in General

2178

The present experiments are with children learning and
generalizing over the appropriate similarities relevant to
visual object recognition. However, it is possible that this is
a specific example of a more pervasive principle about
learning and generalization. A primary goal of education
and learning is to promote generalization across
appropriately similar situations; the benefit of teaching with
simplified instances shown a range of domains such as
mathematics (Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler, 2005),
physics (Bassok & Holyoak, 1989), and complex adaptive
systems (Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003) predict our results
in shape-based transfer. Spanning across children and adult
learners, there are advantages to learning with perceptually
sparse representations.
Goldstone and Sakamoto’s participants (2003) learned the
principles of competitive specialization of ants distributing
themselves over food resources with abstracted ants
(pictured as dots) versus rich ants (pictured as ants).
Students in the abstract condition exhibited better transfer
performance to a contextually dissimilar but isomorphic
problem than those in the rich concrete condition. Even
though the transfer situation was the same for both
conditions, prior experience with simple dots facilitated
abstract understanding of the underlying principles.
Increased concreteness may have actually distracted learners
from a more abstract construal of the ant situation. This is
consistent with our results stressing that simplicity during
learning allows relevant information to be abstracted.
Specific features that come with increased complexity may
have distracted young participants in our experiments from
attending to global shape. A chorus of researchers (Uttal,
Liu, & DeLoache, 1999; Goldstone, Medin, & Gentner,
1991) have described a competition for attentional resources
between abstract and concrete construals of a situation.
Particularly in tasks where concrete features compete
against abstract structural construals for attentional
resources, these studies show that removing potentially
distracting features might be a good teaching strategy.
Some of the difficulties facing novices is that potentially
useful and potentially distracting features may not be
psychologically separable. Schyns and Rodet (1997) taught
adult learners about two different kinds of “Martian cells,”

cell type A or cell type AB. Transfer tests showed that
subjects who first learn about cell type A subsequently
learned about cell type AB as composed of two separate
features, A and B. Subjects who learned about AB cells
simply learned that the two cell types, A and AB, differed.
In their terms, learning A set up the perceptual vocabulary
through which a componential AB was perceived. The
present results are strongly consistent with this pattern.
Learning the simple shape first may have enabled our young
learners to see the complex object as containing the simple
shape along with other features. Learning the complex
shape first does not provide a decomposed perceptual
vocabulary and thus the learner sees the first complex object
as simply different from the shapes, simple or complex, that
follow.

Conclusions
Our results intersect with research regarding in
generalization in varying domains, from object recognition
to more general forms of learning and categorization. Real
object category learning during development may well draw
on domain-general learning mechanisms. The influence of
simplicity seen in this particular domain may be found
wherever these mechanisms are involved because learning is
about abstracting the right information. Experts may not
perceive all available aspects of a situation but they clearly
appreciate the relevant ones. In fact, part of being an expert
is the ability to ignore irrelevant information that may be
misleading. Simplicity during learning allows novices to
simulate expert perception because only the relevant
similarities are available.

References
Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K.J. (1989). Interdomain transfer
between isomorphic topics in algebra and physics.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 15, 153-166.
Biederman, I., & Shiffrar, M. (1987). Sexing day-old
chicks: A case study and expert systems analysis of a
difficult perceptual learning task. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning,Memory,andCognition,13,640-645.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meaning of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chi, M.T., Bassok, M., Lewis, M.W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems.
Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Clark, E.V. (1973). What’s in a word? On the child’s
acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T.E.
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the acquisition
of language. Oxford, England: Academic Press.
Colunga, E. (2003). Correlations among words, shape
properties, and solidity. Presented at the meeting of the
Society for Research in Child Development, Tampa, FL.
Edelman, S., & Intrator, N. (2000). Coarse coding of shape
fragments + retinotopy ~ representation of structure.
Spatial Vision, 13, 255-264.

Fenson, L., Dale, P.S., Reznick, J.S., Bates, E., Thal, D.J., &
Pethick, S.J. (1994). Variability in early communicative
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 59 (5, Serial No., 242).
Gick, M.L., & Holyoak, K.J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Goldstone, R.L., Medin, D.L., & Gentner, D. (1991).
Relational similarity and the nonindependence of features
in similarity judgments. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 222262.
Goldstone, R.L., & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46, 414-466.
Harnad, S. (2005). Cognition is categorization. In C.
Lefebvre & H. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook of
Categorization. London, England: Elsevier.
Holyoak, K.J. (1984). Analogical thinking and human
intelligence. In R.J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the
psychology of human intelligence (Vol. 2, pp. 199-230).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hummel, J.E., & Biederman, I. (1992). Dynamic binding in
a neural network for shape recognition, Psychological
Review, 99, 480-517.
Huttenlocher, J. (1974).
The origins of language
comprehension. In R. Solso (Ed.), Theories in cognitive
psychology.
Potomac, MD: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Imai, M., Gentner, D., & Uchida, N. (1994). Children’s
theories of word meaning: The role of shape similarity in
early acquisition. Cognitive Development, 9, 45-75.
Jones, S.S., & Smith, L.B. (2005). Object name learning
and object perception: A deficit in late talkers. Journal of
Child Language, 32, 223-240.
Palmeri, T.J., & Gauthier, I. (2004).
Visual object
understanding. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 291-303.
Rakison, D.H., & Cohen, L.B. (1999). Infants’ use of
functional
parts
in
basic-like
categorization.
Developmental Science, 2, 423-431.
Schyns, P.G., & Rodet, L. (1997). Categorization creates
functional features. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 681-696.
Sloutsky, V.M., Kaminski, J.A., & Heckler, A.F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and
transfer. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.
Smith, L.B. (2003).
Learning to recognize objects.
Psychological Science, 14, 244-250.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Uttal, D.H., Liu, L.L., & DeLoache, J.S. (1999). Taking a
hard look at concreteness: Do concrete objects help young
children learn symbolic relations? In L. Balter & C.
Tamis-LeMonda (Eds.), Child psychology: A handbook of
contemporary issues (pp. 177-192).
Philadelphia:
Psychology Press.

2179

