UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grammatical and Coherence-Based Factors in Pronoun Interpretation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7nb157tt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Elman, Jeffrey L.
Kehler, Andrew
Kertz, Laura

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grammatical and Coherence-Based Factors in Pronoun Interpretation
Laura Kertz (kertz@ling.ucsd.edu)
Andrew Kehler (kehler@ling.ucsd.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0108 USA

Jeffrey L. Elman (elman@crl.ucsd.edu)
Center for Research in Language, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0515 USA

Abstract
We describe a pronoun interpretation experiment in which a
Coherence Hypothesis is tested against preference-based
analyses of pronoun interpretation, including the Parallel
Function Preference and the Subject Preference. We
demonstrate that preferences can be systematically disrupted
through the manipulation of coherence, and that only the
Coherence Hypothesis can predict the full range of
coreference patterns observed. We argue, following Kehler
(2002), that apparent preferences follow from inferencing
processes which support different types of coherence relation.

Introduction
Three decades of psycholinguistic research into pronoun
interpretation have documented a broad range of biases and
effects linked to syntax, semantics, pragmatics, and more.
This has led some researchers to posit pronoun
interpretation ‘heuristics’, that is, broadly-applicable
strategies for matching pronouns to their antecedents. Of
particular interest to this study are two proposals which
gained prominence in the 1990’s and which continue to play
a role in theories of pronoun interpretation today: the
Parallel Function Preference (Smyth 1994, Chambers &
Smyth 1998, inter alia) and the Subject Preference (Crawley
& Stevenson 1990, inter alia).
These preferences, however, are often in conflict, and
each seems to surface only under certain conditions.
Acknowledging this, proponents of preference-based
models typically identify a basic antecedent selection
preference, and then augment it with additional syntactic or
semantic mechanisms. In this paper we offer an alternative
analysis, following Kehler (2002), in which preference
conflicts are best understood as side-effects of the
establishment of different types of coherence.

Parallel Function Preference
The Parallel Function Preference holds that pronouns are
preferentially resolved to antecedents that occupy a
matching argument position, for example, subject pronouns
prefer subject antecedents, and object pronouns prefer
object antecedents, as demonstrated in (1-2) below.
Samuel threatened Justin with a knife, and
(1) … he blindfolded Erin with a scarf. [=Samuel]
(2) … Erin blindfolded him with a scarf. [=Justin]

1605

However, the Parallel Function Preference fails in (3),
where the object pronoun refers to a subject antecedent.
(3) Samuel threatened Justin with a knife, and
Erin stopped him. [=Samuel]
In light of examples like (3), Smyth (1994) suggests a
modification to the Preference, which requires a perfect
match between the two clauses in both argument structure
(number and type of arguments) and sentence structure
(presence/absence of adjunct modifiers).
In cases in which these conditions are not met, a subject
preference kicks in, supporting resolution to a subject
antecedent. This Qualified Parallel Preference makes the
correct prediction in (3), because the first clause contains an
adjunct modifier which is not matched in the second clause.
It does not account for cases like (4), however, where the
structures are fully parallel. The wrong prediction is made
for (5) as well, where a lack of parallel structure does not
trigger the subject preference. In both (4) and (5), the
subject pronoun instead refers to an object antecedent.
Samuel threatened Justin with a knife, and
(4) he alerted security with a shout. [=Justin]
(5) he alerted security. [=Justin]
Note that neither the basic Parallel Function Preference nor
its more restricted variant takes into account the semantic
cues in (3-5) which support non-parallel reference.

Subject Preference
The Subject Preference, in its basic form, holds that
pronouns are preferentially resolved to subject antecedents.
The account assumes increased salience for arguments in
subject position, which guides antecedent selection for both
subject and object pronouns, as seen in (6-7).
Samuel threatened Justin with a knife, and
(6) … he blindfolded Erin with a scarf. [=Samuel]
(7) … Erin stopped him with pepper spray. [=Samuel]
The Subject Preference, as formulated by Crawley &
Stevenson (1990), however, will not override explicit cues
to antecedent reference, for example, pronoun gender. Nor
is the Subject Preference predicted to override a resolution
to a more plausible referent, as in (4-5) above, where the
semantics of the sentence show a causal bias toward the
non-subject antecedent. Note, however, that the Subject
Preference does not account for cases like (2), where no
such bias is present.

The Coherence Hypothesis
An alternative account suggests that pronoun interpretation
is not the sum of so many superficial cues, but rather the
byproduct of a larger inferencing process, wherein hearers
make sense of a discourse by inferring coherence relations
between successive utterances (Hobbs 1979). Kehler (2002)
extends Hobbs’s proposal, arguing that interpretation
‘preferences’ are actually epiphenomena of the manner in
which different types of coherence are established. Consider
(8-9).
Dennis narrowly defeated Isaac, and
(8) … Lilly congratulated him.
RESULT
(9) … Lilly utterly trounced him.
PARALLEL
In (8), there exists a plausible causal relation between the
two clauses. Interpreting the object pronoun as coreferent
with Dennis supports this relation. Interpreting the pronoun
instead as coreferent with Isaac requires the accommodation
of extra inferences to explain why Lilly congratulated the
loser and not the victor.
In (9), by contrast, a causal relation seems less likely. In
this case, what stands out is the resemblance between the
two clauses. Although Lilly’s win was handier than Dennis’,
it is more likely that the passage coheres due to the
parallelism between the two events and not due to some
causal relationship. A PARALLEL coherence relation
supports parallel coreference, and the pronoun corefers with
Isaac.

Manipulating Coherence
Wolf et al. (2004) tested the Coherence Hypothesis against
both the Subject Preference Hypothesis and the Parallel
Function Hypothesis in a reading time experiment, finding
evidence in support of the Coherence Hypothesis. In a 2x2
design, coherence frame (PARALLEL/RESULT) and
antecedent position (subject/object) were varied. Coherence
was manipulated through verb meaning and the use of the
connectives
and
similarly
and
and
so
(for
PARALLEL/RESULT relations, respectively). In PARALLEL
frames, the verbs in both clauses were synonyms; in RESULT
frames, verb semantics incorporated a bias toward the nonparallel referent. Antecedent position was signaled by
pronoun gender (masculine/feminine), which matched a
name in the preceding clause occurring in either subject or
object position. In half of the stimuli, the coreference
indicated by pronoun gender supported the coherence
relation as indicated by verb semantics and the type of
connective; in the remaining half it did not. Examples are
given in (10-11).
(10) Fiona complimented Craig and similarly
James congratulated her/him after the match,
but nobody took any notice.
PARALLEL
(11) Fiona defeated Craig and so
James congratulated her/him after the match,
but nobody took any notice.
RESULT
Faster reading times were measured for the following
coreference patterns: parallel coreference was preferred with
a PARALLEL coherence frame; non-parallel reference with a
1606

RESULT frame. Wolf et al. thus confirmed that preferences
for pronoun interpretation can be reversed by manipulating
coherence, as predicted by Kehler (2002).

Open Questions
Although the Wolf et al. study provides crucial preliminary
support for the Coherence Hypothesis, a number of
important questions remain. Among these is whether the
observed effect will transfer to a pronoun interpretation task
with ambiguous pronouns. A second issue involves the
range of possible resolution patterns. Wolf et al. restricted
their study to object pronouns, demonstrating that object
pronouns can be resolved to both subject and object
antecedents. Subject pronouns are of particular interest,
however, as both preferences predict a subject-pronoun-tosubject-antecedent resolution pattern, but neither predicts a
subject-pronoun-to-object-antecedent
resolution.
This
suggests the latter pattern is in fact dispreferred, but is such
an assumption warranted?
Table 1: Possible Coreference Patterns
subject pronoun
object pronoun

subject antecedent



object antecedent
?


Finally, it is not clear, given the Wolf et al. design,
whether the observed effects are necessarily due to
coherence or whether an alternative explanation might
apply. For example, all of the Wolf et al. stimuli include a
prepositional phrase in the second clause. This introduces
non-parallel structure, which, according to the Qualified
Parallel Hypothesis, might disrupt the parallel coreference
pattern. It has also been proposed that connectives can carry
extra focusing properties which may disrupt other
preferences (Stevenson et al. 1994, 2000). The Wolf et al.
result does not rule out these possibilities.

Experiment
The present experiment asks whether the pronoun
interpretation preferences reported in the literature can be
interpreted as epiphenomena of the manner in which
different types of coherence are established. As in the
majority of the studies described above, we use an offline
disambiguation task, focusing on the outcome of antecedent
selection, as opposed to the time course of the processes
supporting it. (Additional studies to address the latter are in
development. See Discussion below.)
In a 2x2x2 design, we constructed stimulus sets with 8
variants, as shown in (12-15). Each stimulus contains two
clauses: an introduction and a follow-on, both of which
contain a transitive verb in active voice. The follow-on
clause contains an ambiguous pronoun.
Samuel threatened Justin with a knife, and
(12) … Erin blindfolded him (with a scarf). PARALLEL
(13) … Erin stopped him (with pepper spray). RESULT
(14) … he blindfolded Erin (with a scarf).
PARALLEL
(15) … he alerted security (with a shout).
RESULT

Notice that half of the variants contain an object pronoun,
while half contain a subject pronoun. With this design, we
are able to test the full range of possible coreference
patterns in Table 1, including the subject-pronoun-to-objectantecedent resolution pattern that is not predicted by either
preference account.
This design also allows us to test the Qualified Parallel
Preference, as we have included variants in both a fully
parallel condition (a modifier in the follow-on clause
matches the modifier in the introductory clause) and a
partially parallel condition (no modifier in the follow-on).
Further, we can test the Qualified Subject Preference by
excluding RESULT coherence frames, which, as in the Wolf
et al. experiment, incorporate a semantic bias toward the
non-parallel referent. Finally we rule out the possibility of a
connective focusing effect by using the connective and
across all stimuli.
Thus by manipulating coherence, structure, and pronoun
position independently, we set up tests for each of the
competing hypotheses and address the issues left open by
Wolf et al (2004).

Predictions
The strongest form of the Subject Preference predicts an
across-the-board preference for subject antecedents, while
the Qualified Subject Preference predicts a subject effect
only in non-biasing contexts (here, in PARALLEL coherence
frames). The Parallel Function Hypothesis predicts acrossthe-board parallel coreference (main effect of pronoun
position), while the Qualified Parallel Structure Hypothesis
predicts parallel coreference for only those sentences which
show full, as opposed to partial, parallel structure
(interaction between pronoun position and sentence
structure). The Coherence Hypothesis predicts parallel
coreference in PARALLEL coherence frames, and nonparallel reference in RESULT frames (interaction between
pronoun position and coherence relation).

prepositional phrases, balanced across sets. To allow for
diversity in the stimulus set, verbs in the introductory clause
were also varied across four types: physical action, social
action, mental state verbs, and verbs of address.
Coherence frame was assessed in a prior norming phase,
during which trained judges (Linguistics graduate students),
who were blind to our hypothesis, categorized stimuli as
instances of either a PARALLEL or RESULT coherence
relation. For 119 of the 128 stimuli, 3 of 3 judges agreed on
the coherence relation. For the remaining 9 stimuli, 2 of 3
judges agreed on the coherence relation with an average
confidence score of 8 or more on an 11 point scale.

Design
A repeated measure design was employed, where each
participant was tested on 2 stimuli from each of the 8 types,
and where no two stimuli presented to the same participant
were variants from the same set. The two replications were
block randomized, and the 16 experimental stimuli were
interleaved with 24 distracters; 16 of which also contained
ambiguous pronouns. The resulting 16 lists were then
reversed to rule out ordering effects, yielding 32 unique
stimulus lists.
Participants were presented with a paper and pencil task,
for which they read a two-clause passage and answered a
question immediately after, as in (16).
(16) Samuel threatened Justin with a knife, and he
blindfolded Erin with a scarf.
Who blindfolded Erin?
The answer was taken to indicate the antecedent selected by
the participant in interpreting the ambiguous pronoun.
Where the answer matched the subject of the introductory
clause, a score of 1 was assessed. Where the answer
matched the object of the introductory clause, a score of 0
was assessed. This score was used as the dependent variable
for data analysis.

Data Analysis

Method
Participants
Participants were 32 undergraduates from the University of
California, San Diego. All were self-reported monolingual
native speakers of English. Participants received extra credit
for participation.

A 2x2x2 analysis of variance was conducted with the
following factors: pronoun position (subject/object),
sentence structure (fully/partially parallel), coherence
relation (PARALLEL/RESULT). Separate analyses were
conducted with participants (F1) and items (F2) as random
variables. Two one-sample t tests were also conducted to
compare the overall mean and the mean for a restricted set
(PARALLEL coherence only) to chance.

Stimuli
16 stimulus sets were constructed, with 8 variants per set,
for a total of 128 stimuli. Each set varied pronoun position
(subject/object), sentence structure (fully/partially parallel),
and coherence relation (PARALLEL/RESULT). An example
set is provided above in (12-15).
Full/partial structural parallelism was based on the
presence or absence of a modifier phrase in the second
clause to match the modifier in the first clause. Modifiers
were varied between pre-verbal adverbs and post-verbal

1607

Results
The data showed strong support for the Coherence
Hypothesis, and were not consistent with any of the other
hypotheses. There was no evidence of a Subject Preference
or of a Parallel Function Preference, in either their basic or
qualified formulations.

Overview
Examining gross percentages across participant responses,
no evidence of a subject preference is found. Across all

stimuli, the percentage of resolutions to subject and to
object antecedents are very close at 52:48. (See Table 2.) If
we omit the stimuli which exhibit semantic bias and
consider only those in PARALLEL coherence frames, the
distribution is 54:46, and as such there is no evidence of a
Qualified Subject Preference.
Table 2: Resolutions (%) to Subject/Object Antecedent
Antecedent
Subj
Obj

n

0.52

0.48

512

0.54

0.46

256

0.51
0.52

0.49
0.48

256
256

0.52

0.48

128

0.50

0.50

128

Subject Preference
all pronouns
Qualified Subject Preference
non-biasing context
Parallel Structure Preference
subject pronouns
object pronouns
Qualified Parallel Preference
subject pronouns:
fully parallel structure
object pronouns:
fully parallel structure

Discussion

0.98

0.02

128

0.05

0.95

128

These results strongly support the Coherence Hypothesis,
confirming our prediction that pronoun interpretation
preferences can be reversed through the manipulation of
coherence relations. Furthermore, the Coherence Hypothesis
makes correct predictions across the full range of
interpretation patterns, as described below.

0.10

0.90

128

Against Preference-Based Accounts

Coherence Hypothesis
subject pronouns:
PARALLEL coherence
subject pronouns:
RESULT coherence
object pronouns:
PARALLEL coherence
object pronouns:
RESULT coherence

by the Coherence Hypothesis, is significant [F1(1,31) =
1379.23, p < .0001; F2(1,15) = 2016.158, p < .0001]. A
second, smaller effect, which we did not predict, was found
for coherence alone [F1(1,31) = 4.429, p = .044; F2(1,15) =
7.105, p = .018].
The confidence interval for the overall mean is .516 +/.043. (Recall that a score of 1 indicates resolution to a
subject antecedent, 0 to an object.) Based on a one-sample t
test comparing the overall sample mean to a hypothetical
mean of .5, we conclude that it is not significantly different
from chance [t(511) = .707, p = .240], contra the Subject
Preference Hypothesis. Comparing the mean for PARALLEL
relations only (.539 +/- .061) to the hypothetical mean of .5,
we find the mean for this restricted set is not significantly
different from chance [t(255) = 1.251, p = .106], ruling out a
Qualified Subject Preference as well.
The main effect of pronoun position, predicted by the
Parallel Function Preference, is not statistically significant
[F1(1,31) = .088, p = .768; F2(1,15) = .105, p = .751], nor is
the interaction between sentence structure and pronoun
position, predicted by the Qualified Parallel Preference
[F1(1,31) = 1.130, p = .300; F2(1,15) = 1.552, p = .232].

0.94

0.06

128

Similarly, the percentages do not support a Parallel
Function Preference. We find that subject pronouns are
resolved to subject antecedents about as often as to object
antecedents (51:49). Object pronoun resolutions are
similarly even at 52:48 for subject/object antecedents
respectively. The Qualified Parallel Preference fares no
better, with subject pronouns resolving to subject
antecedents 52% of the time when structure is fully parallel.
Object pronouns in the fully parallel condition resolve to
object antecedents 50% of the time.
Given these near 50:50 splits, the coherence data are
particularly dramatic. We find parallel coreference for
subject pronouns in a PARALLEL frame 98% of the time.
Subject pronouns show non-parallel coreference in the
RESULT frame at a rate of 95%. Object pronouns show
parallel coreference in the PARALLEL frame 90% of the
time, and object pronouns show non-parallel coreference
(resolve to subject) in the RESULT frame at a rate of 94%.

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis of these data confirms that the interaction
between coherence frame and pronoun position, predicted
1608

Recall that both the Subject Preference Hypothesis and the
Parallel Function Hypothesis predict only a subset of
possible resolution patterns. The Coherence Hypothesis, on
the other hand, makes correct predictions for all four of the
patterns under investigation.
Table 3: Comparison of Data Coverage
(Pronoun:Antecedent)
Subject
Preference:
Parallel
Function:
Coherence:

subj:subj

subj:obj

obj:obj

obj:subj

























Further, we find that the qualifications introduced to
extend both the Parallel Function Hypothesis and the
Subject Preference Hypothesis are untenable. We show, for
example, that parallel coreference does not depend on
perfectly parallel structure; parallel coreference was
observed in PARALLEL coherence frames, whether the
structures were fully or partially parallel. Similarly, even
when we exclude the RESULT coherence relations, there is
no evidence of a subject preference; antecedent selection is

split between subjects and objects. And finally, we rule out
a focusing role for connectives (Stevenson et al. 1994,
2000).
Table 4: Summary of Results
Hypothesis
Subject
Preference:
Qualified
Subject
Preference
Parallel
Function
Preference:
Qualified
Parallel
Preference:
Coherence:

Prediction






Across-the-board preference for
subject antecedents
Preference for subject antecedent in
non-biasing contexts (i.e. PARALLEL
relations)
Across-the-board preference for
parallel coreference
Preference for parallel coreference
in fully-parallel structure condition
Parallel coreference with PARALLEL
coherence; Non-parallel coreference
with RESULT coherence

Perhaps more compellingly, however, we show that the
basic preferences supported by the Subject Preference
Hypothesis and the Parallel Function Hypothesis simply
disappear when the relevant factors are balanced. By
manipulating pronoun position and coherence frame, we
were able to systematically ‘break’ these preferences,
supporting our claim that coherence plays a crucial role in
the interpretation of pronouns.

Parallelism
In fact, coherence appears to be at the heart of the
parallelism account. The kinds of data that meet Smyth
(1994)’s requirements for strict parallelism are often
instances of PARALLEL coherence relations. This suggests
that the relevant similarity between two clauses is not
simply structural, but more importantly propositional.
Recognizing a PARALLEL coherence relation, we propose,
depends upon being able to match up meaningful units in
distinct propositions. And constructing sentence pairs that
have similar propositional content is very likely facilitated
by similarity in structure. For example, one would expect
that verbs with similar meaning would have similar
argument structures, taking the same number of arguments,
in the same order. The exact nature of the relationship
between parallel structure and PARALLEL coherence,
however, remains an important issue for future research.

The Subject Effect
The Subject Preference has been documented by a variety of
researchers, and is supported by a plausible model of
discourse processing which takes into account issues of
salience and focus of attention (c.f. related proposals
identifying a topic preference and first-mention effects). So

1609

why do our results show a subject preference occurring at
close to chance levels? As suggested above, the subject
preference disappears when the relevant factors are
balanced.
In this case, the relevant factor is coherence frame. As
described in the immediately preceding section, there is no
default subject preference within a PARALLEL coherence
frame. Subject pronouns tend to corefer with subject
antecedents and object pronouns with object antecedents.
Similarly, there is no default antecedent position in a
RESULT coherence frame. In this experiment, we examined
cases where causal bias supports non-parallel reference, as
in (17) where a subject pronoun refers to an object
antecedent, but causal inferencing might also support a
parallel subject antecedent, as in (18).
Peter snapped at Ethan, and
(17) … he sulked the rest of the afternoon. [=Ethan]
(18) … he felt guilty the rest of the afternoon. [=Peter]
Thus there appears to be little support for a subject
preference in PARALLEL and RESULT coherence frames.
But what about other types of coherence? There may be
reason to believe that the subject preference is more robust
within the ‘OCCASION’ coherence relation, where multiple
discourse segments combine to form a narrative. (See
Kehler 1997 for discussion.) Consider the passage in (19):
(19) Rubens passed Lopez in the final lap, and
he went on to win the race. [=Rubens]
The flow of the narrative seems to be following Rubens, and
the passage as a whole makes the most sense if the driver in
front is the one who wins the race.
Whether and how salience interacts with coherence is an
open question, and we are currently developing studies to
address the issue. While the current study followed the
previous literature in using an offline task, experiments
currently in preparation will utilize online measures such as
self-paced reading time, which we hope will provide a fuller
picture of the processes supporting pronoun interpretation.
For example, although the ultimate resolution for (17) is to a
non-subject antecedent, one might ask, in light of the
subject and parallelism preferences, whether reading times
are delayed in comparison to cases like (18).

Semantic Focusing
Stevenson et al. (2000) make reference to coherence in
formulating their Semantic Focusing Model of pronoun
interpretation. They propose a focusing mechanism
associated with discourse connectives and then contrast this
revised focusing account with a ‘relational’ analysis.
Stevenson et al. find that the revised Semantic Focusing
Model makes better predictions than the Relational Model
in a sentence continuation task.
We suggest that the reliance on discourse connectives to
signal coherence in their work is a critical flaw. Under such
an analysis, antecedent preferences should be stable unless a
focusing connective is introduced. The present experiment
shows, however, that antecedent preferences can be shifted
through the manipulation of coherence in the absence of

discourse connectives. Furthermore, the Relational Model
assumed by Stevenson et al. requires a one-to-one mapping
between coherence relation and preferred referent (for
example, the patient argument is always preferred in a result
coherence relation). That assumption is not a prediction of
the coherence model they cite (Hobbs 1979), and the data
reported here refute the assumption, showing that pronouns
can refer back to either a subject (agent) or an object
(patient) in either the PARALLEL or the RESULT coherence
relation.

The Coherence Model
The Coherence Model is conceptually distinct from
preference-based accounts of pronoun interpretation. Each
of the preference models holds that morpho-syntactic cues
have a direct bearing on pronoun interpretation. The
Coherence Model, on the other hand, holds that such effects
are mediated by the interpretation of coherence.
Table 5: Two Models of Pronoun Interpretation
Model

Mechanism

Preference
Models:

morphosyntax

Coherence
Model:

Summary
We described an off-line pronoun interpretation experiment
in which a Coherence Hypothesis was tested against the
Subject Preference Hypothesis and the Parallel Function
Hypothesis. We demonstrated that preferences can be
systematically disrupted through the manipulation of
coherence relations, and that when the relevant factors are
balanced, preferences disappear. We addressed issues left
open by previous work (Wolf et al. 2004) and showed that
only the Coherence Hypothesis makes correct predictions
for the full range of coreference patterns under
investigation. We suggested further investigation be carried
out using online measures and outlined areas for future
research, including possible interactions between salience
and coherence.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a grant from the
UCSD Academic Senate.

References


pronoun
interpretation

coherence
morpho- 
 pronoun
syntax
interpretation

Evidence for the mediating effect of coherence was
provided in the present experiment, where morpho-syntactic
structure (including transitivity, tense, aspect, voice, and
syntactic structure) was matched across stimulus pairs, but
coherence was manipulated. Further evidence comes from
ambiguous passages like (20), taken from Kehler (2002),
where two competing interpretations of the object pronoun
are possible.
(20) Colin Powell defied Dick Cheney, and
George Bush punished him.
The object pronoun him can be interpreted as coreferent
with either the subject of the preceding clause, Colin
Powell, or the object, Dick Cheney. Crucially, these
competing interpretations are each aligned with a distinct
coherence frame. Under one interpretation, Cheney is
having a bad day: first Powell defies him, and then Bush
punishes him. A PARALLEL relation supports parallel
coreference. Under the alternative, Powell got what he
deserved: he defied Cheney, and so Bush punished him. In
this case, a RESULT relation supports non-parallel reference.
As this example involves a single utterance with two
potential interpretations, there is clearly no morphosyntactic trigger which can select between the two. The only
difference between the two interpretations is the supporting
coherence frame. We argue that any successful account of
the data presented here, including ambiguities like (20),
must appeal to coherence.

1610

Chambers, C. G., and Smyth, R. (1998). Structural
parallelism and discourse coherence: a test of centering
theory. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 593-608.
Crawley, R. A., & Stevenson, R. J. (1990). Reference in
single sentences and in texts. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 19, 191-210.
Hobbs, J. R. (1979). Coherence and coreference. Cognitive
Science, 3, 67-90.
Kehler, A. (1997). Current theories of centering for pronoun
interpretation: a critical evaluation. Computational
Linguistics, 23(3), 467-475.
Kehler, A. (2002). Coherence, reference, and the theory of
grammar. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Stevenson, R. J., Crawley, R. A., & Kleinman, D. (1994).
Thematic roles, focus, and the representation of events.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 519–548.
Stevenson, R. J., Knott, A., Oberlander, J., & McDonald, S.
(2000). Interpreting pronouns and connectives:
Interactions between focusing, thematic roles and
coherence relations. Language and Cognitive Processes,
15, 225–262.
Smyth, R. (1994). Grammatical determinants of ambiguous
pronoun resolution. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
23, 197–229.
Wolf, F., Gibson, E. & Desmet, T. (2004). Discourse
coherence and pronoun resolution. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 19(6), 665–675.

