UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Does Information about Creative Process Affect Audience Appreciation of Artwork?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6cv6n891

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Agata, Takumitsu
Okada, Takeshi

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How does Information about Creative Process Affect
Audience Appreciation of Artwork?
Takumitsu Agata (t-agata@xg8.so-net.ne.jp)
Graduate School of Education and Human Development,
Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan

Takeshi Okada (okadatak@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
Considering an art museum as a learning environment,
there is a situation needs to be improved. Especially in
Japan, many people think modern and contemporary arts
difficult or incomprehensible, and it seems that visitors are
puzzled about how to appreciate and learn from it. Many
educational programs for children that support their appreciation of artwork have been developed through linking
museums to schools (e.g., Housen, 1992). However, while
over 90 percent of visitors to art museums are adults (Falk
& Dierking, 1992), few practices or programs for adult
visitors exist. How can we help adult visitors to appreciate
modern and contemporary arts?
Concerning the style of exhibiting artwork, the question
of whether or not information about the curator’s interpretation should be provided to visitors has been a
controversial issue in the art museum world (McLean, 1993).
People who claim that artwork should be displayed without
any other information stress the importance of visitors’ free
interpretation, that is, meaning-making. Though we agree
with the idea that museums should respect visitors’
meaning-making, situations often occur in which viewers
are so bewildered that they can’t even begin the process of
making a meaning. On the other hand, people who insist
that information about the curators’ interpretation of artwork
should be presented assert that it is nonsense to think that
visitors can understand artwork adequately by just seeing it.
We also think that visitors need some kind of information
about artwork for appreciation. However, it is also true that
the curators’ interpretation easily compels visitors to think
as the curators do and to interrupt visitors’ process of
meaning-making.
Although both approaches to exhibiting art have problems,
most artwork has been exhibited in one of the two styles
mentioned above. This situation may play a role in making
visitors think modern and contemporary arts are incomprehensible. Thus, it is meaningful to develop a new exhibition
style that will enable adult visitors to appreciate artwork
more happily and learn from it more effectively. In this
article, we present the exhibition style that shows artwork
with information about the artist’s creative process, and
investigate the effect of such a style on visitors’ appreciation.
Artworks are usually exhibited in museums without such
information even though they are sometimes situated in art
history as well as in the past works of those artists. In order

Abstract
In this article, we proposed an exhibition style which shows
visitors not only the artwork itself (i.e., art exhibit) but also
information about its creative process (i.e., process exhibit),
and examined the effect of this exhibition style. Thirteen pairs
of participants were encouraged to talk freely while looking at
the art exhibit (their conversations were recorded with ICrecorders), and were also asked to complete questionnaire
surveys before and after looking at the process exhibit. The
results showed that after getting information about the
creative process, they were able to consider the artist’s
concepts and thoughts more actively and appreciate this
artwork more deeply. The process exhibit also facilitated the
audience’s connection of the exhibit to their life experiences.
Thus, our study shows that knowledge about the artist’s
creative process did, in fact, deepen their understanding
without disturbing their aesthetic experiences.
Keywords: museum learning; art appreciation.

Introduction
Recently, learning in museums has been in the spotlight as a
sort of informal education. A museum is a place where
people visit with their families or friends to enjoy themselves, and to learn through intellectual curiosity.
What are the unique characteristics of learning in
museums? The answer can be roughly classified into two
categories. One category includes features of objects
exhibited in museums. Leinhardt & Crowley (2002) claimed
that objects in museums facilitate a kind of example-based
learning. They also identified four features of objects that
make them unique opportunities of learning: veridical
resolution and a density of information, actual scale,
authenticity, and high level of value. The other category is
about collaborative learning. By interacting with others such
as families, friends and curators, people can learn from
exhibits more effectively (Leinhardt & Knutson, 2004).
In recent years, studies concerning visitors’ activities in
museums have increased (e.g., Leinhardt, Crowley, &
Knutson, 2002), and fruitful findings have accumulated.
However, these studies mainly dealt with science museums,
historical museums, or children’s museums, and few studies
shed light on art museums. In addition, most studies targeted
children or the parent-child unit, and adult museum learning
has not been well analyzed.

949

this part, Chaucer’s personal history, pictures, and stories of
how he related the three fictitious families were exhibited.

to facilitate audience understanding of artwork, it would
probably be useful to exhibit not only artwork itself but also
information about the creative process. Moreover, showing
an artists’ series of artworks chronologically, has become a
standard style in art museums in recent years (Schubert,
2000). In such a monographic way of exhibiting, visitors
naturally turn their thoughts toward the artist’s creation.
Thus, the new exhibition style which shows the artist’s
creative process matches with this trend.

Process Exhibit. In the process exhibit, information about
the creative process of this artwork was exhibited. For about
two years, we have collected data about the process of
making “Conversation Piece”. We videotaped each class
and the staff meetings before and after the class. Also, we
collected materials and notes that the artist prepared for this
project. In addition, we interviewed Ogawa at his studio for
six times, approximately four hours each. In the interviews,
we asked him to recall what he was thinking while making
the artwork. With using these data, we described Ogawa’s
creative process of “Conversation Piece” to show at the
exhibit. The displayed information consisted of four parts.
a) The summary of Shinji Ogawa’s personal history and his
previous artwork
Because Ogawa played the part of a fictitious character in
the art exhibit, we introduced him to the audience in the
process research section. Information about his previous
artwork was added to explain the making process of
“Conversation Piece” because some sources of this
artwork’s ideas were his previous works.
b) The framework of “Conversation Piece”
Ogawa wrote for this section about what he wanted to
express in “Conversation Piece”. Below is the summary of
his explanation which was exhibited.
- This art project expresses “Branching and Integration” following a weaving metaphor.
- Warp: “Branching” off three fictional worlds from the
same 60 photographs through collaboration between
the artist and 11 students.
- Woof: “Integration” of those worlds through the 101
year old fictitious painter, Raymond Chaucer.
c) Description of the making process of “Conversation
Piece”
We described Ogawa’s making process of “Conversation
Piece”, focusing on how he “wove” the concepts in this
artwork. The process was displayed in the form of a chart
and eight episodes. Overall, we described how Ogawa came
up with new ideas and threw them away again and again.
d) Three hypotheses on artistic creative process
We analyzed Ogawa’s creative process and summarized it
as follows:
1) Artists create a new concept of artwork through
applying ideas from their past works and discarding
them. Through this process, they gradually become
aware of what needs to be abandoned and what must
be kept.
2) Others take important roles in their decision about
what to discard and what to adopt.
3) Artists create a new concept of artwork by linking it
to their own “theme of representation”.

Method
Target Exhibition
The target exhibition of this study, which was called
“Conversation Piece”, was held at the Nagoya University
Museum, from January 19th to February 18th, 2005. This
exhibition consisted of two sections: one was the art exhibit,
and the other was the process exhibit. The two exhibits were
physically separated so that all visitors could see the art
exhibit first, then the process exhibit.
Art Exhibit. The artwork is based on a collaboration
between the artist Shinji Ogawa and eleven undergraduate
students of Nagoya University. Shinji Ogawa is a
contemporary artist, who has exhibited his paintings and
digital video works at many museums and galleries in Japan
and several places in the United States.
The workshop was conducted in the classroom of a
freshman seminar course at Nagoya University that the
second author organized. The overview of the workshop is
as follows:
1) Ogawa showed the students sixty old photographs of
people from Europe and the United States.
2) The students who were divided into three groups created
fictional family stories based on the photographs.
3) Students were then given old clothes, bags, and other
“historical” objects to use as evidence of their stories to
make them look like real historical events.
This workshop started October, 2002 and ended March,
2003. However, Ogawa spent two years in total for this
project including the planning, workshop, and exhibition.
The art exhibit roughly consisted of three parts:
a) Introduction
Panels described an overview of this project and the sixty
old pictures mentioned above were displayed.
b) Three fictitious family stories created by the students
In this section, students’ works were exhibited. It consisted
of three fictitious families’ stories, family trees, and relics.
c) Fictitious painter’s works created by Ogawa
After students’ workshop ended, Ogawa created a fictional
painter, Raymond Chaucer, who connected all three family
stories. Ogawa made paintings and drawings and signed “R.
C.” on these pictures as if Chaucer made them. In this
exhibition, Ogawa played the role of Chaucer as if he really
existed and Ogawa’s name was intentionally concealed. In

Participants
Thirteen pairs (undergraduate and graduate students, mainly
Humanities and Social Sciences majors and also their

950

friends) voluntarily participated in this study when we
recruited in classrooms. They were not paid for this participation. In addition, since this exhibition was held at the
Nagoya University Museum, university students were
regarded as an authentic audience. The mean participant’s
age was 23.2 years. Females comprised twelve. Thirteen
participants described themselves as infrequent art museum
visitors (0-1 visits per year), and the rest as occasional
visitors (2-3 visits per year). Almost all participants
answered that they like to appreciate art. None of the
participants knew Ogawa’s artworks at that time.

changed. Thus, information about the creative process
influenced participants’ appreciation of this artwork.
We also asked them how it changed in the form of freedescription and interviews. The responses were divided into
three categories. Cohen’s Kappa as the inter-rater agreement
statistic was ranging from .80 to .82. The most frequent
answer fell into the category of “awareness of artist’s
creative process” (15 instances), followed by “awareness of
the artwork’s concept” (14 instances) and “awareness of the
artwork’s structure” (7 instances). Maybe it was natural that
participants became more aware of the creative process
because they were provided with that information. However,
this new viewpoint of appreciation seemed to interest many
visitors. After seeing the creative process, one of the pairs
had the following conversation:
7B: Well, I have never seen artworks in such way.
7A: Yeah, I had no viewpoints of “why he drew this” or
“why he did such things” before. It is interesting to
appreciate art from such a viewpoint. (deleted) I now
know that I can appreciate art in this way.
7B: Yeah.
This pair found a new way of appreciating this artwork that
they had never noticed before.
See also the following conversation that one of pairs
talking during reading episodes of making process.
6A: He (the artist) considers many things (during creating artwork) after all, doesn’t he? [with laughter]
6B: Yeah, but he is captured by his past ideas.
6A: Oh…Yeah.
6B: [with laughter] He is captured by his life.
6A: But it is difficult to discard them, isn’t it?
6B: Yes. He needs to deny himself more or less.
It seems that the participants relived the artist’s mental
experiences of creation. They thought about the feeling of
the artist during creating the artwork and tried to analyze it.
This deep and active appreciation was not found at the art
exhibit. Perhaps, to facilitate such an activity, this exhibition
style is particularly effective especially in the appreciation
of conceptual or abstract art because it is often difficult to
grasp artists’ creative process in those types of works.
Next, we want to talk about awareness of the artwork’s
concept. We counted the number of pairs who talked about
“Branching” or “Integration” during seeing the art exhibit
and the process exhibit. The results showed that although
there were only a few conversations that discussed
“Branching and Integration” in the art exhibit, almost all
pairs talked about the concept in the process exhibit.
Precisely, during appreciating art, only three out of thirteen
pairs uttered these words, while eleven pairs used it during
seeing the creative process (χ2(1)=9.90, p<.01). Note that the
word “Branching and Integrations” were described also in
the art exhibit, so they had an opportunity to talk about this
concept there. We also asked them if they understood the
concept or framework of “Conversation Piece” in the pre
and the post questionnaires in the form of 5-point Likert
scaling. A t-test revealed a significant difference between
the two scores (3.58 vs. 4.00, t(25)=2.28, p<.05). Thus,

Design and Procedure
A student was asked to bring his/her friend to the museum.
They were encouraged to talk freely while looking at the art
exhibit (their conversations were recorded by using ICrecorders). They were also asked to complete questionnaire
surveys (1) after looking at the art exhibit (pretest) and (2)
after looking at the process exhibit (posttest). In addition,
after looking at all sections, we conducted brief interviews
with each of them. Participants’ conversations and
responses from the interviews were transcribed and used for
analysis.
The mean time for appreciation of the art exhibit was 48.3
minutes (SD=11.37) and that of the process exhibit was 26.8
minutes (SD=7.43). Perhaps this relatively long time for
appreciation indicates that participants of this study were
highly motivated and there was a lot of signage to read in
both the art and the process exhibits. The experiment
procedure (including art and process appreciations, questionnaires, and interview) lasted approximately two hours.

Results and Discussion
What kind of effect does the information about the artist’s
creative process have on visitors’ art appreciation? We
examined this question from the following three aspects.
1) Effect on visitors’ view of the artwork “Conversation
Piece”
2) Effect on visitors’ view of the artist, Shinji Ogawa
3) Effect on visitors’ images or ideas of arts and artists in
general
We first compared the difference between the data from
two questionnaires to see whether or not information about
creative process affected visitors’ art appreciation. Then, to
investigate how it affected them, we analyzed what visitors
learned and talked about at the process exhibit.

Effect of showing information about creative
process on visitors’ view of the artwork
“Conversation Piece”
Did participants change their view of this artwork after
learning its creative process? We asked them this question
directly in the posttest with scales ranging from 1 (not
changed) to 5 (changed). The mean answer to this question
was 3.81, with twenty-one (81 percent) responding that it

951

Table 1: The number of participants in each category for impressions of Shinji Ogawa
Definition
Participants only describe that Ogawa tries to do something new or
interesting.

pre
10

post
5

χ2
2.34

p
=.13

Impression or evaluation of his Participants describe impressions or evaluations about Ogawa’s
painting technique and style
painting techniques or style.

5

0

5.53

<.05

Impression or evaluation of Participants describe impressions or evaluations about Ogawa’s
theme or the world of Ogawa’s creation theme or view of world.
artwork

3

12

7.59

<.01

Impression or evaluation of Participants describe impressions or evaluations about Ogawa’s
Ogawa’s creative process
creative process.

0

14

19.16

<.01

Nothing

9

1

7.92

<.01

Category
Searching for something new

Participants describe that they didn’t have any particular impression.

participants whether or not they understood his view of the
world and the artistic expression that he was trying to
achieve. The t-test showed significant difference between
the two scores of the questionnaires (2.65 vs. 3.54,
t(25)=5.53, p<.01). The result indicates that they could
understand better after seeing the process exhibit.
To investigate the effect more clearly, we asked
participants about their impression of Shinji Ogawa in both
questionnaires. We categorized their responses and coded
five different categories as shown in Table 1. Cohen’s
Kappa was ranging from .76 to 1.00, indicating that the
reliability was pretty high. Before having appreciated the
making process of this artwork, the most frequent answer
was “searching for something new” (10 instances), and next
“nothing” (9 instances). Thus, by just being exposed to this
artwork, they got only shallow impressions. They didn’t
seem to have interests in the core of Ogawa’s originality.
In contrast, in the posttest, the most frequent description
was “impression or evaluation of Ogawa’s creative process”
(14 instances), followed by “impression or evaluation of
theme or world of Ogawa’s artworks” (12 instances). The
Chi-square test revealed significant differences of both
categories between the pre and the post questionnaires. Thus,
by getting the information about the creative process, they
became to think more about the artist’s creative process or
theme. It is interesting that showing the creative process was
linked to the understanding of Ogawa’s theme or the world
of his artwork. But how did it come about? The following
conversation is helpful in answering this question.
4B: I don’t know the connection between “Interference”
(Ogawa’s previous work) and “Conversation Piece”.
4A: “Family” is a motif here, isn’t it? The students
made stories through constructing pictures of various
people as families. The viewpoints of people who are
making stories were “Interference”, aren’t they?
4B: The viewpoints of people?
4A: Well, the viewpoint of this artist? It might be the
viewpoint of Ogawa...
4B: What is the meaning of “interference”? That is, the
thing that should exist, but doesn’t exist or…
4A: Yeah. They link each other in this way.
4B: Oh, linking is just that (“Interference”).

information about the artist’s creative process helped
visitors to understand the art concept.
This understanding also linked to the activity of meaningmaking.
7A: [read label] He (the artist) came up with the phrase
“Branching worlds and Integrating Consciousness”
but he didn’t know how to integrate them concretely
(when he started). [with laughter] Well, so…
7B: You know, didn’t you feel something like
incarnation when you saw the paintings of the
characters of fictitious stories next to the paintings of
the students in that artwork?
7A: Ah…
7B: Ogawa is great. Because in his mind, he created
interaction between himself and students, and made
Chaucer integrate it.
The word “incarnation” did not appear in the exhibited text,
and Ogawa did not reflect on this artwork as such. This
example indicates that although they read the same texts
about the concept of this artwork or about the creative
process, each of the participants interpreted this artwork in
their own way. In other words, showing the creative process
didn’t disturb visitors’ meaning-making but did deepen their
appreciation.
In sum, at first almost all participants appreciated this
artwork without considering the concept. However, after
getting information about the creative process, they became
able to relive the change of the artist’s feelings actively and
appreciate this artwork more deeply. Also, they saw this
artwork over again by taking the art concept into account.
Because of these activities, they became more impressed by
the artwork and appreciated it differently from before. Thus,
as a whole, we can say that information about the creative
process affects visitors’ appreciation of the artwork
positively.

Effect of showing information about creative
process on visitors’ view of the artist, Shinji Ogawa
The next question is how an understanding of the creative
process affects visitors’ impressions of Shinji Ogawa. In
both the pre and the post questionnaires, we asked

952

Table 2: The number of participants in each category for the changes of images or ideas of artists
Category
Affinity to collaborative artist

Definition
Participants describe that they came to feel an affinity with the artist
because they saw the artwork created by collaboration with students.

pre
5

post
1

χ2
3.01

p
=.08

Recognition of artists’ talent

Participants describe that they thought that the artist is a genius who
has a great talent.

2

1

0.35

=.55

Change of definition of artist

Participants describe that they extended their definition of artist
because they discovered artists who create artworks in such a style
that they had never knew.

3

1

1.08

=.30

Affinity to artists caused by Participants describe that their image of artists’ creative process was
changes of images of artists’ changed or that they felt affinity to the “human heart” of artists
making process
because of the change of the image of the creative process.

0

14

19.16

<.01

Others

2

1

0.35

=.55

Descriptions that were included in none of the four categories
mentioned above.

the two scores (2.96 vs. 3.38, t(25)=2.28, p<.05). Thus,
although about half participants changed their images of
artists through appreciating the artwork, more participants
changed them through getting information about the making
process.
In order to examine this change qualitatively, we compared free-description data. Their answers were coded into
five categories as shown in Table 2. Cohen’s Kappa was
ranging from .83 to 1.00. In the pretest, the most frequent
change was “affinity to collaborative artist”, and then
“change of definition of artist”. It reflects that they used to
feel artists were distant people or a painter or sculptor.
Because the target exhibition, “Conversation Piece”, was a
conceptual installation consisting of various fictitious
materials, and a result of collaboration between an artist and
novices, it was a new experience for most of the participants.
In the posttest, the most frequent answer was “affinity to
artists caused by changes of images of artists’ making
process” and this is the only category that indicated a
significant difference between the pre and the post questionnaires by Chi square test (χ2(1)=19.16, p<.01). That is,
showing the creative process encouraged visitors to feel
familiar with the artist’s creative process. The following
conversation will help us to understand the meaning of this
result.
5B: I had thought that artists are so different from us.
But, they are actually similar to us.
5A: Yah, Yah, Yah.
5B: It (making art) is similar to living a life.
5A: Though artists might be embarrassed if I say that
they are like us… But, you know, we usually think that
artists are special, don’t we?
5B: Yah. He just worries like us.
5A: Yah! [deleted]
5B: Yah. Like we worry about job searches and
graduation theses, he also thinks in the same way as
we do. I feel closer to the artist now.
They came to think that artists were similar to themselves.
As Weisberg (1986) indicated, people still believe the
genius myth of artists. Namely, many people thought that

4A: I think that it is a little different from linking…
Here, participants were talking about the connection
between Ogawa’s previous works such as “Interference”
and “Conversation Piece”. Through this conversational
elaboration, they gradually understood the consistent theme
in Ogawa’s artworks. They became able to grasp Ogawa’s
creative process of this artwork more broadly, situating it in
Ogawa’s life-long creative process.
Moreover, many participants said that they became
interested in the artist Ogawa at the process exhibit. For
example,
5B: After seeing his work, I think I want to meet Mr.
Ogawa.
5A: Me too.
5B: I want to see him once.
In sum, information about creative process made visitors
pay more attention to the artist. After having appreciated the
making process, they became able to focus on the conceptual aspects of Ogawa’s art creation. Also, they started to
take Ogawa’s long term process of art making into account.
After getting to know Ogawa, some of them became
strongly interested in the artist.

Effect of showing information about creative
process on visitors’ images or ideas of arts and
artists in general
We set up two questions on this matter: one was how this
information affected visitor’s images or ideas of art, and the
other was how it affected visitor’s images or ideas about
artist. We investigated them respectively, but the results
were quite similar and closely related to each other, in
consideration of space of the paper, we introduce only the
latter here.
We asked whether and how their images or ideas about
artists changed by visiting this museum in the pre and the
post questionnaires using 5-point Likert scaling and freedescription. To start with, we compared two scores to see
whether or not they recognized that their images and ideas
of artists had changed through appreciating the art making
process. The t-test revealed a significant difference between

953

artists create ideas in some mysterious way and make
artwork by sparks or flows. Moreover, they think that artists
are so different from common people that general people
can’t understand them. Because most participants of this
study had had these beliefs, the exhibited information that
Ogawa created artwork with trial and error might be a very
surprising one. As a result, many participants answered that
their images of artists’ creative process were changed, and
that they came to realize that the artistic creative process
was not special but ordinary and similar to their own
thinking processes.
Furthermore, when reading about Ogawa’s art making
process, they linked it to their own life experiences. In the
episode mentioned above, both of the participants were
seniors, and had just finished job searches and graduation
theses. They remembered their important experiences and
connected them to the exhibit. Also, some pairs of graduate
students discussed similarities or differences between the
artists’ creative process and their research process. These
are examples of active appreciation in a museum setting.
Leinhardt & Knutson (2004) found that visitors who had a
personal connection to the content of exhibition were more
likely to have powerful learning conversations about art.
That is, the phenomena found here was especially important
for informal learning settings, including art appreciation in a
museum.
In sum, showing the creative process of art made people
change their ideas and images of arts as well as artists, and
also made them feel closer to artists. By thinking of artists
as familiar, people may increase their motivations for
understanding art and artists, and begin to appreciate
artwork more actively. Furthermore, people came to
appreciate exhibits relating with their life experiences.

artists, and became able to see the artist’s activity as similar
to theirs. We expect that these mental activities will enhance
their interests in modern and contemporary arts which they
had felt difficult and incomprehensible before.
What can this study suggest to improve the present ways
of museum exhibition? For the people who insist that
artwork should be exhibited without any other information
in order not to interrupt visitors’ meaning-making, we can
say that this exhibition style helps their appreciation by
respecting their feelings or interpretations. For people who
claim that some kind of information should be displayed for
visitors’ understanding of the artwork, information about the
creative process would be a strong candidate for deepening
their understanding. Thus, showing information about
artists’ creative process somewhat solves a controversy
among art museum people.
However, because these findings were the results of a
case study, many questions remain to be answered.
Examples of such questions are as follows: How does this
exhibit affect visitors’ learning longitudinally?; How does
this exhibition style influence more experienced visitors? In
order to elaborate and generalize the findings of the present
study, further studies are needed to examine the effect of
this exhibition style on visitors’ learning.

General Discussion

Falk, J. & Dierking, L. (1992) The museum experience.
Washington, DC: Whalesback Books.
Housen, A. (1992). Validating a measure of aesthetic
development for museums and schools. IVLS Review, 2,
213-237.
Leinhardt, G. & Crowley, K. (2002). Objects of learning,
object of talk: Changing minds in museums. In S. G. Paris
(ed.), Perspectives on object-centered learning in
museums. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associations.
Leinhardt, Crowley, & Knutson (2002) Learning
conversations in museums. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associations.
Leinhardt, G. & Knutson, K. (2004). Listening in on
museum conversations. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira
Press.
McLean, K. (1993). Planning for people in museum
exhibitions. Washington, DC: Association of Science
Technology Centers.
Schubert, K. (2000). The curator’s egg: The evolution of the
museum concept from the French Revolution to the
present day. London: One-Off Press.
Weisberg, R. W. (1986). Creativity: Genius and other myths.
New York: Freeman.

Acknowledgments
We thank Shinji Ogawa, the eleven students, and other staff
members of the “Conversation Piece” project as well as the
subjects of this research for their cooperation. We also thank
Kevin Crowley, Karen Knutson, and Brenda Mitchell for
their insightful comments on our earlier draft.

References

In this article, we presented a new exhibition style which
shows visitors not only artwork itself but also information
about the creative process, and examined the effect of this
exhibition style. We analyzed it from three viewpoints one
by one. The results indicated that showing the art making
process brought various positive results to museum visitors.
First, information about the creative process influenced
the visitors’ view of appreciation of “Conversation Piece”.
By learning about Ogawa’s creative process, many people
talked about the concept of the artwork or the creative
process, and made meanings differently from before getting
to know about it. That is, information about the creative
process facilitated active learning, and brought out visitors’
deep conversational elaboration. Second, showing creative
process made visitors consider the connection between a
series of Ogawa’s previous artwork and “Conversation
Piece”. This enabled them to grasp Ogawa’s view more
clearly. In addition, to appreciate artworks from such a
viewpoint would match a monographic way of exhibiting
that is in fashion (Schubert, 2000). Third, when reading
about Ogawa’s art making process, visitors linked it to their
own life experiences. They also felt familiar with art or

954

