UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Many Rooms in an Octopus Apartment? Effects of Prosody on Conceptual Combination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1jk1190g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Connell, Louise
Lynott, Dermot

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Many Rooms in an Octopus Apartment?
Effects of Prosody on Conceptual Combination
Dermot Lynott (dermot.lynott@northumbria.ac.uk)
Louise Connell (louise.connell@northumbria.ac.uk)
Cognition & Communication Research Centre, Division of Psychology, Northumbria University
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK
Abstract
Previous theories of conceptual combination have failed to
address the possible role of suprasegmental factors such as
prosodic emphasis patterns. Here, we investigated the effect of
emphasising the initial word (modifier emphasis), both words
(dual emphasis), or the final word (head emphasis) on people’s
interpretations of novel noun-noun compounds (e.g., octopus
apartment). We found that dual emphasis alone affects the
frequency of production and speed of property- and relationbased interpretations. People produced more relation-based
(e.g., an octopus apartment is where an octopus lives) than
property-based (e.g., an octopus apartment has eight rooms)
interpretations when compounds were presented with dual
emphasis than in written form. Additionally, dual emphasis
caused people to arrive at property-based interpretations more
rapidly than relation-based interpretations.
Findings are
discussed with reference to existing theories of conceptual
combination.

Introduction
Octopus apartment, latte crowd and snail mail are all
examples of coined noun-noun compounds generally referred
to as concept combinations. These novel combinations reflect
a fundamental aspect of language generativity, accounting for
between 30% and 60% of new terms in English (Cannon,
1987; McFedries, 2004). It often happens that such
compounds survive to become permanent fixtures of the
language and used everyday by the wider language
community (e.g., soccer mom, camera phone). Others may
only be used in one specific context and not become part of
the language as a lexicalised term in its own right (e.g., daisy
cup as “a cup with a daisy pattern on it”). With these phrases
occurring everywhere from newspaper headlines to
advertisements and novels, it is clear that they represent an
important aspect of language use and growth.
Over the past 25 years, there has been a wealth of research
into the comprehension of concept combinations, with a
number of different theoretical positions proposed. Most
recent research acknowledges that for any given novel
compound there can be many possible interpretations (e.g.,
constraint theory, Costello & Keane, 2000; Competition
Among Relations in Nominals: CARIN, Gagné & Shoben,
1997; Producing and Understanding Novel Compounds:
PUNC, Lynott et al., 2004; concept specialisation, Murphy,
1990).
These theories generally hold that the conceptual
combination process involves the manipulation of properties
and relations between the head (first concept) and the
modifier (second concept). For example, the PUNC model
(Lynott et al, 2004) interprets the compound cactus beetle by
moving the feature “has spikes” from the modifier to the

head, giving rise to the property-based meaning “a beetle that
has spikes”. Alternatively, the relation “eats” can be placed
between the constituent nouns to give rise to the relationbased meaning “a beetle that eats cacti” (e.g., Lynott, et al.,
2004; Gagné, 2000).
Where conceptual combination theories differ is in the
relative importance they place each of the nouns that make up
the compound. The CARIN model (Gagné, 2000; Gagné &
Shoben, 1997) argues for the primacy of the modifier,
showing that the frequency with which a particular relation
(e.g., located, made-of) is associated with a modifier noun can
predict the speed with which people use that relation in an
interpretation (e.g., if the relation [located] is frequently
associated with the noun daisy then daisy cup will be easily
interpreted as “a cup containing daisies”). In contrast,
concept specialisation theory (Murphy, 1990) leans in favour
of primacy of the head, contending that the modifying noun
acts to specialise the representation of the head noun. On the
other hand, constraint theory argues for equal primacy of
head and modifier (Costello & Keane, 2000), with both
concepts given equal weight in the search for the best
interpretation of a given compound. Finally, the PUNC
model (Lynott et al., 2004) differs from all the above by
arguing that that neither constituent noun has a priori primacy
in the interpretation process, and that relative importance is
dependent on each individual concept and that concept’s
internal structure. Clearly, there is little agreement on the
relative importance of the constituent concepts in a nounnoun compound; an issue that needs to be resolved if we are
to understand how people perform this complex microcosm
of language comprehension.

Prosody and Conceptual Combination

1747

None of the cognitive theories of conceptual combination in
the literature to date have specified a role for suprasegmental
information (e.g., prosodic information) in the comprehension
of novel noun-noun compounds. This is a curious omission
in light of the fact that general linguistic theories of language
have noted the meaning-altering effects of prosody for a long
time (Bresnan, 1971; Ladd, 1996), including effects on
lexicalised compound phrases (e.g., Isel, Gunter & Friederici,
2003). Furthermore, the frequency with which novel noun
phrases occur in the English language only adds to mystery of
this oversight.
Broadly speaking, prosody refers to changes in aspects of
speech such as emphasis, pitch, intonation, rhythm and
timing. It is commonly recognised that changes in prosody
can affect meaning. For example, words such as contract and
object change meaning depending on which syllable
emphasis is placed. In investigating the possible effects of

prosody on novel noun-noun compounds, there are essentially
three possible prosodic patterns that need to be considered;
namely modifier emphasis (emphasis on the first word; e.g.,
CHOCOLATE cake), dual emphasis (equal emphasis on both
words; e.g., CHOCOLATE CAKE) and head emphasis
(emphasis on the second word; e.g., chocolate CAKE). The
question is whether using these different patterns affects the
interpretation process in quantifiably different ways.
Connell (2000) observed that the same compound was read
with different emphasis patterns when different meaning
descriptions were attached. When one term is emphasised
above the other, it is with the goal of conveying specific
information by highlighting specific dimensions of the
concepts concerned that might not be immediately obvious
with an alternative emphasis placement (Ladd, 1996; Sproat,
1994). Therefore, it might be reasonable to assume that
prosodic effects can work in the opposite direction, with
different emphasis patterns leading to different meaning
activations (Cutler, Dahan & van Donselaar, 1997) and
therefore different responses. The following experiments
allow us to examine whether patterns of prosodic emphasis
facilitate or inhibit the comprehension process of novel
compounds by presenting stimuli both in written form and
with different prosodic emphases in auditory form.

generated by randomly selecting a modifier and head noun
from this set (excluding compounds where the same word
was used for both head and modifier). In order to ensure the
novelty of test compounds, the British National Corpus
(BNC: http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk), a 100 million word
corpus of written and spoken British English, was searched
for their occurrence. A pool of 27 novel compounds that did
not occur in the BNC was used as test items. In addition, a
set of 14 lexicalised compounds (with a BNC frequency
greater than 20 per million words) was used as fillers.

Experiment 1

Procedure Participants were seated in front of a Toshiba
Laptop and told that they would be presented with two-word
phrases onscreen; some of these phrases would be familiar to
them, while others would not. They were instructed to press
the key labelled “yes” to indicate that they could think of a
possible meaning, or to press the key labelled “no” to indicate
that they could not think of a meaning for the phrase.
Response times (RT) were measured. If the “yes” key was
pressed, participants were then asked to type in the
interpretation they had just thought of. After a brief pause,
the word “Ready” appeared on the screen for 2000ms after
which the next stimuli was displayed. There was a short
break halfway through the experiment.
Prior to the
experiment proper, each participant proceeded through a
series of six practice trials, containing a mix of lexicalised
and novel compounds not featured in the main experiment, to
allow them to become accustomed to the procedure.

The aim of the first experiment is to examine the default
distribution and speed of different interpretation types (i.e.,
property-based or relation-based) for the text presentation of
novel concept combinations. This study focuses on novel
noun-noun compounds (that are not already lexicalised in the
English language) for two reasons: first, because
understanding novel compounds involves performing the full
process of combining constituent concepts rather than
retrieving an existing meaning for the compound
(Wisniewski, 1996); and second, because lexicalised
compounds are already likely to have a conventional
emphasis pattern that could confound the prosodic effect
under investigation in this study.
Regarding the distribution of interpretation types, previous
research has generally shown relational interpretations are
more common than property-based interpretations, although
the proportion of interpretations classed as property-based
varies considerably between item sets, from 0.6% (Gagné,
2000) to 72% (Wisniewski, 1996).
Regarding the speed of different interpretation types, there is
again considerable variation between item sets, with some
empirical studies finding that people arrive at relation-based
interpretations
more
quickly
than
property-based
interpretations (e.g., Gagné, 2000) and others finding the
opposite (e.g., Tagalakis & Keane, 2003).

Participants Eighteen native English speakers were paid a
nominal fee for their participation. One participant was
excluded due to technical difficulties during the experiment.
In order to ensure that participants were actually performing
the conceptual combination task and not just responding
positively to lexicalised fillers, the data of any participant
who produced less than 25% sensible responses to test items
were removed: one participant was excluded on this criterion.

Method

Coding & Design Participant interpretations were marked as
sensible if they described the compound as more than just the
head noun (i.e., elephant complaint must be described as
more than just “a type of complaint”): over 67% of test items
produced sensible responses, a reasonable return given the
difficulty of understanding phrases of randomly-paired nouns.
Each sensible interpretation was then classified by two
independent coders (blind to experimental conditions) as one
of the following interpretation types: property-based (where
a property of one concept is transferred to the other e.g., a
robin snake as a snake with a red breast); relation-based
(where a thematic relation is used to link the two concepts
e.g., robin snake as a snake that eats robins); hybrid or
equivalence interpretations (where the interpretation is a
hybrid of the two concepts e.g., a robin snake is part snake
and part robin). All other interpretations were classified as
other. Agreement between coders was calculated giving a
Cohen’s Kappa of 0.96.

Materials Concepts were selected from 100 noun concepts
used previously in literature from Costello and Keane (2000),
Gagné and Shoben (2001), and Wisniewski (1996). The
concepts used were a mix of artefacts, natural kinds, abstract
concepts, object and non-object concepts (see Medin, Lynch
& Solomon, 2000). A set of two-word combinations was

1748

Table 1: Percentage of responses per interpretation type for
each presentation condition.
Interpretation
Type

Experiment 1
(text)

Property
Relation
Hybrid
Other
N

37%
59%
1%
3%
286

Experiment 2: Emphasis
Modifier Dual
Head
39%
31%
36%
53%
67%
58%
3%
0%
1%
5%
2%
5%
125
129
121

Disagreements were resolved by discussion. Property- and
relation-based interpretations accounted for 96% of
interpretations (see Table 1). Since hybrid/other responses
accounted for such a small proportion of interpretations, they
will not be subject to any further analyses.
The experiment therefore had a single factor design with
interpretation
type
(property-based,
relation-based)
manipulated within participants. Analyses of variance by
participants and by items were carried out on response times
per interpretation type.

Results & Discussion
Results showed that people produced significantly more
relation-based than property-based interpretations (see Table
1), F1(1,15)=9.703, MSE=0.034, p=0.007; F2(1,26)=4.774,
MSE=0.160, p=0.038. These results do not support Gagné’s
(2000) assertions that property-based interpretations are
infrequently produced and not easily interpreted. While the
majority of interpretations were relation-based, a large
proportion (37%) was property-based. Given the compounds
were random combinations of nouns taken from across the
literature (including Gagné & Shoben, 1997), and hence were
not biased towards particular interpretation types, this finding
suggests that people have little difficulty in producing
property-based interpretations.
Additionally, there was no response time difference between
property-based (M=3.706, SD=2.094) and relation-based
interpretations (M=3.321, SD=1.922), with relational
responses being marginally faster by participants only,
F1(1,15)=3.307, MSE=0.197, p=0.089; F2<1. This result
differs from both Gagné (2000, with faster relation-based
responses) and Tagalakis and Keane (2003, with faster
property-based responses). However, the present finding
shows that, at least for this item set of randomly paired nouns,
there is no real processing advantage for relation-based
interpretations.
In summary, the text presentation of novel concept
combinations has shown that the default distribution is for
relation-based interpretations to be more frequently produced
than property-based interpretations (59& and 37%,
respectively) but that there is little difference in the
processing speed of these two different interpretation types.

Experiment 2
This experiment aims to examine whether the use of different
patterns of emphasis (Modifier, Dual or Head emphasis)
affect people’s ability to comprehend novel concept

combinations, with particular reference to the distribution and
speed of property- and relation-based interpretations.
Prosodic stress acts to facilitate information activation (Cutler
et al., 1997), with stressed words being easier to process
(Cutler & Foss, 1977) and more highly activated than
unstressed words (Bock & Mazzella, 1983). As previously
noted, no existing theory of the conceptual combination of
novel compounds incorporates potential prosodic effects;
however, the relative importance each theory places on the
head and modifier nouns leads to different predictions.
First, let us consider the how the distribution of
interpretation types may differ across emphasis conditions
from the default, text presentation in Experiment 1. The
CARIN theory holds to primacy of the modifier, stating that
relational information is particularly tied to the modifier
concept (Gagné, Spalding & Ji, 2005). For example, the
compound octopus apartment may be interpreted as “an
apartment where an octopus lives” if the relation [located] is
commonly associated with the concept of octopus. If the
activation of the modifier concept is increased, the CARIN
view suggests that access to relevant relations will be
facilitated and more relation-based interpretations will
therefore be produced in the modifier emphasis condition
(OCTOPUS apartment) compared to text presentation. In
contrast, concept specialisation theory adheres to primacy of
the head, where the modifier noun acts to fill a relational slot
somewhere in the schema representation of the head concept
(Murphy, 1990). For example, octopus apartment may be
interpreted as “an apartment where an octopus lives” if the
relational slot [location] in the concept apartment is filled by
the modifier octopus This view therefore suggests that
increasing activation of the head concept should facilitate slot
location, which may lead to more relation-based
interpretations in the head emphasis condition (octopus
APARTMENT) compared to text presentation. Other theories
do not expect prosody to alter the default distribution of
interpretations types. For example, octopus apartment may
be interpreted as either “an apartment where an octopus lives”
or “an apartment with eight rooms”. Constraint theory would
expect head or modifier emphasis to cause increased weight
for the corresponding concept in the conceptual combination
process, but this would have no effect on whether relation- or
property-based interpretations were more likely to ensue
(Costello, personal communication, 2005). Similarly, the
PUNC model (Lynott et al., 2004), with its position that
primacy of head and/or modifier depends on the individual
concepts comprising a given compound, suggests that
prosody will have no overall effect on the distribution of
relation- and property-based interpretations.
Second, we come to the processing speed of different
emphasis conditions and interpretation types (although it is
important to note that response times from Experiment 1
cannot be directly compared to those in this experiment
because of different stimulus presentation modalities). As
outlined above, the CARIN theory suggests that increasing
activation of the modifier concept will facilitate access to
relevant relations; therefore, this view may expect modifier
emphasis (OCTOPUS apartment) to yield faster responses
(compared to the other emphasis conditions), in particular for
relation-based interpretations (compared to property-based

1749

interpretations). On the other hand, concept specialisation
theory suggests that increasing activation of the head concept
will facilitate relational slot location; therefore, this may lead
to responses in the head emphasis condition (octopus
APARTMENT) being faster than other emphasis types, with
relation-based interpretations faster than property-based
interpretations.
A different perspective comes from
constraint theory, which suggests that both head and modifier
concepts should be activated because they are equally
important; therefore, this view may expect dual emphasis
(OCTOPUS APARTMENT) to facilitate the fastest
interpretations (whether relation- or property-based). Lastly,
the PUNC model suggests that, since there is no a priori
primacy of either head or modifier concept, prosody will have
no overall effect on the response times; therefore, the default,
text presentation pattern for relation- and property-based
interpretations will be maintained.

experiment, as was one participant whose mean response time
for sensible items was more than two standard deviations
slower than the rest of the sample. As in Experiment 1, the
data of any participant who produced less than 25% sensible
responses to test items were removed: six participants were
excluded on this criterion.
Coding & Design Sensible participant interpretations were
classified by three independent coders (blind to condition) as
per Experiment 1. Analyses of variance by participants and
items showed there was no difference between emphasis
types in the proportion of sensible responses produced:
modifier emphasis = 64%, dual emphasis = 65%, head
emphasis = 61%, [F1<1; F2<1; all pairwise comparisons with
Bonferroni corrections non-significant p>0.99]. Agreement
between coders had a mean Kappa of 0.83 with
disagreements resolved by discussion. As in Experiment 1,
the vast majority of interpretations were property- and
relation-based (95%) and the small proportion of hybrid and
other interpretations means they will not be subject to further
analyses.
The experiment therefore had a three factor design with
emphasis (modifier, dual, head) and interpretation type
(property-based, relational) manipulated within participants
and group between participants.
Comparison with
Experiment 1 was conducted across both sets of data with
experiment treated as a between-participants factor. Analyses
of variance by participants and by items were carried out on
the proportion of responses and RT (sec) per interpretation
type.

Method
Materials Compounds were the same as in Experiment 1.
To ensure consistency in pitch and emphasis levels, and to
eliminate the possibility of unplanned cues, we used a high
quality speech synthesis system (rVoice, 2005) to manipulate
prosodic stress rather than rely on human readers. Audio files
for each compound (with three different emphasis patterns modifier, dual, and head emphasis), were created using
rVoice’s female, UK-English voice (F015) for all stimuli. A
speech markup language, SSML (Speech Synthesis Markup
Language), allowed precise manipulation of pitch and rate of
utterance to construct a separate template for each emphasis
pattern, where emphasis was achieved by increasing the pitch
to 125% and reducing the speed of utterance to 85% for that
portion of the phrase (see Sproat, 1994). The same templates
were used for test and filler items, with each test item having
three versions, and each filler item randomly assigned one
emphasis type. All files were generated at high-quality, 32
kHz sampling frequency at 16-bit resolution, with the volume
normalised for all files. Finally, in order to ensure the
intelligibility and clarity of materials, three independent raters
(blind to condition) were asked to transcribe test and filler
items, and rate the overall quality of the sound file on a threepoint scale from bad to good. All materials were correctly
transcribed and unanimously judged to be of good quality.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to a test
group so that each person only heard one version of each test
compound, with equal numbers of emphasis types per group.
The procedure was then the same as Experiment 1, except
that participants were presented with two-word phrases
through headphones rather than onscreen. Auditory stimuli
were presented through standard closed-ear headphones
(Unitone HD-1010) using a 16-bit sound card with 16 kHz
digital sampling. Response times were measured from the
onset of each stimulus. During the practise trials, participants
had the opportunity to adjust headphone volume to a
comfortable level.

Results & Discussion
Results showed that emphasis type affected both the
distribution and comprehension speed of novel concept
combinations (see Table 1 and Figure 1).
There was a main effect of interpretation type, with more
relation-based
(60%)
than
property-based
(36%)
interpretations
produced
overall,
F1(1,19)=6.838,
MSE=0.262, p=0.017; F2(1,26)=5.818, MSE=0.420, p=0.023.
There was no main effect of emphasis [F1(2,38)=2.072,
MSE=0.004, p=0.140; F2(2,52)=1.058, MSE=0.009, p=0.355]
and the interaction of interpretation type and emphasis was
not significant [F1(2,38)=1.535, MSE=0.085, p=0.229;
F2(2,52)=2.915, MSE=0.074,p=0.063]. The group variable
showed no effects (all ps>0.3).
In planned comparisons of interpretation types per emphasis
condition, people produced more relation-based than
property-based
interpretation
for
dual
emphasis
[F1(1,19)=10.598, MSE=0.119, p=0.004; F2(1,26)=12.845,
MSE=0.161, p=0.001] but the proportions were not
significantly different for either modifier emphasis
[F1(1,19)=1.199, MSE=0.135, p=0.287; F2(1,26)=2.200,
MSE=0.173, p=0.150] or head emphasis [F1(1,19)=3.527,

Participants Thirty native English speakers were paid a
nominal fee for their participation. Data of one participant
were excluded because of technical difficulties during the
1750

Interpretation Type

4 .5 0

RT (sec)

4 .0 0

Propert y -based
R elation-bas ed

D
D

3 .5 0

D
D

D
D

3 .0 0

Error Bars show 95.0% Cl of Mean

2 .5 0

Mo d

Dua l

Hea d

Emphasis

Figure 1: Mean comprehension times for property- and
relation-based interpretations per emphasis condition
MSE=0.178, p=0.076; F2(1,26)=1.816, MSE=0.235, p=0.189]
conditions. Compared to the text presentation of compounds
in Experiment 1, neither modifier [F1<1; F2(1,26)=1.772,
MSE=0.023, p=0.195] nor head emphasis [F1<1; F2<1]
significantly affected the proportion of relation-based
interpretations produced. Dual emphasis resulted in more
relation-based interpretations (67% compared to 59% in
Experiment 1), although this difference was significant only
by
items,
F1(1,36)=1.589,
MSE=0.050,
p=0.216;
F2(1,26)=4.417, MSE=0.020, p=0.045.
There were no reliable main effects of either interpretation
type [F1(1,19)=2.676, MSE=1.259, p=0.118; F2(1,26)=2.751,
MSE=1.931, p=0.109] or emphasis [F1(2,38)=1.303,
MSE=1.795,
p=0.284;
F2(2,52)=3.356,
MSE=1.622,
p=0.043].
There was, however, an interaction of
interpretation type and emphasis [F1(2,38)=7.341,
MSE=0.677,
p=0.002;
F2(2,52)=5.779,
MSE=1.738,
p=0.005]. The group variable showed no effects (all ps>0.1).
Planned comparisons showed that property-based
interpretations were faster than relation-based interpretations
in the dual emphasis condition, [property M=3.230,
SD=1.066; relation M=3.728, SD=1.843; F1(1,19)=5.643,
MSE=0.365, p=0.028; F2(1,26)=11.749, MSE=1.893,
p=0.002], but response time differences were reliable only by
participants for both modifier emphasis [property M=3.941,
SD=2.445; relation M=3.441, SD=1.556; F1(1,19)=4.499,
MSE=1.815, p=0.047; F2(1,26)=1.497, MSE=1.638, p=0.232]
and head emphasis [property M=3.699, SD=1.676; relation
M=3.628, SD=1.145; F1(1,19)=7.123, MSE=0.433, p=0.015;
F2<1].
The notion of primacy of the modifier or head, as advocated
by the CARIN theory (Gagné & Shoben 1997) and concept
specialisation theory (Murphy, 1990) respectively, is not
borne out by this study. If one constituent noun was indeed
the most important component in the conceptual combination
process (i.e., the source of linking relations, or relational
schema slots), then increasing its activation through prosodic
stress noun should have facilitated both the frequency and
speed with which people arrived at relation-based

interpretations. However, modifier emphasis produced a
similar (indeed, slightly lower) proportion of relation-based
interpretations (53%) to text presentation (59%), as did head
emphasis (58%). Any facilitation in response times was not
reliable by items for either head or modifier emphasis.
With its idea of equal importance of head and modifier,
constraint theory also fails to fit the results of this study. If
head and modifier are both equally important, then equal
activation through dual emphasis should facilitate the speed
with which people can interpret the compound, although the
frequency of property- and relation-based interpretations
should not necessarily change. However, there was no
overall difference in response times between emphasis types,
and dual emphasis actually caused the proportion of relationbased interpretations to rise (67% compared to 58% for text
presentation). The PUNC model (Lynott et al., 2004) has
mixed success in accounting for the present findings. If the
primacy of head and/or modifier depends on the compound in
question, then any advantages afforded by prosodic emphasis
will balance out across the item set. Indeed, this was the case,
with no overall difference in response times between
emphasis types. However, PUNC cannot explain why dual
emphasis resulted in more relation-based interpretations, and
faster property-based interpretations.

General Discussion
In this paper, we have considered the role of prosody in
conceptual combination, presenting the first empirical study
to explicitly consider the effects of prosodic stress patterns on
the processing and interpretation of novel noun-noun
compounds. Experiment 1 showed that randomly-generated
compounds, when presented in text form, produced more
relation- then property-based interpretations but with no
accompanying difference in comprehension time.
Experiment 2 showed the novel effect of prosodic emphasis
on conceptual combination, with modifier emphasis (e.g.,
OCTOPUS apartment), dual emphasis (e.g., OCTOPUS
APARTMENT), and head emphasis (e.g., octopus
APARTMENT) showing different results. Dual emphasis
caused people to produce more relation-based interpretations
(67%) than they did for text presentation (59%), but no
difference was found for modifier and head emphasis. Dual
emphasis also meant people were faster to arrive at propertybased interpretations than relation-based interpretations, but
modifier and head emphasis conditions followed the pattern
of text presentation with no reliable difference in response
times.
So, how does text presentation of noun-noun compounds
relate to spoken presentation? Given that modifier emphasis
is by far the most frequent stress pattern for noun-noun
compounds in English (Connell, 2000; Sproat, 1994), and that
people impose prosodic contours on words during silent
reading (Fodor, 2002), it could be argued that people will
impose modifier emphasis on any novel noun-noun
compound encountered in reading. This notion fits with the
similar profile of results found for text presentation and
modifier emphasis, but fails to explain why head emphasis
produces the same profile, or why dual emphasis differs in the
way it does.

1751

Why does modifier and head emphasis fit the pattern of text
presentation relatively closely, only for dual emphasis to
differ? It appears that emphasising both concepts equally
produces a counterintuitive result: people are faster to
produce property-based interpretations but more likely to
produce relation-based ones. This finding may be explained
by considering how relational and property information is
used in the interpretation process. For example, when
interpreting a compound, a person may first arrive at either a
relation-based or a property-based interpretation (e.g., an
octopus apartment could be “an apartment where an octopus
lives” or “an apartment with eight rooms”). If equal
activation of both concepts makes a potential linking relation
more obvious (e.g., that an octopus must live somewhere and
something must live in an apartment), then dual emphasis
could lead to increased proportions of relation-based
interpretations (even if it still takes some time to mesh this
information into an interpretation). At the same time, if equal
activation of both concepts allows parallel properties to be
identified more rapidly (e.g., an octopus has eight arms and
an apartment has a certain number of rooms), then dual
emphasis could lead to faster processing of property-based
responses (even if most people still opt for the more obvious
relation-based interpretation). Thus, dual emphasis appears to
make relational information more obvious (so more people
first arrive at relation-based interpretations) while at the same
time making property-based interpretations faster to process
(so people creating property-based interpretations have faster
responses).
Such a possibility is worthy of further
investigation.
Overall, the present findings suggest that conceptual
combination during comprehension of text and speech may
utilise some different processes.
Reading noun-noun
compounds may allow people to employ some strategies
(e.g., shifting focus between head and modifier) that are
enabled by having both words present on the page or screen.
In contrast, hearing noun-noun compounds in speech may
make such strategies difficult because the phonological loop
does not offer the same flexibility in manipulation as a written
stimulus. The possibility of focus-shifting during conceptual
combination in reading is the subject of ongoing research.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Division of
Psychology, Northumbria University. Thanks to Benedict
Singleton and Darren Dunning for their help in data
collection, and to Rhetorical Systems for providing us with an
evaluation copy of their rVoice software package.

References
Bresnan, J. (1971).
Sentence stress and syntactic
transformations. Language, 47, 257-281.
Bock, J. K., & Mazzella, J. R. (1983). Intonational marking of
given and new information: Some consequences for
comprehension. Memory and Cognition, 11, 64-76.
Cannon, G. (1987). Historical change and English wordformation. New York: Lang.

Connell, L. (2000) Compound stress: A conceptual
combination perspective.
Unpublished manuscript.
Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh.
Costello, F. J. &, Keane, M. T. (2000). Efficient creativity:
Constraints on conceptual combination. Cognitive Science,
24, 2, 299-349.
Cutler, A., & Foss, D. J. (1977). On the role of sentence stress
in sentence processing. Language and Speech, 20, 1-10.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D., & van Donselaar, W. A. (1997).
Prosody in the comprehension of spoken language: A
literature review. Language and Speech, 40 (2), 141-202
Fodor, J. D. (2002). Prosodic disambiguation in silent
reading. In M. Hirotani (Ed.), Proceedings of NELS 32,
pp.113-132. Amherst, MA: GLSA.
Gagné, C. L. (2000). Relation-based combinations versus
property-based combinations: A test of the CARIN theory
and dual-process theory of conceptual combination.
Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 365-389.
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic
relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 71-87.
Gagné, C. L., Spalding, T. L., & Ji, H. (2005). Re-examining
evidence for the use of independent relational
representations during conceptual combination. Journal of
Memory and Language, 53, 445–455.
Hampton, J. A. (1987). Inheritance of attributes in natural
concept conjunctions. Memory & Cognition, 15(1), 55-71.
Isel, F., Gunter, T.C., & Friederici, A.D. (2003). Prosodyassisted head-driven access to spoken German compounds.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29, 277-288.
Ladd, D. R., (1996) Intonational Phonology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Levi, J. N. (1978). The Syntax and Semantics of Complex
Nominals. New York: Academic Press.
Lynott, D., Tagalakis, G., & Keane, M.T. (2004). Conceptual
Combination with PUNC. Artificial Intelligence Review, 21
(3-4), 353-374.
McFedries, P. (2004). The Word Spy. New York: Broadway
Books.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., & Solomon, K. O. (2000). Are
there kinds of concepts? Annual Review of Psychology, 51,
121-147.
Murphy, G. L. (1990). Noun phrase interpretation and
conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 259-288.
rVoice
(2005).
http://www.rhetorical.com/ttsen/technical/rvoice.html . Retrieved February 1st, 2005.
Sproat, R. (1994). English noun-phrase accent prediction for
text-to-speech. Computer Speech and Language, 8, 79-94.
Tagalakis, G. & Keane, M.T. (2003). Modelling the
Understanding of Noun-Noun Compounds: The Role of
Familiarity. Proceedings of the First European Cognitive
Science Conference, pp. 319-324.
Wisniewski, E. J., (1996). Construal and similarity in
conceptual combination.
Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 434-453.

1752

