UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Prior Knowledge and Text Coherence Affect Eye Fixations in Hypertext Overviews

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4r45z723

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Baccino, Thierry
Canas, Jose J.
Salmerón, Ladislao

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Prior Knowledge and Text Coherence Affect Eye Fixations in Hypertext
Overviews
Ladislao Salmerón (lalo@ugr.es)
University of Granada - Department of Experimental Psychology, Campus de Cartuja, s/n.
18071 Granada, Spain

Thierry Baccino (baccino@unice.fr)
University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis – LPEQ - 24, Av des Diables Bleus
06357 Nice, France

José J. Cañas (delagado@ugr.es)
University of Granada - Department of Experimental Psychology, Campus de Cartuja, s/n.
18071 Granada, Spain

comprehension. In this paper, we first review relevant
literature on the topic to draw hypotheses on the processes
involved on visual processing of overviews. Next, we
describe an experiment aimed to test these hypotheses using
the eye-movements methodology. Finally, we discuss current
confusing results in light of the experiment data, and propose
future research lines.

Abstract
Graphical overviews are text devices aimed to foster learning
by conveying in a schematic way the text structure. Despite its
importance in current learning systems such hypertext,
psychological research does not agree on how overviews affect
comprehension. Little is known about how hypertext readers
process graphical overviews, and how this processing influence
comprehension. In the present paper we report an experiment
using the eye-movements technique aimed to explore the role
of prior knowledge and coherence on the visual processing of
graphic overviews. Results reveal that both variables influence
visual processing of graphical overviews and that this
processing systematically affected what was learned from
hypertext.

Graphical overview processing strategies
Reader’s prior knowledge and text coherence are main factors
affecting comprehension (Kintsch, 1998). Thus, we will first
explore how both factors are involved in hypertext overview
processing. Readers with prior knowledge on a text topic can
activate it in order to help building a coherent text
representation, or whenever a text difficulty arises. In
hypertexts, high knowledge readers can make use of their
existing knowledge to organize the different sections of the
text. By contrast, low knowledge readers must rely on
different hypertext features to organize their text
representation. Therefore, we can hypothesize that low
knowledge readers would visually process overviews more
often than their high knowledge counterparts. Some works
studying prior knowledge and eye movements reveal a similar
effect: readers provided with prior knowledge information
perform fewer and shorter regressions than those without
background information (Kaakinen, Hyönä & Keenan, 2003;
Wiley & Rayner, 2000).
Text coherence refers to the extent to which a reader is able
to understand the relations between ideas in a text. Coherence
properties come from those text features that help readers to
understand and link ideas on it. In hypertext, reading order
has coherence properties that could influence its
comprehension easiness. In general, if pupils mainly ‘jump’
between semantically related sections, they will understand
better than if they ‘navigate’ between unrelated parts
(Salmerón et al., 2005). Therefore, we can expect that readers
of an incoherent ordered hypertext would process overviews
more often in order to overcome comprehension difficulties
derived from coherence breaks on the text. Supporting this

Introduction
Current psychological models describe text comprehension as
the process of acquiring a coherent mental representation of
the text. This representation is build at different levels: a
macrolevel of text general organization, and a microlevel of
subordinate text content (e.g. Kintsch, 1998). In lineal texts,
authors use a specific presentation order to signal text
organization to readers (e.g. important ideas are displayed at
the beginning of the text, and are discussed in detail in
successive sections). However, in non-linear systems like
hypertext reading order of text sections is not fixed by
authors, so readers have to rely on other text features to form
a coherent macrolevel representation of the text. Different
hypertext devices assist readers in this task, like graphical
overviews conveying text structure. However, current
psychological research does not agree on how overviews
affect hypertext reader’s comprehension (Salmerón, Cañas,
Kintsch & Fajardo, 2005), and there exist evidence for
positive, null and negative effects. Researchers have
identified important issues not addressed in prior research that
could be responsible of the current confusing situation (e.g.
Dillon & Gabbard, 1998). Indeed, little is known about how
hypertext readers process graphical overviews, and more
importantly, how different processing strategies influence text

715

text topic (compared to those with higher prior
knowledge),
2. and when they read a low coherently ordered text
(compared to those reading a high coherently ordered
text).
Processing strategies and text comprehension:
3. A positive relation holds between amount of time of
visual processing of graphical overviews and text
comprehension for low knowledge readers,
4. whereas a negative relation exists for high knowledge
readers, in both cases only when reading a low
coherently ordered text (no effect is expected for high
coherent texts).

hypothesis, prior research has found that pupils reading illordered texts perform more and longer refixations (i.e.
fixations after the first pass reading) to the segments resolving
the text incoherence (Vauras, Hyönä & Niemi, 1992; see also
Rink, Gámez, Díaz & de Vega, 2003).

How overview processing relates to text
comprehension
As described in the previous section, prior knowledge and
coherence are well known factors facilitating comprehension.
However, when considering both factors in the same reading
situation, an interaction arouses. Low knowledge readers
learn more from a highly coherent text than from an
incoherent one, whereas readers with high domain knowledge
actually learn more from a less coherent text (McNamara, E.
Kintsch, Songer & W. Kintsch, 1996; McNamara & Kintsch,
1996). The explanation for this effect is that unknowledgeable
readers cannot fill in gaps in the incoherent text without
explicit guidance about relationships among information
items; on the other hand, knowledgeable readers who are
overguided will not actively use their own prior knowledge to
form a complete representation of the text.
In other words, prior knowledge is only beneficial when the
reader activates it in order to form a text representation. This
knowledge activation can be induced by features in the text
(i.e. low coherence), but also be prevented by it (i.e. high
coherence, an easy text). Similarly, hypertext overviews
could prevent knowledgeable readers from using their
existing knowledge to organize a coherent text representation
(Shapiro, 1998). Therefore, we would expect that high
knowledge readers devoting more processing to the text
overview will comprehend less than those focusing on their
existing knowledge (thus processing less often overviews).
However, overviews could also facilitate comprehension for
those readers which do not posses prior topic knowledge, by
helping them to build a coherent representation of text
macrostructure. Therefore, low knowledge readers that
process more actively graphic overviews will actually learn
more than those that do not process them.
These effects could be modulated by text coherence. Prior
works have suggested that a text support feature such as
graphical overviews can be beneficial only when text imposes
extra difficulties for learning, for example, when pupils read a
text in a low coherent order (Mayer, 1978). Otherwise,
overviews would not provide added information, thus could
be unhelpful to readers.
We will test these hypotheses in an experiment where
participants read several texts that included graphical
overviews, while their eye-movements were recorded.

Method
Participants Thirty-two third-year psychology students from
the University of Nice Shopia-Antipolis participated in the
study for class credit. All participants were native speakers of
French with normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity.
Data of 4 participants was excluded from analyses because of
incomplete or inaccurate recordings. Hence, reported analyses
are based on data of 28 participants.
Materials and Procedure Participants read a total of 20
expository texts (plus one practice text). Half of these texts
were on topics highly related to the participant’s field of study
(e.g. ‘Forgetting’, ‘Learning’), and the other half were texts
on other disciplines (e.g. ‘Italian Renaissance’, ‘Eclipses’).
Experimental texts were relatively short (M = 234 words, SD
= 17, for the psychology texts; M = 259 words, SD = 18, for
the other disciplines texts) and followed a hierarchical
organization consisting on five sections (see Appendix for a
sample text). There was an introductory passage, two sections
on two main topic issues, and other two sections giving
examples of each two main issues. In each section, no explicit
reference to other sections was made. For each text there was
a coherently ordered version, that was presented as follows:
introduction, topic issue 1, continuation / example of topic
issue 1, topic issue 2, continuation / example of topic issue 2;
and a incoherently ordered version, that read as follows:
continuation / example of topic issue 2, continuation /
example of topic issue 1, topic issue 2, topic issue 1,
introduction. In addition, all texts were presented with a
unique graphic overview that depicted the hierarchical
structure of the text (Figure 1). The overview was available
during all reading on the upper part of the screen, and each
text was presented one section at a time on the bottom part of
the screen, with the participant indicating when he / she
wanted to move to the next section by pressing a key. The
preceding section disappeared when new section was
presented. Although presentation of text was self-paced, the
order in which sections appeared was fixed by the
experimenter, rather than chosen by the participant, as would
normally be the case for hypertext. This was done in order to
avoid noise in comprehension measures introduced by
participants following heterogeneous reading orders
(Salmerón et al., 2005). Students were instructed to read each
text carefully enough to answer some comprehension
questions after reading all texts. There were two open ended

Experiment
In the current experiment we will explore two sets of
hypotheses concerning reader’s processing strategies of
graphical overviews, and its relation with learning from text.
Overview processing strategies:
1. Readers visually process graphical overviews for a
longer time when they have low prior knowledge on
716

order (5) x zone (2) ANOVAs were performed. For all
analyses, differences declared as significant had p < .05.
First-pass fixation duration. Main effects of prior
knowledge, F(1,27) = 119, MSe = 92.7; section order,
F(4,108) = 13.7, MSe = 63.3 and zone, F(1,27) = 2573.4,
MSe = 481.8 were observed. As expected, first-pass fixations
were longer for low prior knowledge texts. Fixations were
longer for the text than for the graphical overview. In
addition, a linear function described results for section order,
F(1,27) = 34.6, MSe = 89.1. Processing time for text sections
decreased as readers advanced through successive sections.
Significant interactions were found between prior knowledge
x zone, F(1,27) = 32, MSe = 32.6, and section order x zone,
F(4,108) = 35.9, MSe = 58.3. Two second order interactions
help to qualify these results: prior knowledge x section order
x zone, F(4, 108) = 5.1, MSe = 51.4, and prior knowledge x
section order x coherence, F(1,27) = 3.1, MSe = 48.6.
Concerning the first one, results showed that the effect of
processing time of section order x zone hold true for low
knowledge readers, F(1,27) = 36.7, MSe = 119.6, but not for
high knowledge, F(1,27) = 3.8, MSe = 77.9, p < 0.1. That is
to say, low knowledge readers devoted more processing time
to the graphical overview at the first encountered section, but
this pattern reversed on the following ones (second to fifth
presented section). But high knowledge readers devoted
similar processing time to both zones at the first section, and
after they focus mainly on the text. Finally, regarding the
prior knowledge x section order x coherence interaction,
results showed that on the first section presented high
knowledge readers processed longer low coherent texts,
F(1,27) = 6.1, MSe= 34.8, but no coherence effect appeared
for low knowledge readers, F < 1.
Second-pass fixation duration. ANOVAs with this
dependent variable revealed main effects of prior knowledge,
F(1,27) = 91.1, MSe = 378, section order, F(4,108) = 44, and
coherence, F(1,27) = 5.5, MSe= 470. The two firsts were
similar than those observed in the analyses with first-pass
fixation duration: there were longer processing for low
knowledge readers and a linear decreasing function of section
order. Regarding the coherence main effect, low coherent
texts were reprocessed longer than the high coherent ones, as
predicted. In addition, significant interactions were found
between prior knowledge x section order, F(4,108)= 4.8, MSe
= 244, prior knowledge x zone, F(1,27) = 14.6, MSe = 172,
and section order x zone, F(4,108) = 10.4, MSe = 303. An
interpretation of these effects must wait until the mediating
effect of a third variable is considered on two significant
second order interactions: prior knowledge x section order x
zone, F(4,108) = 4.2, MSe = 202, and prior knowledge x
section order x coherence, F(4,108) = 2.7, MSe = 171.
Regarding the first interaction, low knowledge readers
reprocessed longer the overview than the text on the first
section presented, F(1,27) = 26.6, MSe = 495.9, but no
difference was found for the subsequent four sections, F < 1.
By contrast, high knowledge readers showed no difference
for the first two sections, F(1,27) = 1.5, MSe = 347.8, but
longer reprocessing of the text for the later sections (third to

questions for each text: one that referred to a single statement
presented in one section (text-based question) and another
which answer required to link at least two ideas presented in
two or three separate sections. Comprehension questions were
presented after all readings were finished, in the same
individually randomized order in which texts were read.
Finally, participants rated their prior knowledge on the topic
texts prior to the experiment in a scale between 0 (no prior
knowledge) to 10 (high prior knowledge).
Apparatus Eye movements were recorded by a Tobii 1750
eye-tracking system. Data was registered binocularly at a rate
of 50 Hz. Participants were seated approximately 60 cm from
the presentation screen. Their head movements were
restricted by means of a chinrest.
Design The experiment followed a 2 x 2 x 5 x 2 withinsubjects design with prior knowledge (low and high), text
coherence (low and high), section order (first to last section)
and zone (overview and text) as factors. Experimental
manipulation of familiarity was compared to participant’s
rated prior knowledge. Supporting the experimental grouping,
participants declared having more prior knowledge before the
experiment for psychology texts (M = 5.1, SD = 1.84) than
for texts on other disciplines (M = 2.87, SD = 1.59), t(54) =
4.82. Dependent variables included first-pass and second-pass
fixations of overview headings and text, in addition to success
rate on text-based and inferential questions.

The Romantic
movement

Victor
Hugo

Alphonse de
Lamartine

Life of the
author

The writer’s
life

Figure 1: Sample graphical overview for the ‘Romantic
movement’ text.

Results
Eye-movements data Before the statistical analyses, eyemovements data were weighted on the basis of the number of
characters in each critical zone. Two main zones were
considered: the graphical overview and the text. For the prior,
we first analyzed five regions corresponding to the section
headings presented in the overview, and afterwards data was
collapsed into a single value. In addition, individual
distributions were analyzed in order to detect outliers
(fixation times 2 SD above or below the participant’s mean).
Those values (between 1.2% and 2% of data) were replaced
by the participant’s mean fixation time. For each dependent
measure, prior knowledge (2) x text coherence (2) x section

717

shown by the interaction between prior knowledge and
coherence, on the first-pass and second-pass fixation data.
Immediately after starting reading a new text, high knowledge
readers seem able to identify an incoherently ordered text,
thus they devote more processing time (i.e. first-pass
fixations) to both the graphical overview and the text than to
coherently ordered texts. By contrast, data suggest that low
knowledge readers need more time to identify an incoherent
ordered text, so they only devote more time to the ill-ordered
materials after a first processing of it (i.e. longer second-pass
fixations).
Results also give support for a direct relation between
visual processing strategies of overviews and learning from
text. As expected, these strategies are particularly important
for low coherently ordered texts (Mayer, 1978). This could be
the fact of most hypertext reading, provided that a coherent
order is not systematically followed by a majority of these
readers (Salmerón, Kintsch & Cañas, in press). Data of the
reported experiment reveal that those readers of unfamiliar
texts that reprocess the graphic overview during more time
end up comprehending the text better (measured by the textbased questions). By contrast, an opposite effect holds for
readers of familiar texts, which suggest that a ‘long
reprocessing strategy’ (i.e. longer second-pass fixations on
the graphical overview) prevents knowledgeable readers from
activating their existing knowledge to fully comprehend a
text.
In addition, results show that longer reprocessing is also
detrimental for high knowledge learners reading coherently
ordered texts, as measured by inference questions. An easy
explanation could be that this result just revealed a lack of
activation of existing knowledge, as was considered the case
for low coherent texts. However, from a theoretical point of
view, high knowledge readers are not induced to engage in an
active processing of text by a high coherent text (McNamara
et al., 1996; McNamara & Kintsch, 1996). Therefore, either if
readers just focus on the text or if they reprocess longer the
overview, they would not necessarily further activate their
existing knowledge, at least not to the extent to which they
will when reading an incoherent text. Therefore, learning
differences observed could not be associated to a disparity in
knowledge activation. A second possible explanation is that
the fact that high knowledge readers learning less reprocessed
for longer the overview could be interpreted as a
miscomprehension signal. That is to say, that these readers
could have experienced comprehension problems during their
reading, thus they tried unsuccessfully to understand from the
overview the miscomprehended parts. It is interesting to note
that this effect holds only for inference questions, intended to
assess comprehension at deeper levels (i.e. situation model).
The fact that readers rely mainly on that representation in
order to assess their comprehension during reading (Rawson,
Dunlosky, & Thiede, 2000), and not on the textbase
representation assessed by the text-based questions, gives
some support to this interpretation.
However, given the correlational nature of the analyses
relating processing and learning, we should be cautious about
the conclusions drawn here. In order to clarify the nature of
the unexpected effect on the negative relation between
duration of second-pass fixations and inference questions for

fifth), F(1,27) = 15.3, MSe = 242.5. Finally, concerning the
prior knowledge x section order x coherence interaction,
results showed an effect opposed to that found for first-pass
data: on the first section presented high knowledge readers
showed no coherence effect, F <1, but low knowledge readers
reprocessed longer low coherent texts than the high coherent
ones, F(1,27) = 6, MSe = 579.6.
Comprehension data The relation between overview
processing and text comprehension was explored through a
series of multiple regression analyses. For each set of data
resulting from crossing the variables prior knowledge (low
and high) and coherence (low and high), a multiple regression
analysis with the forward stepwise method was performed,
for each dependent variable (success rate for text-based and
inference questions), with first-pass and second-pass fixation
duration for the two zones considered (overview and text) as
predictors. Section order presentation was not considered here
with the aim to keep a trade-off between the informativeness
and clarity of the regression formula.
Regression analyses with score on text-based questions
clearly supported our hypotheses. For the two high coherence
groups, no variable predicted comprehension, whereas for the
low coherence groups, the variable second-pass fixation
duration of the graphic overview resulted to be the only
significant predictor. More concretely, for low knowledge
learners reading low coherent texts a positive relation
between variables was observed, R2 = 0.18, F (1,26) = 5.73,
whereas for high knowledge pupils reading low coherent texts
a negative relation aroused, R2 = 0.25, F (1,26) = 8.83.
Finally, regression analyses with score on inference questions
showed an unexpected result: a negative relation between
second-pass fixation duration of the graphic organizer and
comprehension for the high knowledge and high coherence
group, R2= 0.28, F (1,26) = 10.28. No other predictors
resulted significant for this dependent variable.

Discussion
The experiment reported in this paper identifies key factors
affecting visual processing of graphic overviews, and helps to
understand how this processing is related to the learning gain
from a text.
In general, results support our claims that prior knowledge
and coherence are main factors not only in comprehension,
but also in processing graphical overviews. Both processing
and reprocessing is longer for low prior knowledge readers
than for high knowledge (Kaakinen et al., 2003; Wiley &
Rayner, 2000), and reprocessing is also longer for low
coherently ordered text than for high coherent texts (Vauras et
al., 1992; Rink et al., 2003). In addition, results show several
interactions that help us understand overview processing.
Results suggest that readers find graphic overviews useful
mainly at early stages of the reading. This effect is
particularly evident for readers faced with unfamiliar texts, in
which they devote more time to both process and reprocess
graphic overviews than the text itself. Furthermore, results
suggest that readers look at graphic overviews in order to
overcome problems associated to the construction of a
coherent representation of text macrostructure. This is clearly
718

Rawson, K. A., Dunlosky, J., & Thiede, K. W. (2000). The
rereading effect: Metacomprehension accuracy improves
across reading trials. Memory & Cognition, 28, 1004–1010.
Rink, M., Gámez, E., Díaz, J. M., & de Vega, M. (2003).
Processing of temporal information: evidence from eye
movements. Memory & Cognition, 31, 77-86.
Salmerón, L., Cañas, J. J., Kintsch, W., & Fajardo, I. (2005).
Reading strategies and hypertext comprehension.
Discourse Processes, 40, 171-191.
Salmerón, L., Kintsch, W. & Cañas, J. J. (in press). Reading
strategies and prior knowledge in learning with hypertext.
Memory & Cognition.
Shapiro, A. M. (1998). Promoting active learning: The role of
system structure in learning from hypertext. HumanComputer Interaction, 13, 1-35.
Vauras, M., Hyönö, J., & Niemi, P. (1992). Comprehension
coherent and incoherent texts: Evidence from eye
movement patterns and recall performance. Journal of
Research in Reading, 15, 39-54.
Wiley, J. & Rayner, K. (2000). Effects of titles on the
processing of text and lexically ambiguous words:
Evidence from eye movements. Memory & Cognition, 28,
1011-1021.

familiar coherent texts, the eye-movements technique could
be combined with a think aloud procedure. We would expect
that readers of familiar high coherently ordered text
reprocessing for longer the overview might express more
comprehension problems on the think aloud protocols than
those reprocessing less the overview.
The present work takes part of a research approach that
looks to maximize our knowledge on the field of (hyper)text
comprehension by looking up at individual differences on
strategic processing (e.g. Hyönä, Lorch & Kaakinen, 2002).
By exploring these processes with the eye-tracking
methodology we aim to clarify the confusing empirical data
on the field of hypertext comprehension. In this sense, the
current work can exemplify how two different experiments
using similar procedures can lead to different results, if they
do not take into account readers’ strategic processing. In fact,
that was the case in most of the research exploring the effects
of overviews in hypertext comprehension revised in Salmerón
et al., 2005). For example, two similar experiments using
hypertext overviews could provide different comprehension
outcomes if by any chance the distribution of readers
following the previously described ‘long reprocessing
strategy’ were unequally distributed between conditions and /
or experiments.

Appendix

Acknowledgments

Sample of an unfamiliar text. The organization of sections is
identified in brackets. Original texts were written in French.
[Introduction] Victor Hugo
Victor Hugo is a model of writers of the Romantic
movement. As the rest of Romantics, he loved nature and
exotism, and liked to be considered as an exiliate of society.
Indeed, he conceived poets as prophets. He mastered French
vocabulary better than any other writer. The richness and
variety of his works is astonishing.
[Continuation / example of topic issue 1] Life of the author
The author wrote poetry, novels, literary essays and
political pamphlets. During a long period he believed in
Monarchy. Indeed, he became friend of Louis-Philippe who
crowned him lord of France. He was against dead penalty,
and he always defended liberty and rights of poor people.
[Topic issue 2] Alphonse de Lamartine
Alphonse de Lamartine was born in Macon in 1790. After
living the most part of his childhood in Milly, he moved to
Italy, and afterwards he started working with Louis XVIII. He
started writing during this period of his life. His first book,
“Poetic meditations”, was the first book of the Romantic
movement in French literature.
[Continuation / example of topic issue 2] The writer’s life
Religious topics play an important role in his poetry.
However, the dead of his daughter Julia in 1832, and his
increasing politic engagement, changed the nature of his
faith, and the poet became supporter of a liberal
Christianism.

This research was funded by research Grant AP 02-1503 and
research Project Rayuela-SEJ2004-05430/PSIC from the
Spanish Minister of Education.

References
Dillon, A., & Gabbard, R. (1998). Hypermedia as an
educational technology: A review of the quantitative
research literature on learner comprehension, control, and
style. Review of Educational Research, 68, 322-349.
Hyönä, J., Lorch, R. F. & Kaakinen, J. K. (2002). Individual
differences in reading to summarize expository text:
evidence from eye fixation patterns. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 94, 44-55.
Kaakinen, J. K., Hyönä, J. and Keenan, J. M. (2003). How
prior knowledge, WMC, and relevance of information
affect eye fixations in expository text. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 447-457.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E. (1978). Advance organizers that compensate for
the organization of text. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 71, 880-886.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N., & Kintsch, W.
(1996). Are good texts always better? Interaction of text
coherence, background knowledge, and levels of
understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
Instruction, 14, 1-42.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning from text:
effect of prior knowledge and text coherence. Discourse
Processes, 22, 247-288.

719

