UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Looking at Someone You Don't Know Can Help You to Recognize Someone You Do

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/75s2j3b4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Boroditsky, Lera
Winawer, Jonathan
Witthoft, Nathan

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Looking at Someone You Don’t Know Can Help You to Recognize
Someone You Do
Nathan Witthoft (witthoft@mit.edu)
Jonathan Winawer (winawer@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 77 Mass Ave
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Lera Boroditsky (lera@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, 410 Jordan Hall
Stanford, CA 53706 USA

thought to be typical of neurons higher up in the visual
hierarchy and the persistence of adaptation under these
conditions is an indication of a relatively high level locus of
adaptation.
Most of these studies induce their effects in the
laboratory using similar paradigms. For example, Mike
Webster (1999) demonstrated adaptation to faces that had
been distorted by either compressing or expanding a region
between the eyes. Subjects were first shown faces spanning
the continuum from expanded to contracted and asked to
judge how normal the faces looked. Then subjects adapted
to either a contracted or expanded face by staring at it for
some time and then were again presented with the
continuum of faces and asked to judge their normality. In
between judgments of normality subjects again stared at the
distorted face to maintain the adapted state (what is often
referred to as top-up adaptation). Webster found that when
subjects adapted to an expanded face, subsequent judgments
were biased in such a way that slightly expanded faces
looked normal and undistorted faces looked compressed.
The effect is quite powerful and given sufficient adaptation
can be seen by an observer on a single trial which is
probably why there are few objections to the fact that the
results are based on subjective report. One interpretation of
this data is that the viewer’s representation of what is
normal shifts towards recent experience and that judgments
of normality are really comparisons to the normal point. So,
when adapting to an expanded face, the neutral point begins
to move towards that face and subsequent testing with what
used to be normal will appear contracted.
Using a similar paradigm, Leopold et al (2001)
demonstrated identity specific aftereffects. They created a
stimulus set based on the notion of a face space in which
faces are coded with respect to a norm, that is the identity of
a face is the distance from the center of the space on
however many dimensions there are. Having a model of the
space allowed them to do a very sophisticated experiment
showing that when adapted to a particular face A, subjects
were likely to judge neutral faces as having the identity of
anti-A (that is the face opposite A in the face space). They
further showed that this shift in judgments following
adaptation was specific to the trajectory connecting a face

Abstract
Adaptation to faces has been shown to influence judgments of
many different features of subsequently viewed faces. For
example, after viewing a face that has had its internal features
compressed, subjects report that the features of a normal face seem
unnaturally expanded (Webster & MacLin, 1999). Recent work
has extended these findings to identity, showing that the judgments
of the identity of a neutral face can be biased by adaptation to
another face (Leopold, D., O'Toole, A., Vetter, T., & Blanz, V.,
2001). These results have been interpreted as supporting facespace models of recognition where faces are coded with respect to
the prototype. While fascinating, these results require extensive
training and depend on participants’ subjective reports. We
present an objective method for demonstrating that adaptation can
affect identity judgments without extensive training in the lab thus
supporting the notion of identity based aftereffects. However, the
fact that our stimuli are chosen without consideration of a face
space suggests that there may be alternative mechanisms
underlying face representation and adaptation that do not rely on a
prototype.

Introduction
Perceptual adaptation and aftereffects have long interested
psychologists both for the clues they provide about what
kinds of features (and where) might be coded in the visual
pathway and because they demonstrate the ways in which
the visual system adjusts itself in response to experience.
While many well known aftereffects have been described
for ‘simple’ visual features like color and the orientation of
lines more recent work has found that adaptation and
aftereffects are found with more ‘complex’ stimuli such as
shapes and faces (Feng & He 2005; Webster & MacLin
1999). Work on face adaptation in particular has shown that
adaptation can bias many different kinds of judgments about
faces including gender, normality, race, and emotion
(Webster et al, 2004; Rhodes et al, 2004; Rhodes et al,
2003). It has also been shown that these adaptation effects
are somewhat robust to changes in position, orientation, and
size (Yamashita, J., Hardy, J., De Valois, K, & Webster, M.,
2005; Zhao & Chubb, 2001; Leopold, D. A., Rhodes, G.,
Muller, K. M., & Jeffery, L., 2005). These invariances are
894

and its anti-face through the neutral point. They took the
evidence as suggesting an opponent coding mechanism for
faces with the neutral point (or prototype) playing a special
role.
One difficulty with the Leopold et al (2001) study
is that subjects required extensive training not only on the
endpoints but also on faces along the trajectories. That is
subjects spent hundreds of trials learning to identify a face
that was only 10% of the way towards a particular identity.
Subjects might have been trained to represent these faces
with a prototype that did not exist before the experiment. In
addition they used a subjective method which could be
affected by response bias. Here we present an objective
method for showing adaptation can selectively improve
peoples’ ability to recognize famous faces. At no time
before or during the experiment are subjects told the names
of the people they must recognize, nor are they shown
unaltered pictures of the famous faces until the end of the
experiment.

Figure 1: Examples of faces taken from two morphs and
used in the experiment. The top row shows faces from Face
B to Elvis Presley while the bottom row shows faces in
morph from Face A to Bill Clinton.
40 subjects participated in the experiment. 10
subjects adapted to face A during the experiment, another
10 adapted to face B, and the final 20 did not undergo any
adaptation. The test stimuli for all the subjects were
identical. Each version of the experiment had 6 blocks with
the percent famous face increasing across the blocks. In the
first block, subjects were told that they would be shown a
series of faces each of which resembled a famous person,
and that they should try to guess who it was. The subjects
were then shown the 8 40% famous faces in random order
and asked to guess what famous person they resembled if
they could. At no time before or during the experiment
were subjects told the identity of the famous faces used to
make the morphs. In most cases subjects could not identify
the 40% morph.
For the subjects in the adapting conditions, each of
the next 4 blocks began with 55 seconds of adaptation to
one of the two unknown faces. They were then presented
with one of the 40% faces for 1 second and asked to identify
it. This was followed by 5 seconds of top-up adaptation
and then another 40% face until all the 40% faces had been
shown. After the block of 40% faces, subjects did similar
adaptation blocks with the 50%, then the 60% and then the
67% faces. In the last block, subjects were shown the 100%
famous faces without further adaptation and asked to
identify them. The 100% faces remained onscreen until
subjects made a response. Subjects in the baseline (no
adapt) condition had the identical sequence of test stimuli
but no intervening adapting faces.
Our prediction is that subjects should perform
better at recognizing famous faces that have been morphed
with the stimulus they are adapting to. In other words, less
of a famous face needs to be present if it is part of a morph
with the adapting stimulus. Since subjects do not know the
identities of the famous faces used in the experiment, any
information they have must be gotten from the stimuli rather
than changes in response strategy (bias). Furthermore, since
the test stimuli are the same for all subjects, any differences
must be attributable to the effect of adaptation.

Experiment 1
In experiment 1, subjects tried to identify faces taken from
morphs between famous faces and two unknown faces.

Stimuli and Methods
Ten grey-scale pictures of faces (8 famous and 2 unknown)
were used to construct the stimuli in the experiment. Each
image was scaled to the same size and then masked using an
oval to eliminate external features like the ears and hairline.
Using Morph 2.1 software, four of the famous faces (Bill
Clinton, Tom Cruise, Christian Slater, and Sylvester
Stallone) were morphed with an unknown face (hereafter
face A). The other four famous faces (Ben Affleck, Bill
Cosby, Dustin Hoffman, and Elvis Presley) were morphed
with a different unknown face (hereafter face B). Each
morph line (the set of faces including the endpoints and the
graded transformations) was created by hand positioning
corresponding points and lines on each pair of endpoint
faces. The software then generated 58 intervening images
between the endpoints. Counting the unknown face as 1, the
24th, 30th, 36th, and 40th faces were chosen from each
morph for use in the experiment. For each morph, these are
referred to as the 40, 50, 60 and 67% famous faces
respectively. The unknown faces and the famous faces are
considered 0% and 100% famous. Examples of the stimuli
can be seen in figure 1.
Stimulus presentation and response collection was
done using VisionShell software on Macintosh iMac
computers. All subjects were recruited at Stanford and
tested in quiet darkened rooms and received either 5 dollars
payment or credit in an introductory psychology course.

895

putting it is that less of the famous face is required to be
present for successful recognition in the same condition
relative to the different condition.
To quantify the result a logistic function was fit to
the each subject’s data (Palmer, Huk, & Shadlen, 2005).
The logistic had two parameters, one corresponding to the
slope, and one corresponding to the center of the curve (the
"% celebrity" needed for 50% recognition). Betas
representing the center of the curve for each subject were
determined independently for the same, different, and
baseline conditions. Curves that are (centered) shifted
farther to the left represent better recognition performance
(see figure 3). These parameter estimates were then entered
into a 1x3 (adapting conditions: same, different, baseline)
Anova. The results showed a main effect of adapting
condition (F(57,2) = 4.687, p < 0.05. Post hoc t-tests
conducted using Tukey’s Least Significant Difference
procedure showed that a significant shift leftward for the
same adaptation relative to the different condition (p =
0.003). The baseline condition was intermediate between
the two adapting conditions but did not significantly differ
from either (p = 0.1 compared to same and p = 0.14
compared to different).

Analysis and Results
For each subject, faces were excluded from the analysis
either if they were recognized at the first exposure of 40%
prior to any adaptation or if they were not recognized in the
final block at 100%. Data from each of the subjects who
were adapted was divided into two groups dependent on
whether the test face had been morphed with the unknown
face the subject was adapting to, or the one the subject never
saw. Test faces from morphs using the adapting stimulus as
an endpoint are referred to as ‘same’, and those using the
other face were labeled different. So if a subject adapted to
face A, the morphs made with face A were considered
‘same’ and the morphs made with face B ‘different’. The
situation is reversed for those subjects adapting to face B.
Within each of these groups, the number of correctly
recognized faces from a level of morph was divided by the
number of faces the subject recognized at the 100% level.
This yielded a normalized percent correct score for each
level of morph.

Figure 2. Recognition performance of subjects in
experiment 1. Error bars represent standard error of the
subject means. Note that stimuli were presented in blocks
with each block increasing the percentage of famous face.
So the data for the 40% faces on the x axis come from block
2, the 50% from block 3 and so on.

Figure 3: Fitted logistic functions for subjects in
experiment 1. Recognition performance is significantly
better for faces morphed with the adapting stimulus (black
line) than for those not morphed with the adapting stimulus
(solid grey line). Performance in the baseline condition
(dashed grey line) where subjects did not undergo any
adaptation is intermediate.

Overall, subjects did fairly well at recognizing the faces, on
average correctly identifying 72% at some point during the
experiment (mean number recognized = 5.75 faces out of 8,
SEM = 0.32). All subjects who did not leave the room
during the experiment are included in the analysis, and
every subject recognized at least 3 faces. Figure 2 shows
the average data from the 20 subjects who adapted to one of
the two unknown faces in experiment 1. The graph shows
that faces that were morphed with the adapting stimulus
(same) were better recognized than those morphed with the
unknown face not adapted to (different). Another way of

While the preceding finding demonstrates that
adaptation can improve recognition performance, the data
can also be analyzed by item to see whether or not the effect
occurs for all the faces. To analyze the items two logistic
functions were fitted simultaneously the same and different
performance on each item and a set of betas representing the
difference in horizontal shift between the two curves was

896

generated (1 beta for each item). These betas were t-tested
against zero and showed that better recognition was seen
when items were morphed with the adapting stimulus (t(7) =
3.7 , 0.0082, mean shift 13% famous face). The fitted
curves are depicted in figure 4. This way of looking at the
data highlights the fact that the improvement in recognition
performance cannot be due to some items being easier to
recognize than others. The item analysis shows that
recognition of a particular face is modulated in the predicted
fashion by adaptation.

unknown faces were used (hereafter referred to as Faces C
and D). To increase the likelihood that subjects would be
able to recognize the 100% famous faces a separate group of
subjects was asked to identify a number of famous faces that
had been scaled and masked in the same fashion as they
would appear in the experiment. Arnold Schwarzenegger,
Elijah Wood, Nicholas Cage, Matt Damon, John Travolta,
Harrison Ford, Brad Pitt, and Johnny Depp were recognized
the most often were chosen and used in the experiment.
One other minor difference was that instead of the 67%
morph the 70% morph was used.
32 subjects recruited from the Stanford
undergraduate population participated in return for course
credit. 10 subjects adapted to face C during the experiment,
10 adapted to face D, and the remaining 12 did not adapt.
As in experiment 1 subjects were shown the test faces in
blocks with the percentage of famous face in each image
increasing across the blocks.

Analysis and Results
Analysis proceeded exactly as in experiment 1 with faces
recognized on the first presentation (40%) prior to
adaptation and those faces not recognized at 100%
discarded from the analysis. Overall recognition
performance in the adapting conditions was again good,
with subjects recognizing 74% of the faces on average
(mean number recognized = 5.95, SEM = 0.36).

Figure 4. Logistic functions fitted to item data from
experiment 1. Faces were recognized better when morphed
with the adapting stimulus (same – dark line) than when
morphed with the stimulus not seen (different – lighter line).
Organizing the data in this way highlights the fact that
performance for a particular face is dependent on the
adapting stimulus.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed that adaptation to an unknown face
decreased the amount of a famous face needed in an image
in order to recognize it. This effect was specific to morphs
that used the same unknown face as an endpoint as an
adapting stimulus. The effect of adaptation depended on the
adapting stimulus thus ruling out the possibility that the
improved recognition was simply due to some of the faces
being more recognizable than others. The effect was also
present in an item analysis, with 7 of the 8 items showing
recognition performance consistent with the adaptation
effect. To see how general this effect is, experiment 2
replicates experiment 1 using 10 new faces (8 famous and 2
unknown).

Figure 5. Logistic functions fitted to data from experiment
2. As in experiment 1 subjects recognition performance was
better when they guessed the identities of faces from a
morph that were generated using the adapting stimulus as an
endpoint.. However, in this experiment, performance in the
baseline condition is indistinguishable from the different
condition.

Methods
The stimuli and design of experiment 2 were exactly like
experiment 1, except that 8 new famous faces and 2 new
897

recognized. This supports earlier work showing that there
are identity specific aftereffects while eliminating concerns
that recognition performance is really due to changes in
response strategy or a result of training during the
experiment.
The results of the experiments are very robust
considering that a subject has only 4 stimuli in each
condition and that only 10-12 subjects are used for each
group. Furthermore, it is worth considering that the faces
were chosen without taking into consideration where they
might be relative to one another in a face space. This
suggests that perhaps models which take face adaptation to
reveal the primacy of the prototype for explaining face
recognition and aftereffects may be missing other
mechanisms. This is particularly true since the advantage
for adapting in the ‘same’ condition can be seen in most of
the items. Not all of the trajectories from the unknown
faces to the famous faces are likely to pass through the
center of the face space. Given that the origin or prototype
is usually taken to be the average of the faces a person has
seen (Rhodes et al 2003, Leopold et al 2001), having
chosen a set that matches this would be a striking
coincidence. Furthermore, it is not clear from such accounts
whether or not there are multiple prototypes (i.e. separate
ones for gender or race) or whether all faces are coded as
deviations from the global average.
An alternative possibility is that adaptation causes
changes such that differences from the adapting stimulus are
emphasized. Note that such an account is consistent with
the results found in the Leopold (2001) study. Testing
across the center of the face space is just one trajectory
among many that could have been made.
Further
supporting the idea is the fact that Leopold et al found
improvement on face recognition following adaptation to
the prototype in their face space. If aftereffects were merely
the result of shifting the prototype towards recent
experience adapting to the prototype should have no effect.
However, if adaptation (at least in part) results from
emphasizing change from recent experience than this is
exactly the predicted effect.
Finally, our adaptation effects were obtained
without any training on the to-be-recognized faces. This
eliminates the possibility that the desired structure of the
categories is learned during the training (though this would
be an interesting effect in its own right) and applies just to
the stimulus set used in the experiment. That is, it is
possible that training people extensively to classify the
stimuli may induce a prototype representation for those
stimuli. While this may seem unlikely, Leopold has shown
that the same effects using human faces as stimuli can be
induced in monkeys following training (Leopold & Bondar,
2005). Since the prototype is meant to reflect the average of
a person’s experiences it is curious that monkeys would
share that prototype and is suggestive that they learned the
desired structure during training.

The results were similar to those of experiment 1.
Logistic functions were separately fitted to data taken from
the same, different, and baseline conditions. Estimates of
the parameters measuring the horizontal shift of the curve
were entered into a 1x3 Anova. Results showed a
significant main effect of adaptation condition (F(49,2) =
5.945, p = 0.005). Post-Hoc contrasts showed that again
stimuli in the same condition were better recognized than
those in the different (p = 0.002). However, in this case,
same performance was also better than baseline (p=0.036)
while there was no difference between baseline and
different (p>.4). This supports the idea that adaptation is
boosting performance on the ‘same’ faces rather than
disrupting performance on the ‘different’ faces.

Figure 6: Results from item analysis of experiment 2.
As in experiment 1, data were also grouped by item
and analyzed. Logistic functions were fit to each item and a
parameter representing the shift between the same and
different curves obtained for each item. Testing the
collection of parameters representing the horizontal shift
against zero showed again that faces were better recognized
following adaptation to the unknown face they were
morphed with (t(7) = 2.41, p = 0.0468 mean shift ~10%
famous face). Figure 6 shows the curves fit to the aggregate
data.

General Discussion
Here we have presented results showing that adaptation can
selectively enhance the ability to recognize faces. Since
subjects did not know which faces out of all the ones they
know they would need to recognize, the results can not be
attributed to response bias and must be attributed to a
change in the way subjects were processing the test faces.
Which morphs showed improvement was dependent on the
adapting stimulus and not the particular faces to be

898

Rhodes, G., Jeffery, L., Watson, T. L., Clifford, C. W., &
Nakayama, K. (2003). Fitting the mind to the world: face
adaptation and attractiveness aftereffects. Psychological
Science, 14(6), 558-566.
Rhodes, G., Jeffery, L., Watson, T. L., Jaquet, E., Winkler,
C., & Clifford, C. W. (2004). Orientation-contingent face
aftereffects and implications for face-coding mechanisms.
Current Biology, 14(23), 2119-2123.
Webster, M. A., & MacLin, O. H. (1999). Figural
aftereffects in the perception of faces. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 6(4), 647-653.
Webster, M. A., Kaping, D., Mizokami, Y., & Duhamel, P.
(2004). Adaptation to natural facial categories. Nature,
428(6982), 557-561.
Yamashita, J. A., Hardy, J. L., De Valois, K. K., & Webster,
M. A. (2005). Stimulus selectivity of figural aftereffects
for faces. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 31(3), 420-437.
Zhao, L., & Chubb, C. (2001). The size-tuning of the facedistortion after-effect. Vision Research, 41(23), 29792994.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Stanford psychology department for
supporting the visitors from MIT during their extended stay.

References
Fang, F., & He, S. (2005). Viewer-centered object
representation in the human visual system revealed by
viewpoint aftereffects. Neuron, 45(5), 793-800.
Leopold, D. A., O'Toole, A. J., Vetter, T., & Blanz, V.
(2001). Prototype-referenced shape encoding revealed by
high-level aftereffects. Nature Neuroscience, 4(1), 89-94.
Leopold, D. A., Rhodes, G., Muller, K. M., & Jeffery, L.
(2005). The dynamics of visual adaptation to faces.
Proceedings. Biological Sciences/The Royal Society,
272(1566), 897-904.
Leopold, D. A. & I. Bondar. (2005) Adaptation to complex
visual patterns in humans and monkeys. in Clifford, C.
W. G., & Rhodes, G. (Eds). Fitting the mind to the world
: adaptation and after-effects in high-level vision (1st ed.).
Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press.
Palmer, J., Huk, A., & Shadlen, M. (2005) The effect of
stimulus strength on the speed and accuracy of a
perceptual decision. Journal of Vision 5(5), 376-404.

899

