UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Do Computational Models of the Role of Dopamine as a Reward Prediction Error Map on
to Current Dopamine Theories of Schizophrenia?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6v091713

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Davey, Neil
Done, D. John
Frank, Ray J.
et al.

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Do Computational Models of the Role of Dopamine as a Reward Prediction
Error Map on to Current Dopamine Theories of Schizophrenia?
Angela J. Thurnham* (a.j.thurnham@herts.ac.uk), D. John Done** (d.j.done@herts.ac.uk),
Neil Davey* (n.davey@herts.ac.uk), Ray J. Frank* (r.j.frank@herts.ac.uk)
School of Computer Science,* School of Psychology, **University of Hertfordshire,
College Lane, Hatfield, Hertfordshire. AL10 9AB United Kingdom
reward prediction, or TD error, including evidence that the
RPE model of dopamine activity applies to humans as well as
primates. The biological plausibility of existing neural
network models by Cohen & Servan-Schreiber, (1992);
Braver Barch & Cohen, (1999); Suri & Schultz, (1999);
Rougier, Noelle, Braver, Cohen & O’Reilly, (2005) and
O’Reilly & Frank, (2006) are then discussed in the light of
the afore-mentioned dopamine theories of schizophrenia.
Finally, we conclude with four major questions arising from
recent dopamine theories of schizophrenia that remain to be
addressed by current computational models.

Abstract
A review of the current dopamine theories of schizophrenia
reveals a likely imbalance between cortical and subcortical
microcircuits due to an insufficient inhibitory brake, leading to
a disruption of the dopamine system and the classic positive
psychotic symptoms, negative symptoms and cognitive deficits
associated with the disorder. Recent computational models have
modelled the role of dopamine as a reward prediction error,
using Temporal Difference and have successfully shown how
these symptoms could arise from a disturbance to the dopamine
system. We review these models in the light of dopamine
theories of schizophrenia and highlight some of the major
points that should be addressed by future computational
models.

Dopamine Theories of Schizophrenia
Role of Dopamine

Keywords: Dopamine; Schizophrenia; Neurocomputational
Modelling; Salience; Temporal Difference.

Theories of the role of dopamine over the last five years tend
to converge on the idea that dopamine encodes a reward
prediction error (RPE) of the discrepancy between actual and
expected future reward. This discrepancy is used to drive
learning towards actions which are necessary for survival in
the real world (Schultz, 1998), and it is likely that disruption
to this system gives rise to an abnormality in information
processing by dopamine and some of the symptoms currently
associated with schizophrenia, particularly psychosis and
deficits in working memory. Temporal Difference Learning
(Sutton, 1988; Sutton & Barto, 1998), a form of
Reinforcement Learning Theory, provides an explicit method
of modelling and quantifying the Reward Prediction, or
Temporal Difference (TD), error (Schultz, Dayan &
Montague, 1997; Hollerman & Schultz, 1998) and can be
used as a valid computational implementation of the RPE for
neural network simulations. While dopamine should not be
viewed in isolation, but seen to be working in concert with
other neurotransmitters, such as glutamate and GABA (AbiDhargham, 2004; Carlsson, Waters, Holm-Waters, Tedroff,
Nilsson & Carlsson, 2001; Winterer & Weinberger, 2004),
there are still attributes and deficiencies that can be strongly
linked to dopamine activity.
The role of dopamine, and the possible location and nature
of the dysfunction, presented in theories of schizophrenia by
Carlsson et al, (2001); Kapur, (2003); Abi-Dhargham, (2004)
and Winterer & Weinberger, (2004), are discussed in the first
section on dopamine theories of schizophrenia below. The
second section relates specifically to computational models,
particularly existing connectionist models of dopamine as a

It is generally agreed that dopamine enables the ability to
focus on task relevant information. Current theories of the
effects of dopamine on behaviour focus on the role of
dopamine as a neuromodulator in Reinforcement Learning,
where organisms learn to organise their behaviour under the
influence of goals, and expected future reward is believed to
drive action selection, as seen during conditioning.
Neurophysiological recordings of single dopamine neurons in
primates have identified a reward prediction error signal of
the discrepancy between actual and expected future reward
(Schultz et al., 1997; Hollerman & Schultz, 1998). In
conditioning, before learning, this phasic burst of dopamine
occurs at the time an unexpected reward is encountered. As
trials progress and learning continues, the reward becomes
more and more predictable and the phasic burst effectively
moves backwards towards the time the conditioned stimulus
(CS) occurs. Eventually, when full learning has taken place,
the CS will elicit the same phasic response previously
associated with the unexpected reward.
In particular, evidence suggests that the dopamine system
may mediate the Incentive Salience of rewards, modulating
their motivational value, which is dissociable from hedonia
and reward learning (Berridge & Robinson, 1998). The
modern Incentive Salience Theory distinguishes ‘wanting’
from ‘liking,’ and the dopamine system is regarded as that
which calculates the ‘want’ rather than the ‘act’ parts of
instrumental behaviour. Kapur’s framework of psychosis
builds on this hypothesis, and sees the role of dopamine as
mediating the salience of both internal and environmental
representations.
Abi-Dhargham refers to the dopamine hypothesis of
schizophrenia and uses neuroimaging techniques such as

2263

SPECT and PET to monitor changes in synaptic dopamine
levels. Using data from electrophysiological techniques on a
smaller timescale, Winterer & Weinberger are more explicit
and refer to the apparent ability of dopamine to optimise the
signal to noise ratio (SNR) of local cortical microcircuits.
Carlsson et al. take a wider view and see dopamine as one
of many possible dysfunctional neurotransmitters affected in
the brain in schizophrenia. Pharmacological evidence
suggests small differences in the fragile balance between
multi-neurotransmitters at various points in local cortical
microcircuits leads to many of both the positive and negative
symptoms associated with the disorder. They posit that
although there may be an elevated baseline release of
dopamine in schizophrenia, it is possibly secondary to
hypoglutamatergia.

Where is the Dysfunction?
One of the few biological disturbances that have been
identified in schizophrenic patients is an impaired dopamine
system, which traditionally has been of an increase in
dopamine signaling in the striatum, leading to psychosis
(Winterer & Weinberger, 2004). The Dopamine Hypothesis
of Schizophrenia arose as a result of two major findings: (i)
Exposure to dopamine receptor agonists, such as
amphetamine, induces psychosis, and (ii) antipsychotic drugs
provide an antipsychotic effect by blocking dopamine
receptors (Abi-Dhargham, 2004). Current views still posit
deficits due to an increase in dopamine; however it is the site
of the excess that is controversial. Kapur refers to a general
excess, while Abi-Dhargham refers to the traditional
cortical/subcortical imbalance, with an excess in the
subcortex and a deficit in the cortex. Winterer & Weinberger,
on the other hand, suggest that it may be the cortical and not
striatal microcircuits that give rise to abnormal dopamine
signaling. Carlsson et al. also refer to possible cortical
steering of subcortical systems, but by glutamate action.
However, all agree that it is the resulting imbalance that leads
to the problem and, overall, current opinion would imply that
it is the imbalance in the dopamine circuits between cortical
and striatal brain regions that leads to the dysfunction, while
the actual point of the dysfunction remains controversial.
Indeed it may be that disruption at different points in the
circuits may lead to different symptoms or cognitive deficits
and computational modelling may help us to answer these
questions.
Carlsson et al. refer to a secondary general elevated
baseline release of dopamine in schizophrenia, possibly due
to a primary disturbance in cortical glutamate/GABA
mediated steering of monoamine subcortical systems,
(including dopamine). There is a direct glutamate pathway
which acts as an accelerator and an indirect glutamate
pathway that activates GABA and is an effective brake on the
activity of monoamines. It is the balance between accelerator
and brake that maintains stability and glutamatergic failure in
the cerebral cortex may lead to negative symptoms, while
glutamatergic failure in the basal ganglia would favour

positive symptoms. These result from dysregulation of the
dopamine system.
Abi-Dhargham and Winterer & Weinberger also refer to
such an insufficient inhibitory brake as the possible nature of
the dysfunction. Abi-Dhargham refers to a hypostimulation in
the cortex of D1 receptors which causes a deficit in working
memory, and a hyperstimulation in the subcortex of D2
receptors which leads to psychotic symptoms, as a result of
the reduced cortical brake. Winterer & Weinberger refer
principally to a reduced prefrontal dopamine D1/D2 receptor
activation ratio which leads to a lower cortical SNR. They
posit that normally it is the D1 receptors that dominate, but in
schizophrenia D2 receptors dominate, and as a result of the
primary disturbance, secondary effects will occur
subcortically in the striatum leading to contextually
inappropriate, inflexible and bizarre behavioural routines.
All these theories seem to point to an imbalance in the
dopamine system between the cortical and subcortical areas,
due to an insufficient inhibitory brake system, with negative
symptoms occurring as a result of disturbance to the cortex
and positive symptoms as a disturbance to subcortical areas.

What is the Dysfunction?

2264

Kapur posits that psychosis is a state of aberrant salience,
where excess levels of dopamine are no longer stimuluslinked and context-driven. Delusions (paranoia, aliens
interfering with one’s brain), and hallucinations (hearing
voices), may arise then as a result of the individual attempting
to provide their own explanations for experiences which
come out of the blue and are imbued with high importance.
This is in keeping with an earlier theory of schizophrenia by
Maher (1988) that patients make normal attributions, or
reasoned normally to abnormal experiences, i.e., subcortical
abnormality with normal cortical function. It is known that
patients with schizophrenia suffer from a wide-spread
cognitive dysfunction that affects memory, executive
functioning and attention (Bilder et al., 2000; McKenna,
1997). However, there seems to be a dissociation between the
psychotic experiences (delusions, hallucinations) and
cognitive dysfunction. The latter occur well in advance of
onset symptoms, and the trajectory of symptom recovery is
not matched by cognitive recovery (Harvey, Koren,
Reichenberg & Bowie, 2005). Traditional cognitive models
of schizophrenia based on cognitive dysfunction in
memory/attention/executive dysfunction have poor face
validity when used to explain the spontaneous experiences
(delusions/hallucinations) which are bizarre, or strange, since
these are unrelated to past experience and stored memories
(Simpson, Done, Valeé-Tourangeau , 2002).
The recent developments in understanding the role of
dopamine in salience allocation do permit the formulation of
cognitive neuroscience models which can integrate both
Maher’s theory with the known cognitive dysfunctions in
schizophrenia. Computing the salience of stimuli (both
external and internal, such as thoughts/ideas) is probably
achieved by midbrain/ventral striatal dopamine systems rather
than cortical ones (O’Doherty Dayan, Schultz, Deichmann,

Friston & Dolan, 2004). This is the ‘critic’ in models of the
dopamine system in the basal ganglia (Montague, Hyman &
Cohen, 2004; Sutton & Barto, 1998). In schizophrenia we
posit that within the critic, the signal (winner) is distinguished
from the noise (losers). This signal is then transmitted to other
systems (e.g., ‘actor’ in dorsal striatum), or cortical systems,
such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC)
responsible for various attributional, memory, executive and
attentional processes (Durstewitz, Kelc & Gunturkun, 1999).
Thus stimuli, or experienced episodes, which are
unimportant, can be imbued with a high degree of salience by
the critic in the ventral striatum/midbrain. This provides the
spontaneous experience imbued with importance. High
variance in the level of background dopamine activity would
also mean that these experiences occur from time to time, but
not all of the time. Dopamine abnormalities in DLPFC would
not only account for the neuropsychological deficits found in
schizophrenia but they could also integrate the abnormal
experiences into dysfunctional attributional, executive and
memory systems. We can crudely equate these dual roles as
being due to dopamine abnormalities in the midbrain/striatum
and cortex respectively, as outlined previously in the theories
of Abi-Dhargham (2004) and Winterer and Weinberger
(2005). As described previously, the interaction between
these different levels means that they cannot operate
independently, but in consort. This permits a more tractable
model of the psychology of schizophrenia, i.e. a model of
both symptoms and classical cognitive abnormalities.

on D2 receptors, stabilising the elevated dopamine levels
without causing hypodopaminergia. However, they do not
refer to the exact site of those receptors.
Both Carlsson et al. and Winterer & Weinberger focus on
D2 receptor blockade as means of resolving the dopamine
imbalance which leads to psychotic symptoms, but the exact
site of impact remains unclear.

Interim Conclusions

Antipsychotics

Dopamine provides a RPE signal of the discrepancy between
actual and expected future reward and it would appear to be
an imbalance between cortical and subcortical microcircuits
that leads to a dysfunction of the dopamine system. However,
the actual point of the dysfunction remains controversial.
Recently it has been suggested that it may be cortical
microcircuits that give rise to abnormal dopamine signaling,
with secondary downstream subcortical deficits, instead of
the traditional view of a primary subcortical disturbance
(Winterer & Weinberger, 2004).
It is generally agreed that the resulting imbalance may
result from an insufficient inhibitory brake system leading to
either a hypostimulation in the cortex of D1 receptors and a
hyperstimulation in the subcortex of D2 receptors (AbiDhargham, 2004), or a reduced prefrontal dopamine D1/D2
receptor activation ratio, in which D2 receptors dominate,
which leads primarily to a lower cortical SNR (Winterer &
Weinberger, 2004). D2 receptor blockade would appear to be
important in restoring the cortical/subcortical imbalance
(Carlsson et al., 2001; Winterer & Weinberger, 2004).
Furthermore, positive psychotic symptoms arise from
either a primary subcortical hyperstimulation of dopamine
receptors (Abi-Dhargham, 2004), or secondary effects of
either reduced cortical SNR on subcortical systems (Winterer
& Weinberger, 2004), or cortical gluatamate/GABA steering
of subcortical systems (Carlsson et al., 2001). Negative
symptoms and working memory deficits are thought to result
from either hypostimulation of D1 receptors (Abi-Dhargham,
2004) or reduced prefrontal dopamine D1/D2 receptor
activation ratio with D2 receptors dominating (Winterer &
Weinberger, 2004).

The action of antipsychotic drugs can help further understand
what is going wrong with the dopamine system. Kapur
proposes that antipsychotics dampen ‘aberrant saliences’ by
blocking excess dopamine, leading to an attenuation of
motivational salience of ideas and perceptions. In this way
antipsychotics remove the degree to which symptoms occupy
the mind, but not the core content of the symptom. They
simply provide a neurochemical balance where dopamine
levels return to normal, new aberrant saliences are less likely
to form and existing ones are more likely to stop. It is only in
the weeks to come that an individual may work through and
resolve their delusions in their own time. In this way the
delusions and hallucinations may be deconstructed, but this is
not always the case as some patients are never able to resolve
their symptoms psychologically.
Abi-Dhargham does not refer to antipsychotic action, but
Winterer & Weinberger deviate from the traditional view of
antipsychotic action on D2 receptors in the striatum and,
using evidence from imaging studies, suggest that
antipsychotics may exert actions instead through D2 receptor
blockade in the cortex. Carlsson et al. refer to the adverse
effects of classic antipsychotics which lead to
hypodopaminergia in patients in remission from their positive
symptoms that cause failure of the reward system leading to
dsyphoria and anhedonia; and negative effects, such as
catatonia and cognitive deficits. They have developed both
partial dopamine-receptor agonists, and antagonists, that act

Computational Models of Dopamine as a
Reward Prediction/Temporal Difference Error
Signal

2265

Several computational models of the role of dopamine as a
RPE have incorporated Temporal Difference (TD) Learning
(Sutton, 1988), a form of Reinforcement Learning Theory,
which provides an explicit method of modelling and
quantifying the Reward Prediction error (Schultz et al, 1997;
Hollerman & Schultz, 1998; Montague et al., 2004).
Specifically, it provides a mathematical interpretation of how
dopamine is thought to mediate reward-processing and
reward-dependent learning, thus optimising behaviour in an
environment. A class of TD models, known as actor-critic
models (Sutton & Barto, 1998), have been adapted so that
expected future reward is equivalent to incentive salience
(McClure, Daw & Montague, 2003; Montague et al., 2004).

Here, the error signal generated is used in two ways: (i) The
‘critic’ - as a prediction error or learning signal used to create
better estimates of future reward. (ii) The ‘actor’ - to bias
action selection towards situations that predict the best
reward.
It is possible that the same RPE is signaled from dopamine
neurons in both the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and
substantia nigra (SN). The signal is used in two ways
depending on the route it takes, with the projections from
VTA to ventral striatum as the ‘critic’ in TD models,
associated with reward and motivation, and projections from
SN to dorsal striatum as the ‘actor’, associated with motor
control (O’Doherty et al., 2004; Daw, Niv & Dayan, 2005).
The dopamine pathways are arranged in cortical/subcortical
circuit loops involving prefrontal cortex (Alexander et al.,
1985), and it is in the cortical areas that dopamine
dysfunction is believed to have an effect on working memory.
It has also been suggested that TD Learning can help with
the dynamic choice of action selection to obtain natural
rewards required for survival. As well as assisting in the
learning process, it has been suggested that the dopamine
signal can be used in decision-making, when full learning has
taken place, to bias the choice of actions that lead to better
rewards in another actor/critic model by Schultz et al., (1997).
When full learning has taken place the RPE will be zero and
fluctuations above and below that point will provide
important ongoing evaluations in the environment of salience
which can be assessed quickly according to whether the
fluctuations represent potential actions that are better or worse
than expected. In this way an instant comparison can be made
between well-learnt possibilities; all that is required is a
simple behaviour strategy, to choose those actions associated
with increased dopaminergic activity and incentive salience,
and avoid those of low salience where dopaminergic activity
is decreased. In this way, a damaged dopamine system could
explain why adults become slow to do things that they used to
do so easily. Their ability to make these instant comparisons
or to maintain context would become impaired, and lead to
some of the cognitive deficits associated with schizophrenia,
such as poor performance in the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test
(WCST) or the 1-2-AX Test, where it is important to
maintain context.
TD models have proved to be very successful in many
behavioural tasks and are used extensively in robotics to
enable learning and reacting to an environment. However,
while they are often more efficient than other reinforcement
learning algorithms (Suri & Schultz, 1999), complications
may arise when unpredictable events occur, which break the
learning chains constructed through prediction (O’Reilly &
Frank, 2006), and this has led to some researchers who have
previously used TD, seeking alternative combinations of
algorithms as learning mechanism (Hazy, Frank & O’Reilly,
In Press).

Evidence for Role of Dopamine as a Reward
Prediction Error/Temporal Difference Signal
Functional imaging techniques have provided evidence that
the RPE model of dopamine activity applies to human reward
learning, and not just to primates, as seen in
neurophysiological recordings by Schultz and colleagues
mentioned above. Transient learning-related changes
associated with the ‘critic’ have been identified in the brains
of humans subjected to classical conditioning procedures, in
the ventral striatum (putamen) (McClure, Berns & Montague,
2003; O’Doherty, Dayan, Friston, Critchley & Dolan, 2003).
While O’Doherty et al, (2004) showed that activity in the
dorsal striatum is associated with the ‘actor’ only, as no
activity was seen in this area unless an action was required.
In addition, activation patterns consistent with predictions
from a TD model of learning have also been recorded in the
orbital frontal cortex (O’Doherty et al., 2003). Furthermore,
Seymour et al. (2004) have used fMRI to show that neural
activity in the ventral striatum and the anterior insula
corresponds to the signals for sequential learning predicted by
TD models, in humans in higher-order learning.

How Do Existing Computational Models Compare
with the Cortical/Subcortical Debate of Theories for
Schizophrenia?

2266

The early connectionist model by Cohen & Servan-Schreiber
(1992) and some biophysically detailed neural network
models (Brunel & Wang, 2001; Durstewitz et al., 1999;
Durstewitz, Seamans & Sejnowski, 2000) have modelled
dopamine as a neuromodulator crucial for optimising the
SNR thought to enhance working memory. This model is
limited as it simulates only the DLPFC circuits, but not the
critic in striatum and midbrain. Other models have
incorporated Reinforcement Learning methods and modelled
dopamine as a RPE signal, which can be effectively modelled
using TD Learning (Braver et al., 1999; Suri & Schultz, 1999;
Rougier et al., 2005).
As previously mentioned, it is believed that the actual point
of dysfunction in subcortical/cortical microcircuits remains
controversial. Cohen and colleagues have modelled working
memory deficits, simulating the continuous performance test
(CPT) (Cohen & Servan-Schreiber, 1992; Braver et al.,
1999), with the latter model, a more powerful and complete
theory of the mechanism of cognitive control, incorporating
both TD learning and gating functions for dopamine, where
dopamine was seen as a unitary function which enabled an
organism to predict and respond appropriately to events that
led to reward. In this later model schizophrenia was seen as
an impaired ability to internally represent, maintain and
update context relating to working memory from increased
noise in the dopamine system, focusing particularly on the
prefrontal cortex. The model suggested that reduced phasic
activity, i.e., reduced update to active memory, led to
perservatory behaviour; while increased phasic activity, i.e.,
increased update, led to poor interference control, and
therefore distractibility. Additionally, increased tonic (or
longer-term background) activity led to delay related decay of

active memory, and therefore maintenance deficits. Both
perseverations and distractibility are known disturbances to
the prefrontal cortex and are typical symptoms of
Schizophrenia, along with poor maintenance control.
Perseveratory behaviour occurs when a patient becomes
preoccupied with a task and is unable to change strategy or
appropriately update goal representations, while distractibility
is the inability to concentrate or focus on the task at hand.
This model posits that both perseverations and distractibility
are due to impairments in phasic dopaminergic activity which
affect working memory. However, the model is of two very
different systems in the brain doing different jobs and
possibly coding for two different things; salience in the
midbrain and how it possibly affects working memory in the
prefrontal cortex. It is important, therefore, to investigate how
these behaviours relate to each other and it is this interaction
that will be explored in the current research.
The increased noise could be due to an imbalance between
cortical and subcortical structures due to the insufficient
inhibitory brake system on the dopamine system. However,
the model has a simple architecture with no hidden layers and
modules containing between one and four neurons. The
simple task is hard-wired and it is not a cognitive model.
Using a more sophisticated architecture, a neural network
model by Suri & Schultz (1999) specifically modelled
Wolfram Schultz’s work on the response of dopamine
neurons in the striatum to reward-related stimuli using a
‘critic’, which computed and sent a TD error to an ‘actor’,
which governed behaviour. The model did not refer explicitly
to the prefrontal cortex, but showed that a reinforcement
signal without RPE led to perseverations, and sustained
reductions of reinforcement signal led to a loss of learned
behaviour as seen in Parkinson’s disease and lesioned
animals.
O’Reilly and colleagues have produced a range of
biophysically detailed cognitive connectionist models using
O’Reilly and Munakata’s Leabra algorithm, which combines
error-driven and Hebbian learning with k-Winners-Take-All
inhibitory competition (O’Reilly & Munakata, 2000). These
models are capable of implementing the learning and gating
ideas of Braver et al. (1999) mentioned above, incorporating a
brake and accelerator system. A model of dynamic DA
modulation in the basal ganglia by Frank (2005) separates out
the roles of the D1 and D2 receptors applicable to Parkinson’s
disease, without using TD. The XT model (Rougier et al.,
2005) uses an adaptive gating mechanism, based on an
adaptive critic unit, driven by TD Learning and relates
specifically to how the biological mechanisms of the
prefrontal cortex support flexible cognitive control. Dorsal
Lateral Prefrontal Cortex lesions were simulated by removing
units and asymmetric training, resulting in perseverations in
prefrontal cortex, as seen in the WCST and Stroop tasks.
However, in this and all previous models, it was necessary for
the dynamic gating of the basal ganglia to be hard-wired. The
Prefrontal Basal Ganglia Working Memory model of learning
(O’Reilly & Frank, 2006) incorporates the dynamic
interactions between the prefrontal cortex and the basal

ganglia in working memory, and in doing so, abandons the
use of TD in favour of an alternate associative Pavlovian
mechanism. Here dopamine signals reward association and
not reward prediction. Instead of using TD prediction chains
over successive time-steps, which they claim break down
when modelling complicated tasks such as the 1-2-AX task,
the new algorithm uses the Rescorla-Wagner/Delta-rule
algorithm trained by the unconditioned stimulus for the
current time-step. However, this model is of learning and has
not been used to model dysfunction so far.

Conclusions
The following important questions arising from recent
dopamine theories of schizophrenia that remain to be
addressed by current computational models:
1. Is it the cortical microcircuits that give rise to abnormal
dopamine signaling with secondary downstream subcortical
deficits (Winterer & Weinberger, 2004) or the traditional
view of a primary subcortical disturbance?
2. For the most part connectionist models to date do not
differentiate between D1 and D2 dopamine receptors, or
locate the point(s) of dysfunction in the local microcircuits
that give rise to a possible cortical/subcortical imbalance.
They do not distinguish between the theories of AbiDhargham and Winterer & Weinberger, of either: (i) A
hypostimulation in the cortex of D1 receptors and a
hyperstimulation in the subcortex of D2 receptors (AbiDhargham, 2004), or (ii) A reduced prefrontal dopamine
D1/D2 receptor activation ratio, in which D2 receptors
dominate, leading primarily to a lower cortical SNR
(Winterer & Weinberger, 2004).
3. Do positive psychotic symptoms arise from either: (i) A
primary subcortical hyperstimulation of dopamine receptors
(Abi-Dhargham, 2004)? Or (ii) Secondary effects of either
reduced cortical SNR on subcortical systems (Winterer &
Weinberger, 2004) or cortical gluatamate/GABA steering of
subcortical systems (Carlsson et al., 2001)?
4. Do negative symptoms and working memory deficits
result from either: (i) Hypostimulation of D1 receptors (AbiDhargham, 2004)? Or (ii) Reduced prefrontal dopamine
D1/D2 receptor activation ratio with D2 receptors dominating
(Winterer & Weinberger, 2004)?
Furthermore, while enormous progress has been made
regarding flexible, self-organising cognitive control, without
the need for a homunculus (Rougier et al., 2005; O’Reilly &
Frank, 2006), it remains to be seen whether it is prudent to
abandon TD Learning, which has been shown to be an
effective model of RPE (see above), or whether the problems
in the break down of chaining can be overcome by some
other means.

References
Abi-Dhargham, A. (2004) Do we still believe in the
dopamine hypothesis? New data bring new evidence
Neuropsychopharmacology, 7 (supplement 1), S1-S5.
Alexander, G. E., & Delong, M. R. (1985) Microstimulation
of the primate neostriatum. Somatotopic organization of

2267

striatal microexcitable zones and their relation to neuronal
response properties. J. Neurophysiol. 53: 1417–1430.
Berridge, K.C., & Robinson, T.E. (1998) What is the role of
dopamine in reward: hedonic impact, reward learning, or
incentive salience? Brain Research Reviews 28, 309-369.
Bilder et al. (2000) Neuropsychology of first-episode
schizophrenia: initial characterization and clinical
correlates. Am. J. Psychiatry, 157(4), 549-559.
Braver, T.S., Barch, D.M., & Cohen, J.D. (1999) Cognition
and control in schizophrenia: A computational model of
dopamine and prefrontal function. Biological Psychiatry,
46, 312-328.
Brunel, N., & Wang, X. (2001) Effects of neuromodulation in
a corticalnetwork model of object working memory
dominated by recurrent inhibition. J. Computational
Neuroscience, 11, 63-85.
Carlsson, A., Waters, N., Holm-Waters, S., Tedroff, J.,
Nilsson, M., & Carlsson, M.L. (2001) Interactions between
monoamines, glutamate and GABA in Schizophrenia. Ann.
Rev.Pharm. Toxicol,41(237), 237-60.
Cohen, J.D., & Servan-Schreiber, D. (1992) Context, Cortex,
and Dopamine: A Connectionist Approach to Behavior and
Biology in Schizophrenia. Psychological Review 1, 45-77.
Daw, N.D., Niv, Y., & Dayan, P. (2005) Uncertainty-based
competition between prefrontal and dorsolateral striatal
systems for behavioural control. Nature Neuroscience,
8(12), 1704-1711.
Durstewitz, D., Kelc, M., & Gunturkun, O. (1999) A
neurocomputational theory of the dopaminergic modulation
of working memory functions. Journal of Neuroscience,
19(7), 2807-2822.
Durstewitz, D., Seamans, J.K., & Sejnowski, T.J. (2000)
Dopamine mediated stabilization of delay-period activity in
a network model of prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiology,
83, 1733-1750.
Frank, M.J., (2005) Dynamic Dopamine Modulation in the
Basal Ganglia: A Neurocomputational Account of
Cognitive Deficits in Medicated and Nonmedicated
Parkinsonism. J. of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 51-72.
Harvey, P.D., Koren, D., Reichenberg, A., & Bowie, C.R.
(2005) Negative Symptoms and Cognitive Deficits: What
is the nature of their Relationship?, Schizophrenia Bulletin,
(Advanced access 12 /10/05).
Hazy, T.E., Frank, M.J., & O’Reilly, R.C (In Press)
Banishing the homunculus: Making working memory
work. Neuroscience.
Hollerman, J.R., & Schultz, W. (1998) Dopamine neurons
report an error in the temporal prediction of reward
during learning. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 304-309.
Kapur, S., (2003) Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: A
framework linking biology, phenomenology, and
pharmacology in schizophrenia. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 160(1), 13-23.

McClure, S.M., Berns, G.S., & Montague, P.R. (2003)
Temporal prediction errors in a passive learning task
activate human striatum. Neuron, 38, 339-346.
McClure, S.M., Daw, N.D., & Montague, P.R., (2003) A
computational substrate for incentive salience. Trends in
Neuroscience 26(8), 423-428.
McKenna, P.J. (1997) Schizophrenia and related syndromes.
Hove: Psychology Press.
Maher, B.A. (1988) Anomalous experience and delusional
thinking: The logic of explanations. In T.F.Oltmanns and
B.A. Maher (Eds.), Delusional beliefs (pp. 15-33), New
York: Wiley.
Montague, P.R., Hyman, S.E., & Cohen, J.D. (2004)
Computational roles for dopamine in behavioral control.
Nature 431, 760-767.
O’Doherty, J.P., Dayan, P., Friston, K., Critchley, H., &
Dolan, R.J. (2003) Temporal difference models and
reward-related learning in the human brain. Neuron, 38,
329-337.
O’Doherty, J.P., Dayan, P., Schultz, J., Deichmann, R.,
Friston, K., & Dolan, R.J (2004) Dissociable roles of
ventral and dorsal striatum in instrumental conditioning.
Science, 304, 452-454.
O’Reilly, R.C., & Frank, M.J. (2006) Making working
memory work: A computational model of learning in the
prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia. Neural Computation
vol 18(2), 283-328.
O’Reilly, R.C., & Munakata, Y. (2000) Computational
Explorations in Cognitive Neuroscience: Understanding
the mind by simulating the brain. MIT Press.
Rougier, N.P., Noelle, D.C., Braver, T.S., Cohen, J.D., &
O’Reilly, R.C. (2005) Prefrontal cortex and flexible
cognitive control: Rules without symbols. PNAS, 102(20),
7738-7343.
Schultz, W. (1998) Predictive reward signal of dopamine
neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 80, 1-27.
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., Montague, P.R. (1997) A Neural
substrate of prediction and reward. Science, 275: 5306,
1593-1599.
Seymour et al. (2004) Temporal difference models describe
higher-order learning in humans. Nature,429, 664-667.
Simpson J, Done D.J., Valeé-Tourangeau (1998) An
Unreasoned Approach: A Critique of Research on
Reasoning and Delusions. Cog. Neuropsychiatry, 3, 1-20.
Suri, R.E., & Schultz, W. (1999) A neural network model
with dopamine-like reinforcement signal that learns a
spatial delayed response task. Neurosci., 91(3), 871-890.
Sutton, R.S. (1988) Learning to Predict by the Methods of
Temporal Differences. Machine Learning 3, 9-44.
Sutton, R.S., & Barto, A.G. (1998) Reinforcement learning,
MIT Press.
Winterer, G., & Weinberger, D.R. (2004) Genes, dopamine
and cortical signal-to-noise ratio in schizophrenia. Trends
in Neurosciences, 27(11), 683-690.

2268

