UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ideals Aren't Always Typical: Dissociating Goodness-of-Exemplar From Typicality Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7d93m5r3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Holyoak, Keith J.
Hummel, John E.
Kittur, Aniket

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ideals Aren’t Always Typical: Dissociating Goodness-of-Exemplar
From Typicality Judgments
Aniket Kittur (nkittur@ucla.edu)
Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles CA 90095

John E. Hummel (jehummel@psych.uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, Urbana Champagne, Urbana IL 61820
The standard way in which typicality is measured is
through goodness-of-exemplar (GOE) judgments; for example, “How good an example is item A of category B?” This
measure is so universally accepted that the concept of typicality is often introduced as synonymous with category
goodness. For example, a classic paper on categorization
asserts, “Instead of being equivalent, the members of a category vary in how good an example (or how typical) they are
of their category” (Barsalou, 1985, p. 629).
The reason that typicality and GOE are so often considered equivalent is quite simple: in most studies of categorization they are indistinguishable. However (and, we argue,
not coincidentally), most studies of categorization also use
categories structured by central tendencies and represented
by simple features.

Abstract
Items that are rated good examples of a category have generally been assumed to be highly typical as well. However,
most previous studies have used categories defined by simple
features in which exemplar goodness and typicality are
strongly related. We report a study using categories based on
the relationships between features instead of the features
themselves, allowing manipulation of relational ideals independent of featural central tendencies. Goodness-of-exemplar
(GOE) judgments were based on relational ideals, whereas
typicality judgments were based on a mix of ideals and featural central tendencies. These results indicate that exemplar
goodness and typicality can lead to two distinct forms of
graded category structure, and should not be treated as
equivalent.
Keywords: categorization, category learning, similarity, relations, typicality, goodness-of-exemplar

Central Tendencies versus Ideals

Introduction

Central tendency views of category structure have been
dominant for the last three decades. The exemplars of a
category structured by central tendency are considered better members the more similar they are to the “center” of the
category. This similarity measure may be discrete, such as
the number of shared and unshared properties between exemplars represented as lists of features (Rosch & Mervis,
1975), or continuous, such as the distance from a dot pattern
prototype (Posner & Keele, 1970). It may be calculated by
the distance between two items in a hierarchy (Lynch, Coley,
& Medin, 2000), by the distance between two points in a
stimulus space (Ashby & Gott, 1988), or by many other
methods. However, a fundamental assumption of a central
tendency structure is that the further from the “center” an
exemplar gets, the worse an example of the category it becomes. Importantly, we will refer to “central tendencies”
here as those metrics that depend only on the distribution of
individual features. These may include such metrics as familiarity, frequency of instantiation, shared features, and
distance from a prototype or exemplars1. All of these can be
calculated without reference to other categories, goals, or
relations.
However, central tendencies do not appear to define all
categories. Armstrong, Gleitman, and Gleitman (1983)

One of the most robust findings in categorization research
is the graded structure of categories. Every member of a
category is not considered an equally good example of the
category; instead, items lie on a spectrum of category goodness (Rips, Shoben, & Smith, 1973; Rosch & Mervis, 1975).
For example, a robin is considered by American undergraduates to be a better example of a bird than is an ostrich
or a penguin.
This graded goodness-of-example effect is known as
“typicality”, and there is a large body of work supporting its
influence on categorization. Object classification speed
increases with typicality (Rips et al., 1973); for example,
people are fast to affirm that a robin is a bird, but slower to
affirm that a chicken (a less typical bird) is. More typical
items are generated before less typical ones (Mervis, Catlin
& Rosch, 1976). People are more likely to extend inferences when the source of the inference is a typical category
member rather than an atypical one (Rips, 1975). Category
learning is faster when typical rather than atypical items are
presented earlier in the sequence (Mervis & Pani, 1980; see
also Posner & Keele, 1968). In fact, the prevalence of typicality effects in categorization has led some researchers to
say that “if one compares different category members and
does not find an effect of typicality, it suggests that there is
something wrong with – or at least unusual about – the experiment” (Murphy, 2002, p. 24).

1

We do not try to distinguish between prototype and exemplar
theories here, as both predict that items further from the central
tendency of the category will be considered worse exemplars.

429

common one near the middle. Even when theorists have
posited an influence of ideals on category goodness, the
basic assumption that GOE judgments and typicality are
identical has remained unchallenged. For example, Barsalou (1985) and Lynch et al. (2000) found evidence that ideals influence GOE judgments, but did not distinguish GOE
and typicality.
The present study examined whether the assumption that
GOE and typicality judgments are equivalent holds true in
categories defined by relations rather than features. Participants first learned two contrasting relational categories
through classification learning. They then made forcedchoice GOE or typicality judgments (varied betweensubjects) for stimuli in which relational ideal and featural
central tendency information were independently manipulated. Differences in choice preferences across the two
tasks would reveal non-equivalencies between typicality and
category goodness judgments. Preferences for specific
comparisons within task would provide information on how
graded central tendencies relate to category membership.

found that even in categories with supposedly all-or-none
membership (such as female), participants would still rate
the GOE of within-category members differently (e.g., they
would rate mother higher than princess). Bourne (1982)
found a similar difference between categorization and GOE
judgments in logically-defined categories of geometric
stimuli. Such data create difficulties for views of category
membership as defined by graded exemplar goodness or
typicality, since membership in the category does not appear
to be defined by the graded structure.
Furthermore, some categories have ideal exemplars distinct from their central tendencies as defined by frequency
of feature occurrence. For example, the best example of a
food to eat when on a diet may have zero calories, even
though no food may actually achieve that ideal (Barsalou,
1983). Ideals have been shown to be a better determinant of
category goodness than central tendencies in goal-based
categories such as “foods to eat on a diet” and “ways to hide
from the Mafia” (Barsalou, 1983, 1985). Ideals may define
category goodness even in natural categories. Lynch et al.
(2000) found that tree experts used ideals instead of central
tendencies to make GOE ratings for individual trees,
whereas novices used measures such as familiarity. Similarly, Burnett et al. (2005) showed that expert fishermen
based their GOE judgments of freshwater fish on ideal desirability rather than centrality. Hampton (1981) found that
central tendencies were not a good predictor of GOE for
abstract categories. In a study using generated faces as
stimuli, Goldstone, Steyvers and Rogosky (2003) showed
that people tended to categorize based on centrality when
the target category was learned independent of other categories, but were best able to categorize the extreme ideals
(caricatures) when the category was learned in relation to a
alternative contrast category.
To characterize category goodness in ideal-based categories, it does not suffice to consider the features of a single
category’s exemplars; rather, such categories appear to be
defined by the relations their exemplars instantiate. For
example, in both the Barsalou (1983, 1985) and Lynch et al.
(2000) studies, categories were defined by the relations between an exemplar and the user’s goals; and in the stimuli
used by Goldstone et al. (2003), category goodness was
defined in relation to the prototype of the competing category.
It seems that categories defined by individual features, or
without reference to other categories, naturally lead to category structures based on central tendency, as the distribution
of their features provides the only possible metric by which
to measure exemplar similarity. However, when categories
involve relations, two distinct measures become available:
how well an exemplar fits a relational ideal, and the closeness of its features to the central tendency of the category
distribution. In this case it is possible that typicality and
GOE judgments are not identical, and instead measure different types of graded structure. Specifically, an item with
high category “goodness” may lie on the extreme end of a
graded scale, whereas a very “typical” item may be a very

Method
Subjects. 90 University of California, Los Angeles undergraduates participated as partial fulfillment of a course requirement.
Stimuli. Simple geometric shape stimuli were chosen to
minimize the effects of prior knowledge, expertise, and
goals. The stimuli were composed of two overlapping
shapes, an octagon and a square. Each category was defined
by the value of a single relation between the octagon and the
square; e.g., the octagon being larger than the square might
define an exemplar as a member of category A, whereas
being smaller than the square would define it as a member
of category B (see Figure 1). Either the relative size or the
relative shade of the two shapes was used to define the categories (between-subject manipulation). Stimuli were presented and responses collected using a custom Matlab script
on Apple Macintosh computers.
Examples of category A

Examples of category B

Figure 1. Examples of category members where the defining relation is relative size. These are only a small subset of the possible
exemplars for each category.

Procedure. Participants first learned to classify stimuli into
their respective categories through trial and error, with feedback after each trial. They performed a minimum of 200
classification trials, stopping after they reached a criterion of
12 trials correct in a row. During this phase stimuli were
generated from a limited range of feature values.

430

relied on featural central tendencies (or vice versa), we
would expect a difference in participant choice in the R+Fvs. R-F+ condition (with the central tendency measure favoring the R-F+ option and the relational measure favoring
R+F-). Less marked differences would be manifested in an
advantage in the R+F+ vs. R-F- comparison for the R+F+
item (which dominates on both features and relations), and
in a disadvantage in the R+F- vs. R-F+ condition for the
R+F- item (which would be poorer due to its non-central
features).
The second comparison group comprises the two exemplar pairs in which the relations were either both consistent
with the given category or both inconsistent. In such cases
the only manipulated difference was whether the items had
novel, extreme features or seen, central features. However,
there is a subtle difference, which is evident from examining
the exemplars in the R+F+ vs. R+F- pair (the top right pair
in Figure 2). In terms of central tendencies the R+F+ item
dominates: its features have been seen before, and they instantiate a relation of similar magnitude to those previously
seen. However, the R+F- item better exemplifies the relational ideal that defines its category: its octagon is more
bigger than its square than is the R+F+ item. Thus even
though both items are members of the category, the two
possibilities for graded structure lead to different possible
choices, based on featural central tendencies (R+F+) or relational ideals (R+F-). If GOE judgments differ in withincategory
graded
structure

Following classification learning, participants engaged in
a forced-choice test phase in which they chose between two
exemplars based on either typicality or on category goodness. For each exemplar, participants in the typicality condition were asked “which of these is more typical?” of a
particular category, while those in the category goodness
condition were asked “which of these is a better example?”
of a given category.
Both the relational idealness and the featural central tendency of each exemplar could be separately manipulated
during the test phase. An exemplar’s defining relation could
be either consistent (R+) or inconsistent (R-) with the given
category. It could also have features that were from either
the limited range of values seen during training (F+) or extreme values outside of it (F-). The resulting exemplar possibilities (R+F+, R-F+, R+F-, R-F-) were crossed to generate six possible combinations of exemplar pairs (see Figure
2). Two exemplar pairs were different in both their features
and relations, two differed only in their relations, and two
differed only in their features. Each participant judged 128
exemplar pairs, with the order of the pairs and the placement
of each exemplar in the pair pseudorandomized for each
participant.
Two key groups of comparisons test how GOE and typicality judgments relate to relational and featural information.
The first group consists of the four comparisons in which
one exemplar has a category-consistent relation while the
other exemplar’s relation is category-inconsistent (the four
comparisons on the left in Figure 2). This comparison set
allows us to examine the interactions between relations and
features by always having the relations differ while manipulating feature centrality. For example, if GOE judgments
relied on relational information but typicality judgments
∆ Relations + Features

∆ Relations (only)

∆ Features (only)

R+F+ vs R-F-

R+F+ vs R-F+

R+ F+ vs R+F-

R+F- vs R-F-

R-F+ vs R-F-

Category A

R+F- vs R-F+

Figure 2. Diagram of exemplar pairs combinations shown during test for a category defined by the octagon being bigger than the square.
R+ = relation consistent with category; R- = relation inconsistent with category; F+ = seen, central features; F- = new, extreme features.
Actual pairs were instantiated with heterogeneous feature and relation values; examples are for illustration purposes only.

431

1

GOE

Typicality

0.9
0.8

Choice ratio

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
R+F+ vs R-F-

(a)

R+F- vs R-F+

R+F+ vs R-F+

R+F- vs R-F-

R+F+ vs R+F-

(b)

Relationally Different

R-F+ vs R-F-

Relationally Equivalent

Figure 3 (a). Proportion of responses favoring the relationally consistent item. R+ = relation consistent with category; R- = relation inconsistent with category; F+ = seen, central features; F- = new, extreme features. Error bars are one standard error above and below the
mean. (b) Proportion of responses for items with seen, central features in comparisons where both items were either relationally consistent
or inconsistent. The R+F+ vs. R+F- condition was a strong test between ideals and central tendencies.
30

30

(a) GOE

20
15
10
5

(b) Typicality

25
Number of participants

Number of participants

25

0

20
15
10
5
0

0 - 0.2

0.2 - 0.4

0.4 - 0.6

0.6 - 0.8

0.8 - 1.0

0 - 0.2

0.2 - 0.4

0.4 - 0.6

0.6 - 0.8

0.8 - 1.0

Item 1 choice ratio (R+F+ vs R+F-)

Item 1 choice ratio (R+F+ vs R+F-)

Figure 4. Histogram across quintile of mean (per subject) item responses to the R+F+ vs. R+F- comparison for (a) GOE and (b) typicality
conditions. Low values indicate participants who consistently chose using ideals (the R+F- item) and high values indicate participants who
based their choice consistently on central tendencies (the R+F+ item). Middle values correspond to participants who gave mixed responses.

There were two main groups of comparisons in the test
phase: the four comparisons in which the relations differed
between exemplars, and the two in which the relations were
equivalent. Every comparison in the first group has one
exemplar with a category-consistent relation and one with a
category-inconsistent relation. By manipulating the featural
information for each comparison we can test how featural
central tendencies affect category membership decisions.
Participants’ choices for this group are shown in Figure 3a.
Participants in both the GOE and typicality conditions
showed a strong tendency to choose the exemplar with the

from typicality judgments, we would expect to see a difference in participant choice for this comparison.

Results
During the training phase there was no significant difference between the GOE and typicality groups on the
number of trials needed to reach criterion, t(89) = .19, p =
0.66. This finding is unsurprising, since the training phases
were identical for the two groups. However, it does verify
that group differences in learning were not responsible for
differences between conditions in the test phase.
432

significantly different, χ2(16, N = 44) = 28.55, p = 0.027.
The bimodal distribution of participants in the typicality
condition suggests that most participants consistently used
either ideals or central tendencies to make their judgments,
but few used a blend of strategies.

category-consistent relation (by t-test, all p < .001). A 2x4
ANOVA (response type x comparison) revealed no significant main effects or interactions (p > 0.10).
Of particular interest are choice judgments on the R+F- vs.
R-F+ exemplar pair, which directly pitted relational category membership against featural central tendencies. For
this pair choice preference was strongly based on relational
category membership, with no discernible negative effect of
poorer match to central tendencies in comparison to other
conditions. Nor was there any noticeable enhancement
effect in the R+F+ vs. R-F- case, where one exemplar dominated the other in both relational goodness and featural central tendencies. In summary, both GOE and typicality
judgments appeared to be based exclusively on relational
information when differentiating category members from
non-members, with no measurable effect of featural information.
The second comparison group was comprised of the two
exemplar pairs in which the relations were either both consistent with the given category or both inconsistent (the two
comparisons on the right in Figure 2). In such cases the only
manipulated difference was whether the items had novel,
extreme features or seen, central features.
For the R-F+ vs. R-F- comparison both relations were inconsistent with the category; however, the R-F+ exemplar
had central features while the R-F- exemplar had extreme
features. In this case the R-F+ exemplar is both the better
central tendency choice (with previously seen features) and
the better ideal (since its relation is “less” against the ideal
than that of the other exemplar). As expected, participants
in both conditions showed significant preference for the RF+ exemplar (see Figure 3b).
The R+F+ vs. R+F- exemplar pair provided the key comparison in this study. Any differences between central tendency and ideal judgments would likely be expressed here,
as the R+F+ exemplar was the better central tendency
choice while the R+F- exemplar was the better ideal choice
(as its relation was of greater magnitude than the other exemplar). Since both were members of the same relational
category, participants’ choices would also reveal differences
in within-category graded structure. Analysis of the R+F+
vs. R+F- comparison showed a significance difference in
participants’ choices (see Figure 3b). In the GOE condition
there was a strong preference for the ideal (R+F-). This
preference did not hold for the typicality condition, which
generated mean choice judgments close to chance. However, this metric is insufficient to characterize participants’
choices: it does not indicate whether the near-chance performance was due to participants changing their minds
about which response to make within the session, or to different participants using different types of information to
make consistent within-session responses that average to
near-chance overall. To test these alternatives, we analyzed
responses to the R+F+ vs. R+F- comparison on a per-subject
basis. Each participants was assigned to a quintile corresponding to the mean of their responses, resulting in the
histograms shown in Figure 4 The two distributions were

Discussion
This experiment demonstrates that GOE judgments are
distinct from judgments of typicality in categories not defined by featural central tendencies. Specifically, when
graded category membership could be based on either relational ideals or featural central tendencies, participants
asked to make GOE judgments based their responses on
ideals whereas those asked to make typicality judgments
used both ideals and central tendency information.
Importantly, although in typicality judgments many participants used feature central tendency information in deciding between two members of the same category, when the
choice was between two members of different categories
participants chose based on relational information – even if
that meant choosing the item with the poorer match to central tendencies. Thus typicality only appeared to play a role
in determining the graded structure within a category,
whereas category membership operated at an earlier stage.
These data suggest a two-stage model of categorization, in
which items are first judged for category membership and
then graded within the category. Furthermore, it is striking
that graded structure can be based on either ideals or centrality depending on task demands, even though learning
procedures for the GOE and typicality conditions were identical. Our results provide strong evidence that the two types
of graded structure were learned in parallel.
These findings are inconsistent with the hypothesis that
GOE judgments are equivalent to typicality, despite this
equivalence being assumed in many studies of category
learning. We believe there are two reasons why such a fundamental assumption has previously remained unchallenged.
First, most studies examining typicality and GOE as separate measures used categories based on properties of individual features (e.g., Nosofsky, 1991; Rips & Collins, 1993).
These studies found typicality and GOE judgments to be
very similar. For example, Rips and Collins found that
typicality and category likelihood were either indistinguishable or that typicality was a blend of category likelihood and
similarity judgments (neither of which accounts for the data
in the present experiment). These investigators were trying
to distinguish between centrality and frequency, both of
which are dependent on individual feature distributions. In
contrast, we found that typicality and category goodness
have different graded structures dependent on central tendencies and ideals.
Second, those studies that did use categories in which
typicality and GOE can be separated (i.e., where category
ideals do not match central tendencies) used GOE but not
typicality ratings (e.g., Barsalou, 1983,1985; Lynch et al.,
2000). For example, Lynch et al. found that GOE ratings
for trees by experts were based on ideals such as tallness;

433

nonetheless, the title of their study begins: “Tall is typical.”
We argue that tallness may not be typical; instead, tallness
may be an ideal used for GOE judgments, yet at the same
time typicality could be based on central tendency measures.
Our data may also account for the puzzling findings mentioned of Armstrong et al. (1983) and Bourne (1982), in
which graded GOE judgments were not consistent with allor-none category membership judgments. The two-stage
categorization process suggested here may account for these
results, since exemplars are first categorized as members or
nonmembers (according to their relations) and then rated for
typicality or GOE (through graded structure). According to
this hypothesis we would expect to see graded structure for
within-category comparisons, and all-or-none judgments for
between-category comparisons, which is the pattern found
in our data.
In the present study we controlled for prior experience
and knowledge by using artificial categories and stimuli,
whereas most prior studies involving categories based on
ideals have been based on user goals (Barsalou, 1983, 1985),
prior knowledge, and pre-experimental expertise (Lynch et
al., 2000; Proffitt et al., 2000). We believe that the present
methodology provides an important step towards identifying
the specific conditions giving rise to the dissociation between GOE and typicality judgments. However, it will be
important to test whether the results found here generalize to
real-world categories.
In conclusion, we have shown that GOE and typicality
judgments are not the same, and may be based on different
kinds of graded structure. Our results suggest a reinterpretation of typicality for those categories that are not based on
properties of individual features. The present findings support a two-stage model of categorization, blending classical
all-or-none category membership with multiple types of
within-category graded structure. More work is needed to
characterize the interactions of feature-based and relational
information as they relate to common measures of categorization such as typicality, GOE, category membership, and
similarity.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by NSF grant SES0350920 to KH. Special thanks to Patricia Cheng and Barbara Spellman for helpful comments and discussion.

References
Armstrong, S. L., Gleitman, L. R., & Gleitman, H. (1983).
What some concepts might not be. Cognition, 13, 263308.
Ashby, F. G., & Gott, R. E. (1988). Decision rules in the
perception and categorization of multidimensional stimuli.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 14, 33-53.
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory & Cognition, 11, 211-227.

434

Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded structure in categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 629-654.
Bourne, L. E. (1982). Typicality effects in logically defined
categories. Memory & Cognition, 10, 3-9.
Burnett, R. C., Medin, D. L., Ross, N. O., & Blok, S. V.
(2005). Ideal is typical. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 3-10.
Goldstone, R. L., Steyvers, M., & Rogosky, B. J. (2003).
Conceptual interrelatedness and caricatures. Memory &
Cognition, 31, 169-180.
Hampton, J. A. (1981). An investigation of the nature of
abstract concepts. Memory & Cognition, 9, 149-156.
Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Medin, D. L. (2000). Tall is
typical: Central tendency, ideal dimensions, and graded
category structure among tree experts and novices. Memory & Cognition, 28, 41-50.
Mervis, C. B., Catlin, J., & Rosch, E. (1976). Relationships
among goodness-of-example, category norms, and word
frequency. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 7, 283284.
Mervis, C. B., & Pani, J. R. (1980). Acquisition of basic
object categories. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 496-522.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1991). Typicality in logically defined
categories: Exemplar-similarity versus rule instantiation.
Memory & Cognition, 19, 131-150.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77,
353-363.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1970). Retention of abstract
ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 83, 304-308.
Proffitt, J. B., Coley, J. D., & Medin, D. L. (2000). Expertise and category-based induction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 26, 811828.
Rips, L. J. (1975). Inductive judgments about natural categories. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
14, 665-681.
Rips, L. J., Shoben, E. J., & Smith, E. E. (1973). Semantic
distance and the verification of semantic relations. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12, 1-20.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.

