UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit Familiarity Regulates Person Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8242m5nm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Garcia-Marques, Teresa
Mackie, Diane

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit Familiarity Regulates Person Perception
Teresa Garcia-Marques (gmarques@ispa.pt)
Instituto Superior de Psicologia Aplicada, Rua Jardim do Tabaco, 34,
1149-041, Lisboa, Portugal.

Diane Mackie (mackie@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9660
Abstract
This paper reports research showing the impact of implicit
familiarity on information processing. We predicted that
implicit familiarity would reduce analytic processing. As our
studies involved person perception, we predicted that
familiarity would reduce attention to individuated information
and increase the impact of category labels on judgments about
a target person. In two studies participants read either
incriminating or exculpatory information about a defendant in
a criminal case and made judgments of guilt. In Experiment 1,
participants were subliminally exposed to the defendant’s
photo, to another matched photo, or saw no photo before
reading the evidence. Those familiar with the defendant’s
photo used the individuated (evidentiary) information less. In
Experiment 2, participants were subtly made familiar or not
with the incriminating and exculpatory information itself, and
the defendant was described either as a priest or as a skinhead.
Familiarity with the information reduced attention to its
content, increasing reliance on category information.

Introduction
On the basis of research in both cognitive and social
psychology, we have suggested that a subjective feeling of
familiarity regulate information processing, specifically by
making analytic processing less likely (Garcia-Marques &
Mackie, 2001). We thus subscribe to a general dual process
view that human information processing involves two
distinct computation modes (see Sloman, 1996): nonanalytic processing, (characterized by the production of
global or generic response to a focal stimulus) and analytic
processing (where the particulars of a situation are carefully
and systematically analyzed). A match between a stimulus
and a memory representations, as occurs when a stimulus is
re-encountered, results in an "ease" or "fluency" of
processing accompanied by an (implicit) feeling of
“similarity,” “recognition,” or “familiarity” (Eich, 1982;
Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984; Hintzman, 1988; Jacoby &
Dallas, 1981; Murdock, 1982). This feeling of familiarity,
we argue, turns down analytic processing, so that limited
analytic processing resources can be husbanded for novel
situations rather than wasted in situations that have already
been dealt with (Johnston & Hawley, 1994).
These arguments are based on finding in a range of areas.
Research on problem solving, for example, has
demonstrated that a “feeling of knowing” regulates the
process underlying problem solving (Reder & Ritter, 1992;
Schunn, et al., 1997). When individuals “felt” that

1346

particular problems or problem types are familiar, they were
more likely to believe they could be answered by mere
retrieval, rather than by resource intensive computation.
Familiar problems made participants "feel" that they "knew"
the answer, and thus promoted less effortful, top-down,
processing strategies. Unfamiliar problems, in contrast,
triggered more effortful bottom-up computational strategies.
In this domain, then, processors switched between nonanalytic and analytic processing modes on the basis of their
perceived familiarity with the situation.
In a parallel way, previous exposure to a persuasive appeal
decreases the likelihood of its analytic processing (GarciaMarques & Mackie, 2001; Claypool, et al. 2004). In typical
dual processing persuasion paradigms, adequately motivated
participants systematically process the content of persuasive
appeals: such analytic processing is indexed by the fact that
message recipients are differentially persuaded by strong
and compelling as opposed to weak and specious
arguments. In contrast, however, when we subtly exposed
people to messages multiple times, they processed the
previously encountered messages much more superficially,
eliminating the differential acceptance of strong and weak
arguments, even though they were more familiar with them.
In another context, we (Smith, et al., 2005) also
demonstrated the counterintuitive effect that familiarity
(manipulated via prior exposure) increases stereotyping. In
two experiments, participants saw photos of multiple targets
accompanied by an occupational label and some mildly
counter-stereotypic information. Participants were asked to
judge each target and were given the opportunity to do so
using both stereotypic and stereotype-irrelevant traits.
Some of these targets had been seen in an earlier part of the
experiment and some of them were novel. Compared to
judgments about novel targets, judgments made about
targets seen before were significantly more stereotypic.
Once again then, target familiarity appeared to induce less
analytic processing (use of the counter-stereotypic
information) and greater non-analytic processing (reliance
on stereotype labels). When in the second experiment
participants were reminded of the possibility that they might
have seen some of the targets before, this effect disappeared,
once again implicating familiarity as the crucial mediator.
On the basis of these findings, we extended our claim in
this research to the impression or person perception
literature. According to dual process models of person
impression, judgments of a target can be based either on
analytic individuation, the piecemeal processing and
combination of the target’s individual characteristics, or on

non-analytic categorical processing, an inference of target
characteristics based on category membership (Brewer ,
1988; Neuberg & Fiske, 1987). Several kinds of evidence
verify that piecemeal individuation is more analytic
(effortful and systematic) than category-based processing.
First, participants who engage in piecemeal processing of a
target’s attributes spend more time looking at and take
longer to read and rate the information (Fiske, et al, 1987;
Neuberg & Fiske, 1987) than do other participants. Second,
piecemeal individuation of target relevant information is
undermined by cognitive capacity constraints whereas
category-based judgment is not (Bodenhausen, 1990).
We conducted two impression formation experiments to
test the idea that judgments made under conditions of
familiarity reflect individuating information presented about
the target less than judgments made under novel conditions.
The experiments used manipulations of previous exposure
to different aspects of the processing situation to show that
it was the general and diffuse feeling of familiarity triggered
by re-encountering a stimulus, rather than any particular
kind of re-exposure, that regulated use of analytic and nonanalytic information processing modes.

Experiment I
In the first experiment we used prior subliminal exposure
to the photo of a crime suspect to promote a feeling of
familiarity during later presentation of individuating
information relevant to the defendant’s guilt or innocence.
Although mere, and especially unconscious, exposure
typically increases liking for the familiar target (Zajonc,
1968), our claim was different. Compared to conditions in
which such a feeling is not activated, we expected the
familiarly induced by prior exposure to reduce the impact of
individuating information on judgments of guilt.

Method
Participants and Design
Participants were 144 undergraduates (72% females) at the
ISPA (Portugal), randomly distributed to the six cells of a
between-subjects factorial design 3 (no prior exposure vs.
prior exposure vs. irrelevant prior exposure) x 2
(incriminating vs. exculpatory evidence) x 2(stimulus
replication: target face A or B).

Procedure
Participants seated at computers were first asked to
complete a “visual perception” study which served to
manipulate prior exposure to the target face.
Manipulation of prior exposure. Participants focused on a
fixation point (+) centered in the screen and pressed the
space bar to activate presentation of a sequence of five
different pictures (e.g. a tree, a car, a house, a rabbit, a cat).
Each image was presented for variable times ranging from
30 to 70 msec. Between the third and fourth pictures
participants were exposed for 18msec to a blank screen, the
target photo, or a matched photo. To replicate across
stimulus materials, two photos (A or B) were used as both
the target and a matched control across conditions.

Participants then made several judgments. They first
estimated how many objects, how many color images, and
how many images of living things had been presented.
They then named the image presented for the briefest time
and the picture presented for the longest time. These
questions allowed us to assess whether participants were
conscious of the subliminal presentation of the face or not
(if they were, the answer to the frequency estimate about
living things would increase from 3 to 4, for example).
Three sequences of five objects were presented allowing 3
subliminal repetitions of the target.
Participants then completed a “second study,” in which
they identified the name of 10 European countries as
quickly as possible (a filler task).
Person impression task: Participants were told that the
“third” study investigated people's ability to serve on a jury
hearing a criminal case. The instructions stressed the need
for concentration and that all the information about the case
should be read carefully. Following Bodenhausen and
Lichtenstein (1987), we told participants they would be
receiving information about a case (“Criminal Proceedings
Nº 190-23271”) described as an assault occurring at a
certain time and place and committed by an unidentified
individual who ran from the scene leaving the victim
unconscious. Participants then viewed a photo of the alleged
perpetrator (half saw Photo A and half saw Photo B)
accompanied by a description of the suspect as a 25-yearold single male residing in Lisbon. The information states
that the accused denied the charges and was free on bail.
Presentation of individuating information. A majority of
either extenuating or incriminating individuating
information was then presented on the following screen in
the guise of a brief summary of the investigation. Seven
pieces of information about the crime were presented. In
the exculpating condition, participants saw 4 exculpatory
(e), 2 incriminating (i) and 1 neutral (n) item (in the
following order: eiieeen). In the incriminating condition, 4
incriminating, 2 exculpatory and one neutral item were
presented (in the following order: ieeiiin). An example of an
exculpatory item (in translation) was "No physical evidence
either at the crime scene or on the suspect link him to the
crime." An incriminating item was "The suspect was seen
leaving a coffee shop near the scene of the crime about 10
minutes before the crime was committed." Participants took
“all the time they felt necessary” to read this information.
Dependent variables. Participants were then asked to
make several judgments, all on 9-point scales. Four scales
comprised a measure of the suspect’s perceived guilt. These
items were: the defendant's guilt ("not at all likely to be the
one who did it" to "extremely likely to be the one who did
it"), a proposed verdict (“Sure he’s not-guilty” to “Sure he’s
guilty”), a recommended severity of sentence (“No time in
jail” to “Several years in jail”) and a recommendation
about whether the defendant should be detained in jail prior
to trial (“I am sure that he does not need to be detained” to
“I am sure that it is better to detain him”).

Results and Discussion
The responses of 11 participants suggested that they had
seen the supposedly subliminal stimuli: their data were

1347

excluded from further analysis. Since preliminary analysis
showed no significant effect of the stimulus replication of
target faces, this factor was excluded from the analyses.
Judgments of guilt. Responses to the four items used to
assess guilt (indices α = .70) were averaged, so that higher
numbers reflecting higher guilt. This measure was then
subjected to a 3 (no prior exposure vs. prior exposure vs.
irrelevant prior exposure) x 2 (incriminating vs exculpatory
evidence) between subjects analysis of variance.
The nature of the evidentiary information presented about
the case had a significant impact on judgments of guilt
(F(1,128)=18.70, p<.000; Mse=1.72). Not surprisingly, a
preponderance of incriminating evidence produced higher
judgments of guilt (M=5.42) compared to a preponderance
of exculpating information (M=4.42). This difference also
indicates that the manipulation of information was effective
as intended.
Consistent with our hypothesis, this main effect was
qualified by prior exposure, F(2,128)=2.94, p<.056.
Previous subliminal exposure to the target photo reduced the
impact of the individuating information so that there were
no differences between judgments of guilt rendered in the
presence of either incriminating or exculpating evidence
(Minc= 4.90 , Mexc= 4.62; t(128)=1.399, p<.164). In contrast,
the impact of the individuating information was highly
significant both when either a matched photo (Minc= 5.75 ,
Mexc= 4.09; t(128)=2.42, p<.017) or no photo had been
previously presented (Minc= 5.62 , Mexc= 4.56; t(128)=2.76,
p<.006). Consistent with our expectations, familiarity with
the target person, operationalized as prior subliminal
exposure to his photo, decreased the impact of individuating
information on judgments.
Guilt judgments as function of prior exposure
and nature of individuated information
7
6
5
Guilt
judgments

4
3
2
1
0
No prior

Prior

Irrelevant
prior

Figure 1: Guilt judgments as function of prior exposure and
nature of individuated information, Experiment 1.
There was no evidence of the operation of the mere
exposure effect (the main effect of repetition was F<1) ;
repeated exposure to the stimulus did not induce more
positive judgments overall. Compared to those who saw a
novel target, participants in the prior exposure condition did
weighted incriminating information less heavily in their
guilt judgments (t(128)= 1.94, p<.027; consistent with mere
exposure). However participants in the prior exposure
condition also judged the target with exculpatory
information less positively (t(128)= 1.45, p<.074;
inconsistent with the effect).

These results indicated that prior exposure to a target’s
face, designed to make the target “familiar,” reduced the
impact of individuating information on judgments about that
target. This is consistent with our expectation that prior
exposure activates an implicit feeling of familiarity which
reduces analytic processing. These findings also extend
previous findings. In this case, reduction in analytic
processing was demonstrated after familiarity was induced
via subliminal exposure; in this case participants were not
consciously aware of any repetition. This constituted a
methodological improvement over our previous work, in
which repetition of the stimulus was always supraliminal,
opening the consequent reduction in processing up to other
alternative explanations or interpretations such as boredom
with the repeated stimulus or suspicion that made everyone
careful (or less extreme) with their judgments. Our findings
indicated that judgments made about the target by
participants in the prior exposure condition were less
influenced by the nature of individuating information in the
same way that under conditions of familiarity, attitude
judgments are less influenced by the strong and weak nature
of arguments (Garcia-Marques & Mackie, 2001; Claypool et
al., 2004).
It is important to recognize that this familiarity-triggered
reduction of analytic processing was obtained even under
conditions that neither restricted participants’ capacity nor
undermined their motivation. Participants were allowed to
take as much time as necessary to process the information.
If anything, the context of and instructions given in the
experimental setting might be expected to increase
participants’ motivation to carefully process individuating
information, a factor that can under certain circumstances
disrupt the impact of familiarity on processing (see
Claypool et al., 2004).
In this experiment, when
participants were unaware of the prior exposure, the feeling
of familiarity induced by that exposure nevertheless reduced
analytic processing even when processing motivation and
capacity was high.
These results were strongly consistent with our hypothesis
that prior exposure induces a feeling of familiarity when a
stimulus is re-encountered, and that familiarity reduces
processing.
Nevertheless we wanted to be able to
strengthen the conclusions we could draw about these
processes by providing some further evidence about the
nature of these mechanisms. Our general claim is that
familiarity reduces analytic processing, not that familiarity
has this effect only when operationalized in this particular
way (by re-exposure to the target’s image, for example).
We are not claiming that a target with a “familiar face” is
perceived differently or that a familiar face induces different
processing demands (see e.g. Bruce & Young’s, 1986,
model of face processing), but that the feeling aroused by
perceiving a stimulus as familiar in any way impacts how
information is going to be processed. In our persuasion
studies (Garcia-Marques & Mackie, 2001) participants were
made familiar not with the message source, but with the
persuasive arguments themselves. We argued that it was the
feeling of familiarity associated with being exposed to them
again that engaged non-analytic processing. Generalizing
this reasoning to the current context, we set out to show

1348

Manipulation of repetition of information. During the
interview, the detective first made some general statements
about for example the desirability of getting as much
information as possible about the suspect. He then went on
to give some examples of the kinds of information he
thought it was important to gather (activities, life history,
alibi, etc.) during an investigation. In the previous exposure
conditions, the inspector then went on to give examples that
were closely similar in wording to the items of information
later provided regarding the specific case. Thus, the
inspector said (among other things): “For example, it is
important to know if a suspect is seen leaving the scene of
the crime some minutes before the crime took place” and
“It’s relevant whether or not someone was able to identify
the assailant.” These statements were phrased neutrally
(e.g., saying “whether or not” someone could identify the
aggressor), but were similar to a neutral item, 2 exculpatory
and 2 incriminating items of evidence provided later about
the specific crime for all participants (e.g., one incriminating
item stated that “someone was able to identify the
aggressor”). In the no previous exposure condition the
inspector gave examples that were unrelated to the
evidentiary items later provided (e.g. “it’s important to
locate all the people who might have witnessed the crime”)
Presentation of category and individuating information.
Participants received the same information about the crime,
suspect, and evidence as described in Experiment 1 with the
addition that the brief description of the suspect included
information that he was either a skinhead or a priest. Since
familiarity was manipulated via repletion of the evidence,
no photos of the suspect was presented.
Dependent variables were the same as used in Experiment
1, although all items were rated on more sensitive 11 point
scales. As part of a later general questionnaire, participants
were asked to recall the occupation of the suspect.
Participant motivation was assessed by asking them how
interesting they found participation in this Experiment.

that making participants familiar with the criminal evidence
itself would reduce analytic processing of it. This produces
a counterintuitive prediction and conservative test of our
hypothesis: that repetition of information will reduce rather
than enhance its impact on judgments, even though the
repetition of content makes that content salient. Inducing
familiarity by repeating the evidentiary base also helps
eliminate a possible alternative explanation of the results of
Experiment 1. If repetition made participants focus on the
photo itself as the source of relevant information for the
judgment, they might well have disregarded the content of
the presented information. We expected to eliminate this
possibility in Experiment 2.

Experiment II
In Experiment 2 we induced a general feeling of
familiarity that was focused not on the target but on the
individuating information itself. This was achieved by
repeating the gist of some of the provided evidence in
different parts of the experimental session. Given that both
priming and information integration considerations would
predict that repeated information would have greater impact
on judgments, our prediction that such repetition would
reduce the impact of the repeated information was a strong
test of the hypothesis.
In order to provide a better foundation for the claim that
the reduction in impact of individuating information was the
result of non-analytic processing, we also provided in this
experiment some social category information about the
target. If familiarity reduces analytic processing, it was
expected to both reduce the impact of individuated
information on judgments as well as heighten the impact of
categorical information in judgments, compared to when
people process information about a novel target.

Method
Participants and Design. 73 undergraduates (including 55
females) at ISPA, were randomly distributed to the cells of
a 2 (no previous exposure vs. previous exposure to
information) x 2 (exculpatory vs. incriminating evidence ) x
2 (skinhead vs. priest social category information about the
target) between subjects factorial design. Participants were
run in groups of 5 to 15, with random assignment to
conditions within each session.
Procedure. Participants were once again told that the study
investigated people's abilities to serve as a member of a jury
considering a criminal case, and as in Experiment 1 were
told that they should read all the instructions and
information presented carefully. All the relevant information
was presented in a booklet, which was designed to
reproduce as realistically as possible first, the summary of
an interview with a detective inspector, and second, actual
information about a specific case. The topic of the interview
was the way in which criminal proceedings are usually
conducted, and we used this to provide the opportunity to
repeat the gist of some pieces of evidence in the interview
and in the actual case.

Results and Discussion

Three statistical outliers with regard to guilt judgments
were excluded from further analyses (which also made the
data conform to ANOVA assumptions). Some participants
failed to answer all questions, resulting in different N for
some analyses.
Manipulation Checks. Corroborating the pre-testing, the
suspect was perceived as more likely to be violent when
described as a skinhead (M= 7.04) than as a priest (M=
5.37), F(1,60)=15.22, p<.001. The suspect was also seen as
more violent when incriminating (M=6.91) rather than
exculpatory (M = 5.51) evidence was presented,
F(1,60)=10.64, p<.002, but that did not qualify the category
information effect.
Participants recalled the occupation of the suspect equally
well when he was a priest (90%) and when he was a
skinhead (85%; p<.569). None of the other variables
affected correct identification of the category information.
The criminal trial context and instructions had a positive
impact on participants’ motivation to process information.
Responses to the question of how interesting participants

1349

clear, even when it was the information itself that was
repeated to induce familiarity, this rendered that highly
relevant individuated information less, rather than more,
influential in judgments about a target person. This reduced
sensitivity to individuated information was coupled with a
slight increase in the reliance on category based judgments.

found the study revealed mean motivation to be well above
the midpoint of the scale (M = 7.24, S.d.= 1.85).
Judgments of guilt. Responses to the four items used to
assess guilt (Cronbach alpha = .77) were averaged, (with
higher numbers reflecting higher guilt) and submitted to a 2
(no previous exposure vs. previous exposure of evidence) x
2 (skinhead vs. priest) x 2 (incriminating vs. exculpatory
information) ANOVA.
We tested two related hypotheses. First, we expected the
impact of the individuating evidence to be moderated when
the information was familiar compared to when it was not.
The manipulation of information valence had the expected
impact on judgments, F(1,62)=9.47, p<.003, with
incriminating information leading to higher guilt judgments
overall (M=6.07) than exculpatory information (M=4.81).
As expected, however, this pattern of effects was different
depending on prior exposure as revealed by a priori
contrasts. When there was no prior exposure, participants
judged the defendant guiltier in the incriminating evidence
condition (M=6.21) than in the exculpating evidence
condition, (M=4.35), F(1,62)=10.24, p<.002. This effect of
information was eliminated in the prior exposure condition
(Minc=5.93, Mexc=5.78; F(1,62)=1.29, p<.260). This finding
was once again consistent with the idea that prior exposure
reduced analytic processing. Second, we expected the
impact of category membership on judgments to be
enhanced by familiarity, indicating an increase in nonanalytic processing. In the no prior exposure condition, the
skinhead (M=4.99) and priest (M=5.57) suspects were seen
as equally guilty, F <1. In contrast, and consistent with our
hypothesis, those previously exposed to some of the
information judged the stereotypically aggressive skinhead
to be more guilty (M=6.11) than the stereotypically less
aggressive priest (M= 5.09), F(1,62)=3.09, p<.08.

General Discussion

Guilt judgments as function of prior
exposure and category

We hypothesized that the feeling of familiarity impacts
information processing by decreasing analytic processing.
In two studies, we induced a general diffuse feeling of
familiarity either by subliminally presenting a photo of the
target (Experiment 1) or repeating the relevant individuating
information about the target (Experiment 2). Consistent
with our claim, participants’ judgments in both studies
reflected the quality of the presented information less,
regardless of how familiarity was induced. Further
corroborating our idea, the results of Experiment 2 showed
that participants’ judgments tended to also be more sensitive
to category information whenever they felt the situation to
be familiar.
Prior exposure is known to increase preference and liking,
but this effect was not seen in either Experiment. No main
effect was associated with repetition. Although prior
exposure decreased perceived guilt in the presence of
incriminatory information (perhaps reflecting benevolent,
positive, or liking judgments), it increased perceived guilt in
the presence of exculpatory information in both studies.
The majority of studies emanating from the field of person
perception have focused on the impact of category
activation and use in different social judgments and how
this strategy economizes aspects of information processing,
such as item encoding, resource allocation, and response
generation (e.g. Bodenhausen & Lichtenstein, 1987). One
set of studies (Pendry & Macrae, 1994) has focused on the
roles that motivation and capacity play in perceivers'
tendency to think about others in either an individuated or
category-based manner. Our results, together with those of
Smith et al. (2005), show that although motivation and
capacity are two highly relevant moderators of how
information about a target person is processed, they do not
fully explain the regulation of such dual processing. Our
studies call attention to the importance of a “match”
between received information and stored structures (Fiske &
Neuberg (1990), for processing mode. Our findings go
further, however, by showing that this “match” need not be
limited to just a match of category information. The fact
that such matches induce familiarity and reduce analytic
processing might help explain the impact that feature
typicality has on categorization and stereotyping. For
example, exposure to typical and therefore familiar
Afrocentric facial features has been found to activate
stereotypic inferences (Blair, Judd, & Fallman, 2004).
These effects appear to constitute another example of the
typicality of those features activating familiarity, which in
turn decreases reliance on bottom up processing and
increases reliance on category based processing.
Several aspects of this research warrant further
investigation.
Manipulations of familiarity have an
influence on behavior because such artificially induced

7
6
5
Guilt

4

Skinhead

3
2
1
0
No Previous

Previous

Figure 2. Guilt judgments as function of prior exposure and
category label, Experiment 2.
This pattern of results suggests that inducing a feeling of
familiarity by previously exposure to some aspects of the
evidence reduced the impact of the repeated information
itself on judgments, and at the same time tended to increase
the impact of categorical processing on judgments.
In sum, our central claim was replicated in this
Experiment when feelings of familiarity were induced about
the individuated information itself. As our results make
1350

familiarity interferes with the “natural” role of familiarity in
information processing. However every instance of person
perception involves multiple occurrences of the activation
of familiarity associated with expectancies, which can then
interact with the nature of any information given. For
example, activation of the priest category label might make
information about the kind of crime like the one we used
more surprising than activation of the skinhead label.
Equivalent exculpatory information is perhaps less
surprising when a priest is the suspect than when a skinhead
is a suspect (Skowronski, 2002). Thus the experimental
induction of familiarity might privilege categorical
information (as it reduces analytic and increase non analytic
processing), but the very activation of that information
might activate several other processes that undermine the
feeling of familiarity. Note that the results of our second
Experiment, involving category activation, were not as
strong as the results of the first Experiment, suggesting that
this might be the case. Understanding these effects requires
a more systematic study of how violations of expectancies
undermine experimentally manipulated familiarity.
Research in several fields (problem solving, memory, text
comprehension, attention, perception, and so on) has
repeatedly generated evidence that familiar and unfamiliar
stimuli are processed differently. If that is the case, we
should consider our cognitive system as capable of taking
into account the level of familiarity of either the
environment as a whole or of a stimulus in particular, and of
tuning processing to this diagnostic characteristic. Our claim
is that our cognitive system uses the feeling of familiarity to
turn down bottom up processing and consequently rely more
on top-down processing. When things feel familiar, non
analytic processing appropriately conserves resources. But
any disruption of this feeling of familiarity (such as would
occur if incongruent or unexpected information were
encountered) would again affect processing mode, as
repeatedly demonstrated in the literature (see Johnston &
Hawley, 1994; Stangor & McMillan, 1992).

Acknowledgments
Supported by a Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia
Plurianual ID332 to Teresa Garcia-Marques and by National
Science Foundation Grant #BCS-9975204 to Diane Mackie.

References
Blair, I. V., Judd, C. M., & Fallman, J. L. (2004). The
automaticity of race and Afrocentric facial features in
social judgments. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87, 763 - 778
Bodenhausen, G. V. & Lichtenstein, M. (1987). Social
stereotypes and information-processing strategies
Journal of Pers. and Social Psychology, 52, 871-880.
Bodenhausen, G.V. (1990). Stereotypes as judgmental
heuristics. Psychological Science, 1, 319-322.
Brewer, M. B. (1988). A dual process model of impression
formation. In R. Wyer, & T. Srull (Eds.), Advances in
social cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Bruce, V. & Young, A. (1986). Understanding face
recognition. British Journal of Psyc., 77, 305-327.
Claypool, H. M., Mackie, D. M., Garcia-Marques, T.,
McIntosh, A., & Udall, A. (2004). The effects of
personal relevance and repetition on persuasive
processing, Social Cognition, 22 (3) 310-335.
Eich, J. M. (1982). A composite holographic associative
recall model. Psychological Review, 89, 627-661.
Fiske, S., Neuberg, S., Beattie, A., & Milberg, S. (1987).
Category-based and attribute-based reactions to others.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 23, 399-427
Garcia-Marques, T. Mackie, D. M, Claypool, H.M, &
Garcia-Marques, L. (2004).Positivity can cue familiarity,
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1-9.
Garcia-Marques, T., & Mackie, D. M. (2001). The feeling
of familiarity as a regulator of persuasive processing.
Social Cognition, 19, 9-34.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R.(1984). A retrieval model for both
recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91, 1-67.
Hintzman, D. (1988).
Judgments of frequency and
recognition memory in a multiple-trace memory model.
Psychological Review, 95, 528-551.
Jacoby, L. & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relation between
autobiographical memory and perceptual learning.
Journal of Exp. Psychology: General, 3, 306-340.
Johnston, W. & Hawley K. (1994). Perceptual inhibition of
expected inputs: The key that opens closed minds.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 1, 56-72.
Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage of and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review,89, 609-662
Neuberg, S. & Fiske, S. (1987). Motivational influences on
impression formation: Outcome dependency, accuracydriven attention, and individuating processes. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 53(3), 431-444.
Reder, L. M., & Ritter, F. E. (1992). What determines initial
feelings of knowing? Familiarity with question terms not
with the answer. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 18, 435-451.
Schunn, C. , Reder, L., Nhouyvanisvong, A., Richards, D.,
& Stroffolino (1997). To calculate or not to calculate: A
source activation confusion model of problem
familiarity's role in strategy selection. Journal of Exp.
Psych.: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 3-29.
Skowronski, J. J (2002). The effects of entity-related
behavior diagnosticity and implicit theories. Social
Cognition, 20, 136-169.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning.P sychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Smith E., Miller D., Maitner A., Crump S., Garcia-Marques
T., & Mackie D. (2005). Familiarity Can Increase
Stereotyping. Journal of Exp. Social Psychology, 42,
Stangor, C., & McMillan, D. (1992). Memory for
expectancy-congruent and expectancy-incongruent
information: A review of the social and developmental
literatures. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 42-61.
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere
exposure. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology Monographs, 9, 1-27.

1351

