UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Influences of Communication on Categorization and Similarity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mb7k9m3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Baisby, Nick

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Influences of Communication on Categorization and Similarity
Nick Braisby (N.R.Braisby@open.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, The Open University, Walton Hall,
Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK

develop predictions concerning the influences of
communicative factors on categorization. Applying van
Fraasen’s view of explanation to the theory-based account
of concepts, a categorization of an object as a member of a
category depends on what contrast categories are relevant in
the circumstances, which itself depends upon for what
purpose and to whom the explanation is to be given. It
would therefore be expected that categorization would be
influenced by such pragmatic, communicative factors as
audience and purpose.
While no studies have provided direct evidence of the role
of pragmatic factors, many are consonant with their
influence. Barsalou (1983) showed that a categorizer’s goal
united members of ad hoc categories such as ‘things to take
with you in case of fire.’ Medin, Lynch, Coley & Atran
(1997) found that tree experts could use their conceptual
knowledge differently in different kinds of task. For
example, landscapers tended to use biological, taxonomic
information in reasoning about trees, but sorted them into
categories on the basis of attributes relevant to landscaping
(e.g., height, weediness). Ross & Murphy (1999) showed
that participants could cross-classify the domain of food
stuffs according to ‘script’-based notions or taxonomic ones.
That is, their categories reflected the extent to which foods
fitted particular routines or action sequences governing food
(e.g., foods eaten in a restaurant, foods eaten between
meals) as well as particular ‘taxonomic’ categories (e.g.,
dairy products). And other authors have argued that
categorization must be understood as a means to an end (see
Ross, 1997; Solomon, Medin & Lynch, 1999).
Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi & Wang (1999) showed that
categorization of artifacts, as determined by naming, varied
across different linguistic groups, while similarity remained
relatively stable. Malt, Sloman & Gennari (2003), also
considering artifacts, argued that categorization is
determined by a combination of stimulus properties and the
linguistic and cultural properties of the categorizer’s
language. Similar factors might explain Barsalou &
Sewell’s (1984) finding that adopting a different perspective
alters typicality judgments.
Their (United States)
participants, adopting a US perspective, considered ‘eagle’
to be more typical than ‘peacock’; this was reversed when
they adopted a Chinese perspective. While suggestive, none
of these studies provides direct evidence of the role of
audience and purpose in categorization.
Perhaps the most direct evidence for the potential
influence of pragmatic factors on categorization comes from

Abstract
This paper reports three experiments that investigate the
influence of pragmatic, communicative factors on
categorization. Little attention has been given to the role
played by pragmatic factors such as the intended audience and
purpose of communication. Experiment 1 establishes baseline
measures of categorization and similarity for a range of
exemplars of biological categories. Experiment 2 reveals that
the judged categorization and similarity of these exemplars is
affected by the audience to whom such judgments would be
communicated. Experiment 3 reveals that these judgments
are also affected by the communicative purpose of the
categorization. In combination, these data suggest that
pragmatic factors have systematic effects on similarity and
categorization, and suggestions are made as to how these
might be explained.
Keywords: Categorization; pragmatics; communication;
concepts.

Introduction
Murphy & Medin (1985) and others have argued that
concepts are embedded in commonsense or naïve domainspecific theories, and that categorization is explanation- as
opposed to similarity-based. According to this view the
content a concept has depends upon the links between that
concept and all others which figure in a theory of the
domain. For example, whether a person categorizes a tree
as an oak may depend upon whether they consider it to fall
under some concepts of the theory (e.g., deciduous or
pinnate). Thus the theory, or network of concepts, supports
an explanation of the object’s properties. This account,
however, leaves open what exactly should count as an
explanation.
van Fraassen (1980) argued that explanation is pragmatic,
or relevance-based. On this view, explanations are answers
to ‘why’ questions, and what counts as a good answer will
depend upon the circumstances (see also Ruben, 1990). For
example, an explanation of the fact that a particular tree has
leaves might, in summer, include reference to its
membership of the category ‘tree’. In winter, however, this
would be a poor explanation; a good explanation would
need to refer to the tree’s membership of the category
‘evergreen tree’. For van Fraassen (see also Putnam, 1978)
good explanations depend on relevant contrast categories
that do not have the properties which need explaining (e.g.,
non-tree would be the relevant leaf-less contrast category in
summer; deciduous tree in winter).
It is possible to extrapolate from van Fraasen’s account to

107

according to the characteristic feature.
Accordingly,
exemplars were defined in terms of the presence or absence
of genetic- and appearance-based properties, and are drawn
from previous work (Braisby, 2004). The use of these
stimuli also allows for an indirect evaluation of
essentialism, since it contends that categorization is
determined by people’s beliefs concerning deep, underlying
causes (such as genetics).

Markman & Makin (1998). They used a referential
communication task (cf. Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986) in
which dyads of participants collaborated in building models
from toy bricks. One participant, the director, was shown
pictorial instructions for building a model, and was then
required to communicate these in order that another
participant, the model builder, could build the model
successfully. In two experiments, they found that the
referential communication task led to greater betweenparticipant consistency in subsequently sorting the toy
bricks. These results suggest an important interplay between
referential communication and categorization, and it is
possible to extrapolate from these data also to predict effects
of pragmatic factors on categorization.
Clark (1996) emphasizes the importance to successful
referential communication of what he calls common ground,
an indication of the extent of shared information that
speakers and hearers can mutually assume. One source of
common ground is community membership – biologists can
assume more shared information in communication with
other members of the biologist community than with
lawyers, for example. Consideration of common ground
therefore suggests an influence of intended audience.
However, this may also depend on communicative purpose.
What matters is that speakers and hearers establish common
ground “well enough for current purposes” (Clark, 1996; p.
221). A biologist and lawyer may have insufficient common
ground to communicate about the taxonomic definition of
whales, but may communicate successfully enough to
identify one swimming alongside a ship. Effects of
audience and purpose can also be explicated by pragmatic
accounts of communication such as Grice’s (1975) ‘cooperativeness principle’ which suggests people design
communications to be relevant (cf. Sperber & Wilson, 1995)
to the nature or purpose of the exchange in which the
communicators are engaged.
Despite the potential connections between referential
communication and categorization, no studies have directly
addressed the potential influences of intended audience or
communicative purpose on categorization. The following
experiments were designed to address this gap. Experiment
2 investigated the influence of different kinds of intended
audience to whom categorization judgments are to be
conveyed. Experiment 3 investigated the role of the
purpose of communication. Experiment 1 establishes
‘baseline’ measures of categorization and similarity.
The experiments use the same exemplars of the same
biological categories, so that stimulus properties are held
constant across all three. The experiments elicit both
categorization and similarity judgments since the possibility
that these can dissociate raises the question as to whether
pragmatic factors will impact them in the same way.
Previous work (e.g., Thibaut, Dupont & Anselme, 2002) has
shown that stimuli defined by the presence of both
necessary and characteristic features may be categorized
according to the necessary feature, and rated for similarity

Experiment 1
Design
Task (Categorization, Similarity), Appearance (A+,A−) and
Genetics (G+,G−) were within-participants factors.
Participants 30 undergraduate psychology students
attending an Open University residential school volunteered
to participate.
Materials Materials were text descriptions of exemplars of
four biological food categories, chosen from previous work
(Braisby, 2004): salmon, apple, potato and chicken. For
each category, four exemplars were defined by the presence
or absence of appearance and genetic properties: A+G+;
A+G−; A−G+; and A−G−.
Sixteen scenarios were
constructed, one for each combination of exemplar and
category. An example scenario for ‘apple’ follows; the first
set of brackets indicates wordings for G+ and G−
conditions, and the second set indicates the A+ and A−
wordings. “You have just bought an apple from a reputable
retailer. On examining its packaging closely, you find that
it has been genetically modified [but it retains ALL/so that it
has NONE] of the genetic properties specific to apples. On
closer examination, you find that it [looks, feels, smells and
even tastes JUST/does NOT look, feel, smell or even taste]
like an apple.”
Procedure All scenarios were presented and responses
recorded using E-prime (Schneider, Eschman & Zuccolotto,
2002). Participants were given a practice example, and then
presented with the 16 scenarios. After each, participants
judged the category membership of the exemplar given the
category label (e.g., apple), choosing either a Yes or No
judgment. They then rated the exemplar for similarity
relative to the category label on a 7-point scale. Scenarios
were presented in random order.

Results
Responses to the categorization question were summed over
the four categories, yielding a scale of 0 to 4; the similarity
question was transformed to the same scale using the
formula Similarity = (Original Rating -1)*4/6 (i.e., rating of
1 maps to zero; rating of 7 maps to 4; note, high scores
imply high rated similarity). Both similarity and
categorization scores were analysed using ANOVA with

108

Task (Similarity, Categorization), Appearance (A+,A−) and
Genetics (G+,G−) all factors.

Task (Categorization, Similarity) was a between-subject
factor.

Method

Table 1: Categorization and similarity in experiment 1.
Exemplar
A+G+
A+GA-G+
A-G-

Categorization
3.2
1.4
1.5
0.3

Participants 60 undergraduate psychology students, all
native English speakers, attending an Open University
residential school volunteered to participate.

Similarity
3.4
2.5
1.0
0.3

Materials The same materials in experiment 1 were used.
Procedure The procedure for Experiment 1 was used with
the following modifications. For each scenario, participants
were instructed to imagine having an ordinary conversation
about the category exemplar with one of the following
different kinds of audience: an adult, native speaker of
English (Native); a child aged approximately 4 years, who
has a limited understanding of what words really mean (4 yr
old); an adult non-native speaker of English, who can
communicate if they use an English phrase book, and the
conversation is very limited (Non-Native). For each
exemplar, participants were asked to imagine that one of
these audiences had asked them whether the exemplar was a
member of the category (categorization), or how similar the
exemplar was to their idea or image of a category
(similarity).
Order of presentation of scenarios and
audiences was random.

Categorization and similarity for the four types of
exemplar are shown in Table 1. There was no main effect
of Task. There were main effects of Appearance [F(1,29) =
102.25, p < 0.001; η2 = 0.78] and Genetics [F(1,29) = 49.56,
p < 0.001; η2 = 0.63], and interactions between Task and
Appearance [F(1,29) = 8.81, p < 0.01; η2 = 0.23], Task and
Genetics [F(1,29) = 11.70, p < 0.005; η2 = 0.29], and
Appearance and Genetics [F(1,29) = 5.64, p < 0.05; η2 =
0.16], as shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Appearance and genetics in experiment 1.
Appearance +
Appearance Difference
Genetics +
Genetics Difference

Categorization
2.3
0.9
1.4
2.4
0.9
1.5

Similarity
2.9
0.6
2.3
2.2
1.4
0.8

Overall
2.6
0.8
1.9
2.3
1.1
1.1

Results
Responses to the categorization and similarity questions
(transformed as before) were analysed using ANOVA with
Task (Categorization, Similarity) a between-subjects factor,
and Appearance (A+,A−), Genetics (G+,G−) and Audience
(4 yr old, Native, Non-Native) all within-subject factors.
There was no effect of Task. There were main effects of
Appearance [F(1,58) = 246.24, p < 0.001; η2 = 0.81],
Genetics [F(1,58) = 89.05, p < 0.001; η2 = 0.61], and
Audience [F(2,116) = 8.06, p < 0.005; η2 = 0.12]
interactions between Task and Genetics [F(1,58) = 4.70, p <
0.05; η2 = 0.08], Appearance and Genetics [F(1,58) = 5.34,
p < 0.05; η2 = 0.08] (see Table 3), Appearance and
Audience [F(2,116) = 11.72, p < 0.001; η2 = 0.17], and
Genetics and Audience [F(2,116) = 9.36, p < 0.005; η2 =
0.14] these being subsumed by a three-way interaction
between Appearance, Genetics and Audience [F(2,116) =
7.05, p < 0.005; η2 = 0.11] (see Table 4). (Note, in these and
subsequent tables, categorization and similarity ratings are
combined.)

Discussion of Experiment 1
Experiment 1 demonstrates that appearance and genetic
properties, as defined for this stimulus set, have unequal
influences on categorization and similarity judgments.
Overall, the presence of appearance properties increases
similarity and categorization scores more than does the
presence of genetic properties (1.9 vs. 1.1 – see overall
difference scores in Table 2). However, these effects
interact with task. For categorization judgments, genetic and
appearance properties have a roughly equal influence,
whereas appearance properties have a much greater
influence on similarity judgments (2.3 v. 0.8). These
findings provide the baseline pattern relative to which the
influences of audience and purpose can be assessed.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 examined the effects on categorization of
communicating with different kinds of intended audience:
an adult native English speaker, a 4 year old child native
speaker, and an adult non-native speaker of English.

Table 3. Categorization and similarity in experiment 2.
Exemplar
A+G+
A+GA-G+
A-G-

Design
Appearance (A+,A−), Genetics (G+,G−), and Audience (4
yr old, Native, Non-Native) were within-participants factors.

109

4 yr old
3.4
2.8
1.1
0.5

Native
3.1
1.7
1.1
0.5

Non-native
3.5
2.7
1.1
0.6

was a member of the given category (categorization) or how
similar the exemplar was to their idea or image of a category
(similarity). Order of presentation of scenarios and purposes
was random.

Table 4. Appearance and genetics in experiment 2.

Appearance +
Appearance Difference
Genetics +
Genetics Difference

4 yr
old
3.1
0.8
2.3
2.2
1.7
0.6

Native

Non-native

2.4
0.8

3.1
0.9
1.6

2.1
1.1

Results
2.2

Responses to the categorization and typicality questions
(transformed as before) were analysed using ANOVA with
Task (Categorization, Similarity) a between-subjects factor,
Appearance (A+,A−), Genetics (G+,G−), and Purpose
(Defining, Conversing, Picking Out) all within-subject
factors.
There was no effect of Task, but main effects of
Appearance [F(1,58) = 365.17, p < 0.001; η2 = 0.86],
Genetics [F(1,58) = 37.75, p < 0.001; η2 = 0.39], and
Purpose [F(2,116) = 5.41, p < 0.01; η2 = 0.09] interactions
between Appearance and Purpose [F(2,116) = 12.87, p <
0.001; η2 = 0.18], Genetics and Purpose [F(2,116) = 9.50, p
< 0.001; η2 = 0.14] and Appearance and Genetics [F(1,58) =
10.50, p < 0.005; η2 = 0.15] (see Table 5). The three-way
interaction between Appearance, Genetics and Purpose,
however, was not significant. The two-way interactions
between Purpose and Appearance, and Purpose and
Genetics are shown in Table 6.

2.3
1.6
1.0

0.7

Discussion of Experiment 2
Overall, appearance properties make a stronger contribution
to categorization and similarity judgments than do genetic
properties. However, these contributions are influenced by
audience. Whereas the influence of appearance properties is
weakest when communicating with adult native speakers,
this is when genetic properties exert their strongest
influence. The pattern of influence of both properties is
similar for adult non-native speakers as it is for child native
speakers. In addition to these findings, the influence of
genetic properties overall is greater in categorization
judgments (G+ = 2.5, G- = 1.6, Difference = 0.9) than
similarity (G+ = 2.0, G- = 1.4, Difference = 0.6), reflecting
a similar finding in Experiment 1. Interestingly, judgments
to the ‘4yr old’ and ‘non-native’ audiences parallel the
similarity judgments in Experiment 1, suggesting
participants are shifting their categorization judgments in
these conditions to more closely reflect ‘baseline’ similarity.

Table 5. Categorization and similarity in experiment 3.
Exemplar
A+G+
A+GA-G+
A-G-

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 examined the effect on categorization of
communicating with different kinds of purpose: defining the
meaning of a word; everyday conversation; using the word
to pick out an object from a set of pictures.

Defining
3.3
2.4
0.8
0.4

Conversing
3.5
2.8
0.9
0.6

Picking out
3.8
3.4
0.6
0.5

Table 6. The influence of purpose in Experiment 3.

Design

Appearance +
Appearance Difference
Genetics +
Genetics Difference

Task (Categorization, Similarity) was a between-subjects
factor, Appearance (A+,A−), Genetics (G+,G−), and
Purpose (Defining, Conversing, Picking Out) were withinparticipants factors.
Participants 60 undergraduate psychology students
attending an Open University residential school volunteered
to participate.

Defining
2.8
0.6
2.2
2.1
1.4
0.6

Conversing
3.2
0.8
2.4
2.2
1.7
0.5

Picking out
3.6
0.5
3.1
2.2
1.9
0.2

Discussion of Experiment 3
Overall, appearance properties make a much stronger
contribution to categorization and similarity judgments than
do genetic properties. However, these contributions are
influenced by purpose.
The contribution of genetic
properties increases from ‘Picking Out’ to ‘Conversing’ to
‘Defining’, whereas the contribution of appearance
properties decreases in this same order. Indeed, the pattern
for Defining and Conversing resembles that for similarity
ratings in Experiment 1.

Materials The same materials in Experiment 1 were used.
Procedure The procedure for experiment 2 was modified as
follows. For each scenario, participants were asked to
imagine conversing with an adult, native speaker with one
of the following purposes in mind: a) to define the meaning
of a word; b) to hold an everyday conversation; or c) to use
the word to pick out an object in a picture book. For each
exemplar, participants were asked to imagine that a member
of these audiences had asked them whether the exemplar

110

participants with different intended audiences or different
purposes, they appear much less essentialist.
One
interpretation for these findings is that essentialism, far from
being a blueprint for categorisation, reflects a mode of
categorisation, one that is appropriate for certain contexts
and situations. When communication of a certain kind is
required, categorisation may appear to conform to
essentialism; in other circumstances, it may appear to be
non-essentialist. This interpretation fits comfortably with
the observation that categorisation can be given in a rulebased or similarity-based mode (cf. Smith & Sloman, 1994).
It may also be that the notion of community membership
can be used to make sense of the general lack of
essentialism displayed by the participants in these
experiments. In the case of communicating with native
speakers, where participants appear least non-essentialist,
participants are presumably influenced in their judgments
by their membership of a shared linguistic community of
native English speaking adults. Perhaps it is reasonable to
assume that other members of this community would also
be aware of and concerned with genetic properties. With 4
year olds and non-native speakers this assumption may not
hold. Categorisation and similarity will then be conditioned
by the assumed non-essentialist nature of these audiences.
Thus, it may be that previous demonstrations of essentialism
in part reflect assumptions on the part of participants
concerning the communities to which they belong. Perhaps
participating in science experiments for University research
would naturally lead participants to believe they are in a
community where essentialism is assumed.
In spite of the foregoing, there are aspects of these results
that raise some methodological questions. For example, all
of the categories are food categories – curious hybrids
between natural and artifact categories. It is possible that
because of their partly socially constructed nature, these
categories are more susceptible than others to
communicative influences. It would be valuable to extend
the research reported here with a range of different
categories.
Overall, these experiments suggest that categorisation and
similarity judgements vary according to both the audience to
whom one is communicating, and the purpose of that
communication. They suggest that future investigations of
categorisation need to consider the potential impact of such
pragmatic, communicative factors, and incorporate these
into theoretical accounts.

General Discussion
Experiments 2 and 3 show that the contribution of
appearance and genetic properties to categorisation and
similarity, shifts according to intended audience and
communicative purpose. These shifts in categorisation (and
similarity) judgments are dramatic – A+G- exemplars are
either clearly in the category (picking out, experiment 3) or
pretty much not in the category at all (native speaker,
experiment 2). In everyday conversation (experiment 3),
categorisation appears much as it would when
communicating with a 4 year old or a non-native speaker
(experiment 2). When categorising for a native speaker
(experiment 2), the influence of appearance falls relatively
speaking, while that of genetics increases. Categorisation
for a native speaker most closely resembles baseline
categorisation – categorisation judgments when no audience
or purpose is specified (experiment 1). However, for all of
the other purposes and audiences used in these experiments,
judgments appear to most closely resemble baseline
similarity.
One explanation for these shifts derives from Clark’s
(1996) notion of common ground. For the purpose of
picking out a picture in a book, genetic properties would
generally be irrelevant. Moreover, because they are nonvisible, these properties cannot be assumed to be known to
both speaker and hearer, unless they both belong to a certain
community. For example, two generally well-educated and
fluent speakers of English could be considered to have some
awareness of and language for genetic properties. In
communication with one another, they could assume some
knowledge of these properties, and so make their judgments
accordingly when they deem that genetic properties are
relevant. In communicating with different communities – 4
year olds, non-native speakers – this assumption cannot be
so readily made. Therefore, assumptions about community
membership and the hidden nature of genetic properties, can
render explicable some of these shifts in the influence of
genetic properties. By contrast, appearance properties can
be generally assumed to be apprehended by speakers and
hearers of all but particular impaired communities.
Although these experiments were not aimed at addressing
essentialism in categorisation, because of the nature of the
materials used they have relevance to this literature.
Experiment 1 confirmed previous findings from Braisby
(2001, 2004) that suggests categorisation in biological
categories does not show a strong dependence on genetic
factors. Such a finding is at odds with the literature on
essentialism which supposes factors such as genetics – deep
underlying causes – are strongly determining of
categorisation. However, the findings of experiments 2 and
3 suggest one possible explanation. Participants appear
most essentialist, and give greatest weight to genetic factors,
when communicating with other adult native speakers, and
also when communicating for the purpose of defining the
category.
When the communicative context presents

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 211-227.
Barsalou, L. W., & Sewell D. R. (1984). Constructing
representations of categories from different points of
view. Emory Cognition Project Report No. 2. Emory
University, Atlanta, GA.
Braisby, N. (2001). Deference in Categorization: Evidence
for Essentialism? In Moore, J. D. & Stenning, K. (Eds.),

111

Putnam, H. (1978). Meaning and the Moral Sciences.
London: Routledge.
Ross, B. (1997). The use of categories affects
categorisation. Journal of Memory & Language, 37, 240267.
Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1999). Food for thought:
Cross-classification and category organization in a
complex real-world domain. Cognitive Psychology, 38,
495-553.
Ruben, D. H. (1990). Explaining Explanation. London:
Routledge.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime User’s Guide. Pittsburgh: Psychology Software
Tools, Inc.
Smith, E. E. & Sloman, S. A. (1994). Similarity- versus
rule-based categorization. Memory & Cognition, 22,
525–538.
Solomon, K. O., Medin, D. L., & Lynch, E. (1999).
Concepts do more than categorize. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 3 (3), 99-105.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance. Second
edition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Thibaut, J-P, Dupont, M. & Anselme, P. (12002).
Dissociations between categorization and similarity
judgments as a result of learning feature distributions.
Memory & Cognition, 30(4), 647–656.
van Fraassen, B. (1980). The Scientific Image. Oxford:
OUP.

Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ.: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Braisby, N. (2004). Similarity and Categorization: Getting
Dissociations in Perspective. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, &
T. Reiger (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge: CUP.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In Cole, P., &
Morgan, J. (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol.3: Speech
Acts. New York: AP.
Malt, B.C., Sloman, S.A., & Gennari, S.
(2003).
Universality and language specificity in object naming.
Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 20-42.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Malt, B.C., & Sloman, S.A. (2003). Linguistic diversity and
object naming by non-native speakers of English.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6, 47-67.
Markman, A. B. & Makin, V. S. (1998). Referential
communication and category acquisition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 127(4), 331-354.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Atran, S.
(1997). Categorization and reasoning among tree experts:
Do all roads lead to Rome? Cognitive Psychology, 32, 4996.
Murphy, G. L. & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.

112

