UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactive Graphical Representations Support the Formulation of Sound Hypotheses in a
Rule Discovery Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/93q543p6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Vallee-Tourangeau, Frederic
Payton, Teresa

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactive Graphical Representations Support the Formulation of
Sound Hypotheses in a Rule Discovery Task
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau and Teresa Payton
Psychology Research Unit, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE

f.vallee-tourangeau / t.payton@kingston.ac.uk
Abstract
In the 2-4-6 rule discovery task, reasoners seek to discover a
rule that governs the arrangement of three numbers (or triple).
The to-be-discovered rule is ‘any increasing sequence’. Upon
being given the triple 2-4-6 as an initial example, however,
reasoners are lured to formulate overly specific hypotheses.
Traditionally, this task is conducted primarily from an internal
representation of the triples and candidate hypotheses. More
recently, substantial representational effects have been
demonstrated wherein an external representation of the
dimensions of the problem space facilitated successful rule
discovery. In the current study, an interactive external
representation was created by concurrently plotting each triple
produced by the participants. Compared to a control group,
participants who performed the task with this interactive
external representation formulated sounder hypotheses which
led to the production of more informative triples and to more
successful rule discovery.

Introduction
The importance of the physical presentation of a problem in
fostering a productive representation distributed over the
mind of the reasoner and the external appearance of the
problem has been well documented (e.g., Simon, 1996;
Zhang, 1997). Recent work on hypothesis-testing has
explored the importance of the manner with which key
elements of the reasoning task are physically presented. For
example, Vallée-Tourangeau and Krüsi Penney (2005)
examined hypothesis-testing behaviour in a simple inductive
inference task where some of the computational cost
underpinning the hypothesis-testing process could be
delegated to the positioning of external artefacts
manipulated by the participants. Vallée-Tourangeau and
Krüsi Penney reported that such richer distributed
representations fostered more productive and successful
hypothesis-testing behaviour.
The research reported here examines hypothesis-testing
behaviour using the 2-4-6 rule discovery task in conditions
where the hypothesis-testing process is supported by a rich
external representation of the problem. In the traditional 24-6 task (Wason, 1960), participants must discover a rule
that governs the generation of sequences of three numbers
(triples). The rule to be discovered is ‘any increasing
sequence’. However, participants are informed at the start
that the triple 2-4-6 satisfies the rule. Participants are
instructed to generate new number sequences to test their
hypotheses until they feel highly confident they have
2287

discovered the rule. The triple 2-4-6 encourages participants
to formulate overly narrow hypotheses such as ‘even
numbers increasing in twos’, ‘numbers increasing by a
constant’, “third number = first number + second number”,
that are too algebraically specific. Because the scope
delineated by these hypotheses is much narrower than, and
at times nested in, the one delineated by the correct
hypothesis (viz., ‘any increasing sequence’), a simple
positive-test strategy will unfailingly yield positive feedback
(Klayman & Ha, 1987) from which participants draw
growing confidence that they are on the right track. Yet, the
vast majority of participants fail to announce the correct
‘any increasing sequence’ rule on their first attempt: 79%
failed to do so in Wason (1960), a finding much replicated
since (e.g., Tweney, Doherty, et al., 1980; ValléeTourangeau & Krüsi Penney, 2005).
The hypothesis-testing behaviour of participants engaging
in the traditional 2-4-6 task is characteristically indolent and
prosaic. That is, participants do not work very hard before
announcing their best guess, testing on average five number
sequences. Clearly, the need to work harder at discovering
the rule is hampered by the abundance of positive feedback
which participants invariably receive for these initial triples.
Second, participants are not creative in the kinds of number
sequences they produce and test, exploring a very narrow
region of the space of possible triples. Again, in light of the
abundance of positive feedback, participants experience
little pressure to create more adventurous or unusual number
sequences. There is no hard and fast method that guarantees
success at this task (cf. Gorman & Gorman, 1984). It is
clear, however, that those who do succeed exhibit, in
relative terms, considerably more diligence and creativity
than those who don’t, producing a significantly greater
number of triples of a much broader variety before
announcing their first guess.

Distributed Representation
This simple rule discovery task packs an important
inferential challenge, namely that of mapping the scope and
generalisability of hypotheses. In this respect, the 2-4-6 task
is representative of real-world hypothesis testing. However,
in its original formulation and many of its replications, the
task is of limited ecological validity in that much of the
hypothesis-testing behaviour is canvassed in the head, that
is, it proceeds primarily from an internal representation of
triples and possible hypotheses. To be sure, participants
write number sequences on an answer sheet against which

Figure 1: Actual protocol from Participant 2 in the Experimental Condition. The participant
announced the correct rule after generating ten triples.

the experimenter affixes feedback, and in that respect there
is an external record of past triples. Yet real-world
hypothesis testing usually proceeds on the basis of a tight
coupling of artefacts (cognitive or otherwise) and ideas. For
example, the apparatus, measuring instruments and
methodologies scientists employ to ply their trade encourage
and constrain the formulation and test of certain kinds of
hypotheses. Test results are also represented in graphical
formats, some more likely than others to act as further
catalyst of productive hypothesis formulation and testing
(cf. Cheng, 1996; Reinmann, 1999).
Vallée-Tourangeau and Krüsi Penney (2005) examined
the impact on hypothesis-testing behaviour of a richer
distributed representation of the problem space in a 2-4-6
task isomorph. In this version of the task, sequences could
be made of numbers ranging from 1 to 6. However, the
triples were created by manipulating three traditional sixsided dice. Participants rotated the face of the dice or
interchanged their order to produce new triples. A group of
control participants engaged in the 2-4-6 task without the
dice, but also with numbers ranging from 1 to 6. Even with
this considerably reduced space of triples (63 = 216 triples)
only 21% of the control participants announced the correct
rule, in line with the first-announcement performance
observed in the original Wason (1960). In contrast, 66% of
the participants with the dice isomorph announced the
correct rule. These participants produced more triples, of a
more varied kind, before announcing their guess than
control participants. It appeared that providing an external,
manipulable, representation of the triple space made the
number permutations perceptually salient and easier for
reasoners to implement. The external environment was thus
configured in a way that naturally encouraged diligence and
creativity.

2288

Vallée-Tourangeau, Krüsi Penney, and Payton (2005)
examined the impact of creating a visual representation of
the generated number sequences on hypothesis-testing
behaviour in the 2-4-6 task. They created a task isomorph
where numbers could range from 1 to 8, mapping out a
space of 512 possible triples. Using a stack of small paper
grids (4.5cm by 6.5cm) where the x axis was labelled 1st,
2nd, 3rd and the y axis ranged from 1 to 8, participants
plotted each new number sequence before producing the
next one, creating a graphical record of the triples they
tested. Compared to control participants who did not have
access to such a graphical record of their tested triples,
graph participants were more likely to announce the correct
rule on first announcement.
The productive impact of the graphs on reasoning in the
2-4-6 task may be due to their ability to ‘limit abstractions’
(Stenning & Oberlander, 1995). Graphs offer perceptually
transparent representations of the simple linear relationships
between consecutive numbers. They also offer a medium
other than strings of numbers with which to formulate new
hypotheses, that is a medium where hypotheses can be
expressed using more qualitative concepts as opposed to
quantitative, numerical ones. It is thus plausible to suggest
that participants in the graph condition of ValléeTourangeau et al. (2005) were freer to contemplate a range
of hypotheses that were not constrained by the algebraic
parameters implied by the initial 2-4-6 triple. However,
Vallée-Tourangeau et al. did not ask their participants to
explicitly formulate and write down a hypothesis for each
triple generated. Thus, the impact of the external
representation on the nature of the hypotheses formulated by
participants remains conjectural.

Figure 2: Actual protocol from Participant 7 in the Control Condition. The participant tested four triples and
gave up.

The Present Study
The study reported here sought to determine the exact nature
of the hypotheses entertained when participants engage in
the 2-4-6 task with or without the benefit of an enriched
distributed representation Participants engaged in a 2-4-6
task isomorph with numbers ranging from 0 to 18 specifying
a space of over 6,000 possible triples. Before the
formulation of each triple, participants were required to
explicitly formulate a hypothesis. In addition, a number of
important modifications to the procedure employed by
Vallée-Tourangeau et al. (2005) were implemented, namely
(i) the interactive nature of the graphical representation, (ii)
the opportunity to continue after announcing an incorrect
rule, and (iii) the computer-driven feedback. These
improvements are discussed in turn.
First, the external representation was interactive in that it
synchronously reflected the selection of numbers in the
creation of a test triple. Thus, triples were plotted one
number at a time as participants selected individual
numbers. In Vallée-Tourangeau et al. the representation was
created after having generated the triple. In contrast, then,
participants in the present study could alter their number
selection more dynamically on the basis of perceptual
feedback.
Second, in the task employed in Vallée-Tourangeau et al.,
(2005), participants were permitted only one announcement.
If they announced an incorrect rule, they were not given the
opportunity to continue. Clearly announcing an incorrect
rule may significantly alter the nature of the hypotheses
entertained. Hence, in the present study, participants who
announced an incorrect rule were invited to continue with
the task, thus permitting an assessment of hypothesis-testing
behaviour before and after a first announcement.
Third, in nearly all past versions of the 2-4-6 task, the
experimenter provides feedback for each generated triple, a
process that conspires to create a pupil-teacher
communicative context that might enhance perceived
accountability for triples produced (cf. Lerner & Tetlock,

2289

1999). There is evidence to suggest that automating
feedback using a computer-controlled version of the 2-4-6
task makes it substantially harder (e.g., Vanderhenst, Rossi,
& Schroyens, 2002, Exp. 2). In the present study, the
feedback was generated by the computer and hence
eliminated participant-experimenter interactions for each
triple generated.
The goal of the study was to determine whether an
enriched, interactive external representation encouraged the
formulation of a qualitatively different set of hypotheses,
weakening the algebraic specificity constraints implied in
the initial 2-4-6 triple.

Method
Task
Participants engaged in a task isomorphic with Wason’s
(1960) 2-4-6 rule discovery task where numbers could range
only from 0 to 18. Their task was to discover the rule that
governed the production of ‘correct’ sequences of three
numbers. They did so by producing new sequences that
would be categorised as satisfying, or not, the to-bediscovered rule. As in the original Wason task, participants
were informed at the outset that the triple 2-4-6 was a
number sequence that satisfied the rule.

Experimental Design & Procedure
Participants were assigned to an Experimental or a Control
group on a random basis. Participants engaged in the task
using a specially configured Excel worksheet split into a top
half where participants typed in their hypotheses (see Fig. 1)
and a bottom half where they entered new three-number
sequences and then clicked on the feedback box to receive
feedback. These halves were segmented with vertical
dividing lines into separate columns each corresponding to a
new hypothesis-testing attempt.
In the Experimental group, as participants entered a new
triple in the bottom half of the worksheet, the number
sequence was automatically and synchronously plotted on a

2-axis grid, where the x-axis coded the number position in
the triple (first, second, or third) and the y-axis ranged from
0 to 18 (see Fig. 1). The task instructions in the
Experimental group were as follows:
The present task consists in discovering why certain
numbers go together in a sequence. To start you off, I can tell
you that 2-4-6 is a sequence that satisfies the rule I have in
mind. In order to discover my rule, you should produce new
number sequences from 0 to 18 by typing your sequence into
the relevant boxes. Before generating each number sequence
please enter the reason for your choice in the blue box (type it
in).
These numbers will then be plotted on the individual
graphs; to discover whether your sequence meets the rule
input “x” into the bottom left hand box, the right hand box
will then tell you whether your sequence meets the rule. You
can produce as many or as few sequences as you wish, but
proceed to tell me your best guess only when you feel highly
confident that you have discovered the rule that I have in
mind.

the Experimental (N = 28) or the Control (N = 28) group on
a random basis. As a result, the Experimental group was
composed of 28 females and no males, with an overall mean
age of 21, while the Control group was composed of 27
females, and 1 male with an overall mean age of 20.

Results
In the analyses reported below a .05 rejection criterion was
employed throughout unless otherwise indicated.

In the Control group, the triples were not plotted, and
hence participants proceeded to discover the rule in the
absence of that external representation (see Fig. 2). The task
instructions were the same as those for the Control group
with the omission of the phrase referring to numbers being
plotted. In both groups, participants who announced an
incorrect rule were encouraged to continue and test new
triples and make further announcements.

Measures
Hypothesis-testing behaviour was measured in three ways.
First, the proportion of Experimental and Control
participants who announced the correct hypothesis at the
time of their first announcement and at any later
announcements. Second, the number and type of triples
tested. Specifically, how many received positive and
negative feedback, and of those positive triples, how many
displayed variable increments (e.g., ‘1-5-8’) in contrast to
those that displayed constant increments (e.g., ‘3-6-9’). The
generation of such variable positives has been shown to
correlate significantly with the ability to discover the correct
rule (Vallée-Tourangeau & Krüsi Penney, 2005). Third, the
number and kind of hypotheses produced by participants.
Hypotheses were coded in terms of algebraic specificity.
Hypotheses low in algebraic specificity were those that did
not stipulate explicitly a specific algebraic rule governing
the composition of a number sequence. Thus, hypotheses
such as “all even numbers” “random order”, “increasing
sequence” were classified in the low algebraic specificity
category. In turn, hypotheses such as “gap is 2”, “numbers
add to 12”, “second number + first number = third number”,
“three times table”, were classified in the high algebraic
specificity category.

Participants
Fifty-six university undergraduates received course credits
for their participation. Participants were assigned to either

2290

Correct Announcement
The frequencies, and proportions, of participants
announcing the correct rule in both Experimental and
Control conditions are reported in Table 1. On first
announcement, 11 or 39.3% of the Experimental
participants announced the correct rule while 4 or 14.3% of
the Control participants did so. Of the 14 participants in the
Experimental group that continued with the task beyond the
first announcement, 10 or 71.4% discovered the rule. Of the
19 participants in the Control group who chose to pursue the
task beyond the first announcement, 9 or 47.4% discovered
the rule. Over all announcements, 21 or 75% of the
Experimental participants discovered the correct rule, while
13 or 46.4% of the Control participants did so. Chi square
analyses revealed that (i) a significantly greater number of
participants in the Experimental group announced the
correct rule on their first attempt than Control participants,
χ2(1) = 4.46, N = 56; (ii) over all announcements a
significantly greater number of participants in the
Experimental group discovered the rule, χ2(1) = 4.70, N =
56; (iii) but that there was no significant difference in the
rate of success beyond the first announcement χ2(1) = 1.91,
N = 33.

Table 1: Number (and percentage ) of participants who
announced the correct rule on first announcement and
over subsequent announcements.
Announcement
First
Correct

Subsequent

Incorrect

Correct

Incorrect

Experimental

11
39.3%

17
60.7%

10
71.4%

4
28.6%

Control

4
14.3%

24
85.7%

9
47.4%

10
52.6%

Triples
The number and kind of triples generated by the participants
are reported in Table 2. Leading up to the first
announcement, Experimental participants tested slightly
more triples of a slightly greater variety than Control
participants, but none of the group differences were
significant. Over subsequent announcements, Experimental
participants tested fewer triples (means of 3.5 vs. 5.2, t(31)
= 1.78, p < .09) and produced a significantly higher

TABLE 2: Hypothesis-testing profile of participants in the Experimental and Control groups as measured up to their first
announcement and then over all other annoucements in terms of mean triples produced, mean types of triples (positive or
negative), and mean percentage of positive triples that increased in variable increments (pos var). s. e. = standard error
First Announcement

All Other Announcements

Triple Type
Triples

Positive

pos var (%)

Triple Type
Negative

Triples

Positive

pos var (%)

Negative

mean

s.e.

mean

s.e.

mean

s.e.

mean

s.e.

mean

s.e.

mean

s.e.

mean

s.e.

mean

s.e.

Experimental

6.7

0.9

5.3

0.7

23.1%

5.2%

1.4

0.4

3.5

0.4

2.6

0.3

50.5%

6.8%

0.9

0.2

Control

5.8

0.6

4.8

0.4

12.2%

4.4%

1.0

0.3

5.2

0.6

3.8

0.5

22.2%

4.4%

1.4

0.2

proportion of variable positive triples, 50.5% vs. 22.2%,
t(31) = 2.73, than Control participants.

Hypotheses
Over all announcements participants generated on average
6.35 hypotheses in the Experimental group and 6.64
hypotheses in the Control group, a statistically nonsignificant difference. However, examining the relative
proportion of the types of hypotheses, significant
differences were observed (see Fig. 3). Leading up to the
first announcement, the vast majority (84%) of the
hypotheses offered by the participants in the Control group
were classified as highly specific compared with 64% in the
Experimental group. However, after announcing an
incorrect rule, the nature of the hypotheses formulated
changed significantly in both groups: Fewer specific
hypotheses were formulated overall, although the proportion
of algebraically specific hypotheses was lower in the
Experimental group (34%) than in the Control group (56%).
In a 2 (Groups: Experimental vs. Control) by 2
(Announcements: First vs. Subsequent) mixed analysis of
variance, the main effect of Groups was significant, F(1, 28)
= 14.7, as was the main effect of Announcement F(1, 28) =
12.7, but not the interaction (F < 1). The results of this

Mean Percentage

100%

CONTROL

EXPERIMENTAL

75%

50%

25%

0%
First

Subsequent

ANNOUNCEMENT

Figure 3: Mean percentage of hypotheses
categorised as high in algebraic specificity up to the
first announcement and over all subsequent
announcements.

2291

analysis confirm that Control participants generated a
greater proportion of hypotheses that expressed specific
algebraic links between numbers than Experimental
participants, and that in both groups, more such hypotheses
were formulated leading up to the first announcement than
over subsequent announcements.

Discussion
In the present study participants engaged in a task isomorph
of Wason’s (1960) 2-4-6 task. The goal of the task was to
discover the rule ‘any increasing sequence’ by using
numbers ranging from 0 to 18. The resulting space of
possible triples while still large, was considerably smaller
than in the one specified in Wason’s original task.
Nonetheless, the task remained very hard. Of the 28
participants in the Control group who engaged in the
representationally impoverished version of the task, only
four announced the correct rule on their first attempt. Of the
19 participants who continued with the task, only 9
announced the correct rule over their subsequent attempts.
Thus the majority of Control participants abandoned the
task without discovering the correct hypothesis.
In the Experimental condition, each triple was
automatically and synchronously plotted as participants
entered the sequence of numbers. The graphical
representation of the linear relationship among adjacent
numbers helped participants discover the rule: 11 out of 28
announced the correct rule on their first attempt and of the
remaining 14 participants who persevered after making an
incorrect first announcement, 10 announced the correct rule
over subsequent attempts. Thus 75% of the Experimental
participants discovered the rule.
The graphical representations helped Experimental
participants produce a greater proportion of varied positive
triples, especially after a failed first announcement. Positive
triples that increase in variable increments provide crucial
evidence against a rule that specifies an invariant algebraic
relationship among adjacent number, the very kind of rule
that is naturally suggested by the initial triple 2-4-6.
The nature of the hypotheses formulated by Experimental
participants also supports the contention that the graphical
representation attenuated the tendency to think of
algebraically specific candidate hypotheses. Over all

announcements 70% of the hypotheses formulated by the
Control participants identified a specific algebraic feature,
whereas 55% of the ones formulated by the Experimental
participants did so. The key to discovering the correct rule
in the 2-4-6 task is to abandon the plausible algebraicallyspecific hypotheses suggested by the initial triple. It is no
surprise that the Experimental participants did so much
better in this 2-4-6 task isomorph.
Proceeding only on the basis of a numerical
representation, reasoners in the Control group could but
formulate hypotheses that were highly specific
algebraically. Control participants only had numbers on
which to anchor the creation of hypotheses. Numbers
naturally invited formulaic recipes that would transform the
first number of the triple into the second, and the second
into the third. Given that the correct rule eschews such
algebraic specificity, the representational medium of the
task in the Control group was not conducive to discovering
the correct rule.
In contrast, examining the nature of the hypotheses
formulated in the Experimental condition suggests that the
interactive graphical representation released participants
from such a narrow numerical focus. The plotted lines
encouraged the formulation of hypotheses that sought to
capture the observed visual trend in simple non-algebraic
terms, thereby more naturally converging on the correct
‘any increasing sequence’ rule. To be sure, reasoners more
expert at curve fitting and calculus might have formulated,
for example, hypotheses that mathematically described
negatively or positively accelerating curves. Had the
experimental sample included such participants, it remains
uncertain whether the interactive graphical representations
would have fostered such a high degree of successful rule
discovery. Be that as it may, participants in either group
never once formulated a hypothesis that could be considered
an attempt at mathematically fitting a curve.
The results reported here lend further support to the
contention that successful rule-discovery behaviour in the 24-6 task is to a significant extent determined by contextual
and representational factors external to the reasoner. The
hypothesis-testing profile drawn from the typically poor
performance in Wason’s 2-4-6 task is textbook lore (e.g.,
Poletiek, 2001). Yet the results reported here paint a
considerably more positive picture of performance in the 24-6 task. When the hypothesis-testing process is distributed
over an internal representation of the task as well as a rich
external representation of the triples, participants formulate
more pertinent hypotheses and create a more informative set
of number sequences that position them favourably to
discover the correct rule. The fact that real-world hypothesis
testing rarely proceeds solely on the basis of the reasoner’s
internal representation of the problem and test results, calls
into question the representativeness of hypothesis-testing
behaviour as observed in the traditional version of the
Wason 2-4-6 task.

2292

Acknowledgment
This research was supported by a grant from the Economic
and Social Research Council (UK) awarded to FVT.

References
Cheng, P. C.-H. (1996). Scientific discovery with law
encoding diagrams. Creativity Research Journal, 9, 145162.
Gorman, M. E., & Gorman, M. E. (1984). A comparison of
disconfirmatory, confirmatory and control strategies on
Wason’s 2-4-6 task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 36A, 629-648.
Klayman, J. & Ha., Y.-W. (1987). Confirmation,
disconfirmation, and information in hypothesis testing.
Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.
Lerner, J. S., & Tetlock, P. E. (1999). Accounting for the
effects of accountability. Psychological Bulletin, 125,
255-275.
Poletiek, F. H. (2001). Hypothesis testing behaviour. Hove,
East Sussex: Psychology Press Ltd.
Reinmann, R. (1999). The role of external representations in
distributed problem solving. Learning and Instruction, 9,
411-418.
Simon, H. A. (1996). The sciences of the artificial (3rd
Edition). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stenning, K., & Oberlander, J. (1995). A cognitive theory of
graphical and linguistic reasoning: logic and
implementation. Cognitive Science, 19, 97-140.
Tweney, R. D., Doherty, M. E., Worner, W. J., Pliske, D.
B., Mynatt, C. R., Gross, K. A., & Arkkelin, D. L. (1980).
Strategies of rule discovery in an inference task.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 109123.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., & Krüsi Penney, A. (2005). The
impact of external representation in a rule discovery task.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 17, 820-834.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Krüsi Penney, A., & Payton, T.
(2005). Representational effects in a rule discovery task.
In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2236-2241). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Vanderhenst, J.-B., Rossi, S., Schroyens, W. (2002). When
participants are not misled they are not so bad after all: A
pragmatic analysis of a rule discovery task. In W. D. Gray
and C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty
Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 902-908). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses
in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12, 129-140.
Zhang, J. (1997). The nature of external representations in
problem solving. Cognitive Science, 21, 179-217.

