UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is a Bear White in the Woods? Effects of Implied Perceptual Information on Stroop ColorNaming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8hc7c4fm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Connell, Louise
Lynott, Dermot

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is a Bear White in the Woods?
Effects of Implied Perceptual Information on Stroop Color-Naming
Louise Connell (louise.connell@northumbria.ac.uk)
Dermot Lynott (dermot.lynott@northumbria.ac.uk)
Cognition & Communication Research Centre, Division of Psychology, Northumbria University
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK
Abstract
Color is undeniably important to object representations, but so
too is the ability of context to alter the color of an object.
This study examined whether canonical knowledge about
typical color or contextual knowledge about scenario-specific
color plays a central role in object representation. Participants
performed a modified Stroop task that asked them to name the
color of a target word (typical or atypical), following
presentation of a sentence that implied a (matching or
mismatching) color for the target object. Context was found
to affect naming of atypical ink colors (e.g., “tomato” in
green) with faster responses in the match condition, and with
faster naming of typical ink colors (e.g., “tomato” in red)
regardless of whether context matched or mismatched. These
results suggest that typical color is ordinarily dominant but
that unusual contexts cause people to hold in mind both
typical and scenario-specific perceptual information.

Introduction
Imagine a person sitting in a car listening to a news report.
This is an everyday cognitive event and yet is fraught with
many unresolved issues.
Say the report is about
international efforts in bear conservation: how do we
represent a bear that is not actually in front of us at the
time? How do we represent its appearance – with sharp
teeth and typically thick, brown fur? Does our mental bear
change color to white if the report mentions the North Pole?
The ability to utilise and adapt conceptual knowledge is
central to human cognitive life, and how we manage to do
this is a key question in cognition research.
Research has shown that color is an important part of our
conceptual representation of objects (Halff, Ortony &
Anderson; 1976; Naor-Raz, Tarr & Kersten, 2003;
Nicholson & Humphrey, 2004). Knowledge about color
typicality allows us to recognize objects with highly
diagnostic colors (e.g., banana or fire engine) more rapidly
than objects with no particular diagnostic color (e.g., dog or
lamp: Tanaka & Presnell, 1999). Indeed, our conceptual
knowledge of an object’s typical color is more influential in
object recognition than the color actually perceived (Mapelli
& Behrman, 1997; Tanaka & Presnell, 1999). For example,
when participants are primed with a picture of a purple
apple (i.e., displayed in an atypical color), they are faster to
recognize a cherry (which shares the prime’s typical color
red) than a blueberry (which shares the prime’s displayed
color purple; Joseph & Proffitt, 1996).
However, the presence of context can easily alter
conceptual considerations of an object’s color.
For

example, when asked to compare the color grey to black and
to white, Medin and Shoben (1988) found that people
considered grey to be more similar to white in the context of
hair, but more similar to black in the context of clouds.
Similarly, Halff et al. (1976) found that people represented
the color red differently for hair, wine, flag, brick, and
blood, considering the color of a red flag to be more similar
to a red light than a red wine.
Such context effects are not limited to simple noun-color
combinations, but have also been found for larger scenarios.
Research in embodied or situated cognition (see Wilson,
2002, for review) has shown that people represent implied
perceptual information during sentence comprehension even
though doing so does not facilitate task performance
(Connell, 2005, in press; Stanfield & Zwaan, 2001; Zwaan,
Stanfield & Yaxley, 2002). In the case of color, Connell
(2005, in press) has shown that short-term, contextual
representations of object color can affect people’s ability to
recognise objects. For example, participants were presented
with a sentence that implied a particular color for an object
(e.g., “The driving instructor told Bob to continue at the
traffic lights”), followed by a picture of the object (e.g.,
traffic lights). Connell found that people were slower to
verify that traffic lights had been mentioned when it was
pictured in the color implied by the sentence (i.e., green
light), compared to when it was pictured in an alternative
color (i.e., red light). In the absence of any prior context,
people can easily ignore the perceptual color of a stimulus
when attending to shape in an object recognition task
(Proverbio et al., 2004). In the presence of context,
however, Connell suggested that people may find it difficult
to ignore the perceptual green of a pictured traffic light
when a short-term representation of greenness had been
activated by the preceding sentence.
So what happens if our context-specific representation of
an object conflicts with our canonical knowledge?
Theories of embodied cognition usually describe color
representation as the specialization of a perceptual
simulation to include color information (Barsalou, 1999;
Zwaan, 2004). However, there has been little discussion of
how such specialization might take place if the object
simulation is already specialized with a typical color. For
example, we know that tomatoes are usually red but we may
encounter a scenario in which they are green. Which
representation – contextual or canonical – plays a dominant
role? The “semantic Stroop” provides an interesting
paradigm to investigate this question.

1139

Semantic Stroop
While the original Stroop (1935) study showed that
automatic reading of color terms interfered with people’s
ability to name ink color (e.g., incongruent “blue” written in
red is slower than congruent “red” written in red), further
research has demonstrated the influence of context on
performance in Stroop tasks (see MacLeod, 1991 for a
review). For example, Warren (1972) showed that people
were slower to name the ink color of a target word if it had
been primed by preceding context (e.g., priming with
“aunt”, “uncle” and “cousin” interfered with color-naming
for “relatives”). However, priming can also facilitate colornaming: if the ink color of a target word is primed (even
unconsciously), participants are faster to respond with the
color name (Cheesman & Merikle, 1986; Kouider &
Dupoux, 2004). Knowledge of property dominance within a
concept also has a bearing on whether context interferes in a
Stroop task. When a low-dominance property is presented
(e.g., “buzz” for bee), people experience interference in
naming ink color only when the preceding sentence had
already implied that property (e.g., interference for “The
child heard the bee” but not for “The child was hurt by the
bee”), but high-dominance properties (e.g., “sting” for bee)
produce interference regardless of context bias (Whitney et
al., 1985).
As a variant, the semantic Stroop was first developed by
Klein (1964; see also Ménard-Buteau & Cavanagh, 1984),
who extended the classic Stroop paradigm to show the same
interference effect occurred for object nouns with associated
color typicality. For example, using target words that were
semantically associated with color such as “sky” and
“blood”, Klein found that participants were slower to name
the ink color when it was atypical for that object (e.g.,
incongruent “sky” written in red is slower than congruent
“blood” written in red). However, recent findings suggest
that such slowed naming times in the semantic Stroop task
appear to be the product of a blocked list design (i.e., where
each condition is presented to participants as separate
stimuli lists). Naor-Raz et al. (2003) argued that blocked
list designs allow participants to focus attention strategically
(i.e., to ignore or defocus words in incongruent lists, but to
attend sharply in congruent lists), while mixed designs with
randomized single-item presentation prevent such selective
strategies (for similar strategizing in emotional Stroop tasks,
see Dalgleish, 1995; Holle, Neely & Heimberg, 1997).
Naor-Raz et al. found that Klein’s (1964) semantic Stroop
effect was actually inverted when the stimuli were presented
in a randomized mixed design (e.g., incongruent “banana”
written in purple faster than congruent “banana” written in
yellow). They concluded that presenting color-associated
words activates object information (e.g., “banana” activates
yellow) which hinders naming ink color when participants
attempt to access the same name in the congruent condition.
The findings detailed above leave us with several
interesting issues.
We know that presenting colorassociated words in their typical color causes interference in
naming, at least for randomized experimental designs

(Naor-Raz et al., 2003). Will this effect of canonical
knowledge (e.g. tomatoes are typically red) still slow colornaming if a mismatching prior context is used (e.g., where
tomatoes are green)? We also know that low-dominance
properties are not activated by object mention (and hence do
not cause interference in color-naming) unless the preceding
context has specifically primed that property (Whitney et
al., 1985). Will this context effect also mean that naming
atypical ink colors (e.g., “tomato” in green) will only be
affected if preceded by a matching atypical context (e.g.,
green tomatoes)? The aim of the following study is to
address these questions.

The Current Study
We have seen above that color is undeniably important to
object representations, but so too is the ability of context to
alter its representation. This study’s objective is to examine
how canonical and contextual knowledge about object color
interact: whether canonical knowledge about typical color or
context-specific knowledge about color plays a central role.
In the experiment, people are asked to perform a modified
Stroop task that tests whether canonical and/or contextual
color information is activated during sentence
comprehension. Participants are presented with a colorassociated word such as “tomato” (in either typical red or
atypical green), having just read a context sentence such as
“Jane tasted the tomato before it was ready to eat” or “Jane
tasted the tomato when it was ready to eat” (either matching
or mismatching the following ink color). In Stroop tasks,
the effect of context depends on what has been primed: if
the target word is primed, it interferes with naming ink
color (Warren, 1972), whereas if the color name is primed,
it facilitates naming ink color (Cheesman & Merikle, 1986;
Kouider & Dupoux, 2004). The design used in this
experiment always primes the target word (because it is
always mentioned in the previous sentence) but primes the
name of the color according to whether the context matches
or mismatches. This manipulation therefore allows us to
examine whether color-naming is being facilitated by
object-typical or context-specific color.

Experiment
With a sentence such as “Jane tasted the tomato before it
was ready to eat”, people’s canonical knowledge about
tomatoes indicates that they are typically red, while their
contextual representation of the scenario indicates that this
particular tomato is likely to be green. In other words,
when there are two possible colors for tomato (typical red
and contextual green), which color is more likely to be
activated when the word “tomato” is presented in isolation?
Will participants experience more interference in naming
ink color when “tomato” is displayed in red or in green?
Previous research suggests different possibilities.
The first possibility is that canonical knowledge about
color typicality will dominate, and that people will respond
more quickly to atypical ink colors than to typical ink colors
(regardless of the previous context). Naor-Raz et al. (2003)

1140

demonstrate this, arguing that color-shape associations
activated during lexical access (e.g., tomatoes are red)
produce competition between the lexical entries for the
object name and color name, thereby slowing access to the
color name. While Naor-Raz et al. do not consider potential
context effects, their account suggests that that any colorshape associations that arise upon reading the word
“tomato” are canonical in nature and stem from long-term
knowledge of tomatoes.
In other words, canonical
knowledge is activated on reading of a target word which
causes participants to experience interference in accessing
the name of the typical, canonical color (i.e., responses to
typical slower than atypical).
The second possibility is that knowledge about contextspecific color will dominate, and that people will respond
more quickly when context matches the ink color than when
it mismatches (regardless of the typicality of the ink color).
Several studies have demonstrated the power of context in
overriding canonical object information such as categorical
typicality (Roth & Shoben, 1983) and property salience
(McKoon & Ratcliff, 1988). According to this account, if
the context implies that the tomato in question is green then
participants will be faster to color-name if the target word is
shown in green, because people’s responses are facilitated if
the ink color has been primed (Cheesman & Merikle, 1986;
Kouider & Dupoux, 2004). Reading the target word will
access participants’ contextual knowledge and allow faster
color-naming when the ink color matches the active,
contextual color (i.e., match faster than mismatch).
There is a third possibility that predicts an interaction
between canonical typicality and short-term context.
According to Whitney et al. (1985), high-dominance
properties produce interference regardless of context but
low-dominance properties require a specifically biasing
context to produce interference.
To align property
dominance and color typicality, this account suggests that
typical ink colors will be activated regardless of context but
atypical ink colors will require a specifically biasing context
to be activated. Since priming the color name facilitates
naming ink color (Cheesman & Merikle, 1986; Kouider &
Dupoux, 2004), people will be faster to respond when the
target word is shown in a typical color (e.g., “tomato” in
red) and when the target word is shown in an atypical color
(e.g., “tomato” in green) following a matching context. In
short, reading the target word will access context-relevant
knowledge (of either the typical object color or the contextspecific atypical color) and facilitate color-naming when the
ink color matches the active canonical/contextual color. In
other words, typical and atypical match conditions will be
responded to equally quickly, but both conditions will be
faster than the atypical mismatch condition.

green) and 20 were fillers (object nouns with no associated
color, each displayed in a single ink color: e.g., “book” in
turquoise). All ink colors used for test words were colored
naturalistically by sampling shades from photographs of
relevant objects, meaning that both typical and atypical
versions represented possible (natural) colors for that
particular object. A pretest of 12 independent raters
confirmed that each chosen typical color (e.g., tomato-red)
was considered more typical for that object than its atypical
counterpart (e.g., tomato-green) at least 75% of the time
(M=94%). Additionally, color saturation and luminosity
were controlled between typical, atypical and filler ink
colors.
Forty context sentences were constructed to accompany
the target words. Of these, 20 were test sentences (featuring
test words: see Appendix) and 20 were fillers (featuring
filler words). Thus, the test sentences formed pairs, with
each member of a pair implying a different color for the
same object (i.e., matching and mismatching the ink color of
the target word). Another pretest was conducted to ensure
that the test sentences actually implied the intended object
color. Pairs of test sentences were separated to form two
groups of items and 24 new participants were randomly
assigned to one of the groups. Each sentence was presented
along with two line drawings of the target object, where one
drawing was shaded using the object’s typical color and the
other using its atypical color. Participants were asked to
choose, from four forced-choice alternatives, whether the
sentence was best matched by a) the first picture, b) the
second picture, c) both pictures equally, or d) neither
picture. All test sentences used in this experiment had the
picture from the matching condition chosen at least 50% of
the time (M=83%). There were no differences between
typical and atypical items (82% and 83% respectively).

Method
Materials. Forty word/color combinations were created for
use in this experiment. Of these, 20 used test words (object
nouns with associated color typicality, forming pairs of
typical and atypical ink colors: e.g., “tomato” in red and in

1141

Design. Test items were divided into four groups so that
each group featured one of four combinations of context
sentence and ink color: matching-typical, matching-atypical,
mismatching-typical, mismatching-atypical. Each group
contained equal numbers of match/mismatch and
typical/atypical test items, and the various shades of color
featured (reds, blues, etc.) were distributed approximately
evenly across groups. Participants were assigned randomly
to one of the groups. Thus, the experiment was a 2 (context:
matching, mismatching) × 2 (ink color: typical, atypical) × 4
(group) design, with context and ink color as withinparticipants variables and group as a between-participants
variable.
Participants. Forty-eight native speakers of English from
Northumbria University (not involved in pretests) were paid
a nominal sum for participation.
Procedure. Testing took place on portable computers
running Presentation software.
Participants read
instructions describing the experiment that asked them to
read each sentence to themselves (e.g., Jane tasted the

tomato when it was ready to eat). They were told that a
word from the sentence would then appear onscreen (e.g.,
tomato), and their task was to name the color of the text, out
loud and as quickly as possible, using short color names.
Participants were also told that quick responses were
important because their response time was being measured,
and to read every sentence carefully as their comprehension
would be tested at various points during the experiment. A
light grey screen background was used throughout the
experiment to optimize visibility of every stimulus color.
Each trial began with a left-aligned vertically-centred
fixation cross presented for 1000ms, followed by
presentation of a sentence. When participants pressed the
space bar to indicate comprehension, another fixation cross
was displayed centrally onscreen for 500ms, followed by a
single word. Participants had to name aloud the ink color of
the displayed word as quickly as possible. Response times
were measured from the presentation of the stimulus to the
voice-triggered response. In half of all filler trials, a
comprehension question (relating to the filler sentence)
appeared after color-naming and participants indicated their
decision by pressing the key labelled “yes” (the comma key)
or “no” (the full-stop key). Each participant was required to
answer an equal number of “yes” and “no” comprehension
questions. A blank screen was displayed for 500ms as an
inter-stimulus break between trials. Including a practice
session to allow participants to become accustomed to the
voice-response task, the entire procedure took
approximately 10 minutes.
Analysis. Four participants responded incorrectly to >50%
of the comprehension questions and were eliminated from
the analysis. All responses <300ms and >2000ms were
considered outliers and dropped from the analysis, as were
any responses more than two standard deviations away from
a participant’s mean in the relevant condition: in total, less
than 5% of the data was excluded. Color-naming responses
were considered to be correct if the experimenters
considered the named color to be a reasonable
approximation of the color displayed: (e.g., the color for
“chameleon” in the typical condition was considered correct
if named as “yellow” or “orange” but not “red” or “blue”).
Responses that contained disfluencies or self-corrections
were removed prior to analysis. Analyses of variance were
performed on correct responses by participants (F1) and by
items (F2).

Results & Discussion
Results were consistent with the view that canonical
typicality and short-term context interact, and that colornaming can be facilitated by both object-typical and
context-specific color. Figure 1 shows the mean correct
response times (in ms) for the context × ink color conditions
(matching typical M=984, SD=306; mismatching typical
M=909, SD=281; matching atypical M=912, SD=269;
mismatching atypical M=1083, SD=276). Error rates were

approximately equal across all conditions (matching typical
=95%, all other conditions=96%).

Figure 1. Mean color-naming times (ms) per context and
ink color. ‘*’ indicates a reliable difference between
conditions.
There was no main effect of either context
[F1(1,39)=3.929, MSE=37459, p=0.055; F2(1,24)=2.295,
MSE=11187, p=0.143] or ink color [F1 & F2<1.13] 1.
However, the interaction of context and ink color was
MSE=42034,
p=0.005;
reliable
[F1(1,39)=8.688,
F2(1,24)=5.174, MSE=11187, p=0.032]. When the ink color
was typical for that object (e.g., “tomato” in red), the
preceding sentence (matching or mismatching) made no
difference to how quickly people were able to name the
color [F1 & F2<1]. On the other hand, when the ink color
was atypical (e.g., “tomato” in green), people were faster to
name the color when it matched the preceding context
sentence than when it mismatched [F1(1,39)=13.278,
MSE=36752, p=0.001; F2(1,12)=12.885, MSE=6234,
p=0.004]. It is also useful to view the results from the
perspective of the context variable. When the context
matched the ink color, there was no difference in naming
times for typical and atypical ink colors [F1(1,39)=3.000,
MSE=32942, p=0.091; F2(1,12)=1.071, MSE=14362,
p=0.321]. In contrast, when the context mismatched, people
responded more quickly to typical ink colors (e.g., “tomato”
shown in red after sentence implies green) than to atypical
colors (e.g., “tomato” shown in green after sentence implies
red)
[F1(1,39)=9.200,
MSE=31726,
p=0.004;
F2(1,12)=5.834, MSE=8013, p=0.033].

General Discussion
In this study, canonical typicality and context effects on
object representation are examined with respect to color
information in a novel application of the semantic Stroop
paradigm. Results showed that both canonical and context-

1142

1

The group variable had no main effect and is not reported further
due to its lack of theoretical importance.

specific perceptual information interact: color naming was
fastest both when ink color was typical for that object and
when it matched the color implied by the previous sentence.
This finding is in line with previous research on property
dominance, and is also compatible with embodied theories
of representation which state that perceptual information is
activated during sentence comprehension.
It is interesting to note that canonical-contextual
reinforcement – where the context implies an already typical
color – did not result in the fastest response times. Rather,
the fastest naming times were determined by context: people
responded quickly (regardless of ink color) where the
context sentence implied an atypical color (909 ms and 912
ms for the Mismatching Typical and Matching Atypical
respectively). This finding suggests that when an object has
an associated, typical color (such as a tomato being typically
red, or a bear being typically brown), encountering a
context where it has a different color causes the object to be
represented with both typical and contextual color
information. In other words, these results suggest that
context does not overwrite typical color in object
representations, but rather it causes both to be held in mind.
Regarding previous Stroop research, these findings
suggest that Naor-Raz et al.’s (2003) results (participants
were slower to name typical colors) do not generalize to the
presence of context. People in this study did not experience
interference in naming typical ink colors because of the
priming action of the preceding context (see process model
below). Indeed, rather than context being an overwhelming
influence, this study found that typical colors are activated
regardless of context but atypical ink colors require a
specifically biasing context to be activated, much like
Whitney et al.’s (1985) examination of property dominance.
Regarding theories of embodied or situated cognition (see
Wilson, 2002, for review), previous research has shown that
implied perceptual information is activated during sentence
comprehension even though doing so does not facilitate task
performance (Connell, in press.; Stanfield & Zwaan, 2001;
Zwaan, Stanfield & Yaxley, 2002). Color representation is
usually described as the specialization of a perceptual
simulation to include color information (Barsalou, 1999;
Zwaan, 2004). However, there has been little discussion of
how such specialization might take place if the object
simulation is already specialized with a typical color. This
paper shows (see also Connell, in press) that implicit
perceptual information on object color is represented during
language comprehension, and suggests that a contextspecific specialization can be held in parallel with the more
usual, typical specialization of an object. Echoes of these
findings can be found in Kaup, Lüdtke and Zwaan (in press)
who suggest that both “expected” and “actual” properties
may be represented simultaneously in language
comprehension.
For example, a process model of the task might proceed
as follows. First, people read the context sentence. If
object-typical color is implied then nothing out of the
ordinary has happened and the object retains its usual

specialization of the typical color (e.g., red tomato with high
activation of red). However, if object-atypical color is
implied then something unusual is afoot and the object is
represented with a parallel specialization of both typical and
atypical colors (e.g., red|green tomato with both colors at
high activation). Second, people see the target word. If the
ink color is typical then people’s responses are facilitated
because the color has been primed by either the matching or
mismatching context (e.g., highly activated red in tomato or
highly activated red|green in tomato, respectively, both
facilitate “tomato” in red). If the ink color is atypical then
color-naming is also facilitated by matching context (e.g.,
highly activated red|green in tomato facilitates “tomato” in
green). On the other hand, atypical ink color following a
mismatching context does will not be facilitated (e.g.,
highly activated red in tomato does not facilitate “tomato”
in green). Therefore, we see fastest naming times in the
matching-atypical and mismatching-typical conditions,
followed by the slightly slower matching-typical condition,
followed by the significantly slower mismatching-typical
condition (as shown in Figure 1).
It could be argued that people are not merely specializing
object color in such scenarios, but rather are specializing the
subcategorization of the object (e.g., categorizing from
generic bear to specialized polar bear or grizzly bear, or
from generic tomato to specialized ripe tomato or unripe
tomato). However, in terms of embodied representations
this is not a matter of particular concern. A simulation of a
green tomato will also carry other sensorimotor information
previously experienced regarding such tomatoes, perhaps
including its texture (harder and crisper than ordinary red
tomatoes) and taste (sharper and milder than ordinary red
tomatoes). The fact that this tomato may now be labeled an
“unripe tomato” is secondary to the specialization itself.
The findings reported here offer an insight into how the
well-documented phenomena of typicality and context
effects actually interact during comprehension of implied
perceptual information.
Parallel specialization, where
typical object information is held in mind in the face of
contradictory context, offers several advantages to the
language comprehender, such as allowing for easy error
correction and rapid identification of other (more typical)
exemplars. Further research is needed to investigate the
implications of such possibilities.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Division of Psychology in
Northumbria University. Many thanks are due to Ben
Singleton and Darren Dunning for data collection.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences 22, 577–660.
Cheesman, J., & Merikle, P. M. (1986). Distinguishing
conscious from unconscious perceptual processes.
Canadian Journal of Psychology, 40, 343-367.

1143

Connell, L. (in press). Representing object color in language
comprehension. Cognition.
Connell, L. (2005). Color and stability in embodied
representations.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
482-487). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dalgleish, T. (1995). Performance on the Emotional Stroop
Task in groups of anxious, expert, and control subjects: A
comparison of computer and card presentation formats.
Cognition and Emotion, 9, 341-362.
Halff, H. M., Ortony, A. & Anderson, R. C. (1976) A
context-sensitive representation of word meanings.
Memory & Cognition 4, 378–83.
Holle, C., Neely, J. H., & Heimberg, R. G. (1997). The
effects of blocked versus random presentation and
semantic relatedness of stimulus words on response to a
modified Stroop task among social phobics. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 21, 681-697.
Joseph, J. E., & Proffitt, D. R. (1996). Semantic versus
perceptual influences of color in object recognition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
& Cognition, 22 (2), 407-429.
Kaup, B., Lüdtke, J., & Zwaan, R. A. (in press). Processing
negated sentences with contradictory predicates: Is a door
that is not open mentally closed? Journal of Pragmatics.
Klein, G. S. (1964). Semantic power measured through the
interference of words with color-naming. American
Journal of Psychology, 77, 576-588.
Kouider, S., & Dupoux, E. (2004). Partial awareness creates
the ‘‘illusion’’ of subliminal semantic priming.
Psychological Science, 15 (2), 75-81.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the
Stroop effect: An integrative review. Psychological
Bulletin, 109 (2), 163-203.
Mapelli, D., & Behrmann, M. (1997). The role of color in
object recognition: Evidence from visual agnosia.
Neurocase, 3 (4), 237-247.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1988). Contextually relevant
aspects of meaning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 14 (2), 331-343.
Medin, D., & Shoben, E. (1988). Context and structure in
conceptual combinations. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 158190.
Menard-Buteau, C, & Cavanagh, P. (1984). Localisation de
l’interférence forme/coluleur au niveau perceptual dans
une tâche de type Stroop avec des stimuli-dessins
[Localization of the form/color interference at the
perceptual level in a Stroop task with stimuli drawings].
Canadian Journal of Psychology, 38 (3), 421-439.
Naor-Raz, G., Tarr, M. J., & Kersten, D. (2003). Is color an
intrinsic property of object representation? Perception,
32, 667-680.
Nicholson, K. G., & Humphrey, G. K. (2003). The effect of
color congruency on shape discriminations of novel
objects. Perception, 32, 339-353.
Proverbio, A. M., Burco, F., del Zotto, M., & Zani, A.
(2004). Blue piglets? Electrophysiological evidence for
the primacy of shape over color in object recognition.
Cognitive Brain Research, 18, 288–300.

Roth, E. M., & Shoben, E. J. (1983). The effect of context
on the structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 15,
346-378.
Stanfield, R. A., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psychological Science, 12, 153–156.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643662
Tanaka, J. W., & Presnell, L. M. (1999). Color diagnosticity
in object recognition. Perception & Psychophysics, 61
(6), 1140-1153.
Warren, R. E. (1972). Stimulus encoding and memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 94, 90-100.
Whitney, P., McKay, X, Kellas, G., & Emerson, W A., Jr.
(1985). Semantic activation of noun concepts in context.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 11 (1), 126-135.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 625–636.
Zwaan, R.A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In B.H.
Ross (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation
(Vol. 44, pp. 35-62). New York: Academic Press.
Zwaan, R.A., Stanfield, R.A., Yaxley, R.H. (2002).
Language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes
of objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.

Appendix

1144

40 test items were created from 10 base sentences x 2
(Match/Mismatch) x 2 (Typical/Atypical) conditions. The
following context sentences are presented as [typical /
atypical] variants → target word: typical color / atypical
color:
• Jane tasted the tomato [when / before] it was ready to
eat. → tomato: red / green
• Joe was excited to see a bear [in the woods / at the
north pole]. → bear: brown / white
• Paula thought the tree outside her window looked
beautiful in the [summer / autumn]. → tree: green /
orange
• John looked at the steak [on his plate / in the butcher’s
window]. → steak: brown / red
• The children watched the seagulls fly across the sky in
the [sunshine / rain]. → sky: blue / grey
• Susan liked it when her [granddaughter / grandmother]
wore her hair up. → hair: brown / grey
• Anna found it very [easy / difficult] to spot the lamb in
the dark grass. → lamb: white / black
• Sarah stopped in the woods to pick a leaf off [a tree /
the ground]. → leaf: green / orange
• The bananas that Mark bought [looked / didn't look]
ready to eat. → bananas: yellow / green
• The teacher pointed to the chameleon lying
camouflaged in the [grass / sand]. → chameleon: green
/ yellow

