UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is Learning in SRT Tasks Robust Across Procedural Variations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4wb2f9md

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Chambaron, Stéphanie
Ginhac, Dominique
Perruchet, Pierre

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is Learning in SRT Tasks Robust Across Procedural Variations?
Stéphanie Chambaron (sginhac@u-bourgogne.fr)
LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France

Dominique Ginhac (dginhac@u-bourgogne.fr)
LE2I, UMR 5158, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France

Pierre Perruchet (Pierre.Perruchet@u-bourgogne.fr)
LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France

modification since its introduction by Nissen and Bullemer
(1987). A target appears in one of four possible locations on
a computer screen, and the participants are asked to react to
the appearance of the target by pressing as fast as possible a
key that spatially matches the location of the target. The
next trial is displayed a short interval (around 200 ms) after
the participants' response. Unknown to the participants, the
same sequence (typically a 12-trial sequence) is continually
cycled.
Admittedly, some variants have been explored, such as
the introduction of a secondary task (e.g., Stadler, 1995) or
the use of probabilistic sequences (e.g., Schvaneveldt &
Gomez, 1998). Also, some changes have been incorporated
to the original Nissen and Bullemer procedure to improve
the control procedures. Nissen and Bullemer compared
performances in the repeated sequence to performances in
random sequences of trials. It has been noted that this
procedure does not allow to assess precisely what
participants learn from the repeated sequence. In most
recent studies, after several blocks of training a "transfer
block" is inserted in which the regular sequence is switched
to another sequence, the nature of which is carefully
controlled. If RTs are longer for the transfer sequences than
for the preceding sequences of training, it can be inferred
that participants learned the features on which the training
and the transfer sequences differed. However, overall, the
variations introduced in the original task appear quite
limited. For instance, they are much more restricted than in
artificial grammar learning studies, in which different
grammars (e.g. finite state vs. biconditional grammars) and
different stimuli (consonant letters, tones, target locations,
and so on) have been used extensively.
Starting from this observation, our question is the
following: Is the frequent claim that SRT tasks are
prototypical of a large sample of natural situations involving
sequential materials actually warranted? What about the
possibility that the conclusions issued from SRT tasks are in
fact tightly linked to a very specific experimental setting?
A prior study of our own (Chambaron, Ginhac, FerrelChapus & Perruchet, 2006) indeed suggests that benefiting
from the repetition of events may not be as easy as SRT
research leads us to believe. In this study, we attempted to
replicate prior results in continuous tracking tasks. In Wulf
and Schmidt (1997; see also Shea, Wulf, Whitacre, and
Park, 2001), participants were asked to track a moving
target by acting on a hand-driven lever. The target moved

Abstract
The Serial Reaction Time (SRT) task has served as a
privileged paradigm to study implicit learning processes. In
contrast to other paradigms of implicit learning, this task has
been commonly used without major variation since its
introduction by Nissen and Bullemer (1987), and this raises
the issue of the generality and robustness of the conclusions
drawn from its exploitation in the face of procedural
variations. In the three reported experiments, we show that
performance improvement persists when (1) the repeated
sequence is surrounded by random sequences, hence making
the repeated sequence less salient than in the procedures used
to date, (2) the task is performed with a computer mouse
rather than with keypresses, hence breaking the one-to-one
matching between stimuli and responses and (3), the number
of possible locations of the target is extended from 4 to 8 and
the possible location of the target is no longer displayed on
screen. These results contrast with those of a prior study
(Chambaron, Ginhac, Ferrel-Chapus & Perruchet, 2006), in
which we showed that learning did not occur in a tracking
task involving the continuous movement of a target on screen.
We conclude that learning in SRT tasks is robust in the face
of important procedural changes, and that further studies are
needed to determine the reasons accounting for the learning
failure observed in Chambaron et al.

Introduction
The Serial Reaction Time (SRT) task has been heavily used
in studies investigating implicit learning. This prominence
can be justified by a variety of reasons. For instance, the
SRT task is more likely than other tasks to keep learning
implicit, due to the fact that participants are never informed
about the presence of regularities in the task they perform.
Another advantage is that the reliability of the measures
collected in SRT tasks is seemingly better than in other
implicit learning tasks such as artificial grammars
(Salthouse, McGuthry & Hambrick, 1999), and this feature
is obviously crucial for studies investigating the
preservation of implicit learning abilities in elderly people
or in neurologically impaired patients.
However, grounding a large part of a research field on a
single task, irrespective of its intrinsic qualities, is also
endowed with potential shortcomings. The issue of concern
is the generality and the robustness of the conclusions
drawn from this task. Regarding the SRT task, the problem
is all the more critical as the task has received no major
148

along a horizontal axis, according to the y-value of a
polynomial function. The experimental sessions consisted of
a succession of trials, with each trial divided into three
segments. Typically, the first and the third segment were
generated by a function in which the coefficients were
randomly drawn on each occasion, hence generating
pseudo-random target displacements. The same function
served to generate the second segment, but the coefficients
were now fixed, and hence, the movement described by the
target around the middle of each trial was the same across
the whole training session. The tracking accuracy of
participants improved only on the repeated segment.
On the face of it, these results suggest that the conclusions
drawn from SRT tasks can be easily generalized to fairly
different experimental settings. However, Chambaron et al.
(2006) found that participants failed to learn the repeated
segment in several experiments in which the design of the
studies by Wulf and collaborators was followed, except that
a different repeated segment was used for each subject in
order to ensure a sound control over the idiosyncratic
properties of this segment. A plausible explanation for the
discrepancy between our results and those of Wulf and
collaborators is that most of the experiments by Wulf and
collaborators used the same repeated segment, and that the
speed of displacement and the acceleration of the target in
this segment were found to be lower than in the random
segments used to assess the baseline. In support of this
hypothesis, we obtained positive results when using this
same repeated segment for all participants. Overall, this
analysis suggests that much of the evidence for implicit
learning in a continuous tracking task could be due to the
selection of a repeated segment that is especially easy to
track. The consequences for our concern are
straightforward: Learning from event repetitions may not be
as easy as studies involving SRT tasks seem to suggest.
The present set of experiments is aimed at introducing a
few selected variations in an otherwise standard SRT task,
in order to circumscribe the conditions which allow learning
to occur. In Experiment 1, the salience of the repeated
sequence is lowered by introducing a large number of
random trials within the training phase. In Experiment 2, a
mouse is used instead of the keyboard to break the usual
one-to-one correspondence between stimuli and responses
and, in Experiment 3, the number of targets is increased.
These variations make the procedure closer to that of the
continuous tracking tasks. Note also that by increasing the
overall complexity of the task, the variations we introduce
make it closer to the natural situations of sequential
learning, which the SRT paradigm is intended to reproduce.

to continuous tracking studies, where the ratio of random
segments is twice more important than the proportion of
repeated segments. It appears important to assess the
importance of this feature. Indeed, cycling over the
sequence certainly makes the repetition especially easy to
discover. If learning turns out to be impossible or even
deeply impaired when the signal/noise ratio is lowered, this
would be damaging for the generalizability of the
conclusions issued from SRT research, because the
signal/noise ratio in real world settings is certainly much
lower than in SRT studies. In Experiment 1, the repeated
sequence is surrounded by random sequences of equal
length, as in continuous tracking studies.

Method
Participants Participants were 17 undergraduate students
from the University of Burgundy, 15 females and 2 males.
All had normal vision and were right-handed. They had no
prior experience with the task and were not informed about
the purpose of the experiment.
Apparatus and stimuli Stimulus presentation, RT
measurement and response recording were all implemented
on a PC laptop equipped with a 14 inch-TFT color monitor
of 1024 x 768 pixels resolution. Four square boxes (200
pixels x 200 pixels) each indicating a potential stimulus
location, were located in a horizontal line in the middle of
the computer screen and remained on the screen throughout
the session. The target (a blue circle of 100 pixels diameter)
appeared in the centre of each square.

Procedure
The participants sat in front of the computer. They were
asked to respond as fast as possible to the stimulus
appearing at one of four locations on the screen, by pressing
the corresponding key ("W", "C", "B" and ",", were the four
target locations in the left-to-right order) on a French
AZERTY keyboard (which would be "Z", "C", "B", and
"M" on a QWERTY keyboard) with the index and middle
finger.
The experiment consisted of 8 training blocks, separated
by a subject-paced pause. Each block comprised seven 36trial series. Each series started with a 12-trial random
sequence, followed by the 12-trial repeated sequence, after
which a new 12-trial random sequence was again presented.
On each trial, the target was erased immediately after
subject's correct keypress, and the next stimulus was
displayed after a response stimulus interval of 200 ms. If the
participant made an error, the target remained on the screen
until the subject pressed the correct key.
Each 12-trial sequence, whether repeated or random,
respected the following criteria: (1) two stimuli never
appeared consecutively in the same position, (2) the stimuli
occurred an equal number of times in each of the four
positions (i.e., each stimulus occurred three times in each of
the four locations in a 12-trial sequence). In addition, there
was no repetition at the junction between sequences, so that
no salient cue marked the change from the random to the
repeated sequences and vice-versa. Different random

Experiment 1
In the standard SRT task, the repeated sequence is
continuously cycled. Some random trials have been
occasionally introduced, either between the repeated
sequences (Stadler, 1993; Meulemans, Van Der Linden &
Perruchet, 1998) or within the repeated sequence in studies
exploring probabilistic learning (Shanks, Channon,
Wilkinson, & Curran, in press). However, in these studies,
the proportion of random trials is greatly reduced compared
149

settings. In Experiment 2, one half of the participants
performed the SRT task in this way. However, the other half
was asked to move a cursor with a computer mouse, then to
click with the mouse when the cursor overlapped the target.
This no longer allowed the formation of simple stimulusresponse links, since the movement required to reach a
given target was a function of the location of the prior target
in the sequence. The hypothesis that this change could be
detrimental for the occurrence of learning stems from our
negative results in continuous tracking tasks (Chambaron et
al., 2006), in which there was no direct matching between
the location of the target and a specific motor action.
Except for the use of a computer mouse in one group of
participants, the sequences and the general design of
Experiment 2 were borrowed from Shanks (2003). A 12trial sequence was repeated through 11 blocks of training.
Then participants were shown a block composed of a
transfer sequence in which the prior regularities were
broken, and the training sequence was again displayed over
two additional blocks. Learning was assessed as the
difference between the RTs collected in the transfer block
and the RTs collected in the surroundings blocks.

sequences were generated for each block and each subject,
and a different repeated sequence was randomly selected for
each subject. The total duration of the session was about
30 minutes.

Results
The mean of the RTs for correct responses was computed
separately for both the repeated sequences and the random
sequences of each block. An analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with blocks (8) and sequence (repeated vs. random) as
repeated measures was performed on these values. There
was a main effect of block (F(7,112)=6.78; p<.001), which
reflects the fact that RTs decreased significantly during the
training phase. RTs were significantly shorter for the
repeated sequence than for the random sequence
(F(1,16)=22.49 ; p<.001), and there was a significant
interaction between block and sequence (F(7,112)=5.08;
p<.001). As shown in Figure 1, this interaction was due to
the fact that the difference between repeated and random
sequences increased across blocks.
520

Method

Repeated
Random

500

Participants Twenty first-year psychology students at the
University of Bourgogne (15 females and 5 males) served as
participants. All of them were right-hand dominant and had
normal vision or vision that had been corrected to normal.
They had no prior experience with the task and were not
informed about the purpose of the experiment. They were
randomly assigned in two groups: "keyboard group" (n=10)
and "mouse group" (n=10).

Reaction Time (ms)

480

460

440

420

400

380
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Apparatus and stimuli The material and the stimulus
presentation were identical to those of Experiment 1.
However, the repeated sequence was now cycled without
intervening random trials. The general design of the
experiment, including the sequences, was borrowed from
Shanks (2003). Specifically, two different sequences, called
SOC A and SOC B, were used (SOC A = 1-2-1-3-4-2-3-14-3-2-4 and SOC B = 4-2-4-3-1-2-3-4-1-3-2-1). These
sequences are structurally similar and are related by the
transformation 1↔ 4. In each sequence, each location (1, 2,
3, 4) occurs three times and each possible first-order
transition (e.g., 1-2, 1-3, 1-4) occurs once. The sequences
differ by the second-order transition rules, hence the
acronym SOC, which stands for "Second-Order
Conditionals" (Reed & Johnson, 1994).

8

Blocks

Figure 1: Reaction Time across Training Blocks for
repeated and random sequences in Experiment 1.
Error bars represent standard deviations.
Furthermore, block-by-block comparisons revealed a
significant difference from block 2 onwards between the
repeated and the random sequences (Fs(1,16) = 21.63;
ps<.000266). For block 1, the difference was only
marginally significant (F(1,16)= 3.68, p= 0.07. This
analysis confirms that learning in SRT tasks appears after a
very small amount of practice (Perruchet & Amorim, 1997;
Perruchet et al., 1997).

Procedure

Experiment 2

The procedure was the same as the one used by Shanks
(2003). The experiment was composed of 14 blocks of 96
trials (i.e., 8*12-trial sequence) during which all participants
were exposed to a four-choice serial RT task. The repeated
sequence was displayed on Blocks 1-11. On Block 12, the
transfer sequence was introduced, then the training sequence
was displayed again on Blocks 13-14. For half of the
participants, SOC A was the training sequence and SOC B

In SRT tasks, there is a one-to-one correspondence between
the location of the target on the screen and the key that
participants are asked to press. Thus, it is possible that
learning simply proceeds through the formation of a
stimulus-response link between the occurrences of the target
in a given location and, say, moving the index finger of the
left hand. This again may constitute a very specific
situation, without any or very few analogs in real-world
150

phase, indicating that participants had learned the training
sequence. Most importantly, the performances of the two
groups evolved in parallel, as attested by the lack of
interaction between Groups and Blocks F(1,18)=0.64,
p=.434).

the transfer sequence, and this allocation was reversed for
the other half of the participants. On each trial, the target
appeared in the centre of one of the four boxes displayed on
the screen, and all participants were asked to react as
quickly and as accurately as possible. The "keyboard group"
received the same instructions as in Experiment 1. The
"mouse group" was asked to move the mouse cursor from
its current location towards the target, and to click on the
mouse when the cursor was inside the box displaying the
target. Once the correct response was given, the target was
removed and the next stimulus appeared after a 200-ms
delay. Response latencies were measured from the onset of
the target to the completion of responses (keypress or mouse
click).

700
Keyboard- SOC A
Keyboard- SOC B
Mouse - SOC A
Mouse - SOC B

650
600

Reaction Times (ms)

550

Results
The dependant variable was the reaction times for the
correct responses in both groups. The results are shown in
Figure 2. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed
on RTs with Group (keyboard vs. mouse) and Sequence
(SOC A vs. SOC B) as between-subject factors, and Blocks
as a repeated measures factor. Considering first the main
effects, RTs were shorter for the "keyboard group" than for
the "mouse group", although this effect was only marginally
significant (F(1,16) = 3.53; p=0.073). The difference can be
explained by the fact that the participants assigned to the
"mouse group" had to move the mouse to reach the target
before clicking on it. There was no significant difference as
a function of the allocation of SOC A or SOC B to the
study phase and the transfer phase, respectively (F(1,16) =
.79; p=.391). Finally, a significant effect of Blocks was
obtained (F(13,208)=16.38, p<.001): RTs decreased across
the training phase (Blocks 1-11), increased on the transfer
sequences (Block 12) and decreased again across the last
two blocks (Blocks 13-14).
The only significant interaction was between Groups
(keyboard vs. mouse) and Blocks (F (13, 208) =2.19,
p<0.011). Visual inspection of Figure 2 suggests that this
interaction is mainly due to the fact that RTs decreased
more quickly in the mouse group than in the keyboard group
during the training phase. It is worth stressing that this
difference does not directly attest for a different exploitation
of the repeated sequence. Indeed, the better performance
improvement observed in the mouse group may be due to
the fact that non specific learning effects were stronger than
in the keyboard group (e.g., the mouse gain may have been
different from the one participants were familiarized with,
and the quick decrease in RTs observed for the mouse group
may simply reflect some familiarization with the mouse
device).
In order to capture the genuine effect of sequence
repetition, we performed a second ANOVA with Group
(keyboard vs. mouse) as a between-subjects factor and
Block as a within-subjects factor. However, the Block factor
now contrasted the RTs collected on the transfer block
(Block 12) with the RTs averaged over Blocks 10, 11, 13,
and 14. The effect of Group again approached the
conventional significance criterion F (1, 18) =4.40, p<0.051.
There was also a main effect of Blocks F (1, 18) =40.75,
p<0.001. RTs were significantly higher during the transfer

500
450
400
350
300
250

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Blocks

Figure 2: Reaction Time across Training Blocks and Test
Block for input devices (keyboard / mouse) and different
sequences (SOC A / SOC B) in Experiment 2.
To sum up, participants learned the regularities in the
sequence to the same extent when they used the keyboard
(with a one-to-one mapping of stimulus location to response
selection) and when they used a computer mouse, in which
this kind of mapping was no longer possible.

Experiment 3
In most studies using a SRT task, the target can move across
four possible locations. This limitation has a straightforward
reason: Extending the number of possible positions makes
keypressing quite difficult to perform, at least on a standard
computer keyboard. However, this limitation also has
damaging consequences with regard to the generalizability
of the conclusions drawn from SRT studies, because the
number of possible events in a world-sized environment is
usually much greater. Worthy to note, the possibility of
responding with a computer mouse instead of with the
keyboard, as attested in the prior experiment, relaxes us
from this constraint. The main objective of Experiment 3
was to explore a situation in which the target could move
across eight locations instead of four.
This main change was accompanied by several other
ones, the general objective of which was to make the task
increasingly similar to the continuous tracking task in which
we failed to obtain evidence of learning (Chambaron et al.,
2006). The target skipped only between adjacent locations,
as if it was actually moving throughout an horizontal axis
across the screen, and the possible locations of the target
were no longer indicated on the screen. Overall, these
changes made the task subjectively very different from the
standard SRT task. For instance, they prevented the use of a
strategy consisting in ascribing a verbal label (e.g., 1, 2, 3,
4, from the left to the right) to the different locations, hence
151

favoring the explicit coding of the repeated sequence.
Finally, participants no longer had to click on the computer
mouse. They were simply asked to locate the cursor within
the target as long as possible. The successive targets
appeared at a regular pace, independent from the
participants' success at the task. Performances were assessed
through the Time on Target instead of reaction times.

Procedure
Participants were presented with 14 blocks comprising 88
trials each. Within each block, a 16-trial sequence was
repeated five times, and four random targets were added at
the beginning and at the end of the block in order to make
repetition less salient. During Blocks 1-11, the target
followed the repeating sequence. The transfer sequence was
displayed in Block 12, and the training sequence was
displayed again in Blocks 13-14, as in Experiment 2.
The procedure differed from that of Experiment 2 by the
following aspects: (1) The target could appear at one of
eight locations on the screen instead of four locations; (2)
the possible locations were no longer displayed on the
screen throughout the session and, (3) the target remained
displayed on the screen for 600 ms before the appearance of
the next target, irrespective of the participants' responses.
Participants were asked to locate the cursor within the target
as long as possible.

Method
Participants Undergraduate students of Psychology (N=20,
16 females and 4 males) participated in this experiment.
They had no prior experience with the experimental task
and were not aware of the specific purpose of the study. All
of them were right-hand dominant and had a normal or
corrected vision.
Apparatus and Stimuli The apparatus was identical to the
one used in the previous experiments. However, the
repeated sequence now comprised 16 trials, and it fulfilled
several constraints. First, a target could only appear just on
the right or just on the left of the preceding target (i.e. the
position 4 was always followed by the positions 3 or 5).
This property made the generated sequence more
"continuous" than in previous experiments in which a target
location could be followed by any of the three other ones.
Second, the choice of one among the two possible
subsequent locations was random, but a probability of .7
was arbitrarily chosen to privilege the continuity of the
target displacement (i.e the sequence 2-3-4 was followed by
5 in 70% of the cases, and by 3 in 30% of the cases). This
constraint avoided to cause too large a number of small
movements. Thirdly, among the sequences generated
according to the previous two criteria, only those in which 6
locations from the 8 possible ones occurred at least once
were used in the experiment.
For instance, the sequence S = 3- 4- 5- 6- 5- 4- 3- 2- 3- 21- 2- 1- 2- 3- 4 respects the three preceding criteria. Note
that this sequence is not balanced for location frequency,
unlike the SOC sequences used in Experiment 2. For
example, Location 2 occurs four times, Location 5 occurs
two times and Location 8 never occurs in the sequence
above. If the transfer sequence used to assess learning
covered different locations, an eventual difference in
performance between the two sequences could be attributed
to the learning of frequency distribution, instead of
reflecting sequential knowledge. To avoid this shortcoming,
the transfer sequence was generated by permutating the
training sequence. For instance, the transfer sequence
corresponding to the training sequence above is T = 1- 2- 34- 5- 6- 5- 4- 3- 2- 1- 2- 3- 4- 2- 3. Note that, as a
consequence of its generation mode, transfer sequences also
met the three criteria used to build the training sequences.
However, it remains possible that a transfer sequence was
easier (or harder) to track than the training sequence from
which it was derived. To prevent any bias, a different couple
of sequences was generated for each participant.

Results
As shown in Figure 3, the mean Times on target (TOTs) for
the training blocks (Blocks 1-11) increased, and
performance dropped on the transfer block (Block 12),
before increasing again when the training sequence was
reintroduced (Blocks 13-14). An ANOVA performed with
Blocks (14) as a repeated measures factor revealed a main
effect of Blocks (F (13, 247) =17.91, p<0.001).
380
360

Time on Target (ms)

340
320
300
280
260
240
220
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Blocks

Figure 3: Time on Target across Training Blocks
and Test Block in Experiment 3.
Error bars represent standard deviations.
A second ANOVA was aimed at comparing the TOTs
collected on the transfer sequences (Block 12) and the TOTs
collected on the four surrounding blocks (Blocks 10, 11, 13
and 14). The main effect of Blocks was significant (F (1,
19) =42.52, p<0.001), hence indicating that participants
learned the regularities in the repeated sequences.

Conclusion
The three reported experiments show that learning in SRT
tasks is remarkably robust in the face of important
procedural changes. In Experiment 1, learning occurred
despite the fact that the repeated sequence was surrounded
152

by two random sequences, making the signal / noise ratio
much lower than in the standard SRT task. In Experiment 2,
the SRT task was performed either with a keyboard, as
usually, or with a computer mouse. Using a computer
mouse breaks the one-to-one matching between stimuli and
responses that exists with the keypressing method. The
results showed that learning did not differ as a function of
the input devices. In experiment 3, the number of possible
locations was extended from 4 to 8, and other changes were
introduced regarding the nature and the presentation of the
sequences. As with the standard procedure, we observed a
significant impairment in performance on a final transfer
block, indicating that participants have learned at least some
regularities embedded in the repeated sequence.
As indicated in the introduction, this series of studies was
mainly motivated by the striking contrast between on the
one hand, the claim that the SRT paradigm is representative
of a large sample of natural situations involving sequential
material, and on the other hand, the high level of
standardization of the paradigm. Inserting a large amount of
noise in Exp. 1, breaking the one-to-one correspondence
between stimuli and responses in Exp. 2 and increasing the
number of possible events in Exp. 3, lead us to make the
experimental situations more similar to real world tasks
involving sequential behavior, such as learning to drive a
car, learning to play a musical instrument, and more
generally, operating a device. Our results are clearcut: the
precise experimental conditions and parameters involved in
the standard task are in no way a necessary prerequisite for
learning to occur. This conclusion allows us to be optimistic
regarding the generalizability of the huge number of past
studies that relied on the standard SRT paradigm. Note,
however, that this conclusion needs to be somewhat toned
down by our prior failure to get evidence of learning in
continuous tracking situations (Chambaron et al., 2006).
Discovering the reasons for this failure requires further
investigations.
Beyond their implication for past studies, the reported
experiments also provide a source of new ideas for future
research. For instance, the methodology used in our first
experiment offers the opportunity to measure learning
across the whole training phase, whereas learning is only
measured at the end of training in the standard paradigm.
Our results reveal that learning appears after a very small
amount of practice and confirm prior results (Perruchet &
Amorim, 1992; Perruchet, Bigand & Benoit-Gonnin, 1997).
Moreover, the possibility of using a computer mouse
instead of keypresses (Experiment 2), which makes it
feasible to increase the number of possible events
(Experiment 3), should make it possible to explore a number
of issues that stood out of reach with the standard
procedure. For instance, the target may be located anywhere
in a two-dimensional space. Overall, these possibilities open
to a large array of manipulations regarding the statistical
structure of the repeated sequence.

5158), the Université de Bourgogne (LEAD and LE2I), and
the Région de Bourgogne (AAFE).

References
Chambaron, S., Ginhac, D., Ferrel-Chapus, C., Perruchet, P.
(2006). Implicit Learning of a Repeated Segment in
Continuous Tracking: A Reappraisal. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59A, 845-854.
Meulemans, T., Van Der Linden, M. & Perruchet, P. (1998).
Implicit Sequence Learning in Children. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 69, 199-221.
Nissen, M.J. & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional
requirements of learning: Evidence from performance
measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32
Perruchet, P. & Amorim, M. A. (1992). Conscious
knowledge and changes in performance in sequence
learning: Evidence against dissociation. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology-Learning
Memory
and
Cognition, 18, 785-800.
Perruchet, P., Bigand, E. & Benoit-Gonnin, F. (1997). The
emergence of explicit knowledge during the early phase
of learning in sequential reaction time. Psychological
Research, 60, 4-14.
Reed, J. & Johnson, P. (1994). Assessing implicit learning
with indirect tests: Determining what is learned about
sequence structure. Journal of Experimental PsychologyLearning Memory and Cognition, 20, 585-594.
Salthouse, T. A., McGuthry, K. E., & Hambrick, D. Z.
(1999). A framework for analyzing and interpreting
differential aging patterns: Application to three measures
of implicit learning. Aging Neuropsychology & Cognition,
6, 1–18.
Schvaneveldt, R. W. & Gómez, R. L. (1998). Attention and
probabilistic sequence learning. Psychological Research,
61, 175-190.
Shanks, D. R. (2003). Attention, awareness, and implicit
learning. In L. Jimenez (Ed.), Attention and implicit
learning (Vol. 48, pp. 11-42). Amsterdam and
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Shanks, D. R., Channon, S., Wilkinson, L., & Curran, H. V.
(in press). Disruption of sequential priming in organic and
pharmacological amnesia: A role for the medial temporal
lobes
in
implicit
contextual
learning.
Neuropsychopharmacology.
Shea, C. H., Wulf, G., Whitacre, C. A. & Park, J. H. (2001).
Surfing the implicit wave. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 54(3), 841-862.
Stadler, M. A. (1993). Implicit serial learning: Questions
inspired by Hebb (1961). Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 21, 819827.
Stadler, M.A. (1995). The role of attention in implicit
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21, 674–685.
Wulf, G. & Schmidt, R. A. (1997). Variability of practice
and implicit motor learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 9871006.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS, UMR 5022 and UMR

153

