UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is Time Going to Stand? Hebrew and English Speakers' Conceptions of Time

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0h21820j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Author
Palmer, Caroline

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is Time Going to Stand? Hebrew and English Speakers’ Conceptions of Time
Yulia Paluy (ypaluy@sfsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1600 Holloway Avenue
San Francisco, CA 94132 USA

Abstract
This study examines conceptualization of future intention
cross-linguistically. While prior research established the
psychological reality of “time as motion” conceptual
metaphor for speakers of English, the universality (and the
implied embodied nature) of this metaphor is not obvious.
Results of this study show that English and Hebrew speakers
conceptualize future intention differently following the
different spatiotemporal metaphors in their languages.

Introduction
How do people conceptualize time? We usually conceive
of time as a continuum that goes from the past through the
present to the future. But this conception is too vague. What
specifically do we know about time? We know that it is
unidirectional and progresses at a constant rate (it is
unlikely to be transported from “now” to 1850, and
improbable to wind up in 2010 in less than 4 years from
now). Tied to this knowledge is a basic property of time - it
is quantifiable and thus measurable - that much is clear from
our use of clocks and calendars. It is also clear that not all
aspects of time are apparent from our immediate experience
- do we conceive of time as moving from top to bottom,
right to left or front to back; does it run, flow, stand or
crawl? Empirical evidence suggests that the abstract domain
of time is likely to be shaped by metaphoric mappings from
the more concrete and sensory domain of space (Boroditsky,
2000).
In English (as in many other languages) there exists a
framework of conceptualizing the relational structure of
time in terms of motion in space. As part of the Conceptual
Metaphor Theory (CMT), it is noted that there are two
different time perspectives – the ego-moving and the timemoving (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). In the ego-moving
perspective, the ‘ego’, or the observer, progresses toward
the future on a stationary time line, as in the phrase “I’m
going to miss the deadline”. In this metaphor, a deadline
(point in time) is conceptualized in terms of a fixed point in
space, which the speaker will miss. Conversely, in the timemoving perspective, the observer is stationary, while the
time moves. An example of the latter perspective is a phrase
such as “time is flying by.” In this metaphor, the speaker
remains stationary, while time passes by him as a flying
object.
An assertion made in recent versions of the CMT with
respect to “time as motion” is that it is an example of a

primary metaphor (Grady, 1997). There are certain criteria a
metaphor needs to satisfy to be considered primary. Primary
(as opposed to compound/complex) metaphors have a
relatively high degree of experiential grounding and are
based on one-to-one mappings (i.e., linguistic labels from
only one experiential domain are used to conceptualize an
abstract domain). The most important criterion for a primary
metaphor is its universal nature for all humans at a
conceptual level, rather than level of metaphoric expression.
This criterion, in the context of “time as motion,” is partially
based on the assumption that time, although not a directly
experiential domain, is nonetheless a quantifiable and
measurable one and thus supposedly objective. Objective
domains should therefore be conceptualized identically
across languages. However, the universality of the “time as
motion” metaphor is questionable, because different
languages talk about time differently. Specifically, there is a
difference in the ways in which the English and Hebrew
languages talk about future intention. What are the effects of
such linguistic differences on the respective speakers’
conceptions of time? If spatiotemporal metaphors are
indicators of underlying conceptualization, then different
metaphors for the same phenomenon might indicate a
difference in conceptualization.
Gentner, Imai and Boroditsky (2002) have shown
evidence for the psychological reality of time
conceptualization following the two different systems that
the English language provides us with (time and egomoving). Empirical evidence for the effect of crosslinguistic difference on temporal thinking comes from a
study on English and Mandarin speakers. The two
languages talk about the relational structure of time
differently. English predominantly describes time as a
horizontal linear continuum (“Chanukah is already behind,
but Christmas is still ahead of us”), while Mandarin also
describes time as a vertical linear continuum (“Chanukah is
already up/above, but Christmas is still down/below”). In a
series of studies, native speakers of English and native
speakers of Mandarin (Mandarin/English bilinguals) tended
to think about time according to the metaphors used in their
respective languages (Boroditsky, 2001). The purpose of the
present study is to further explore the influence that
languages exert on their speakers’ conceptions of time.
More specifically, it is hypothesized that the different ways
in which Hebrew and English languages express future
intention affect the respective speakers’ conceptualization of
future intention.

1916

Future Intention in English
The English construct going to is used to denote future
intention, as in the following phrases - a) She is going to
give birth; b) He is going to make a mistake; c) I am going
to pass this test. Going to in such context expresses future
intention, not a physical act of motion. Going to in the
temporal sense is a product of grammaticalization, during
which this construct was imported from the domain of space
(motion along a continuum) to the domain of time (future
intention) and became a “time as motion” spatiotemporal
metaphor (Traugott, 1978). Additionally, the construct will
is used in English to denote future intention, as in the phrase
“She will give birth.”
Future Intention in Hebrew
The going to construct translated literally is used in the
temporal sense in Hebrew as well (holekh when the subject
is male, holekhet when the subject is female). As in English,
holekh/holekhet is used to express physical motion, like in
the phrase “Hu holekh la-bank/ He is going to the bank,” as
well as future intention, like in the phrase “Hu holekh laasot
taut/ He is going to make a mistake.” What makes Hebrew
interesting for the purposes of the present study is that the
Hebrew verb omed (when the subject is male, omedet when
the subject is female) is also used to talk about future
intention. Omed/omedet literally means stand(s) in English.
So in Hebrew, the phrase “He omedet ba-knisa la-bank/ She
stands in the entrance to the bank,” and the phrase “He
omedet laasot taut/ She is going to make a mistake” share
the same verb, to stand. It is likely that stand in Hebrew, in
the temporal sense of future intention, is also a product of
grammaticalization, during which the spatial construct stand
was imported into the domain of time. (English also uses
stand(s) to talk about future events, but this use is limited in
scope to matters of accidental gain/loss, such as “she stands
to lose her fortune over this shady deal” or “he stands to
inherit a large sum of money.”) Will does not exist in
Hebrew at all. Verbs can be conjugated to reflect future
tense/intention.
Does Language Shape Conceptualization of Future
Intention?
As already mentioned with respect to “time as motion“
metaphor, English uses both time-moving and ego-moving
perspectives. However, even though both perspectives exist
in Hebrew, neither seems to apply to the spatiotemporal
metaphor of a future intention expressed by the verb
stand(s) (a semantic equivalent of the English temporal
going to). The stationary nature of this construct is in direct
contrast to the “time as motion” metaphor, because in a
Hebrew phrase such as “Ani omedet laasot taut” (literally: I
stand to make a mistake; metaphorically: I’m going to make
a mistake), there is no sense of ‘me’, the agent, advancing
toward the moment in which a mistake is going to be made,
nor is there a sense that the moment of the mistake is
advancing toward ‘me’.
If metaphors involving ego-moving perspective are
processed by activating motion spatial thinking (which is to
be expected because in the ego-moving perspective, time is
stationary and people move through it), then people should
be better at processing such metaphors if they have been
primed with pictures of people in motion than if they have

been primed with pictures of people without motion. If
time-moving perspective metaphors are processed by
activating stationary spatial thinking (which is to be
expected because in the time-moving perspective, people
are stationary and the time moves), then people should be
better at processing such metaphors if they have just seen a
stationary prime than if they have just seen a motion prime.
However, if spatiotemporal metaphors are indicators of
underlying conceptualization, then different metaphors for
the same phenomenon might indicate a difference in
conceptualization. Therefore, it is expected that after seeing
motion primes, English speakers will be better at processing
ego-moving targets than time-moving targets (because “I’m
going to” is used for both physical motion and future
intention). Conversely, it is expected that Hebrew speakers
will be better at processing ego-moving targets than timemoving targets after seeing stationary primes (because “I
stand” in Hebrew is used for both physical upright position
and for future intention).
Additionally, if motion spatiotemporal metaphors are
processed by activating motion spatial thinking, then people
should be better at processing such a metaphor if they have
just seen a motion spatial prime than if they have just seen a
stationary spatial prime. Therefore, it is expected that
English and Hebrew speakers will be better at responding to
the spatiotemporal going to targets after being primed with a
motion scenario than after being primed with a stationary
scenario. Also, since in English both going to and will are
used for future intention, while in Hebrew going to used
(albeit less frequently), but will does not exist at all, Hebrew
speakers should be better at processing going to targets than
will targets, while English speakers should do equally well
on will and going to targets.

Experiment
Participants
Participants were 29 native English speakers (recruited
from San Francisco State University Psychology classes)
and 25 native Hebrew speakers (recruited by snowball
sampling from the San Francisco Bay Area). All
participants were fluent in English (self reported). Native
English participants received course credit; native Hebrew
participants received payment for their participation. Native
English participants ranged in age from 19 to 43 years (M =
25 years, SD = 5.5 years). Native Hebrew participants
ranged in age from 21 to 40 years (M = 30, SD = 5 years).
Native Hebrew participants ranged in age of acquisition of
English from 2 to 11 years (M = 7.1 years, SD = 3.7 years).

Design

1917

The experiment consisted of a set of 128 primes, 16
targets and 16 target fillers. Participants answered spatial
prime true/false questions followed by target true/false
questions about time. Primes were spatial pictures
accompanied by a sentence description. Half of the primes

were motion and the other half were stationary scenarios.
True motion primes depicted people in motion (running,
biking, or jumping), accompanied by a sentence accurately
describing the particular type of motion in the picture (e.g.,
“She is jumping” for a woman depicted jumping). True
static primes depicted people without motion (sitting or
laying), accompanied by a sentence accurately describing
the picture (e.g., “He is sitting” for a man depicted sitting).
False primes were constructed by mislabeling the pictures
(i.e. a picture of a sitting person, sentence reads: “He is
laying”), but keeping the nature of the entire page consistent
(either motion or stationary). False statements were created
to prevent the participants from figuring out the structure of
the experiment (all experimental trials were true).
Targets were temporal statements. Half of them were going
to spatiotemporal statements (e.g., ‘‘The year 2050 is going
to precede the year 2060”), and the other half were temporal
will statements (e.g., ‘‘The year 2050 will precede the year
2060”). Additionally, half of both motion and stationary
targets were ego-centered statements (e.g., “I’m going
to/will be 50 years old before I’m 60 years old”), and the
other half were time-centered statements (e.g., “The year
2050 is going to/will precede the year 2060”).
Target filler statements were all false and were constructed
by reversing the order in each of the target statements (e.g.,
“The year 2060 will/is going to precede the year 2050“;
“I‘m going to be/I will be 60 years old before I‘m 50 years
old“). Four different experimental sequences were created to
guard against order effects. Each participant completed a set
of 2 practice trials followed by 64 experimental trials. Each
experimental trial consisted of two spatial prime questions
(both motion or both static) followed by one temporal target
question. The two primes and the target in experimental
trials were true. Each target question appeared twice, once
after motion primes and once after stationary primes.
The experiment was carried out on an Apple laptop using a
reaction time program designed with MacLaboratory
Reaction Time program. Experimental materials were in
English for both English and Hebrew participants.

on the critical predictions. Data of participants who a) were
Hebrew/English bilinguals from age 5 or below; b) did not
know what the word “precede” means; or c) had above 50%
of incorrect responses overall, were omitted from the
analyses, leaving 23 native English speakers and 16 native
Hebrew speakers. Only responses to true target time
questions were analyzed. Responses to targets that followed
an incorrect response to a prime were considered incorrect.
Responses were analyzed with repeated-measures ANOVA,
with language (Hebrew, English) as between-subjects
factor, and prime type, target type as within-subjects factors.
As predicted, Hebrew and English speakers patterned
differently in their responses to the same primes and targets.
After seeing motions primes, English speakers were more
accurate at processing ego-moving targets, such as “I’m
going to be 60 years old before I’m 70 years old,” than at
processing time-moving targets, such as “The year 2060 is
going to precede the year 2070.” Hebrew speakers’
responses followed the opposite pattern, albeit without
statistical significance. After seeing stationary primes,
Hebrew speakers were more accurate at processing egomoving targets than time-moving targets.
Native English speakers were more accurate in answering
ego-moving targets (99.45%) than time-moving targets
(94.57%) after seeing motion primes, F (1, 22) = 4.632, p<
.05. Hebrew speakers’ responses show the opposite trend
but without significance, perhaps due to the smaller sample
size and therefore less power in the analysis. Hebrew
speakers were more accurate in answering ego-moving
targets (99.99%) than time-moving targets (94.52%) after
seeing stationary primes, F (1, 15) = 3.462, p=.083 (nonsignificance is likely due to higher attrition of Hebrewspeaking participants and hence less power in the analysis).
The predicted difference in the interaction of prime type and
ego/time-moving target between the two language groups
was confirmed as a three-way interaction in a 2(target) X
2(prime) X 2(language) ANOVA, F (1, 37) = 7.942, p < .01.
English

Hebrew

100

Procedure

98
96

All participants were tested individually in English with
English instructions. Questions (primes and targets) were
presented on a computer screen. For each question,
participants had to respond by pressing one of two keys on a
keyboard (“D” for false, “L” for true). Accuracy of
responses, as well as response times were recorded by the
computer.

90
Stat

Mot

Stat

Mot

Prime type

Results
Percentage of correct responses and response times were
analyzed. However, only the analysis of percentage of
correct responses revealed significant differences between
the two language groups. Response times followed the same
patterns, but the differences were not statistically significant

Ego
Time

94
92

Figure 1: Percentage of correct responses to ego and timemoving targets following motion and stationary primes is
plotted for English and Hebrew speakers.
Additionally, Hebrew and English speakers’ responses
revealed opposite patterns for the will and going to targets.
Hebrew speakers were more accurate to process going to

1918

targets (98.45%) than to process will targets (95.92%),
while English speakers were more accurate to process will
targets (98.1%) than to process going to targets (96.87%).
This pattern is probably due to the fact that in Hebrew going
to is used (albeit less frequently than in English), but will
does not exist at all (verbs are conjugated to reflect future
intention/tense). English speakers’ response patterns are
likely because will targets were shorter and therefore
potentially easier to process. This pattern was confirmed in
a two-way interaction by a 2(target) X 2(language)
ANOVA, F (1, 37) = 5.152, p < .05.

100
99
98

Will
Going to

97
96
95

However, there is a puzzling result - while spatial primes
seemed to activate long-term metaphoric temporal
thinking), they did not work for immediate processing of
temporal metaphors (i.e., participants were not better overall
at processing going to targets after seeing motion primes). A
possible explanation is that while the primes did invoke
motion thinking, none of them involved actual physical
walking (motion primes depicted people running, jumping
and biking) and therefore there was a differentiation
between the types of motion depicted and the actual walking
that is involved in going. Future research should examine
the hypotheses of this study with more pronounced primes
(e.g., video clips for motion primes, static pictures for
stationary primes) to explore the precise conditions under
which motion spatial thinking is used for temporal thinking.
Overall, the findings of this study suggest that “Time as
Motion” conceptual metaphor is not universal. Rather, the
findings lend support to Whorf’s Principle of Linguistic
Relativity - people tend to conceptualize a particular aspect
of the domain of time according to the languages they
speak.

94
English

Acknowledgments

Hebrew

Native language

The author thanks John J. Kim for his help during all stages
of this research.

Figure 2: Percentage of correct responses to will and going
to targets plotted for English and Hebrew speakers.

References

Contrary to the prediction, English and Hebrew speakers
were not better at processing the going to targets after being
primed with motion scenario than after being primed with
stationary scenario, F (1, 37) = .665, p = .42.

Conclusions
The results of this study suggest that conceptualization of
future intention is not universal, but is based on the
particular metaphors used in one’s native language. English
speakers were more accurate at processing ego-moving
targets than time-moving targets after seeing motion primes.
Conversely, Hebrew speakers were more accurate at
processing ego-moving targets than time-moving targets
after seeing stationary primes, even though both groups
were tested in English. Although the construct going to is
occasionally used in Hebrew, as well as a number of other
metaphors suggestive of “time as motion” conceptual
mappings, it appears that the habitual use of a “time as nomotion” spatiotemporal metaphor is pervasive enough to
encourage thinking about agentive (based on the ego
perspective) future intention in stationary terms.
Additionally the lack of the construct will for future
intention in Hebrew appears to lead to Hebrew speakers’
reduced accuracy of processing of will sentences compared
to going to sentences.

Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1–28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?:
Mandarin and English speakers’ conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time
goes by: Evidence for two systems in processing space
time metaphors. Language & Cognitive Processes, 17(5),
537-565.
Grady, J. (1997). Foundations of meaning: Primary
metaphors and primary scenes. Dept. of Linguistics, U.C.
Berkeley: Ph.D Dissertation.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by,
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Traugott, E. (1978). On the expression of spatiotemporal
relations in language. In J. H. Greenberg (Ed.),
Universals of human language: Word structure (Vol. 3,
pp. 369–400). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Whorf, B. (1956). In J. B. Carroll (Ed.), Language, thought,
and reality: Selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1919

