UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
JUDGEMAP - Integration of Analogy-Making, Judgment, and Choice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/60z541xc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Kokinov, Boicho
Petkov, Georgi

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

JUDGEMAP – Integration of Analogy-Making, Judgment, and Choice
Georgi Petkov (gpetkov@cogs.nbu.bg)
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street, Sofia 1618, Bulgaria
uniform but with a peak in the middle even when the
distribution of the stimuli magnitudes is uniform.
Sharif, Simonson, & Tversky (1993) demonstrated
preference reversals when people chose among the same
alternatives under different circumstances. They proposed
the idea that people just count the number of justifications
for each alternative. However, people use in their choices
not only the ordering relations between the stimuli but
also the exact values of those stimuli. This cannot be
explained by simple enumeration of the justifications, but
requires a kind of weighting.
There are many models that describe these effects but
few are able to explain why they appear. Some models
postulate a formula that reproduces one or another
contextual effect (Parducci, 1965); other models look for
such mechanisms at the sub-symbolic level (Busemeyer,
Johnson, 2004). Our goal was not to create special
mechanisms that can reproduce all these effects. Instead,
we began with several general assumptions about
cognition, in particular the ideas that memory is
decentralized and associative; that analogy-making is at
the core of many cognitive processes; and that context is
not just a source of noise but is a necessary condition for
effective and flexible cognition. After that we designed
the JUDGEMAP model on the basis of these principle and
the mechanisms already developed for modeling analogymaking and at the end we demonstrated that the model is
able to replicate a number of seemingly unrelated
phenomena.

Abstract
This paper illustrates how mechanisms initially designed
for explaining analogy-making can also model judment and
choice and account for contextual effects on these
processes. The JUDGEMAP model is presented as well as
three simulations that replicate some well known
contextual effects in judgment and choice. It is
demonstrated how the same basic mechanisms, designed
for analogy-making can be responsible for seemingly
unrelated phenomena, like the frequency effect in judgment
and the concave form of the utility function; the preference
for the middle ratings in judgment, the nonlinear form of
subjective probability; and the effect of preference reversal.

Introduction
JUDGEMAP is a model of judgment and choice that
assumes that the structure mapping ability is fundamental
for human cognition. It successfully replicates many
contextual effects that are reported in the literature. Some
of these effects seem unrelated but it turns out that the
same basic mechanisms can produce them. The
phenomena, which are simulated with JUDGEMAP, are
briefly presented below.
Kahneman & Tversky (1979, 1983) demonstrated that
the subjective value (utility) is a concave function of
money. On the other hand, Parducci & Perret, (1971)
demonstrated the frequency principle in human
judgments, i.e., the tendency people to use all available
categories almost equal times. These two facts seem
unrelated and there is no model that accounts for both of
them. However, we assume that these phenomena may
result from one and the same mechanism, that is: the
pressure for one to one mapping which is fundamental for
analogy-making. At the same time, we assume that this
mechanism has evolved for analogy, not for the processes
of judgment and choice.
Kahneman & Tversky (1983) demonstrated that the
value of a gamble is not a linear function of the
probability of winning. More precisely, an increase in the
range of small and large probabilities appears to have a
larger effect than the equal increase in the middle-range
probabilities. On the other hand, Petrov & Anderson
(2005) demonstrated that when choosing, people prefer to
use the middle ratings more often than the extreme ones.
In other words, the overall distribution of the ratings is not

The DUAL architecture and the AMBR model
The principles that we assume to be basic for human
cognition are organized in the DUAL architecture
(Kokinov, 1994b, c). It is based on decentralized
associative memory, and is designed to model the context
sensitivity of human cognition. The architecture combines
symbolic and connectionist representations and processes.
From the symbolic point of view, DUAL is an associative
network of huge number of micro-agents running in
parallel. The situations and the concepts are represented in
a decentralized way. Even relatively simple concepts and
instances are represented by a large coalition of
interconnected DUAL-agents. From the connectionist
point of view, the same network is a connectionist
network. Unlike many connectionist models, however, the
activation does not represent the meaning but the

1950

with several possible partners. Thus, dynamically, a
constraint
satisfaction
network
of
hypotheses,
interconnected with the network of concepts and events
emerges.
As a final result of all these mechanisms, the most
consistent analogy wins against its competitors.

relevance of the respective agents to the current context.
The activation spreads from two special nodes INPUT
and GOAL, representing the sensory input and the current
goals, respectively. The overall pattern of activation
changes continuously in response to the changes in the
environment and in the goals and thus, it represents the
current context.
In order a system to be flexible, it should be potentially
able to search many possible different paths. In order to
be effective, however, in any certain moment it should
explore relatively small number of paths. The DUAL
answer to this trade-off is that the context determines
which paths are relevant and should be explored in any
given moment. Actually, the relevance of the DUALagents, represented by their activation level, controls the
speed of symbolic processing. The most active agents
work faster, the less active ones slower, and the inactive
ones do not work at all. There is a certain threshold and
all agents, which activation exceeds this threshold form
the Working Memory (WM) of the model. The agents in
the WM exchange symbols among each other, create new
agents and new connections. However, all symbolic
operations are performed locally, without any central
executor and the global behavior of the system emerges
from these local interactions.
The AMBR model (Kokinov, 1994a; Kokinov, Petrov,
2001) is a DUAL-based model for analogy-making. Its
main mechanisms involve detecting local similarities
between entities and these similarities serve as
justifications for creating hypotheses for possible
correspondences between the respective entities; the local
mappings grow up, involving their neighbors, keeping the
structural correspondence between the relations.
A marker-passing mechanism is responsible for finding
semantic similarities between objects in Working
memory. The markers originate from objects and
relations, spread up through the conceptual class
hierarchy, meet each other, and thus justify creation of
hypotheses for correspondence between the elements of
the target situation and memorized elements from past
situations. However, it is important to stress that the
markers are passed with speed that reflects the relevance
of the respective elements and thus the system is fully
prevented from the so-called ‘combinatory explosion’.
The local correspondences ‘grow up’ under the pressure
for structural consistency. A set of mechanisms are
responsible for finding such structural justifications for
novel hypotheses. For example, the hypotheses for
correspondence between two relations create hypotheses
for correspondence between their respective arguments;
the
correspondences
between
instances
create
correspondences between their respective concepts, etc.
The consistent hypotheses support each other; the
inconsistent ones compete with each other. The pressure
for one-to-one mapping results in building inhibitory links
between hypotheses that relate one and the same agent

JUDGEMAP model
Judgment on a scale: JUDGEMAP considers the
process of judgment on a scale as an emerging result from
the work of several overlapping processes. First, a
comparison set is formed via the spreading activation
mechanism and the target stimulus (or stimuli) is included
in this set. Second, some ordering relations between the
elements in the comparison set are recognized. Third, a
mapping between the comparison set and available scale
labels is established.
The simulation begins when the representation of the
target stimulus (stimuli), possibly together with some
contextual elements are attached to the INPUT node, and
the representation of the instruction, namely the
correspondence “higher magnitude corresponds to higher
rating” is attached to the GOAL node. Then the activation
spreads through the network, it activates the properties of
the stimuli and their respective concepts. Possibly, some
prototypes of these concepts, and some recently used
instances are also activated. Thus, gradually, many
exemplars and prototypes enter the WM and form the
comparison set.
There are comparison relations that are activated by the
GOAL node and they have to find any manifestations of
these relations in the environment and to create new
temporary instances. For example, if the task is to judge
the overall utility of gambles, represented with their
probability to win and their profit, the comparison relation
‘higher profit’ compares the profits of the gambles in the
comparison set, and creates new relations of the following
form: ‘The profit of gamble A is higher than the profit of
gamble B’. Independently, the comparison relation
‘higher probability’ does the same with the probabilities
of the gambles. Following the main DUAL principles, all
these operations are performed locally on the basis of
exchange of symbolic messages between neighboring
agents.
However, in order to judge the absolute magnitudes, it
is not enough to know only the relative ordering relations
between the stimuli. The so-called second order
comparison relations compare the differences. For
example, if the system has already recognized that the
profit of 100 is higher than the profit of 50, and that the
profit of 20 is higher than the profit of 10, than a secondorder comparison relation could be produced that will
represent the fact that the first difference is larger than the
second one. The second order comparison relations allow
the properties of the interval scales to be computed using
only local computations. Without the higher order

1951

The hypotheses that connect the grade ‘chosen’ with
different gambles compete with each other. However,
they do not wait until all possible hypotheses emerge.
Instead, if one of these hypotheses keeps being the leader
for sufficiently long period of time, it is promoted to
become a winner, and is interpreted as the response of the
model.

relations the model would not be able to differentiate, for
example, the set of magnitudes 10, 20, and 100 from the
set of magnitudes 10, 50, and 100.
All these comparisons between magnitudes serve for
justifications to create hypotheses for possible
correspondences between the stimuli in the comparison
set and the available scale labels, keeping in
correspondence the structure of the ordering relations
among the stimuli and the respective structure of the
ordering relations among the scale values. Thus, the work
of JUDGEMAP can be viewed as a process of making
forced analogy.
Since the scale labels are instances of the respective
integer numbers, the neighboring ratings are
interconnected with relations ‘next’ and ‘previous’. The
activation spreads over this chain in both directions. Thus
if the stimulus A is already mapped onto the rating “3”,
and stimulus B is greater than A, then under otherwise
equal conditions the stimulus B will be mapped onto 4
rather than 5 or 6, since the label “4” is already active
from the previous stimulus (A) mapping. This produces
an assimilation effect towards the last rating.
All mapping principles are inherited from the AMBR
model, including the pressure for one-to-one mapping.
Choice: JUDGEMAP assumes that the same basic
mechanisms underlie judgment and choice (see Medin,
Goldstone, Markman, 1995, for a related view),. Actually,
the process of choice-making is considered as a process of
judgment on a two-point scale. Several alternatives are
attached to the INPUT in order to be judged on a twopoint scale. The only difference with the judgment task is
that the system does not report the winners for all target
alternatives, but the winner for the higher rating, i.e. the
rating-label ‘chosen’ becomes a driver.
The alternatives can be attached to the INPUT
sequentially or simultaneously. For example, let two
gambles, named A and B are attached to the INPUT
simultaneously. The relevant to the task dimensions are
then activated through the spreading activation
mechanism. The irrelevant dimensions, of course, would
also be activated and as a consequence, under certain
circumstances the irrelevant dimensions can also play role
in the process.
The two-point scale consists of two ‘grades’ – ‘chosen’
and ‘rejected’, and the relation that the first rating is
‘higher’ than the second one. This ‘scale’ is also attached
to the INPUT. The corresponding relation ‘better stimulus
corresponds to higher rating’ is attached to the GOAL.
The understanding of the term ‘better stimulus’ is coded
with links from this relation to more specific ones, e.g.,
‘higher profit’ or ‘higher probability’. The first
hypotheses between gambles and ratings emerge just after
the first comparisons; then the structure mapping
mechanism creates more hypotheses. Inhibitory and
excitatory links are created between the inconsistent and
the consistent hypotheses, respectively.

Simulations
In previuos studies (Petkov, 2005) it was demonstrated
that JUDGEMAP replicates many of the empirical
phenomena in human judgments, for example, the
sequential assimilation effect, the range and frequency
effects. JUDGEMAP produced also some new predictions
about the role of the irrelevant dimensions in judgment
that were empirically tested and comfirmed (Kokinov,
Hristova, Petkov, 2004). In the current study the role of
the retrieval and mapping mechanisms in judgment and
choice are explored. More preciesly, it is demonstrated
how these mechanisms that were designed for analogymaking may influence judgment and choice as well.
Moreover, these mechanisms can reproduce contextual
effects in seemingly unrelated to analogy-making tasks.

Simulation 1
The first simulation shows that a mechanism for one-toone mapping designed explicitly for analogy-making may
model successfully two additional, seemingly unrelated
phenomena in human judgment and choice, namely that:
• people use all available ratings almost equal number
of times in their judgments, a phenomena known in
the field of judgment as the frequency principle
proposed by Parducci & Perret (1971);
• subjective value (utility) is a concave function of
money, a phenomena well known in the field of choice
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979, 1983).
These two phenomena may resemble each other if they
are reduced to judgment of skewed sets. It could be
speculated that low prices dominate in the environment
and as a consequence the comparison set formed when
judging prices would be positively skewed. Since
JUDGEMAP replicates the frequency effect successfully
(Petkov, 2005) it could be argued that the model will
manage to replicate the concave utility function as well.
For the purpose of the current simulation, a set of prices
was randomly extracted from Internet advertising sites
and were given to the model to be judged on a seven-point
scale. Six categories (home & garden, toys & baby, office,
books, clothing, sports) and 15 products from each
category were randomly chosen, thus forming a set of 90
prices (47 different price-values). The distribution of this
set turned out to be the following: 32 prices less than $10,
38 prices between $10 and $50, 11 prices between $50
and &200, and 9 prices were larger than $200. All 90

1952

prices were judged sequentially. The procedure was
repeated 100 times, varying the order of stimuli
presentation in a random way.
The initial moment – judgment of the first stimulus –
needs a special comment. The system must judge the
stimulus in a ‘vacuum’ – without anything to compare
with. Our belief is that human beings do not face such a
situation since they have extremely huge knowledge bases
and in all cases, they are able to retrieve (or to construct)
something similar to the target. However, if (and only if)
such a case appears the system creates the first hypothesis
without any reason (justification). It just takes the most
active rating and maps the target onto it. Suppose, for
example, that the first price is judged with 4 and let the
next price be lower than the first one. JUDGEMAP
compares it with the previous one and creates a new
comparison relation that in turn serves as a justification
for new hypotheses (Fig. 1). The order of creation of these
new hypotheses reflects the activation of the scale
elements. Since the previously used rating was 4 it would
be the most active rating and because of the chain-like
organization of the scale representation the rating 3 would
be more active than 2 and 1. Thus, the first new
hypothesis would connect the second target stimulus with
the rating 3. It could win the competition even before the
creation of any new hypothesis.

1

Price 10
Price 20

2

3
5

Price 50

4
7

Price 10

6

Figure 2: The constraint for one-to-one mapping creates
inhibitory links (with gray) between the hypotheses that connect
different stimuli with one and the same rating as well as
different ratings with one and the sane stimulus.

The final result of the first simulation was that the
ratings given by the model formed a concave function of
the money (mean difference from the straight line for all
47 different price values is 2.71, t (46) =19.11, p<0.01), in
accordance with the empirical data.

Simulation 2
2

3

4

5

The second simulation starts with the assumption that two
seemingly different facts are actually manifestation of one
and the same effect, that is:
• On one hand, Petrov & Anderson (2005) demonstrated
that people prefer to use the middle ratings more often
than the extreme ones even when the distribution of
the stimuli magnitudes is uniform.
• On the other hand, Kahneman & Tversky (1983)
demonstrated that the value of a gamble is not a linear
function of the probability of winning. More precisely,
an increase in small and in large probabilities appears
to have a larger effect than the equal increase in
middle-range probabilities. In order to test whether
JUDGEMAP distributes ratings in a way similar to
humans, the model was tested with a set of 112 lines,
uniformly distributed over their length. Each line was
represented with a line-agent and with an agent that
represents its length, coded with a real number. The
task of JUDGEMAP was to judge the length of the
lines on a seven-point scale. All 112 lines were given
to the system sequentially in a random order. As
demonstrated in previous studies (Petkov, 2005)
JUDGEMAP successfully simulates the sequential
assimilation effect towards the recently used grade,
and a smaller in size contrast effect with respect to the
previous line length. One additional effect, however,
was that the ratings produced by JUDGEMAP were

6

1

7

Price 10

Price 40
<

Figure 1: The comparison relations are justifications for new
hypotheses for correspondence.

Since the overall set of prices is skewed (more low prices
than high prices), the competition for the low ratings
would be higher (Fig.2). Suppose, for example, that there
are two hypotheses for the target stimulus ‘price 50’ – to
judge it with 3 or with 4. If there are many memorized
stimuli that were judged with 3, being everything else
equal, the rating 4 would be the winner, because of the
inhibition received from its rivals. The overall result of
this mechanism would be an overestimation of all stimuli
from a positively skewed set.

1953

speed of the creation of the hypotheses about those ratings
and secondly, the chain-like organization of the ratings
that makes the middle ratings dominating in their
activation level (see Fig.1). As a result, JUDGEMAP
rarely gives extreme grades because hypotheses for them
are usually created at later moments. For example,
suppose that a certain probability was rated 4. If the next
probability had to be higher, then the first created
hypothesis would most probably be 5, the second one
would be 6, etc. Being created first, these hypotheses had
an advantage, and only a justification with very high
activation level should be established, in order the
extreme rating of 7 to win.

not uniformly distributed, but had a peak in the middle
range (Figure 3). The standard deviation of all ratings,
obtained from the simulation was 1.34, whereas for
assumed uniform distribution it should be 2.01
(χ2(111)=49.53, p<0.01).
Frequency

35
30
25
20
15

Simulation 3
This simulation highlights the role of the justifications
produced by JUDGEMAP for each hypothesis. It
illustrates also the application of the model to making
choice and demonstrates the preference reversal observed
by Sarif, Simonson, & Tversky (1993). Two gambles, A
and B, presented with their probability for winning and
their profit,, were used for stimuli in all trials, while in
half of the trials an additional gamble C was presented.

10
0

Rating
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 3: Distribution or ratings when a uniform set of stimuli
was judged by JUDGEMAP.

An analogous simulation was performed using gambles as
stimuli. A set of 100 gambles was designed. The first
gamble proposed 1% chance to win 1000, the second one
– 2% chance to win 1000/2, etc. The last gamble proposed
100% chance to win 10. Thus, the expected utility for all
100 gambles was equal. JUDGEMAP judged how large
the probability for winning is on a seven-point scale (the
profit was irrelevant to this task). All 100 stimuli were
judged 100 times in a random order each time. Not
surprisingly, the results again were analogous. (The
standard deviation obtained from the simulation was 1.21,
whereas if a uniform distribution is assumed it should be
2.01, χ2(9999)=3660, p<0.01).
The same data are illustrated in the fig.4 in the form of
money/judgment function.

profit

B
C
O

A
probability

The exact values of the probabilities and profits were
randomly chosen but the relative position of the stimuli in
the probability/profit space remained the same (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Relative positions of the stimuli.

The probability of the gamble A was always larger than
the probability of B. The profit of A was always smaller
than B. JUDGEMAP is sensitive to the ordering relations
between the stimuli and takes also into account the
differences between the absolute magnitudes using
second-order relations. In order to do so, however, at least
three stimuli should enter in the comparison set. For this
reason a third stimulus, named O, with probability and
profit zero was added. This additional “gamble” retrieved
(constructed) from memory equipped the model with
ability to detect whether A and B differ much more along
one of the dimensions in comparison to their difference on
the other dimension. Thus, 100 different sets of gambles
A and B were designed and given to the model for making
a choice between them. In each task the two gambles were
attached to the INPUT simultaneously. When
JUDGEMAP chose between these stimuli, it preferred A
– 49 times, and B – 51 times. After that, a third gamble,
C, was added to each of the 100 tasks. Its profit was

Judgment

Probability
Figure 4: The concave form of the money/judgment function.

The preference for the middle ratings may result in the
observed overestimation of the small probabilities and
underestimation of large probabilities that Kahneman &
Tversky (1979) called the π-function. This effect naturally
emerges from the basic mechanisms, designed in DUAL:
firstly, the activation level of the ratings controls the

1954

from the AMBR model. This supports the assumption that
the process of structural mapping is at the core of human
cognition and people adapt the available basic mapping
mechanisms to other tasks, like judgment or choice.

randomly chosen to be between the profits of A and B. Its
probability was always smaller than the probability of A
and B (Figure 5). As a result, JUDGEMAP preferred A –
37 times, B – 60 times, and C – 3 times. The existence of
the alternative C became crucial for preferring B over A
(χ2 (1, N = 97) =5.45, p=0.02). JUDGEMAP obtained this
result because its decisions are always based on
justifications, which property was inherited from the
AMBR model. There were more reasons to prefer B than
A (B was better than C on to two dimensions, A was
better than C on one dimension only). Since the higherorder relations are sensitive to the absolute magnitudes as
well, JUDGEMAP did not choose always the gamble B in
accordance with the empirical data while the reasonbased choice theory (Sarif, Siminson, & Tversky, 1993)
could not explain why B is not always preferred to A in
this case.

References
Busemeyer, J., Johnson, J. (2004) Computational models of
decision making. In: D. Koehler & N. Harvey (Eds.)
Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making. Blackwell
Publishing Co., pp. 133-154.
Hofstater, D. (2001) Analogy as the Core of Cognition. In Dedre
Gentner, Keith J. Holyoak, and Boicho N. Kokinov (eds.) The
Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press/Bradford Book.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (1979) Prospect Theory: An
Analysis of decision under risk. American Psychologist, vol.
39 (4), pp.341-350.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. (1983) Choices, Values, and
Frames. Econometrica, vol. 47, pp. 263-291.
Kokinov, B. (1994a) A Hybrid Model of Reasoning by Analogy.
In Holyoak, K., Barnden, J. (eds) Advances in Connectionist
and Mental Computation Theory, vol. 2: Analogical
Connections. Norwood, NY: Ablex.
Kokinov, B. (1994b) The DUAL Cognitive Architecture. A
Hybrid Multi-Agent Approach. In A. Cohn (ed.) Proceedings
of the Eleventh European Conference of Artificial
Intelligence. London: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Kokinov, B. (1994c) The Context-Sensitive Architecture DUAL.
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Kokinov, B. & Petrov, A. (2001) Integration of Memory and
Reasoning in Analogy-Making: The AMBR Model. In:
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., Kokinov, B. (eds.) The Analogical
Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Kokinov, B., Hristova, P., Petkov, G. (2004) Does Irrelevant
Information Play a Role in Judgment? In: Proceedings of the
26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp.
720-725) Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Medin, D., Goldstone, R., Markman, A. (1995) Comparison and
Choice: Relations between Similarity Processes and Decision
Processes. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, vol. 2 (1), pp. 1 –
19
Parducci, A. (1965) Category Judgment: A Range- Frequency
Model. Psychological Review, vol. 72 (6), pp 407-418.
Parducci, A., Perret, L. (1971) Category-Rating Scales: Effects
of Relative Spacing and Frequency of Stimulus Values.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, vol. 89 (2), pp 427-452.
Petkov, G. (2005) Judgment as Mapping (JUDGEMAP2). In:
Proceedings of the Doctoral Consortium at the Fifth
International and Interdisciplinary Conference on Modelling
and Using Context (pp. 95-104). Technical Report LIP
2005/007 of the Laboratoire d'Informatique de Paris 6, URL
http://www.lip6.fr
Petrov, A., Anderson, J. (2005) The Dynamics of Scaling: A
Memory-Based Anchor Model of Category Rating and
Absolute Identification. Psychological Review, vol. 112 (2),
pp. 383-416.
Shafir, E., Simonson, I., Tversky, A. (1993) Reason – Based
Choice. Cognition, vol. 49, pp. 11-36.

Conclusions
The JUDGEMAP model of human judgment and choice
is presented. It is based on the cognitive architecture
DUAL and is integrated with the AMBR model for
analogy- making. According to the model, the process of
judgment is a process of mapping between a dynamically
constructed comparison set and the set of the ratings.
During the judgment process some ordering relations
between the elements of the comparison set are
recognized. These relations serve then as justifications for
hypotheses formation for correspondence between the
stimuli and the available ratings. The consistent
hypotheses support each other; the inconsistent ones
compete with each other. After the relaxation, one of the
hypotheses about the target stimulus wins and is
interpreted as a response of the system. According to the
model, the process of choice making is a kind of
judgment. However, when choosing, the driving force is
to find the stimulus that corresponds to the highest rating.
In the three simulations some contextual effects in human
judgment and choice were replicated. It is demonstrated
how the pressure for one-to-one mapping, designed for
the AMBR model for analogy-making, can be responsible
both for the frequency effect in judgment and for the nonlinear form of the function between the subjective utility
and the amount of money. The fact that people use the
middle ratings more often than the extreme ones in
judgment is explained in terms of the dynamic mechanism
for hypothesis creation, which is highly sensitive to the
relevance of the items. In addition, the same basic
mechanism is assumed to be responsible for the fact that
an equal increase in the probability has larger effect in the
extreme probabilities than in the middle ones. Finally,
JUDGEMAP also accounts for the preference reversal
effect in choice. The mechanism for creating only
justified hypotheses is responsible for this effect. All these
mechanisms, however, are not created for the purpose to
obtain these concrete results. Instead, they are inherited

1955

