UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language as a Tool for Thought: The Vocabulary of Games Facilitates Strategic Decision
Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2n8028tv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Keller, Josh
Loewenstein, Jeffrey

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language as a Tool for Thought:
The Vocabulary of Games Facilitates Strategic Decision Making
Jeffrey Loewenstein (jeffrey.loewenstein@mccombs.utexas.edu)
McCombs School of Business, 1 University Station B6300
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Josh Keller (josh.keller@mccombs.utexas.edu)
McCombs School of Business, 1 University Station B6300
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Abstract

thereby influence key decision makers to favor their desired
policies. More than 60 years ago, the sociologist Mills
(1939) argued that problems are perceived relative to a
vocabulary. For example, what counts as murder seems
straightforward, but should differ substantially across
vegans, anti-abortion activists, lawyers, soldiers and the
(hopefully extinct) ritual practitioner of human sacrifice
(Clark, 1998).
One role of language is to invoke particular framings or
interpretations. There are many decision-making studies that
could be viewed as such, particularly among studies of
framing effects (e.g., Larrick & Blount, 1997), although few
attribute their effects to language per se. For example,
Liberman, Samuels and Ross (2004) found that people
choosing in a prisoner’s dilemma situation were more likely
to cooperate if the situation was labeled a “Community
game” than if it was labeled a “Wall Street game.” These
labels invoked cultural norms, and hence people’s
understanding of the decision to be made. As studies of
priming and memory accessibility amply demonstrate, that
which can reliably invoke is important.
Language not only invokes but also guides reasoning.
One way language does so is by providing and organizing
“tools for thinking” (Vygotsky, 1934; see also the related
proposal of culture as a toolkit, as in Swidler, 1986). The
tool analogy runs as follows: just as work is easier if one has
the right tool for the job, so too is it easier to reason through
a decision if one uses appropriate words for describing it.
Also, if a hammer is available, one is more likely to think of
nailing something together—and analogously, knowledge of
a particular vocabulary makes it more likely one will use
that vocabulary to understand and make decisions about
situations. By this view of language, vocabularies do not
determine whether someone can or cannot think of
something, but rather vocabularies make particular ideas
and subsequent reasoning easier and more likely to occur.
Further, just as an individual tool is less useful than a
toolbox of related tools for coordinated activity, so too are
sets of words—vocabularies—more useful than individual
words (Loewenstein & Ocasio, 2005; Loewenstein &
Gentner, 2005).
One final important aspect of conceptualizing
vocabularies as toolkits is that just as the same tools can be

People in competitive decision-making situations often make
poor choices because they inadequately understand the
decision they are to make, particularly because they fail to
consider contingencies such as how their opponent will react
to their choice (Tor & Bazerman, 2004). Accordingly it would
be useful to have a generally applicable vocabulary to guide
people towards effective interpretations of decision situations.
The vocabulary of games provides one such toolkit. We
presented 508 participants with words from the vocabulary of
games, or some lesser form of support, on a tic-tac-toe
decision scenario. Participants then generated a course of
action for a second competitive decision-making scenario.
Participants presented with words from the vocabulary of
games were more likely to transfer and generate sound
explanations of contingencies than participants receiving the
same key information in other terms or lesser support.
Vocabularies not only invoke particular framings of decision
situations, but can guide reasoning through those and
subsequent decisions as well.

Introduction
There are two basic steps to making a decision:
understanding what is to be decided, then making the actual
decision (Brandenberger & Nalebuff, 1996; Newell &
Simon, 1972). Most decision research makes assumptions
about how people understand the decision situation, and
then analyzes how they subsequently make the decision.
Considerably less decision research has examined the
systematic influences that lead people to their initial
understandings of decision-making situations (see, e.g.,
Bazerman, Curhan & Moore, 2000, for an argument on the
need for more such research). We agree with March (1994:
211-212), who claimed that “understanding decision making
involved understanding the ways in which language carries,
elaborates, and creates meaning.” The broad proposal
guiding our research is that the vocabulary people use to
articulate a decision frames and guides their reasoning of
that decision.
The words used to describe a decision should influence
how people understand the decision and accordingly what
choices and actions seem most reasonable to make.
Political actors appear to assume this to be true, as indicated
by the resources they expend to “frame the debate” and

501

useful in a wide variety of settings and for a wide variety of
projects, vocabularies can also capture abstract ideas of
wide applicability. This is often the case for professional
and expert vocabularies (jargon). For example, whether and
how much to donate to public radio and how much effort to
put into writing one’s section of a co-authored first draft are
quite different decisions, but both can be construed more
generally as decisions about cooperating in social
dilemmas. Vocabularies are particularly useful for helping
people transfer abstract ideas and frameworks typically used
in one context for use in understanding and making
decisions in a novel situation (Gentner & Loewenstein,
2002; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005).

four numbers guide their choices (Hristova & Grinberg,
2005). People are even poor at recognizing a useful framing
of a decision when directly presented a choice between two
(Blount & Larrick, 2000). The poor interpretation of initial
situations is a general concern that skews decision making
and problem solving (Newell & Simon, 1972; Kershaw &
Ohlsson, 2004).
If people perform poorly on a wide variety of decision
problems due to poor initial interpretations, then it would be
useful to have a generally applicable vocabulary to guide
people towards effective interpretations of decision
situations. Such a vocabulary would demarcate categories
and suggest lines of reasoning that facilitate making sound
choices across situations. The vocabulary of games provides
one such toolkit.

The Vocabulary of Games
One important toolbox for thinking about decision making
is the vocabulary of games (von Neumann & Morgenstern,
1944; Luce & Raiffa, 1957). Clearly there is more to game
theory than its vocabulary, but it is just as clear that learning
the vocabulary is part and parcel of learning the larger
approach to understanding strategic decision making.
Minimax, the logic of backward induction and decision trees
have become standard approaches to strategic decision
making. Research in decision making highlights why these
developments and subsequent training are so important:
people often fail to think about what actions they and their
opponents can take in a competitive decision making
situation.
The best known problems used to highlight poor
interpretations and reasoning through contingencies are the
Acquiring a Company problem used by Max Bazerman and
colleagues (e.g., Ball, Bazerman & Carroll, 1991; see also
Foreman & Murnighan, 1996) and the Monty Hall problem
(from the game show, “Let’s Make a Deal”, e.g., Burns &
Wieth, 2004; Idson et al, 2004). In key ways, these
problems are like the simple children’s game, tic-tac-toe, in
which two players attempt to get three marks in a row on a
3x3 grid. In all of them, it is a poor strategy to decide what
to do without first considering what the other person will do
in response to that choice. To adults—perhaps because most
adults played tic-tac-toe as children—it is obvious that there
are two players, what the rules of the game are, and what
possible moves the players can make. To children learning
the game, however, these things are not so obvious, and so
there are actual winners and losers. And like these
inexperienced children, adults without sophisticated
understanding of decision making use faulty approaches to
the unusual competitive decision making situations of the
Acquiring a Company and Monty Hall problems. On their
first attempts, most adults focus on poor subsets of the
available information (usually they focus on their own
choice and ignore what will follow it) and as a result give
the wrong answer (Tor & Bazerman, 2004). These problems
in understanding decision situations extend well beyond the
Acquiring a Company and Monty Hall problems. Even for
prisoner’s dilemma games, a recent eye-tracking study
suggested that some participants systematically focus on
just four of the (only!) eight numbers available, and those

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examines whether receiving a simple subset
of terms of the vocabulary of games could facilitate decision
making requiring participants to consider contingencies.
First we presented people with a tic-tac-toe decision
scenario, followed by a challenging decision scenario that,
like the Monty Hall and Acquiring a Company problems,
requires people to think through contingencies of what
actions are possible for themselves and their counterparts.
This was a novel decision scenario about two people playing
an unusual party game (the scenario is presented in full in
the Appendix). The vocabulary terms were presented
accompanying a tic-tac-toe decision scenario, allowing the
actual text of the key decision scenario to remain constant,
and to require participants to transfer it to a new situation.
Thus there were three conditions: the vocabulary condition,
the “game-only” control condition (who were given the tictac-toe decision scenario without the accompanying
vocabulary terms), and the “reversed” control condition
(who completed the key decision scenario before the tic-tactoe decision scenario in case that scenario in itself was
helpful).

Methods
Participants A total of 215 undergraduate students at a
large public university taking an introductory course in
Management (although they were not business school
students) participated for extra course credit.
Design Participants were randomly assigned to the
vocabulary condition (n=88), the game-only control
condition (n=86), or the reversed control condition (n=41).
Procedure and Materials All materials were presented on
a computer. Most participants were first given a tic-tac-toe
decision scenario. They were shown the current state of the
board three moves into a game and asked to choose between
two possible subsequent moves. In the vocabulary
condition, the screen was titled “Tic-Tac-Toe Game,” the
choices were labeled “move A” and “move B,” and the
question was:
“You are O, and now have essentially two choices, A or
B (all other moves are equivalent to these, just imagine

502

encountered words from the vocabulary of games and
reflected upon the contingencies in the tic-tac-toe problem.

rotating or flipping the board around). Which move
should you make?”
In the control conditions, the screen was titled Tic-Tac-Toe,
the choices were labeled A and B, and the question was the
same except the word move was replaced by decision. There
was a correct answer—one of the two moves led to a certain
loss. After choosing one of the two moves or the option that
stated both moves were equally good or bad, participants
were shown the two choices again and told which was the
correct answer. The vocabulary condition read:
“You were presented with the two moves above. The
correct answer was Move B. As in many games, the
challenge is to look ahead several moves to determine
where the other player can place their pieces. If you go
through this exercise, you will realize that, following
Move A, X has two ways to win. O can only block one
of these. Following Move B, the outcome would be a
draw.”
Participants in the control conditions were told simply:
“You were presented with the two options above. The
correct answer was B.”
Participants then completed the party hat decision
scenario—listed in the Appendix—about an unusual party
game between “you” and “a guy” involving two white hats
and one black hat. The key to solving the problem is to
recognize that the guy’s silence means he must not know
what color hat he has. Because he can see you and there is
only one black hat, if you had on a black hat he would know
he was wearing a white hat. Thus you must be wearing a
white hat. Finally, we note that the reversed control
condition completed the party hat decision before the tictac-toe decision.
Scoring The key dependent measure was participants’
explanations for their choices to the hat decision. Their
forced choice responses were uninformative, as many
participants chose the correct response for the wrong reason
(specifically, many said they had a two-thirds chance of
being right if they guessed “white hat”). As a result, we only
counted a response as correct if participants provided a
correct explanation for their correct choice. We counted as
correct those explanations that stated the logic just listed
about the meaning for the other party’s silence. These
responses were quite distinct, and two coders blind to
condition showed perfect agreement.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 built on Experiment 1 with two important
enhancements. First, we added two conditions to
disentangle presenting the vocabulary from encouraging
people to think through contingencies. The extended
vocabulary condition, like the vocabulary condition in
Experiment 1, included terms from the vocabulary of games
in the context of analyzing contingencies in the tic-tac-toe
decision. One new condition was a minimal vocabulary
condition that presented a few words from the vocabulary of
games but not those about contingencies. Perhaps invoking
the vocabulary would be sufficient, even without presenting
words related to contingencies. The other new condition was
a content control condition.
This group received a
discussion of the contingencies in the tic-tac-toe decision
scenario, but using words specific to tic-tac-toe rather than
general terms from the vocabulary of games. This is a strong
test of whether or not just the idea of contingencies, but not
the vocabulary of games itself, is key to interpreting
contingencies and transferring that understanding to further
decisions. The second change is that we used a new
competitive decision scenario. This decision scenario was
not a game but a business decision. This enables us to
generalize to the broader decision-making domain, and
beyond situations normally termed games.

Methods
Participants Participants were 293 undergraduates from the
same sample as in Experiment 1.
Design Participants were randomly assigned into one of five
conditions: the extensive vocabulary condition (n=55), a
minimal vocabulary condition (n=68), a content control
condition (n=54), a game-only control condition (n=51), and
a reversed control condition (n=65).
Procedure and Materials The overall procedure and the
tic-tac-toe materials were largely the same as in Experiment
1. The questions and explanations for the tic-tac-toe
decision were new. In the two vocabulary conditions, the
question was: “Player O is competing against opponent X.
Player O plans a strategy to win, or at least tie, the game. Of
the two possible moves, A and B, which should Player O
make?” In the three control conditions, the question was:
“O has two choices, A or B. What is O’s best choice?”
Table 1 lists how each condition explained the right answer.
Next, participants were shown the software decision
scenario (shown in the Appendix). The decision was
whether a software company should preemptively begin
work on an about-to-be ordered game for desktop computers
or for videogame consoles. Participants were asked to
explain a decision to pursue one of the formats or to wait.
Next, because these decision problems are challenging, all
participants were given two hints, and could then generate a
new answer. Specifically, they were asked “How could she
not just have a good guess or estimate of which format is
likely, but actually be CERTAIN about the format Nanosoft

Results and Discussion
As predicted, vocabulary condition participants were more
likely to generate correct explanations than were control
condition participants (15% versus 2%), χ2 (1, N=215) =
13.95, p < .001. There was little difference in performance
between the two control conditions (game control: 2%
correct explanations; reversed control: 0% correct
explanations). The low level of performance overall is
consistent with the difficulty of these problems.
Nonetheless, the reliable advantage for the vocabulary
condition implies that participants were better able to
consider the contingencies in the hat decision if they had

503

5.61, p < .05. There was no sign that minimally hinting at
the vocabulary of games or presenting the contingency logic
in situation-specific terms outside the vocabulary of games
were of any benefit. Rather the suggestion is that
understanding a decision problem using the vocabulary of
games—a coherent toolkit for thinking through sequences
of contingent actions by two players—can be effectively
transferred to think through a further decision scenario.
We found additional evidence that the vocabulary of
games was effective in what people wrote in their
explanations. The explanation advantage demonstrated by
people in the extensive vocabulary condition was fully
mediated by the use of words suggesting insight. Words
denoting insight were automatically content coded
according to LIWC dictionaries (Pennebaker & Francis,
1999; we found similar patterns coding for words used to
discuss contingencies, such as because, since, thus,
alternatives, options). We found that a greater proportion of
the extensive vocabulary group’s responses exhibited
insight than did those from the remaining groups (84%
versus 64%), reliable according to a logistic regression, B =
1.085, S.E. = 0.473, Wald χ2 = 5.257, p < .05. Expressing
insight, in turn, was associated with correct explanations
(35% correct for those using insight words versus 4% for
the remainder), B = 2.49, S.E. = 0.616, Wald χ2 = 16.368, p
< .001. Finally, although the extensive vocabulary group
generated reliably more correct explanations (as noted
above), B = 0.885, S.E. = 0.382, Wald χ2 = 5.367, p < .05,
this effect was no longer significant if insight was also
entered into the model. In this combined model, expressing
insight continues to show a reliable advantage for
generating correct explanations, B = 2.417, S.E. = 0.618,
Wald χ2 = 15.285, p < .001, but the effect of being in the
extensive vocabulary condition is no longer significant, B =
0.622, S.E. = 0.402, Wald χ2 = 2.399, p = .12. A Sobel test
confirmed the reduction was reliable, Z = 1.99, p < .05,
implying mediation (Baron & Kenny, 1986).
There was an interesting relationship between
participants’ performance on the tic-tac-toe decision and the
software decision. Receiving the extensive vocabulary was
most valuable for those who had incorrectly answered the
tic-tac-toe decision. One potential explanation is that those
who were correct did not pay much attention to the main
part of the manipulation, which occurred in the explanation
of the correct answer. A second potential explanation is that
those who were wrong were most in need of interpretive
help, which was only capably supplied by the extensive
vocabulary. For those who gave the correct response to the
tic-tac-toe decision scenario, the extensive vocabulary group
was no more likely to provide a correct explanation for the
software decision scenario than were those in the other
conditions (36% versus 27%), χ2 (1, N=155) = 1.14, p = .29.
However, for those who were given an incorrect response to
the tic-tac-toe decision scenario, the extensive vocabulary
group was more likely to provide a correct explanation for
the software decision scenario than were those in the other
conditions (32% versus 13%), χ2 (1, N=138) = 4.57, p < .05.

is assigning Creative Designs?” And, “If Game Driver
knows which format Creative Designs was assigned by
Nanosoft AND they have not yet started to hire, what
implications does this have for the format that Nanosoft
assigned to Creative Designs?”
Finally, similar to
Experiment 1, in the reversed control condition, the
software decision scenario was presented first, then came
the tic-tac-toe decision scenario.
Table 1: Descriptions of the correct answer to the
Tic-Tac-Toe problem by condition.
Condition

Extensive
Vocabulary

Descriptions
The winning move is B. You can see why
if you consider how Player X would move
in response to Player O choosing move A.
Follow that plan through to see what move
Player O would take after that. Looking
moves ahead reveals that after move A,
Player X will win. After move B, Player O
can force a tie, and so move B is best.

Minimal
Vocabulary

The right move for Player O was move B.

Content
Control

The correct choice was B. You can see
why if you consider what X would choose
after O chose A, and then what O would
choose after that, and so forth. After choice
A, X will achieve 3 in a row. After B, O
can prevent that outcome, and so choice B
is best.

Game
Control

The correct choice was B.

Reversed
Control

The correct choice was B.

Scoring As in Experiment 1, we only counted a response as
correct if participants provided a correct explanation for
their correct choice. We counted as correct explanations that
stated (1) the other company knows what kind of game the
focal company was assigned to create, (2) even with this
knowledge the other company had not started work
themselves, and so (3) this must mean they were assigned a
console game because if the focal company had been
assigned the computer game the other company would know
what they were supposed to produce. These responses were
so different from the other responses that they were
essentially self-evident, and two coders blind to condition
agreed on all entries.

Results
The Software decision problem was difficult, as only 3%,
evenly distributed across conditions, solved it prior to the
hints. However, after the hints, there were clear differences
by condition (Table 2). The extensive vocabulary condition
(35% correct explanations) performed better than all the
remaining groups (an average of 20%), χ2 (1, N=293) =
504

General Discussion

Table 2: Proportion correct explanations by condition and
correctly solving the Tic-Tac-Toe Decision Scenario.

Condition
Extensive
Vocabulary

These studies represent a first step in examining vocabularylevel toolkits for framing decision situations and guiding
subsequent reasoning. In two studies with two decision
scenarios, we found that describing contingencies using the
vocabulary of games in a familiar game facilitated reasoning
about contingencies to correctly elucidate a subsequent,
novel decision situation.
Presenting words from the vocabulary of games about
contingencies appeared critical. Explicitly referencing the
vocabulary of games but not its terms for handling
contingencies was ineffective, perhaps because for these
participants the vocabulary of games is a loose rather than
tightly integrated and coherent framework. Perhaps students
of game theory would need less prompting. Explicitly
describing the contingencies in the tic-tac-toe decision using
words specific to tic-tac-toe rather than words from the
vocabulary of games was ineffective. This is most likely due
to a transfer failure. That is, we assume people thought
about the contingencies in the tic-tac-toe problem because
they were clearly described, but because these descriptors
were tied to the specific game itself, they did not facilitate
transferring that framework to interpret and reason through
the subsequent decision scenario. Vocabularies are effective
both because they articulate key domain relations and
because they can be used across situations (Gentner &
Loewenstein, 2002; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005).

Correct Explanations for the
Software Decision Scenario
If Correct on
If Wrong on
Tic-Tac-Toe
Tic-Tac-Toe
Total
.36 (13/36)

.32* (6/19)

.35* (19/55)

Minimal
Vocabulary

.28 (11/40)

.14 (4/28)

.22 (15/68)

Content
Control

.15

(4/26)

.14 (4/28)

.15

Game
Control

.36

(8/22)

.10 (3/29)

.22 (11/51)

Reversed
Control

.29

(9/31)

.12 (4/34)

.20 (13/65)

(8/54)

Note. The reversed control group received the Software
decision prior to the Tic-Tac-Toe decision.
* p < .05 for the contrasts of the Extensive Vocabulary
group with all remaining groups.
Lastly, we note that there was a reliable effect of the game
vocabulary simply on answering the tic-tac-toe decision
correctly. Those receiving game vocabulary (there was no
difference between the two vocabulary conditions prior to
making a choice for this decision) were more likely to
answer the tic-tac-toe decision correctly than those not
receiving game vocabulary (62% vs. 46%), χ2 (1, N=293) =
6.72, p < .01. This is evidence that even the minimal
vocabulary condition was of some benefit, even if it was not
sufficient to yield transfer advantages on the software
decision scenario.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dedre Gentner and William Ocasio for useful
discussions of these issues, and the McCombs School of
Business, University of Texas at Austin, for its support.

Appendix
The Party Hat Decision Scenario
You are at a birthday party and the host drags out an
unusual assortment of activities. You get trapped in the
following situation: You and a guy at the party are seated,
both facing the same way. You are in front, so he can see
you but you can't see him. Someone puts a hat on your head,
and you are told the man also had a hat put on his head. You
are then told that there are two white hats and one black hat
available, and the first person to guess the color of their own
hat within 30 seconds will win a prize. However, wrong
guesses are heavily penalized: you will have to wear a
ridiculous costume for the rest of the party. You scramble to
think about whether you can claim the prize. Before you
know it, the host warns that 25 seconds have gone by. In the
remaining seconds, should you: 1. Announce you have a
white hat; 2. Announce you have a black hat; or 3. Say
nothing? Please describe how you arrived at your choice.

Discussion
Thinking about decisions using words from the vocabulary
of games facilitated generating correct explanations that
appropriately considered contingencies. Specifically, even
simple words from the vocabulary of games led to greater
success on a tic-tac-toe decision scenario. And more
extensive support from the vocabulary of games that
encouraged thinking through sequences of moves led to an
advantage for considering contingencies to correctly explain
the right choice on a distinct challenging business decision
scenario. This was the case even though the words were
presented in the context of the tic-tac-toe decision scenario,
and hence this advantage of game vocabulary required
participants to transfer that framework to the software
decision scenario. The implication is that vocabularies can
(1) invoke particular understandings of decision situations,
(2) guide reasoning through those decisions and (3)
facilitate transfer to subsequent decisions.

The Software Decision Scenario
Creative Designs is a company that designs games for
videogame consoles (such as Microsoft’s Xbox, Sony’s
Playstation or Nintendo’s Game Boy) and computers

505

Foreman, P., & Murnighan, J. K. (1996). Learning to avoid
the winner's curse. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 67, 170-180.
Gentner, D., & Loewenstein, J. (2002). Relational language
and relational thought. In J. Byrnes & E. Amsel (Eds.),
Language, Literacy, and Cognitive Development (pp. 87120). Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Hristova, E., & Grinberg, M. (2005). Information
Acquisition in the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma Game: An
Eye-Tracking Study. In Bara, B. G., L. Barsalou, & M.
Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (983-988).
Mahwah, New Jersey: LEA.
Idson, L. C., Chugh, D., Bereby-Meyer, Y., Moran, S.,
Grosskopf, B., & Bazerman, M. (2004). Overcoming
focusing failures in competitive environments. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 17, 159-172.
Kershaw, T. C., & Ohlsson, S. (2004). Multiple Causes of
Difficulty in Insight: The Case of the Nine-Dot Problem.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30(1), 3-13.
Larrick, R. P., & Blount, S. (1997). The claiming effect:
Why players are more generous in social dilemmas than
in ultimatum games. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 72, 810-825.
Liberman, V., Samuels, S. M., & Ross, L. (2004). The name
of the game: Predictive power of reputations versus
situational labels in determining Prisoner’s Dilemma
game moves. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
30, 1175-1185.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50, 315-353.
Loewenstein, J., & Ocasio, W. C., (2005). Vocabularies of
Organizing: How Language Links Culture, Cognition,
and Action in Organizations. McCombs Working Paper
No. OSSM-03-05. http://ssrn.com/abstract=813344.
Luce, R. D., & Raiffa, H. (1957). Games and decisions.
New York: Wiley.
March, J. G. (1994). A primer on decision making. New
York: Free Press.
Mills, C,W. (1939). Language, logic and culture. American
Sociological Review, 4(5): 670-680.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1944). Theory of
Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Newell, A., and H. A. Simon. 1972. Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Pennebaker, J. W., & Francis, M. E. (1999). Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC): A text analysis
program. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Swidler A. (1986). Culture in action: symbols and
strategies. American Sociological Review, 51, 273-86.
Tor, A., & Bazerman, M. H. (2004). Focusing Failures in
Competitive Environments: Explaining Decision Errors in
the Monty Hall Game, the Acquiring a Company
Problem, and Multiparty Ultimatums. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 16, 353-374
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986 [1934]). Thought and Language.
Cambridge, MA: The M.I.T. Press.

(desktops and laptops). A major software company,
Nanosoft, announced that they will be launching THREE
new games, TWO for game consoles and ONE for
computers. Nanosoft will develop one of these games
themselves, and will hire two companies for the other two
games. Creative Designs won one of the bids. The other
winning bidder was Game Driver. Nanosoft told Creative
Designs and Game Driver that it would take two months for
them to know which game format each company should use.
The two-month delay was a big problem for Creative
Designs. The sooner they finish, the more money they can
make, especially if they finish before Game Driver.
Specifically, if they start planning for a videogame console
game early, and this is what Nanosoft ultimately asks them
to make, they will make an extra $1 million in profit. But if
they are wrong about the format, they will lose $2 million in
extra expenses. On the other hand, if they start planning for
a computer game early, and this is what Nanosoft ultimately
asks them to make, they will earn an extra $2 million in
profit. However, if they are wrong about the format, they
will lose $1 million in extra expenses. Creative Designs
knows that Game Driver is in the same situation.
Two weeks later, the CEO of Creative Designs became
aware of some key information. A sales representative at
Creative Designs learned that Game Driver discovered 4
days ago which format Nanosoft will assign Creative
Designs to work on, even though Game Driver still doesn’t
know what they themselves will be working on. The CEO
also knows from Creative Designs’ Human Resources
Manager that Game Driver has not done any planning or
hiring yet on their Nanosoft game.
Please advise the CEO on the right decision.

References
Ball, S. B., Bazerman, M. H., & Carroll, J. S. (1991). An
evaluation of learning in the bilateral winner’s curse.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
48, 1–22.
Baron, R. M. & Kenny, D. A. (1986).The moderatormediator variable distinction in social psychological
research:
Conceptual,
strategic,
and
statistical
considerations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
Bazerman, M. H., Curhan, J. R., & Moore, D. A. (2000).
The death and rebirth of the social psychology of
negotiation. In M. Clark, & G. Fletcher (Eds.), Blackwell
handbook of social psychology. Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell.
Brandenburger, A. M., & Nalebuff, B. J. (1996). Coopetition. New York: Doubleday.
Burns, B. D., & Wieth, M. (2004). The collider principle in
causal reasoning: Why the Monty Hall Dilemma is so
hard. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.
133(3), 434-449.
Clark, H. H. (1998). Communal lexicons. In K. Malmkjær
& J. Williams (Eds.), Context in language learning and
language understanding (pp. 63-87). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
506

