UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Lexicon and Syntax in a Bilingual Connectionist Network

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/00v772v9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Francozo, Edson
Garcia, Ricardo Basso
Rinaldi, Valderes Aparecida

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Lexicon and Syntax in a Bilingual Connectionist Network
Valderes Aparecida Rinaldi (valderesrinaldi@yahoo.com.br)
Department of Linguistics, State University of Campinas
P.O.Box 6045, 13083-970 Campinas SP BRAZIL.

Ricardo Basso Garcia (rbgarcia@gmail.com)
Department of Linguistics, State University of Campinas
P.O.Box 6045, 13083-970 Campinas SP BRAZIL

Edson Françozo (edson@unicamp.br)
Department of Linguistics, State University of Campinas
P.O.Box 6045, 13083-970 Campinas SP BRAZIL.
Abstract
If bilingualism is a common phenomenon, research on
bilingualism using recurrent networks is not. Few models
using recurrent neural networks were developed in the past
years in an attempt to address, among others, the question: is
the lexical knowledge about two (or more) languages kept
apart? French’s (1998) results have shown that there are two
separate regions in the lexicon, each one corresponding to one
specific language. The present study extends French’s model
by including syntactic differences between the languages in
addition to the exclusively lexical ones in the original
simulation. Our network not only kept the lexicons apart, but
also represented more fine grained structural differences
between the languages in the hidden layer activation space.
Keywords:
acquisition.

bilingualism;

connectionism;

language

Introduction
Studies in bilingual knowledge and learning have grown
into a full blown research field during the past twenty years
(or so). In the past few years, experimental and sophisticated
tools have allowed for considerable advances in the area,
making room for the investigation of central questions about
memory and language processing in bilinguals.
Computational modeling is also part of this landscape (for
reviews, see French & Jacquet, 2004, and Thomas & van
Heuven, 2005) and connectionist models are plenty: BIA
(Bilingual Interactive Activation; Dijkstra & van Heuven,
1998), BIMOLA (Bilingual Model of Lexical Access;
Grosjean, 1997), SOMBIP (Self-Organizing Connectionist
Model of Bilingual Processing; Li & Farkas, 2002), Hasta
La Vista, Baby (Scutt, 1997), BSRN (Bilingual Simple
Recurrent Network; French, 1998) and BLLCN (Bilingual
Language Learning in Connectionist Networks; Liang,
2004). Among these, Simple Recurrent Networks (SRNs)
simulations allow for important aspects of the problem to be
explored – on the one hand, the bilingual acquisition of
language and, on the other, the dynamics of the mechanisms
responsible for bilingual knowledge organization.
French (1998) put forward a simulation in which two
small artificial languages are acquired by an SRN. Among

the interesting results he obtained, it is of special interest to
us the fact that in his simulation the very same network was
able to separately represent the lexical knowledge of each
language. Another result was that within each language
cluster, word classes (i.e., subject nouns, verbs, and object
nouns) were correctly identified and categorized. This was
interpreted as an indication of the sensitivity of the system
to the statistical regularities of the input, namely, the
transitional dependencies present in word co-occurrence
patterns in sentences.
Clearly, French’s (1998) is a step towards a richer
understanding of the dynamics underlying bilingual
knowledge and organization. In special, it is a step towards
understanding how lexical and structural bilingual
distinctions are accomplished through time, much in the
way posited by Elman (1990). In this connection, a question
can be posed: what if syntactical complexity is added to the
grammar of the model, so that languages are distinguished
not only by their lexicons, but also by their different
structures? It is hoped that by adding syntactical complexity
light will be shed on the mechanisms underlying bilingual
knowledge.
Computational simulations are of interest in connection
with questions like this, because they offer the chance of
manipulating variables believed to be active during
bilingual language acquisition, but which cannot be
controlled for in human data gathering.

The Simulation

2021

An SRN was trained on two small artificial languages, just
like in French (1998). For each of the languages, 4
adjectives were (optionally) added in the subject position.
Thus, for each language, 16 words of were used (Table 1),
resulting in 4 different syntactic structures (Table 2; notice
that both objects and adjectives were optional). The
intended syntactical difference between languages is thus
brought about by differences in adjectives position: they
always occurred before nouns in alpha and after them in
beta (which, for mnemonic reasons, are referred to,
respectively, as English and French). It must be noted that

words and lexical categories do not carry any semantic
content in the simulation.

separate the two languages as well as word categories within
each language.

Table 1: Lexicon for alpha and beta.
Adjectives
Subject names
Verbs
Object names
Adjectives
Subject names
Verbs
Object names

Tree Diagram for Variables
Ward`s method
Euclidean distances

Alpha
big, small, heavy,
Chinese
girl, woman, boy, man
lifts, touches, sees,
pushes
toy, ball, book, pen
Beta
grand, petit, lourd,
chinois
fille, femme, garçon,
homme
souleve, touche, voit,
pousse
juet, ballon, livre, stylo

BALL
BOOK
PEN
TOY
LIFTS
PUSHES
SEES
TOUCHES
BIG
CHINESE
HEAVY
SMALL
BOY
GIRL
MAN
WOMAN
BALLON
STYLO
JOUET
LIVRE
POUSSE
VOIT
SOULEVE
TOUCHE
CHINOIS
GRAND
LOURD
PETIT
FEMME
HOMME
FILLE
GARCON
0

6

8

10

12

Figure 1: Cluster analysis showing the hierarchical
knowledge after 12 epochs (60,000 sentences).

Beta
SV
SVO
SAV
SAVO

Architecture and training
Using the categories and patterns from Tables 1 and 2,
5,000 sentences were generated, thus creating a bilingual
environment similar to French’s, except by the added
grammatical complexity. Following Scutt (1997) and
French (1998), no language difference was tagged nor was
any semantic constraint furnished to the network. To
simulate actual bilingual interaction, language switching
was included (switch probability was set to 0.001). No
language switching was allowed in the middle of a sentence.
A 33 node input (and output) network was created, with
44 nodes in the hidden and context layers. For both alpha
and beta, a localist vector was used to represent the 32 word
inputs to the network, with an extra vector representing the
end of sentence. The learning rate was 0.1 and momentum
0.9. Training comprised 12 epochs (60,000 sentences).

From the differences in linkage distance in Figure 1, it is
also possible to argue in favor of the idea that language
separation is prior to word categorization within each
language. Thus, the present simulation achieved the same
separation of languages as in French (1998).
Additional evidence concerning the representation of
knowledge of the two languages can be gathered from the
output of the network. At each cycle in a test run, we
studied the average activation levels of words grouped
according to their syntactic function, i.e., we added together
the activation levels of all adjectives, subject names, verbs
and object names, in both languages. In Figure 2, below,
network predictions in instances in which English adjectives
were fed to the input level are shown. The activation level
of English subjects, the natural prediction when English
sentences are started by adjectives, is by far the highest
(approximately one third of the total activation).

Activation

Alpha
SV
SVO
ASV
ASVO

4

Linkage Distance

Table 2: Sentence frames for alpha and beta.
Pattern
1
2
3
4

2

Results
Once the network learned its task, testing was performed by
presenting the same 5,000 sentences used in training.
Cluster and Principal Components Analyses (PCA) were
then performed on the hidden layer activations.
Learning Two Languages The inspection of Figure 1
makes it readily apparent that the network was able to

2022

1
Grammatical Categories

EngSub
EngVerb
EngObj
EngAdj
FreSub
FreVerb
FreObj
FreAdj

Figure 2: Average levels of activation of word categories
when English adjectives are input to the network.

Overall, in Figure 3, the activation of French word
categories is higher than English ones when French
adjective words are input to the network. Moreover, French
verbs are more activated than any of the other categories,
which is an outcome of the fact that in the training set,
French adjectives can only be followed by verbs.

Activation

EngSub
EngVerb
EngObj
EngAdj
FreSub
FreVerb
FreObj
FreAdj

1
Grammatical Categories

Figure 3: Average levels of activation of word categories
when French adjectives are input to the network
One general trend that emerges from Figures 2 and 3 is
that all word categories display some activation, even if not
related to the language being processed. In Figure 2, for
instance, an English adjective, while mostly predicting
English subject nouns, also activates the other categories in
English and French, as well. That is, both languages seem to
be activated at the same time.

In this figure, the trajectories for both languages are
clearly distinguished, almost orthogonal, showing that
language distinction is not only a matter of static differences
regarding lexical representation, but also concerns different
dynamics in sentence processing. One interesting feature of
such dynamics is that subject nouns and adjectives, in both
languages, are positioned closer to each other in comparison
to verbs and object nouns. It seems clear, in this case, that
the network abstracted from word order to some sort of
structural knowledge, i.e., factor 2 seems to encode the fact
that adjectives always come together with subject nouns,
irrespectively of ‘superficial’ word order. In other words,
the network has learned something about constituency:
subject nouns and adjectives bound together to form a
higher order constituent.
As far as trajectories between subject nouns and
adjectives in factor plane 1x2 are concerned, they are
opposed for the two languages – in English the system
departs from the region of adjectives toward that of subject
nouns; in French, it only reaches the very same region
having departed from the subject nouns. That is, the
opposing trajectories seem to reflect the differences in
syntax or word order. The effect of word order is better
viewed in yet another factor plane. Consider Figure 5,
below.

livre
book
souleve

pc 3

lifts

Syntax However, the task presented to the SRN was not as
simple as French’s, since categorizing adjectives, which
could or could not occur in the different sentence positions
in the two languages, posed an altogether different job to the
network.
In order to account for this, one needs to examine the
mechanism which, in time, performs sentence processing.
By means of a PCA, we investigated the trajectories of pairs
of sentences containing adjectives, one for each of the
languages. In Figure 4, one such pair is depicted.
lifts

pc 2

book

boy

livre
souleve

grand
garçon

big
pc 1

Figure 4: Trajectories in state space (factor plane 1x2) for
big boy lifts book and garçon grand souleve livre.

grand
big
garçon
boy
pc 1

Figure 5: Trajectories in state space (factor plane 1x3) for
big boy lifts book and garçon grand souleve livre.
Now, the trajectories are similar for both languages, even
though adjective order is different. That is, in plane 1x3, the
surface order of the sentence determines the path of the
system. An additional feature of the system is also apparent
in this figure: subject nouns, adjectives, verbs, and object
nouns are placed in distinct “slices” of plane 1x3 (from left
to right and from bottom to top), irrespective of language.
This is an indication that different components, within the
same system, simultaneously code for different features in
the training set: two languages, four syntactical functions,
two different word orders, and so on.
In order to further check the dynamics of the system, we
decided to check what happens when a syntactically
anomalous sentence is processed. In Figure 6, a comparison
is made between big boy lifts book and boy big lifts book*.

2023

be thus seen as evidence of the importance of context in the
bilingual processing of sentences.

When canonical word order is changed, the trajectory in
state space 1x2 is consequently adapted to reflect the new
context. In this case, not only trajectories change, but also
the representation of the adjective that is brought closer to
the verb and farther from the subject noun (in comparison
with the legal sentence). We believe this shows how the
system copes with grammatical knowledge disruption – in
this case, a disruption in constituency, and not simply in
word order.

livre
souleve

pc 2

grand

lifts

boy

lifts

livre
souleve

grand

lifts

garçon

book

pc1

livre

book
livre
big souleve

PC 2

big
book

Figure 7: Trajectories in state space (factor plane 1x2) for
sentences with language switching in French (boy grand
souleve livre*, garçon big souleve livre*, garçon grand lifts
livre*, and garçon grand souleve book*)

boy
boy
big
PC 1

General Discussion
We would like to highlight the role we believe language
switching had in the experiment. In bilingual language
acquisition, a child interacts with others who speak only one
language at a time. For instance, it is reasonable to imagine
that a bilingual learner uses one language at school and
another at home, or that she employs different languages
while interacting with each of her parents. As a
consequence, simulation studies of bilingual language
acquisition have to account for this in model design. Scutt’s
(1997) simulations of bilingualism, although quite realistic
as far as the scope of its coverage of syntactic phenomena is
concerned, have employed a training regimen which did not
take language switching into consideration (language varied
freely within the training set). His failure to obtain language
separation, it seems to us, stem from overlooking the
importance of this variable in bilingual language
acquisition. In contrast, both our study and French’s (1998)
may have been able to obtain language separation by
explicitly modeling language switching.
Another point of interest is the outcome of our experiment
with code switching, which highlighted the role of language
context in bilingual sentence processing. For instance, the
literature on visual word recognition suggests that bilinguals
use language context information to facilitate word
recognition (e.g., Grainger, 1992; Scarborough et al, 1984).
The same kind of facilitation may be operative in our coded
switching experiment. As can be seen in Figure 7, whenever
the code switching occurs in any but the initial word of a
sentence, only small disturbances in trajectories arise. This
could be credited to the system having contextual
information about the language (in this case, French) being
processed. On the contrary, in the case of code switching in
the first position, the context establishes the expectation that
an English sentence will follow; however, since the

Figure 6: Trajectories in state space (factor plane 1x2) for
boy big lifts book* and big boy lifts book.
To sum up, while the hierarchical cluster analysis
revealed how the network statically represented lexical
knowledge with the state space, PCA let us see how,
dynamically, the network processes sentences in both
languages. In sentence processing, grammatical knowledge
appears as trajectories in the state space of the system which
are, inter alia, capable of coding for constituency. Insofar as
constituency in both the languages in our study differs,
different trajectories do portray language differences.
Syntax and Code Switching One interesting question, as
far as bilingualism is concerned, is code switching. In
Figure 7, below, we present the trajectories for garçon
grand souleve livre and four instances of code switching,
each of them in a different syntactic position.
Three of the code-switched sentences are gathered in the
same region of the state space as the original sentence. But
they display variations in trajectories that are due to code
switching in different syntactic positions. As can be seen,
code switching causes disturbances in the dynamics of the
system.
In the case of boy grand souleve livre* (Figure 7), an
English word in the beginning of a French sentence led the
system to behave differently in relation to the other three
language mixed sentences. In the present case, it seems that
the English word tricked the system into a different solution,
that is, into a different state space region. If we compare the
trajectory of this language mixed sentence with [big] boy
lifts book in Figure 4, it seems that the English word boy has
forced the system to solve the French sentence in the region
normally employed to process English sentences. This can
2024

continuation is in French, remarkable shifts in trajectories
result.
A further point of interest concerns the levels of
activation of both languages in the system (cf. Figures 2 and
3). The relevant question is whether bilinguals process
languages in parallel or not. Recent investigation on
bilingual language processing using brain imaging and
eyetracking (Marian et al., 2003) suggests that bilinguals
can activate both languages in parallel even when in
monolingual situations. Our simulation concurs with such a
view.
One final point concerns the inclusion of grammatical
complexity in our simulation. It is a fact that, in natural
bilingual learning, languages vary not only in their lexicons,
but in structure as well. Thus, including adjectives in the
present simulation lends strength to the claim that
connectionist simulation is suitable for the study of at least
certain aspects of bilingual language acquisition. But the
complexity which was added was quite modest, and
warrants no evidence concerning, for instance, the role of
grammatical knowledge in bilingual language acquisition.
This was felt as a needed cautionary step leading toward a
system which is veridical, enjoys data contact and input
representativeness (Christensen & Chater, 2001).

Acknowledgments
Research supported by FAPESP (01/00136-2) and CNPq.

References
Christiansen, M. & Chater, N. (2001). Connectionist
psycholinguistics: capturing the empirical data. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 5: 82-88.
Dijkstra, A., & Van Heuven, W. J. B. (1998). The BIA
model and bilingual word recognition. In J. Grainger & A.
M. Jacobs (Eds.), Localist Connectionist Approaches to
Human Cognition. Mahwah, NJ, USA: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14: 179-211.

French, R. M. (1998). A Simple Recurrent Network Model
of Bilingual Memory. In Gernsbacher, M. A., & Derry, S.
J. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Cognitive
Science Society Conference (pp. 368-373). NJ: LEA.
French, R. & Jacquet, M. (2004). Understanding bilingual
memory: models and data. Trends in Cognitive Sciences.
8(2), 87-93.
Grainger, J. (1992). Visual Word Recognition in Bilinguals.
In The Bilingual Lexicon (ed.) R. Schreuder, B. Weltens.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Co.
Grosjean, F. (1997). Processing mixed language: Issues,
findings and models. In de Groot, A. and Kroll, J. (Eds.).
Tutorials in Bilingualism: Psycholinguistic Perspectives.
Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Li, P., & Farkas, I. (2002). A self-organizing connectionist
model of bilingual processing. In Altarriba, R. H.J. (Ed.),
Bilingual Sentence Processing (pp. 59-85). North
Holland: Elsevier Science Publisher.
Liang, J. (2004). Bilingual language learning in
connectionist networks. Proceedings of the Sixth
International Conference on Cognitive Modeling.
Mahwah, N.J.
Marian, V., Spivey, M. & Hirsch, J. (2003). Shared and
separate systems in bilingual language processing:
converging evidence from eyetracking and brain imaging.
Brain and Language, 86, 70-82.
Scarborough, D.L., Gerard, L. & Cortese, C. (1984).
Independence of lexical access in bilingual word
recognition. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 23, 84-99.
Scutt, T. W. Hasta La Vista Baby: ‘Bilingual’ and ‘SecondLanguage Learning’ in a Recurrent neural network trained
on English and Spanish, paper presented at the 1997
GALA Conference, Edinburgh.
Thomas, M. S. C. & Van Heuven, W. (2005).
Computational models of bilingual comprehension. In J.
F. Kroll & A. M. B. De Groot (Eds.) Handbook of
Bilingualism: Psycholinguistic Approaches. Oxford
University Press

2025

