UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Lively Looks: Priming Preschoolers' Predictions of Post-verbal Arguments during Online
Sentence Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6p12x6vp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 28(28)

Authors
Snedeker, Jesse
Thothathiri, Malathi

Publication Date
2006-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Lively Looks: Priming Preschoolers’ Predictions of Post-verbal Arguments
during Online Sentence Processing
Malathi Thothathiri (malathi@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Abstract
This study explores the grammatical representations
employed by preschoolers during online sentence processing.
Tomasello and colleagues have argued that young children,
unlike adults, are limited to structural representations
organized around individual lexical items (Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 4 (2000) 156). Evidence for broader
syntactic representations in adults comes from, among other
things, studies showing syntactic priming during production,
which persists in the absence of lexical overlap. Studies of
production priming in children have produced mixed results.
The present study uses the visual-world paradigm to look for
comprehension-to-comprehension priming in 4-year-old
children. In two experiments, we find structural priming for
datives which persists even when the prime and target
sentences do not share any content words. These results
demonstrate that four-year-olds have abstract structural
representations that are not solely based on individual lexical
items, and that they use those representations to anticipate the
arguments of verbs during online sentence processing.

Introduction
The grammar of a natural language consists of generalized
structures (or rules) defined over syntactic categories. To
creatively produce sentences, a speaker needs to know
which words in the language can instantiate which
categories. An important question in language acquisition is
how categorization unfolds over development. One
influential proposal is that children gradually merge their
representations of individual verbs to form abstract
categories (the Verb Island hypothesis; see Tomasello,
2000). Early evidence for this view came from children’s
spontaneous production. For example, Tomasello (1992)
found that his one-year-old daughter restricted most verbs to
a single construction type, failing to use them in alternate
permissible constructions, which she had used with other
verbs. For example, while draw was used with locative and
benefactive prepositional phrases, cut appeared only in
simple transitive sentences. Observational studies, however,
cannot tell us whether restricted usage reflects the input that
the child receives, differences in the meanings of the verbs,
or the limited range of situations that the child wishes to
discuss. These issues have been addressed in production
experiments with novel words (see Tomasello, 2000 for a

review). For example, Tomasello & Brooks (1998) exposed
children to a novel verb in an intransitive construction while
modeling an action (e.g., The sock is tamming).
Subsequently, they modeled the same action and tried to
elicit transitive constructions from the children (e.g., He’s
tamming the car). While older children extended novel
verbs to new constructions, 2-to-3-year-olds primarily used
them in the constructions they were exposed to during
training. The authors concluded that abstract representations
of verbs and their thematic roles are generalizations over
narrow lexical patterns that begin emerging around three to
four years of age.
Fisher (2002) pointed out some problematic assumptions
behind this interpretation. First, the constructions in which a
verb can occur depend on a complex set of semantic
constraints. Consider drop and fall. They have similar
meanings and both can occur intransitively. Drop can also
occur in transitive sentences (e.g., Alice dropped the ball),
but fall cannot (e.g., *Alice fell the ball). Thus, children’s
reluctance to extend verbs to transitive constructions may be
due to their limited knowledge of these semantic constraints
rather than the absence of abstract syntactic representations.
Second, extracting the meaning of a novel verb from a
visual scene is difficult even for adults (Gillette, Gleitman,
Gleitman, & Lederer, 1999). Children in the above
experiment may have failed to infer that the novel verb
referred to the manner of a caused motion (rather than the
object’s path or position) and could therefore be used
transitively (Levin, 1993).
In sum, this debate has brought to the fore methodological
problems with both observational studies of spontaneous
speech and experimental studies of production with novel
words. Recently, structural priming has been used to
investigate the abstractness of children’s syntactic
representations. Adult studies have found robust evidence
for structural priming using a variety of tasks (Bock &
Loebell, 1990; Pickering & Branigan, 1998) and
constructions (Chang, Bock, & Goldberg, 2003; Scheepers;
2003). For example, speakers are more likely to produce a
passive sentence after hearing a passive sentence than after
hearing an active one. This facilitation is structural in that it
occurs even when the two consecutive sentences have no
content words in common. The presence or absence of

2246

structural priming in children could shed light on the nature
of the representations that underlie their linguistic behavior.
But the work to date has produced mixed results. While
some researchers find structural priming in 4- and 5-yearold children (Huttenlocher, Vasilyeva, & Shimpi, 2004),
others find structural priming only after age 6 (Savage,
Lieven, Theakston, & Tomasello, 2003).
Thus, the nature of 4-year-olds’ verb representations is
still an open question. The current study uses structural
priming, but differs from previous studies in two important
ways. First, our experiments examine priming during
language comprehension rather than production. Since
production tasks are often more difficult for children than
comprehension tasks, this may provide a more sensitive
measure of children’s linguistic knowledge. Indeed, studies
that use preferential looking to measure comprehension
(e.g., Fisher, 2000) typically find evidence for argument
structure abstractions at an earlier age than studies using
production measures. Second, the current study uses a
visual-world paradigm that taps online sentence processing.
We measure participants’ eye movements while they listen
to instructions and manipulate objects.
Under these
circumstances, eye movements to the objects are tightly
linked to the unfolding utterances and are sensitive to
lexical and structural processing in both adults (e.g.,
Allopenna, Magnuson, & Tanenhaus, 1998; Tanenhaus,
Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995) and children
(Snedeker & Trueswell, 2004; Trueswell, Sekerina, Hill, &
Logrip, 1999). By using a technique with good temporal
resolution, we can explore whether structural priming
affects children’s initial interpretation of the arguments
following a verb.
In two experiments, we investigate within- and acrossverb priming in 4-year-olds. While within-verb priming can
result from either verb-specific or more abstract
representations, across-verb priming can only result from
the latter.

filler sentences that were not datives. The third and fourth
were prime sentences that were either DO or PO datives
(e.g., DO: Give the elephant the ball; PO: Give the ball to
the elephant). The fifth and final sentence was the target
sentence, also a DO or PO dative (e.g., DO: Give the bird
the dog bone; PO: Give the birdhouse to the sheep). Prime
type was crossed with target type such that each child was
randomly assigned to one of four possible conditions (DO
prime-DO target; DO prime-PO target; PO prime-DO
target; PO prime-PO target).
Eye movements were recorded by a camera centered
behind the display, following the procedure employed by
Snedeker & Trueswell (2004). They found that gaze
direction coded from the hidden camera correlated highly
with fixations that were simultaneously recorded using
head-mounted eye-tracking. Eye movements were coded as
being to the center, away or to one of the four quadrants. If
the eyes were not visible the frame was coded as track loss
and excluded from the analysis. All eye-coding was done
with the audio turned off. For a random 10% of the trials,
eye movements were coded by a second blind coder.
Intercoder reliability was 91.2% (Cohen’s Kappa = 0.89).
In dative sentences, the animacy of each noun phrase
typically depends on its thematic role. In DO sentences, the
first NP refers to the recipient, which is usually animate. In
PO sentences, the first NP refers to the theme, which is
usually inanimate. On target trials, the set of toys that
accompanied the utterance contained two items that were
phonological matches to the initial part of the first NP (e.g.
“bird…”). See Figure 1. One was a possible animate
recipient (e.g., bird). The other was a possible inanimate
theme (e.g., birdhouse). We predicted that in response to the
ambiguous part of the first NP, participants primed with DO
sentences would look more at the animate match (e.g., bird)
while those primed with PO sentences would look more at
the inanimate match (e.g., birdhouse).

Experiment I
In Experiment I, we asked whether 4-year-olds show withinverb priming. Critical instructions were double-object (DO)
or prepositional-object (PO) dative sentences with the verb
“give”. We chose to use the dative alternation because a
number of studies have concluded that by three years of age,
children comprehend and produce both kinds of dative
constructions (Campbell & Tomasello, 2001; Gropen,
Pinker, Hollander, Goldberg, & Wilson, 1989).

Camera

Participants
Twenty 4-year-olds from the Boston area participated (4;0
to 4;6. Mean age = 4;1. 11 female). All were native speakers
of English.

Methods
Instructions were recorded by a female native English
speaker. Each participant listened to four blocks of
instructions. Within a block, the first two sentences were
2247

Fig. 1. Depiction of visual scene for DO: Give the bird the
dog bone; PO: Give the birdhouse to the sheep. The
ambiguous interval is underlined.
We coded eye movements on target trials only. It takes
about 200 ms to program an eye movement (Matin, Shao, &

Boff, 1993). Thus, our critical time interval began 200 ms
after the onset of the first NP (e.g., “bird…”) and ended 200
ms after the onset of the disambiguating information (e.g.,
the in “Give the bird the dog bone”; house in “Give the
birdhouse to the sheep”). The total interval of interest was
400 ms. Our dependent measure was the proportion of looks
to the inanimate match (e.g., birdhouse) during the
ambiguous interval. For each target trial, we calculated
looking time to the inanimate match as a proportion of
looking time to all four items and the center. For each
participant, we calculated the looking time to the inanimate
match averaged over all target trials.1

Experiment II
In this experiment, we asked whether 4-year-olds show
across-verb priming. Prime dative sentences used show or
bring. Target dative sentences used give. Production studies
with adults typically find weaker priming across verbs than
with the same verbs (Pickering & Branigan, 1998).
Therefore, we anticipated smaller effects and tested more
participants in this experiment than in Experiment I.

Participants
Thirty eight 4-year-olds participated (3;11 to 4;11.2 Mean
age = 4;0. 23 female). All were native speakers of English.
None had participated in Experiment I.

Results and Discussion
Unsurprisingly, children performed the right action on 90%
of the target trials, correctly interpreting utterances, which
were
lexically,
syntactically
and
pragmatically
unambiguous. Our primary interest was in how they
interpreted the direct-object noun during the brief
ambiguous interval. A 2x2 ANOVA (Prime Type x Target
Type) of the eye movement data revealed a significant effect
of prime type [F(1,16) = 12.887; p<0.01]. As predicted,
participants primed with PO sentences looked more at the
inanimate match compared to those primed with DO
sentences (Figure 2). There was no effect of target type
[F(1,16) = 2.28; p > 0.1] or interaction [F(1, 16) < 1; p >
0.1]. These results demonstrate within-verb comprehensionto-comprehension priming in 4-year-olds. This priming
unfolds rapidly during the online processing of the
utterance, influencing the initial interpretation the directobject noun.
Within-verb priming results are compatible with both
verb-specific and abstract representations. Therefore, in
Experiment II, we asked whether priming would occur when
the prime and target verbs are different.

Methods
Methods were identical to Experiment I, except for the fact
that prime sentences used show or bring instead of give.
Intercoder reliability for the coding of eye movements was
92.8% (Cohen’s Kappa = 0.89).

Results and Discussion
The children performed the correct action on 92% of the
target trials, indicating that they had little difficulty with the
sentences regardless of whether the primes and targets
matched. Their eye movements, however, indicated that the
primes did influence their interpretation of the direct-object
noun during the critical ambiguous region. For each
participant, the proportion of fixations to the inanimate
match was submitted to a 2x2 ANOVA (Prime Type x
Target Type). There was a reliable effect of prime type
[F(1,33) = 6.022; p<0.05]. As predicted, participants primed
with PO sentences looked more at the inanimate match
compared to those primed with DO sentences (Figure 3).
There was no effect of target type or interaction (both F’s <
1; p’s > 0.1). These results demonstrate across-verb
comprehension-to-comprehension priming in 4-year-olds.

0.35

0.4

0.3

0.35

Looks to inanim ate m atch

Loo ks to ina nim a te m atch

0.4

0.25
DO Prime
PO Prime

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

0.3
0.25
DO Prime
PO Prime

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

0
DO Target

0

PO Target

DO Target

Fig. 2. Within-Verb priming: Proportion of looks to the
inanimate match during the ambiguous interval.

PO Target

Fig. 3. Across-Verb Priming: Proportion of looks to the
inanimate match during the ambiguous interval.

1

We excluded trials in which participants were looking at the
center or away (i.e., not at any of the four items) for more than
2/3rd of the interval.

2
Only 5 participants were older than 4;6. Results were not
different when these participants were excluded.

2248

General Discussion
In two experiments, we have demonstrated both within- and
across-verb comprehension-to-comprehension priming in 4year-old children. Under the Verb Island Hypothesis,
structural representations are specific to individual verbs.
Thus, activation of a construction that contains one verb
may influence the comprehension of subsequent utterances
with the same verb but there should be no effect on
comprehension of subsequent utterances with a different
verb. In contrast, abstract structural representations defined
over a category of verbs would lead to priming between
different verbs. Thus, our across-verb priming results in
Experiment II demonstrate that 4-year-olds have abstract
representations.
What is the nature of these representations? In the adult
priming literature, proposals for primed representations
include thematic roles, animacy features, context-free rules
and hierarchical syntactic relations (Bock, Loebell, &
Morey, 1992; Chang, et al., 2003; Pickering & Branigan,
1998; Scheepers, 2003). While our measure was
transparently related to animacy features (looks to the object
reflect the expectation that the direct-object noun will be
inanimate), the priming itself need not have occurred at this
level. Animacy is systematically related to thematic roles
(Dowty, 1991), which are in turn tightly linked to
grammatical structure (Baker, 1988). The priming of
syntactic structures or rules could therefore support robust
inferences about thematic-role assignment, which in turn
support predictions about animacy. Thus our results are
compatible with all the proposals listed above and uniquely
support none of them. For current purposes the crucial
point is that the primed representations span across verbs
and thus are more abstract than item-specific generalizations
or Verb Islands.
This study rules out two alternate explanations for prior
evidence of structural-priming in children. First, because the
paired constructions used in priming studies are
distinguished by the presence or absence of closed-class
words (e.g., to), many of the production effects could reflect
the priming of these words rather than grammatical
structures. By measuring priming prior to the point at which
this morpheme occurs, we avoided this possibility. Second,
because the alternate forms of these constructions vary in
their length, which in turn influences their prosodic
structure, production priming effects could reflect speeded
access to recently-used prosodic templates.
In
comprehension tasks this confound never arises because
participants in different prime conditions are given
prosodically identical target utterances.
Our results are consistent with several lines of research
indicating that young children have abstract structural
representations. Fisher and colleagues have demonstrated
that even 18-month-olds can use word order to interpret
transitive utterances with novel verbs (Gertner & Fisher,
2004). By four, even advocates of the Verb Island
Hypothesis agree that children employ structural
generalizations in novel-verb production tasks (Tomasello,

2000). Nevertheless we believe that priming studies in
preschoolers uniquely constrain this debate. Productivity in
novel-verb tasks can always be attributed to ad hoc
strategies that are employed only when the necessary itembased representation is missing. For example, an infant who
interprets the preverbal argument of a novel verb as its agent
could be drawing an analogy from a single known verb
rather than using a stable abstract representation of
transitivity. Priming studies with common verbs provide no
footholds for this kind of explanation.
Item-based
representations are perfectly adequate for understanding the
utterances in the current study. The fact that children
spontaneously employed abstract structural knowledge
demonstrates that these representations are an integral part
of everyday language comprehension.
The paradigm reported here can be used to answer two
important questions that remain. First, do younger children
use abstract structural priming? As with 4-year-olds, recent
studies of production priming in 3-year-olds have produced
mixed results. Using the dative alternation and a sentenceimitation task, Song & Fisher (2004) found structural
priming in 3-year-olds. In contrast, Gamez, Shimpi, &
Huttenlocher (2005) did not find structural priming using a
picture description task with 3.5-to-4.5-year-olds. Exploring
comprehension priming in 3-year-olds could help us
interpret this discrepancy. A second important issue is how
different verbs are clustered together in abstract
representations. In other words, how abstract are the abstract
representations? Dative verbs fall into several semantic
classes (Gropen, et al., 1989). For example, some signify
physical transfer (e.g., give) while others signify
metaphorical transfer or communication (e.g., show). Is
comprehension-to-comprehension priming in young
children limited to verbs with closely similar meanings or
does it encompass all verbs that participate in the dative
alternation? 3 By looking for priming within and across
semantic classes, we hope to discover how dative verbs are
organized in young children’s minds.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by a Harvard University McMaster’s
grant to Malathi Thothathiri. We thank Cindy Fisher for
helpful discussions, Steven Pinker for comments on the
manuscript, and Sneha Rao and Jane Sung for their
assistance in collecting and coding data.

References
Allopenna, P. D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(1998). Tracking the time course of spoken word
recognition using eye movements: Evidence for
continuous mapping models. Journal of Memory &
Language, 38, 419-439.

2249

3

. The current study contained verbs from different semantic
classes but lacked the statistical power to detect differences.

Baker, M. C. (1988). Incorporation: A theory of
grammatical function changing. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Bock, K., & Loebell, H. (1990). Framing sentences.
Cognition, 35, 1-39.
Bock, K., Loebell, H., & Morey, R. (1992). From
conceptual roles to structural relations: bridging the
syntactic cleft. Psychological Review, 99, 150–171.
Chang, F., Bock, K., & Goldberg, A. E. (2003). Can
thematic roles leave traces of their places? Cognition, 90,
29-49.
Campbell, A. L., & Tomasello, M. (2001). The acquisition
of
English
dative
constructions.
Applied
Psycholinguistics, 22, 253-267.
Dowty, D. (1991). Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection, Language, 67, 547–619.
Fisher, C. (2002). The role of abstract syntactic knowledge
in language acquisition: a reply to Tomasello. Cognition,
82, 259-278.
Fisher, C. (2000). Who’s blicking whom? Word order
influences toddlers’ interpretations of novel verbs. Paper
presented at the 11th International Conference on Infant
Studies, Brighton, UK.
Gertner, Y., & Fisher, C. (2004). How early does word
order guide sentence comprehension? Paper presented at
the 29th Annual Boston University Conference on
Language Development, Boston, MA.
Gamez, P. B., Shimpi, P. M., & Huttenlocher, J. (2005).
Emerging syntactic representations as evident through
priming. Poster presented at the 2005 SRCD Biennial
Meeting, Atlanta, GA.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., & Lederer, A.
(1999). Human simulations of vocabulary learning.
Cognition, 73, 135-176.
Gropen, J., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., Goldberg, R, &
Wilson, R. (1989). The learnability and acquisition of the
dative alternation in English. Language, 65, 203-257.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., & Shimpi, P. (2004).
Syntactic priming in young children. Journal of Memory
and Language, 50, 182-195.
Levin, B. (1993). English verb classes and alternations: A
preliminary investigation, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.

Matin, E., Shao, K. C., & Boff, K. R. (1993). Saccadic
overhead: Information-processing time with and without
saccades. Perception & Psychophysics, 53, 372-380.
Pickering, M. J., & Branigan, H. P. (1998). The
representation of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming
in language production. Journal of Memory & Language,
39, 633-651.
Savage, C., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M.
(2003). Testing the abstractness of children’s linguistic
representations: lexical and structural priming of syntactic
constructions in young children. Developmental Science,
6, 557-567.
Scheepers, C. (2003). Syntactic priming of relative clause
attachments: Persistence of structural configuration in
sentence production. Cognition, 89, 179-205.
Snedeker, J., & Trueswell, J. C. (2004). The developing
constraints on parsing decisions: The role of lexicalbiases and referential scenes in child and adult sentence
processing. Cognitive Psychology, 49, 238-299.
Song, H.-J., & Fisher, C. (2004). Syntactic priming in 3year-old children. Paper presented at the 29th Annual
Boston
University
Conference
on
Language
Development, Boston, MA.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632-1634.
Tomasello, M. (2000). The item-based nature of children’s
early syntactic development. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4, 156-163.
Tomasello, M. (1992). First verbs: A case study in early
grammatical development, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Tomasello, M., & Brooks, P. (1998) Young children’s
earliest transitive and intransitive constructions. Cognitive
Linguistics, 9, 379-395.
Trueswell, J., Sekerina, I., Hill, N. M., & Logrip, M. L.
(1999). The kindergarten-path effect: Studying on-line
sentence processing in young children. Cognition, 73, 89134.

2250

